HARWARDS Phlebotomy: Or, A Treatise of letting of Blood, Fitly serving, as
well for an advertisement and remembrance to well minded Chirurgians, As also
to give a caveat generally to all men to beware of the manifold dangers, which
may ensue upon rash and unadvised letting of Blood.

Comprehended in two Books: Written by SIMON HARVVARD.

Imprinted at London by F. Kingston for Simon Waterson. 1601.

To the Right Honorable his singular good Lord, Gilbert Earl of Shrewsbury,
Baron Talbot, Lord Comin of Badenho, Valence, and Montchency, Lord Strange of
Blanch-minster, of Brimsfeld, Corfham, Furniuall, Verdon, and Louctoft, Knight
and companion of the most noble order of the Garter, and one of her Majesty's
most honorable privy Counsel: many joyful and happy years, with all increase
of Honor.
IT is a property (Right Honorable, my singular good Lord) naturally given to
every workman and artificer, that be his work never so rude and homely, yet
would he be loath that his labor should vanish, and perish: but seeing that it
is the best that his ability can perform, he desires the same as long as may
be, to remain and continue upon the earth. This cause makes also many to be
so forward in publishing their writings in print, that when they themselves are
taken away by death, yet by their works there may still remain some lasting
record, and remembrance of the workmen. But the especial cause which has
moved me at this time to set forth these my two books of Phlebotomy, is, the
sincere affection and desire that I have to bring some supply and help (if I
can) unto two very great wants and abuses, which I daily perceive to be now too
common and grassant in sundry corners of this realm. For first, although in
Cities, as principally in the famous City of London, the people enjoy a great
blessing of God, in having so many worthy and expert Physicians and
Chirurgians so nearly dwelling together, that at all times the one may be able
and ready to advise, and the other also as willing and sufficient to lend a
helping hand: yet in Country towns, there are many nowadayes* which do
practice the opening of veins (almost in every other Village one) and most of
them neither have any learned counsel to direct them, neither are of
themselves sufficiently instructed in the matter which they take in hand:
whereby, though many of them do mean well, and intend all for the best, yet in
the event, both to the harm of their patients, and also to their own grief,
there often insueth more hurt and danger, then ease and succor. And another as
great an occasion there is of many detriments and hindrances to man's health,
to wit, the wilful temeritie and rashness of some ignorant people, which for
every small impediment have recourse presently to letting of blood, and by
their unadvised importunity do urge forward the Chirurgian, and even greedily
draw upon themselves those manifold inconveniences, from which afterward they
can not again so easily be delivered and made free. For although on the one
side the benefits be most excellent which redound by Phlebotomy being rightly
and duly administered, for thereby the fullness of the body does come to a
mediocrity, griefs which come by extension are pacified, the spirits are
refreshed, and natural heat euented, the lims being as it were eased of a
great burden, are made more quick and ready to execute every office, nature is
enabled to concoct what is requisite, and to expel the unprofitable, flowing
humors are either drawn back, or turned aside, from the place where they
annoy, or else are they dispatched and utterly avoided, narrow and obstructed
passages are opened; and finally, very present help is brought thereby to many
dangerous infirmities: Yet on the other side, great also are the harms which
may ensue by letting of blood, if the same be rashly and vnconsiderately
attempted, the spirits and blood are spent and wasted, the natural heat is
plucked away and dispersed, the principal parts are made ouercold, and utterly
lose their strength, old age is hastened on, and made subject to palsies,
apoplexies, dropsies, and cachexies or bad habits, many (the bridle of choler
being taken away) do in a moment fall into most faint Iaundises, many have the
one half of their hearing and sight diminished, and the one arm and the one
side utterly weakened, and many also are brought to an unrecoverable
destruction of their health and life.

To redress in some part these most perilous incidents, I have collected out
of the most famous Physicians both ancient and modern this discourse of
Phlebotomy, which although it be penned (as commonly Physic treatises are) in
plain and familiar words, most fit for them to whom it is principally
directed; yet because it comprehends the handling of one of the greatest
remedies of corporal griefs, as a learned Physician commenting upon Galen ad
Glauconem does write, Trincauel in expla^. lib. 1. de art c^ra^ua ad
Glauconem. Alex. Messer. lib^. ^escop^s mittendi sanguinem.
Venae sectio in magnis remedijs ab omnibus medicis semper habita est. And
Messaria, the chief Doctor and professor of Padua, in a treatise of
Phlebotomy, dedicated to Contarenus a worthy Senator of Venice, says, Inter
medica remedia nullum sanguinis missione nobilius, nullum praestantius, nullum
tutius, and does call it further generosum and praesentaneum vitae hominis
praesidium. And seeing also that amongst the high cares and charges which
chief peers and governors do bear in common wealths, this seems not to be
the least, which concerns so nearly the health, the strength, and even the
life it self of so large a part of the inferior commons, I have therefore
adventured most humbly here to present and offer this my first part of the
great Physic remedies unto your Honors patronage, and favorable protection,
not doubting but that according to your Lordships accustomed clemency you will
vouchsafe the same thereof, not so much respecting the poor gift, as the good
heart of the giver, and according to your prone inclinatiion unto the truth,
and to the general good of the commons, your Honor will have greater regard
unto the grave auctorities of the auctors out of whom these observations are
collected, then unto the homely phrase and plain method of the obseruer and
collector thereof. The eternal God, who has heaped upon your Lordship all
those degrees of honor, unto which your noble Progenitors have often
heretofore bin most worthily advanced, grant unto your Lordship with the like
good success as they in former times have done, many prosperous years happily
to enjoy them, to your daily increase of honor, and to the good and glory of
our English nation, ever continuing you in the high favor of our most gracious
Sovereign, and blessing you perpetually both in this world with the love and
hearty affection of the whole Commons, and also for ever with the happy
society of the Saints in the life to come.

From Tanridge in Surrey this 29. of August. Anno. 1601. Your Honors most
humble in all duties to be commanded Simon Harward.

The Preface, declaring the order and contents of these two books of
Phlebotomy.
BEing purposed and resolved for the more general benefit of my countrymen to
publish in two english treatises (the first whereof I do here in title
Phlebotomy: and the other, godwilling, hereafter, as soon as leisure shall
serve, Cathartice) as compandiously and as orderly as does or shall lie in my
power, all the chiefest aphorisms and conclusions, which have bin handled and
written by the most famous Physicians of all ages, as concerning such cautions
and circumstances as are to be observed in letting of blood, or purging the
body of man: Although in practice it does in many cases fall out, that purging
ought to take place before the opening of any vain (as shall h^ereafter more
at large appear in this book) yet for as much as blood is the most excellent
and principal humor that is dispersed in the whole body, according to that of
Galen, (...), Gal. libr. 2. de temperamentis.
the best and most familiar juice in man is blood. I have therefore thought
good in my method of declaring how we must deal with these several humors,
Fuc^s. Instit. libr. 2. Brigt^^us in therapeutica.
to follow the example of diverse learned men of our time, to wit, in respect of
the disposing of them, to give unto blood the first place and pre-eminence.
These two remedies are not only accounted the chiefest amongst the kinds of
euacuations, but also amongst all other corporal helps prescribed or invented
for the curing of man's infirmities: As well affirms Mercurialis, Hieron.
Mercurial. Consil 42.
Duo magnorum auxiliorum genera reperiuntur, purgatio nempe and sanguinis
missio, There are two kinds of great remedies found out, to wit, purging, and
letting of blood. These (...), Galen 2. Ap^. 29.
are called great helps, because they are applied unto great diseases, and also
because (howsoever they being abused do bring the greatest harms) yet being
well and rightly administered, they do bring the greatest and most present
cases and remedies, that ever either inwardly or outwardly were devised for
man's health.

This my first part of the Remedia magna in Physic, I have comprehended in two
books, the sum and contents whereof, as also of every part thereof, I have
thought it not amiss first briefly to prefix and lay open to the view of the
well willing reader.

The first book showing what Phlebotomy is, and to what use it serves in
several diseases, conteyneth ten Chapters.

The first, what Phlebotomy is, and of the four distinct kinds and uses
thereof.

The second, how letting of blood ought to be used in continual agues, as also
in burning fevers.

The third, how bloodletting may be admitted in some kinds of diary agues made
by obstructions.

The fourth, how far letting of blood may be allowed in intermitting agues,
quotidians, tertians, and quartaines.

The fifth, whether letting of blood be to be admitted in the Plague, and
pestilent fever, as also in the Pox, measels, and such other contagious
infirmities, and when and how.

The sixth, how letting of blood is to be used in phrensies, quinsies,
pleurisies, inflammations of the raynes or womb, and other inward
inflammations, as they are considered in themselves without agues.

The seventh, in these dangerous inflammations aforesaid, whether euacuation
or reuulsion be more necessary, on whether side the vain is to be taken for
reuulsion, and what is the meaning of Hippocrates his rule (...), to flow
rightly, or with a right course.

The eight, whether letting of blood be to be practiced in cold diseases, as
palsies, cramps, apoplexies, and whether it may fitly be used in melancholic
winds, colicks, and dropsies.

The ninth, whether in rheumes and distillations, as also in the gout and in
Morbus Gallicus, any benefit may ensue by letting of blood.

The tenth, whether letting of blood be expedient for such as have hot livers
and cold stomachs, as also for such as have itches and scabbes, and such other
faults of the skin. Further, whether it be fit for the disease called of
seafaring men the skuruy, and for the cachexia, or bad habit of body: and
finally, what and how many are the drifts and scopes in letting of blood.

The second book concerning the rules and circumstances which are to be
observed, when for the preventing or curing of a disease any vain is to be
opened, conteyneth likewise ten Chapters.

The first, whether the party that is to be let blood have truly that distented
plenitude which is called of Physicians corpus plethoricum, and how the
several kinds of plenitude may be known.

The second, of the consideration of the temperature of the party, what it is
by manner of diet, or by exercises, or by place of abode, or by custom, or by
habit, or by constitution of body.

The third, whether the body have need to be prepared before letting of blood.

The fourth, of the age, sex, and solubilitie of the party, whether old men,
or children, or women being either with child, or having their terms, may be
let blood. Also, whether any having bodies either too costiue or too soluble,
may be let blood.

The fifth, of the state and time of the disease, what consideration is to be
bad thereof in bloodletting, and which we must regard most of the powers, the
animal, the natural, or the vital.

The sixth, of the time of the year, the time of the constellations of the
planets, and the time of the day most fit for letting of blood.

The seventh, on whether side the vain is to be taken when we let blood to
prevent diseases, or to avoid or derive their matter, as also what vain must
chiefly be chosen for sundry infirmities.

The eight, what manner of incision must be made, how large, how small, how
deep, what quantity of blood may be taken, and therein of the meaning of
Galens word to let blood ad animi deliquium.

The ninth, what order must be taken with them that are let blood, as well in
the act it self to prevent swounings, as also afterward for their government
and diet.

The tenth, how defects and errors are to be supplied and mended, and how the
Physician, and in his absence the Chirurgian may know by the blood being a
little while reserved, what course is further to be taken with the patient.

Before I enter into the discourse upon these several arguments, I must pray
the reader first to give me leave briefly to answer certain doubts and
occasions of offenses which perhaps might arise upon the publishing of this
treatise. First therefore if any (because I baning heretofore committed to the
pressse certain Sermons, and matters of Divinity, do now begin to set forth a
Physic work) do therefore gather or suspect that I have converted my studies
from the scriptures unto Galen, let him know that in this point I am utterly
mistaken by him, for most of my physic observations were then collected when
first I gave my mind that way, which was long before I published any matter of
Divinity: so that if there have bin any alteration or conversion of studies, it
has bin from the perusing of Physic auctors to the reading of writers wholly
theological. And yet still (the conjunction betwixt the body and soul being
so ne^re, and the sympathy so great) I see no cause but that he which studieth
Divinity, may lawfully now and then so bestow a spare hour in viewing of the
remedies ordained by God for man's infirmities, that he may be able in corporal
extremities to yield relief as well particularly to himself, as in common to
his good friends. If any do think otherwise, if he be a Divine, I pray him
that he will grant me license to compare small enterprises to those which were
so far more noble and excellent, and to offer to his consideration that
example of Moses, Act. 7. 22. Aug. de ciuitate dei lib. 8. cap. 38. Basilius
page 404.
which was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, that is (as Augustine
does expound it) in Astronomy, Geometry, Arithmetic, and such like, which
knowledges, though they came sometimes from heathen men, yet were they the
gifts of God, Qui operatur per malos non in malis. Or to call to his
remembrance Solomon, Eccl. 1. 1.
whom the holy Ghost does entitle with the name of Preacher: and yet God gave
him wisdom also to discourse upon philosophical matters concerning beasts, 1.
Reg. 4. 31.
birds, fishes, and every sort of simples even from the greatest to the least,
from the Cedar tree to the moss that grows upon the wall. If he be a
Physician, which supposes that the study of Physic can not be tolerated in
them whose vocation is spiritual, then do I only oppose against him the
authority of the most worthy Physician and grave interpretour of Plato,
Marsilius Ficinus, who, because some did object against him, Nonne est
Marsilius sacerdos? Quid sacerdotibus cum medecina? Quid cum astrologia
commercij? Ficinus makes an apology for himself, Marsil. Ficinus in apologia
praefixa lib. 1. de studiosorum sanitate tuenda.
proouing evidently, Antiquissimos quondam sacerdotes fuisse medicos pariter
and astronomos. He adds for proof, quod sane Chaldaeorum, Persarum,
Aegyptiorum testantur historiae. Ad nullum praeterea magis quam ad pium
sacerdotem pertinere singularis charitatis officia. He concludes, officium
vere praestantissimum est procul dubio, and maxim necessarium, and inprimis ab
hominibus exoptatum, efficere videlicet vt sit men's sana in corpore sano, id
autem tum demum praestare possumus si con^ungimus sacerdotio medicinam.

Now if there be any that shall think it strange that I do so often allege
the testimonies of Fernelius, Fuchsius, Montanus, and others (as relying much
upon them) and yet do in some points a little dissent from them, I wish them to
be certified, that I have a reverend opinion of those writers, and am very
willing that in those positions which are best determined by them, they should
in no wise be frustrated of their due praise and glory. But if others in some
doubts have found out more then they, then do I challenge liberty as near as I
can to make choice of the soundest, and in these human matters to be as the
Poet speaks of himself:

Nullius addictus iurare in verba magistri. Horat. epist. libr. 1. epist. 1.
Where Galen does well, I must needs give him his due commendations, and even
admire those singular gifts of nature which God bestowed upon him, but where he
skoffeth (as he does sometimes) at Christianity, Gal. de differentus puis.
lib. 2. and lib. 3. de sectis proteruis medicorum.
there I detest and abhor his blasphemies, and leave him to the judgment of
that God, to whom only it is known, whether ever before his death his heart
were better lightened with some beams of sparkles of his grace. The words of
those excellent Greek and Latin Physicians (upon whose auctorities and the
reasons delivered by them these my assertions are grounded) I have not set them
down in the proper languages of the first auctors, because my purpose was, as
near as I could, to reduce the whole matter into a brief and compendious
treatise: but I have both faithfully Verbatim translated them, and also in most
places caused the chiefest parts of their arguments and conclusions by a
several print to be apparently distinguished, very plainly to be discerned.
By which distinct form of character, as also by the books and discourses
cited in the margent, it may evidently appear, that howsoever (to put some
difference betwixt this my labor and an other english Phlebotomy heretofore
published) I have prefixed my name to the title of the whole work, yet I do
not presume to carry away the matter as of my self, but am very desirous that
the loving reader should be satisfied with the judgments of those worthy and
famous writers, whose counsels and aduises can not (I hope) but be welcome
unto them, which with modest and well affected minds shall desire to embrace
the truth.

The first book of Harwards Phlebotomy.
The first Chapter.
What Phlebotomy is, and of the four distinct kinds and uses thereof.

PHlebotomy is the letting out of blood by the opening of a vain, for the
preventing or curing of some grief or infirmity. I take in this place blood,
not as it is simple and pure of it self, but as it is mingled with other
humors, to wit, fleame, choler, melancholy, and the tenue serum, which all (as
Fernelius shows) as they are contained together in the veins, Fernel method.
medendi lib 2. cap. 1. and 3.
are by one word usually called by the name of blood. And although it still
fall out that other humors are also by Phlebotomy euacuated out of the whole
body, Fuchs. Instit. lib. 2.
yet (as Fuchsius does prove out of Galen) it is properly the remedy of those
diseases, which of the ranknes of blood have taken their original. There are
four several sorts and uses of letting of blood. The first is called (...),
Montanus in medicin^ vniuersalis part. 3.
euacuatio: The second is called (...), and of Montanus euentatio: The third
(...), revulsio: The fourth (...), deriuatio. The first, which is called
Euacuation, is the avoiding of that repletion and fullness whereby the body is
ouercharged.

Repletion or fullness, called of the Grecians Plethora, is an universal
redounding of blood. It is of two sorts, the one is called quoad vasa, when the
veins and vessels containing blood, Fernel. method. medend. lib. 2. cap. 1.
have their whole capacity fully and thoroughly filled: and the second
repletion is called quoad vires, in which the veins do not swell, and yet they
conteyne more blood and nourishment then by nature can be ordered and governed.
In the repletion quoad vasa (as Montanus shows) are two dangers, Montanus
medicinae vniuersalis part. 3.
first, least by the immoderate quantity there should happen either
suffocation, or the rupture of some vain: and secondly, least the abundance of
blood should corrupt and putrefie. For the avoiding of both these perils, it is
very expedient that in a full body a vain should be opened, although no grief
do draw us thereunto, but only the mere fullness. Hippocr. 1. Aph. 1.
For as Hippocrates says, The full habit of the bodies of champions, if it
come to the highest degree of fullness it is frail and slippery, for it can
not contiune long in the same estate. The second kind of repletion termed
quoad vires, is rather to be helped by medicines then by letting of blood. For
if raw and undigested humors do abound in the body, the opening of a vain
will draw out much good blood: but as for the bad blood which is gathered in
the first veins about the liver and the middle entrals, it will draw it into
the whole body, Gal. libr. 3. (...) t^^nda.
as Galen does at large demonstrate, and therefore euacuation by some purging
potion shall in this case be more fit then letting of blood. Yet when by the
nature of the disease there is evident danger of a corruption and putrefaction
of humors to ensue, then a little quantity of blood drawn shall be much
auaylable to anticipate and prevent it, if always regard be had how far the
strength will permit, and what humor is especially mixed together with the
blood in the veins. Fernel. method. medend. lib. 2. cap. 4.
For as Fernelius shows, there is another way two kinds of repletion or
plethora, the one is called pure, the other impure. Montanus makes also two,
the one simple, and the other compound. The pure does consist of (in a manner)
an equal portion of all the best juices. The impure is an abounding of vicious
humors in the veins. If the plenitude come by choler, the vain may the more
plentifully make euacuation. But if the fullness come by fleame or by
melancholy, then must the euacuation be made by little and little at several
times when necessity requires, and when the veins being ouer-full do
threaten danger. How all these several kinds of plenitude shall be known, I
shall have occasion to declare more at large in the first Chapter of the second
book.

The first use of Phlebotomy, to wit, euacuation, has place not only in pure
repletions, but also in all dangers of putrefaction, according to that of
Galen: Gal. therap. method. lib. 11.
It is good to open a vain not only in fevers called synochi (which have one
continual fit, and do proceed of inflamed blood) but also in all other
humors that stand in danger of putrefaction, when the regard which is had of
age and strength does nothing prohibit. For nature which does dispose and
govern our bodies, being lightened, and having put off that which a^ a burden
did ouercharge her, will easily overcome the rest in such sort, that it will
concoct what is to be concocted, and expel what is to be expelled.

The second use of letting-bloud is called of Montanus euentatio, This (...) is
called of Platerus euentilatio.
whereupon he makes a second kind called Phlebotomia euentatiua, which is the
venting of any humor that does boil and bubble within the veins. For as the
former, to wit euacuation, has respect unto the plenitude; 10. Bapt. Mont.
part 3. Medicinae vniuersalis.
so this (...) has properly a relation to the boiling and bubbling. So (^ayth
he) in quotidians and quartans we do often let blood, not because there is any
fullness or great multitude of ill humors, but because we would by venting
take away the boiling and bubbling thereof. This venting has place both
whether there be any putrefaction in the humor or no. But if our scope and
purpose be only simply to vent, then is it best to do it by letting a little
blood, and often according to the rule of Auicenna, Melior est multiplicatio
numeri quam quantitatis. Otherwise if the case be compound that both there be a
fullness and a boiling, that we must both euacuate and vent, then shall it be
most fit to do it at once, and plentifully and as long as the strength will
permit, as is taught at large by Galen in the eight book of his Methodus
medendi. And in the same book speaking of some agues that are like to Diarian
fevers, and do come of obstructions, he does use these words: Gal. method.
therapeut. libr. 8.
That the humor may be vented we have need of the great remedy, we must let
blood the party being of sufficient strength, although there be no signs of
plenitude. How it shall be known when the humors do thus boil and have need
of venting, it shall be laid open at large in the two Chapters next following.

The third use of letting blood is called (...) Revulsion: Montanus calls it
Phlebotomia diuersina, which is a plucking back of humors, when they are
carried from any one part of the body into an other with force and violent
course. Euacuation does respect the fullness, Venting the bubbling up, and
Revulsion the violent course of the humor. How this revulsion must be made, is
discussed in the seventh Chapter of this first book.

The fourth use of bloodletting is called (...), deriuatio; of Montanus,
Phlebotomia deriuatiua, which is a deriuing of a humor from any place where it
is settled and impacted, into some other near place, by which it may best be
overcome or avoided. It differs from revulsion two especial ways. First,
revulsion is into places far distant, as Hippocrates shows: Hippocr. libr.
de ^^^ium natura. page 245.
We must endeavor to open a vain distant as far as may be from the place
where the grief is made or the blood gathered, for so there shall be no danger
of a sudden change, and besides the custom being translated an other way,
thou shall make that there shall be no more flowing to the former wonted place.
But deriuation of humors is into the nearest places, as by which they may most
fitly be avoided, according to that of Galen: Deriuation is made into places
nigh joining, Gal. lib. 5. de c^^ and. morb. cap. 3.
but revulsion is made into places plain opposite. Again, an other difference
there is, that revulsion is of humors now flowing, but deriuation is of them
that are already settled, as is witnessed by the same Author: Gal. lib. 4.
method. therapeut. cap. 6.
If the flowing be still carried in his violent course, we must use revulsion to
draw it to the contraries, but when the humor is settled and impacted in the
place, then it is better to derive it. He gives the reason of it, for the
change is nearer, and both the access and the drawing force of the purging
medicine is more ready when the place is nigh. And what there he speaks of
medicines, Gal. libr. 2. ad Glaucon. cap. 7.
the same he writes of Phlebotomy. Reuulsion is the remedy of fluxes or
rheumes still flowing, but deriuation is their help when they have taken hold
of any part: but both these kinds of euacuation does Hippocrates command to
be done by the common veins. Thus much briefly concerning the first question,
what Phlebotomy is, and of the four several kinds or rather uses thereof.

CHAP. 2.
How letting of blood may be used in continual agues called synochi, in hot
agues, and how also in burning fevers.

BEing now to declare particularly, how Phlebotomy is to be used in most of the
usual diseases which commonly do reign amongst men, seeing there is no kind
of infirmity that has more sorts of it self subject to letting of blood then
has the Ague, I have thought it not amiss to begin first with it. In the ague
synochus, which has one continual fit, seeing that it proceeds of the
inflammation of blood, needs must the opening of a vain be very fit and
convenient for it. But there are two kinds of it. The one is called synochus
mitior, or ephemera extensa, in which only the thinner part of the blood is
kindled, it is dissolved very often before the fifth day, it has the urine
somewhat reddish and thick, the pulse great and thick, but not evidently
unequal. And the other is called synochus vehementior, wherein the whole
substance of blood is inflamed. It carries manifest notes of crudities, to wit,
vnequalnes in the pulse, and the urine red and thick, and the tongue waxes
somewhat rough and blackish. In either of these synochi letting of blood is
requisite, and that as plentifully as strength will permit. If at the first it
were omitted, it may be done in the fourth day or in the seventh day, or after
the seventh day. But the best and safest time is even in the beginning of the
infirmity, Fernel. method. med. lib. 2. cap. 6.
as Fernelius says, It is more safe to let blood when the disease approaches,
then when it has already taken possession of us, according to the old verse:

Aegrius eijcitur, quam non admittitur hospes.
It is a more hard thing to cast out a bad guest, then it is at the first not
to admit him.

And therefore Platerus wills us in these synochi sine putredine, Platerus de
febribus page 113.
wherein the blood is not putrefied but inflamed, to hasten the letting of
blood, not only to vent or euentilate the blood inflamed, but also to pluck
back the same, least breaking out of the veins into the principal parts, it
does stir up there most perilous inflammations. For Platerus and Fontanonus
be both of this opinion, that the inflammations in the noble parts do follow
these synochi, and not go before them. And therefore they do advise in the
first beginning to open a vain, and if in the first day it be omitted when the
ague is thought to be but an ephemera, an inflaming of the spirits for one day;
yet the next day following, when it appears plainly that it is no ephemera,
because it lasts longer then a day, but that it is a plain synochus, then
let out blood boldly a good quantity, according to the strength of the party;
or else take the less blood at once, and open the vain either the same day or
the next day again, which is the safest way for such as be weak. In this ague
does the second use of Phlebotomy, to wit, euentatio, or euentilatio greatly
show forth his power, according to that of Galen, writing of the hot ague
called synochus: Gal. method. therap. libr. 9.
In whom soever the body in the multitude of humors being made unapt to vent
and breath out, has gathered such a heat that now it is come to a fever, the
party must be let blood as much as strength can endure, knowing that if this
remedy be not taken, they which are so affected shall either be strangled by
suffocations, or suffer syncopies and very dangerous s^ounings wholly to
overthrow them: Montanus writing upon the thirtenth Canon of A^icenna
concerning bloodletting, Montan. medicinae vniuersalis part. 3.
does make three several sorts of this hot ague coming of blood inflamed,
and shows in which of them blood may best be let. The first is called
Homotona, which from the beginning to the end does keep the same tenor. The
second Epacmastica, which increases more and more until it come to state and
vigor. The third Paracmastica, which always decreaseth. In the first and the
last he admits boldly to let blood, but in the second sparingly, least
strength and power failing the disease should overcome nature. So also if it be
febris putrida, or synochus cum putredine, a fever wherein the humor is
putrified, he does require a little before in the same book, that we should
not let blood in any great quantity: Because where the humor is already
putrified, although though we should let blood even till the strength fail,
yet should we not avoid the putrefaction: for putrified blood is become
earthly, and therefore can not be expelled. And if we let blood in a great
quantity, the putrefaction will still remain, and the virtue and strength will
be made so weak, that we shall not be able to remove that putrefaction which
remains. He obiecteth the example of Galen his practice, who in a certain
servant having this synochus cum putredine, did let blood ple^tifully to
swouning or fainting. Gal. therap. meth. libr. 9. ad (...) vide li. z. ca. 8.
But he answers to that place, that when Galen came to that servant, the
humor was not fully putrified, but only that there appeared some signs of
putrefaction, and in the second day he opened a vain. So that when the signs
of putrefaction did begin he let blood, and not when the humor was already
putrified: Montan. medicinae vniuersalis part. 3.
and further, it was a fever always declining. But he concludes there, I say
plainly that of the fever should be with a putrefaction and a vain should be
opened, the patient should be killed. The most certain sign to know when the
ague is faulty only by means of the inflammation, and when it is faulty by the
putrefaction, Trincau. in explanatione lib. ^. Galeni de d^fferenti^^ ^ebrium.
is (as Trincauel in his explanation upon Galen does show) by the systole and
diastole of the pulses. For there is a double use of the pulse, the one for
cooling of the spirits, and to that does serve the diastole, or enlarging of
the artery, for when the artery is enlarged a more cooling air being drawn
in, does temper the heat of the spirits. The other is that the smoaky vapor
(which must needs be engendered by the force of heat working upon moisture)
may be so let out, that the spirits may be purified: and to this use serves
systole the contraction or compression of the artery. For while the artery is
drawn and pressed together, the hot air and smoky vapors are expelled and
avoided. Now it must needs be that betwixt these two contrary motions, a rest
must of necessity go between them. When there is need of cooling, there the
diastole or enlarging of the artery is swifter, and the inward pawse or rest is
shorter: but where there is more need of avoiding moist and putrifyed
excrements, there the systole or contraction of the artery is swifter, and the
outward pawse is shorter. And this later he makes to be the most certain note
to know all putrifyed agues, in which the humors rotting, many smoky vapors
must needs be engendered, this he calls so proper, familiar, inseparable, and
certain a sign to know and discern putrified agues from others, that it
neither does nor can deceive. An other sign there is of a putrifyed ague, when
exspiratio est inspiratione insignior, when the breathing out is more evident
then the breathing in, because there is more need of exhaling putrified
vapors, then of cooling. Alex. Massaria page 134. shows sundry causes why
letting blood should be good in putrified agues, first, it cools and dries,
and all cooling and drying things are good for putrefactions. Again, it is
good in respect of the ague, and last of all it helps much transpiration, by
means whereof it must needs be good to help putrefaction. Mont. medic.
universe. part. 3.
When Montanus affirms that to let blood in putrified agues is to kill the
patient, he means a liberal euacuating of blood, but otherwise his words
before do show plainly that it may be done moderately to vent the vapors.
Platerus de febribus page 113.
And Platerus shows an other cause why it ought to be done, because the
occasion of putrified agues does lie hid in the blood and in the branches of
the hollow vain, together with the blood is avoided some portion of the
putrified humor. Fernel. in methodo general^ de curand^^ febribus.
Of the same judgment is Fernelius, The opening of a vain which may take away
both the multitude and also a great portion of the putrified humor, does
greatly avail to the curing of the fever. Gal. method. therap. lib. 11.
And an other reason shows Galen why this must be done, because nature being
disburthened of a part, shall the more easily overcome the whole, as I have
declared in the Chapter going before in the first use of Phlebotomy.

If the ague be that which is called Causo the burning fever, whose matter is
not the heat of blood, but the burning of choler (and whose signs are tossing
of the body, Hippocr. de ratione victus in acutis, sect. 4.
an insatiable thirst, the tongue dry and rough either yellow or black, a
nipping about the stomach and liver, yellow excrements, the urine very thin
and something wanne, the pulse swift, thick and hard, doting, a little sweat
about the forehead and neck, but every where else the skin very dry, and
therewithal a little rough) letting blood may also well be used at the
beginning, but in no great quantity, only four or five ounces for venting or
euentilation are sufficient. Auicenna in his curing of the Causo does affirm,
Auicennae prima quarti.
that blood is not to be let in it, unless there do appear redness and
thickness of urine, but that is not Causo, Montanus in canonem. 11. Auicennae
in medicinae vniuersalis part. 3.
but rather synochus. Montanus shows, that the true continual burning fever
seeing that the matter which does putrify in it (to wit choler) is most hot
and most dry, it becomes in a manner altogether fiery.

Hppocrates teaches the way of curing a burning Hippocr. de ratione victus in
acutis, sect. 4 page 382.
fever by quenching the burning heat, by giving water and mulsa aquosa, but he
makes no mention of letting of blood, thereupon Montanus does conclude: that
letting of blood is not to be permitted in a burning fever. But I think
Montanus his argument in that disputation upon the eleventh Canon of Auicenna
is of small force. For although Hippocrates do not precisely command in that
place blood to be let in a burning fever, yet he makes it in the same place to
be a sign of the dissolution of the disease if the patient do bleed at the
nose: and presently upon it he utters these words, At in morbis acutis
sanguinem detrahes si vehemens fuerit morbus, and qui aegrotant aetate florenti
fuerint, and virium robore valuerint. Platerus does require in the Causo or
burning fever, Platerus de febribus page 115. and page 55.
that there should be a liberal letting of blood if strength do permit,
because he thinks it not to proceed of pure choler (as many other Physicians
have taught) but of blood putrified and inflamed in the great artery, and
causing so much the more dangerous fever as it is kindled in the trunck of the
great artery nearest unto the heart. If Hippocrates do require Phlebotomy in
morbis acutis, then must it needs be good in the burning fever, which as
Trincauell declares is maximus and acutissimus morbus. Trinc. de ratione
curandi part. corp. affect. lib. 2. cap. 11.
But still in the quantity Hippocrates his rule must be observed, to have a due
regard of the age and strength.

CHAP. 3.
How bloodletting may be admitted in agues caused by obstructions, as Diaries
etc.

GAlen shows, Gal. meth. med. lib. 8. cap. 4.
that by obstructions sometimes the transpiration and vapouring out may be
intercepted, and by the obstructions they which have bad humors fall into
agues, as Diaries and such like, and in them he requires as very expedient the
opening of a vain, first for venting or euentilation: for as he says, unless
the bad humor be vented, it must needs become putrified: and secondly, because
those things which you shall minister afterward to deliver from obstructions
will work more effectually. For it is best to come to deterge and loose
obstructions, having first by bloodletting (for he speaks there of
Phlebotomy) avoided part of the evil humors. For we seeking to deliver the
obstructions before we have made euacuation, it is in danger that we shall
imp^^t the obstructions more firmly then before. How the greatness of the
obstruction shall be known, Galen shows a little after in the same book,
Gal. method. therapeut. libr. 8.
The declaration of the quantity of the obstruction is made manifest by the
ague: for upon greater obstructions the ague is greater, and upon less
obstructions it falls out to be less. Bapt. Montan. medicinae vniuersalis
part tertia.
Montanus being fallen into the consideration of this place of Galen, does make
three several kinds of obstructions, and shows in which of them
bloodletting is requisite, and in which not. The first obstruction is when in
the pores of the skin in the outward parts the transpiration and vapouring
out is stayed and prohibited. The second kind of obstruction he calls
coarctatoria, when such a multitude of humors is contained within the veins,
that the passage of the spirits being stopped, they cannot pass thorough the
veins, whereby there comes a peril of suffocation. The third obstruction is
called oppilatio, when some tough matter does so stop the conduits and channels
of the veins, that neither matter nor spirits can pass thorough them.

In the first kind of obstructions Phlebotomy is good, because by it the body
is made more thin, and humors being without the veins in the compass of the
skin, are by bloudletting drawn into the veins, and so do pass away, as
Montanus does demonstrate out of Galen.

In the second kind of obstruction letting blood is also convenient, Gal. de
sanit. tuenda libr. 4.
that the thronging together of humors may cease, and that blood may be
vented. But in the third kind of obstruction it were ill done to let blood,
because the thick humor which is impacted in the first veins, is not thereby
euacuated, but rather increased, as the same author does prove out of the same
fourth book of Galen de sanitate tuenda. I think he has respect to that
position of Galen: Ibid.
In a werisome and faint body there is little good blood, and many raw humors,
Phlebotomies do avoid the good blood, but as for the ill blood which is
gathered together in the first veins, especially that which is about the liver
and mid bowels, they disperse and spread it throughout all the body. How in the
two last kinds of obstructions the humor must be prepared and made fluxible,
before we attempt any letting of blood, it is to be declared hereafter in the
third Chapter of the second book. But the question is here only of the first
kind of obstructions, when in an ague called diaria or ephemera (which lasts
not above 24. hours) by reason either of the constipation or thicknes of the
skin the spirits and vapors have lost their accustomable flowing out,
whereby the spirits are inflamed, whether in this ague blood is to be let or
no? I answer, that according to the judgment of many excellent Physicians of
our time, Platerus de febribus page 286. Fuchsius de morbis medendis. lib. 4.
cap. 1. Brigthus in therapeutica.
this ague is best overcome by causing kindly sweates, by medicines loosing
obstructions, and by using fit bathes without letting of blood. But if it do
continue more then a day, that it be now diaria plurium dierum, or as some call
it ephemera extensa, then all do agree that letting of blood is very expedient,
for fear least of an ague not putrified it do become a synochus putrida, and
so bring greater danger. For as diaries or agues of one day do pass into
diaries of many days, unless the obstruction be loosed as Galen says; Gal.
lib. 10. method. medendi.
Unless the obstruction be cured they fall into agues of many days: so also
the diaries of many days do fall into putrified agues and hectic fevers,
unless they be in time helped and eased, as the same Galen shows in the
first page of his ninth book de methodo medendi. But concerning letting of
blood, Galen does in the tenth book generally set down his judgment very
briefly concerning all diaries caused by obstructions. Gal. method. therap.
lib. 10.
One obstruction comes by multitude, and an other by the quality of the
humors being too tough, or too thick. In that which comes by multitude,
letting of blood is the chiefest manner of curing, but in that which comes by
the quality of the humor, the use of the extenuating things is best.

CHAP. 4.
How far letting of blood may be allowed in intermitting agues, quotidians,
tertians, quartaines.

MOntanus affirms, Mont. medicinae vniuersalis part. 3.
that in a phlegmatic ague, if the fleame be thick and of a glassy green
color, as it falls out in the agues called epialae, then in no wise may any
vain be opened, because although there be a great boiling, yet we have need
of a great heat, that the matter may be concocted, and the passages opened,
and therefore he thinks that we have need rather of frictions. But if it be
pituita dulcis, such a fleame as may easily be converted into blood, then he
allows letting of blood as a fit help to remove the obstruction. He shows
in the same place a little before, that the chiefest cause why we sometimes use
phlebotomy in quotidians and quartaines, is to vent the vapors. Vide finem
tertiae partis medicinae vniuersalis Mont^ni.
It respects not the multitude, but the quality, because it is done only to
help the bubbling of the humor. In the tertian he says, that Phlebotomy is
not necessary, neither euacuatiue, because there is no fullness of blood, but
only evil humors mixed with the blood, nor yet Euentatiue, because the
paroxysmes of the tertians continue not above twelve hours, and have a great
distance of intermission, and therefore can not have so great a boiling as
should need to be vented with so great a remedy as is Phlebotomy. And as
touching the quartaine, he says, that bloodletting does not agree unto it of
it self as it depends of melancholic humor, but per accidens, as when it
comes upon the suppressing of the menstrua or haemorrhodes, or when it
comes ratione sanguinis adusti by means of burnt blood, then he allows the
letting of blood. Platerus does think that all intermitting agues do proceed
of a putrified cause, Platerus' de febribus page 151. and 154.
lying hid in the mesaraick veins, and therefore if any of them could be
opened, he supposes some help might come: but seeing those mesaraick veins do
no where appear at the skin, it were best not only in quartaines but also in
tertians (if possibly it may be) to cause a flux of y^ haemorrhoids, because
the haemorrhodiall veins are branches of y^ mesaraik veins. He will have no
vain to be opened there, unless it appear exceeding well, because a small
wound made there, does bring oftentimes great torments: but he will have either
the flux to be procured by some medicine, or else leaches to be applied. He
allows not phlebotomy in exquisite tertians, and such as are afflicted with
most vehement heat, by reason of choler inflamed, neither does he think it
fit in phlegmatic agues, in which cases he which shall rashly and unskillfully
let blood, shall not only avoid nothing of the cause lying hid in the mesaraik
veins, but also as he says, the matter being plucked out of the mesaraick
veins into the hollow vain, he shall of an intermitting ague make a
continual ague; Plat. ibid.
or else, the purer blood, by reason of emptying the branches of the hollow
vain, being drawn out of the mesaraick veins, that choleric and putrified
humor which remains (and whereunto blood was before a bridle and a means to
assuage it) will now become more fierce. Therefore he concludes, that in these
kinds of agues more harm is done by admitting Phlebotomy then by omitting it,
unless some grievous symotome do happen, that by the inflaming of blood an
inflammation also of some of the inward parts be feared, or unless there be a
plethora or plenitude in the body (which may be observed by the rednes and
thicknes of the urine, and by the long continuing of the heat after the fit,
and when there is no fit) then not in the beginning of the ague, but about the
third or fourth fit, in the day of intermission, out of that vain of the arm
that appears most filled, it will do very well to let blood 5. 6. 7. or 8.
ounces. In quartains it must be done in y^ left arm, and somewhat later then
in tertians: Plater. Ibid.
For quartaines are at the beginning gently to be handled, least a double
quartain or a triple quartain be made, and least also the strength should
decay, which here we must preserve by reason of the long continuance of the
disease. Fuchsius in an exquisite tertian (which proceeds of mere choler,
Fuchsi. de medendis morbis lib. 4. cap. 6.
not mixed with any other humor) does prove out of Galen ad Glauconem, that
neither letting of blood, nor vehement purging medicine can be convenient for
it. Brigthus in therapeutica.
Doctor Bright does think requisite that in the first day of intermission (to
ventilate the body) 6. or 8. ounces of blood be taken. Fernelius in methodo
generali de curandis febribus.
These judgments do seem to be contrary, but yet the several circumstances
being considered, they may both be very well reconciled. For as Fernelius
shows the opening of a vain in respect of it self is hurtful to an
exquisite tertian, it takes away the profitable and necessary humor, and
leaves behind the impure and hurtful. Again, in this kind of ague the body
is wont to be very thin and of little blood: But the sharp choler which is the
matter of the ague, and does abound and boil under the hollow part of the
liver when blood is taken away does wax more fierce. Yet he allows there
letting of blood in respect of other symptoms, such as are headache, beating of
the temples, and heaviness of the body, in corpore plethorico. In tertiana
notha, or the bastard tertian, where choler is for the most part mingled with
fleame, or where choler does not make it self the matter of the ague, but does
kindle other humors (which may be known in that the pulse is much less,
Fuchs. de morbis medendis lib. 4. cap. 7. Brigthus in therapeut.
thinner and slower then the other, and the heat also less) then is no blood
to be taken at the beginning of the Ague; but afterward the matter being
prepared, when the urine does appear red and thick, a vain may be opened the
day going before the fit, and four ounces of blood may be taken. But if the
blood prove thin and somewhat yellowish, then must you straightway suppress
it. In the melancholic quartaine if it come upon the staying of any usual or
natural purging of blood, then stir up that if you can: if you can not, then
within the 14. or the 20. day let a little blood out of the saluatella, if the
strength be weak; or otherwise out of the basilica of the left arm, having
before given a clyster. But if the quartain do come ex atrabile of black
choler, which has fits beginning with less shaking, and those also shorter
then the melancholic (for the melancholic continues 24. hours) and is also
accompanied with a sharp heat and vehement thirst, and with much more
unquietness then the melancholic, then you may let blood in the beginning four
or five ounces out of the basilica of the right arm, and the next day after if
strength will permit two or three ounces out of the saluatella of the left
hand. If that the black choler do proceed of burnt blood you may let out more
then if it proceed of any other humor. Heurnius lib. 2. method. ad pra^n.
That learned Heurnius says, Black choler is ougly, and does spring of some
burnt humor; but melancholy is the very melancholic juice or the dregs of
blood. These are of a nature far differing. For to black choler are due those
things which may pacify the fiercenes of it, as Violets, Endive, and such like:
but to melancholy are due such things as are moderately warm and opening, as
the roots of Capers, the aperitiue roots, and such like, always adjoining to
them such things as have vim humectandi a moystening force. And as in potions
and medicines these two require a far differing method, so also (as you have
already heard) in the manner and time of letting of blood.

In the intermitting agues we must not have a bare and naked respect only to
the fever it self, but we must heedily regard all the symptoms and dangers
which may ensue by the means of other accidents, Trincau. in (...) ad
Glauconem.
as Trincauel in his Commentary upon Galen ad Glauconem does at large declare
by the example of an exquisit tertian. An exquisit tertian (says he) was never
in respect of it self counted amongst great diseases, and therefore Phlebotomy
does not properly appertain unto it. But in other respects it is not only
profitable, but also necessary, when regarding the state of the body, our scope
and purpose is to prevent and avoid future mischiefs. Trincau. Ibid.
For often may an exquisite tertian pass either into a continual ague, or
into a burning ague, when the body is full either of blood or of choler. His
reason is because blood may by reason of the multitude putrify: and also
choler if it be much, and the strength do grow so weak that it neither can
govern it nor expel it, it must needs more and more putrify. Hippocr. libr.
de morbis.
And also according to Hippocrates easily may a tertian be converted into a
plurisy. For these causes (says Trincauel) the opening of a vain may have
place in an exquisite tertian, Trinc. in expl. libr. 1. ad Glauconem de art
curatiua.
but that according to Auicenna must be until the third fit. Thus in all
intermitting agues, though not in all after the same manner, nor in the same
time, nor in the same quantity, nor for the same end and purpose, that axiom
of Galen holds firmly, Gal. therap. method. lib. 11.
that not only in continual agues but also in all other agues whatsoever
where any humor does putrify, it is good to open a vain. You have his words
and his reason in the first Chapter of this book set down at large in the
first use of Phlebotomy. One general note to know in tertians and quartaines
whether any blood may be spared, is y^ thinness and y^ yellowishnesse of the
blood. For the same which D. Bright does write in bastard tertians, Brigt in
therapeut.
that if the blood do prove thin or yellowish, we must straight stop. The same
does Fuchsius require in quartaines, Fuchs. de redend^^ morbis lib. 1. cap. 8.
that if the blood do appear black and thick, such as is commonly in
splenetick men, then we shall let the party bleed more largely; but if the
blood do prove thin and yellow, then must it be presently stayed: for such a
humor is not unprofitable, but as well by his substance as also by his quality
it does amend the thick and cold humors.

Alexander Massaria chief Doctor and professor of the University of Padua, a
man of excellent judgment, Massaria de ^upis mit^endi sanguinis page 132.
does in his late treatise concerning Phlebotomy differ from the opinions of
Platerus and Fernelius, as touching letting blood in tertian agues; and
allows letting blood sometimes in exquisite tertians, and sometimes in
bastard tertians, alleging the auctority of Galen, Gal. lib. 1. ad Glauconem
cap. 10.
so that it be done (...), straight in the beginning, and other things duly
considered, as the strength and plenitude, and due preparation of the body. And
he wondereth what Auicen should mean, when he says, Massaria page 91.
that upon immoderate bleeding choleric humors do more boil and rage,
whereby the patients are more inflamed, whereas experience does testify that
unseasonable or excessive bleeding does bring rather dropsies and cold and bad
habits of body, then any boiling heat or inflaming. If in tertians the
choleric humors of the body be first drawn away and the bowels euacuated by
a glister, and a fit time chosen for the opening of the vain when the stomach
is fasting and empty, I see no reason but the stomach and bowels should draw
back sufficiently to keep the mesaraick veins from sending any such store of
humors into the hollow vain, as should putrefy the blood in it or the
branches thereof. And the rather do I yield more to the judgment of Massaria,
then of Fernelius and Platerus in this point, because the most learned and
expert Physician Heurnius does testify, Heurnius libr, de morbis cap^^is cap.
10.
that in letting blood in choleric bodies we do often avoid more choler then
blood, and by experience I have found it very often to do much good and bring
present help toward the beginning of tertians, although after the fifth or sixth
fit I have not seen much good to come thereof. Massaria page 133. Gal. libr.
1. ad Gauconem. cap. 11.
But in quartain agues Massaria cleaves to that of Galen, We must deal softly
and gently with quartaine agues at the beginning, and neither use any strong
purging nor euacuation of blood, unless it do mightily abound: And if to him
that opens the vain the blood do appear black and thick, such as especially
is found in splenetick persons, let him let blood the more boldly; but if it
appear yellow and thin, let him straightway suppress it.

CHAP. 5.
Whether letting of blood be to be admitted in the plague or pestilent fever,
as also in the Pox and such other contagious infirmities, and when and how.

AVicenna in his eeuenth canon concerning bloodletting (as Montanus has
divided them) does set it down for a rule, Mont. medie. universe. part. 3.
that in what agues soever there is a most vehement inflammation, there must be
no letting of blood. Montanus discoursing upon that place, says, that we must
regard not so much what the disease requires, as what the strength can bear,
Mont. Ibid.
In respect of the disease Phlebotomy does agree, but not in respect of the
powers. He brings in an instance of a pestilent fever, and shows that blood
is not to be let in it, because although of it self in regard of the pestilent
fever there is no greater remedy then letting of blood, seeing that by it the
body is made apt to vent and vapor out the spirits, the inward heat is
extinguished, and putrified blood is euacuated: yet if blood be let all do dye,
Mont. Ibid.
and therefore we must abstain from Phlebotomy in the pestilent fever, because
in a moment of time the strength utterly decays. Platerus shows sundry
great dangers which letting of blood does bring unto them that are infected
with the plague, Platerus de febribus page 225.
and that little good help can be expected thereby. I can not see how
Phlebotomy can avail to pluck that venomous quality from the heart, or to
bring it out of the body together with the blood, seeing that it is rather
procured thereby, that the infection which from outwardly comes into the body
and does presently infect the spirits, should be drawn more deeply inward.
And moreover the motion of nature (whereby straightwayes in the first invasion
it goes about to shake out the poison by sweates, Plater. Ibid.
by outward pustles and by botches) may be hindered by letting of blood, and the
powers thereby weakened, which we ought to keep strong to expel that poison.
It neither does avoid the cause of the disease, neither is there any need
here of any euentilation of heat, seeing it is not here so vehement.
Hereupon he concludes, that upon rash and unadvised letting of blood in plague
times many me^ are killed. Yet he acknowledges that when the plague has taken
hold upon bodies which are sum plethorica vel cachectica, full of blood or of
corrupt humors whereby a fever is kindled, then if by opening of a vain the
plenty and putrefaction of the blood be taken away, all the other symptoms
will become more tolerable: but that must be done sparingly, and with a due
regard of the strength. And if in the beginning strength be decayed, then is
Phlebotomy not to be admitted, though the fullness of the veins do require
it: for of lusty youths we have found by experience more to escape in the
plague time without letting of blood then by letting of blood. If Phlebotomy be
used it must be done rather in respect of the fever then of the pestilent
quality, seeing that this venom does not consist in the blood, but coming
from outwardly does suddenly possess the heart, and we do not think that it
can be expelled or drawn out from it by Phlebotomy. And if the case do so
stand that by the means of the plenitude and fever a vain must needs be
opened, then he shows in what order it must be done. First, it must be done
in the beginning: for unless the vain be opened within 24. hours of the
beginning, it will rather hinder nature then do any good. Also it must be
considered whether the party be in a sweat or no: for in no wise must the
sweat be hindered by Phlebotomy. But after the party has sweat and has bin
refreshed with a little meat or some cordial receipt, then may a vain be
opened howsoever there has gone no clyster nor purging before, because the
time has not given leave. Choose the vain in that side which is most grieved.
If any eruption appear about the flanck open the saphena. If in the upper
parts, then some vain in the arm or hand of the same side. If under the
arme-hole, take the basilica. If about the ^ares, the cephalica. If in the
face, open the vain under the tongue. And ever to the botches appearing, let
cupping glasses be fastened, that the poison may abide in the same place, and
not by Phlebotomy be drawn into the inward parts. Trincauel does account it
very dangerous to let blood when pimples do outwardly appear: Trincauel
tractat. de febre pestilentiali.
but when as well by the pulse, as by the former manner of diet which the party
has used, it is found to be expedient; then let it be done straight in the
beginning before the putrefaction of the pestilent fever be much increased; and
before nature do seek to expel unto the skin. Hippocr. de morbis vulgar. lib.
1. sect. 7.
Thus he proves out of Galen, who commenting upon one of Hippocrates his
patients called Crito, who dyed upon a kind of pestilent fever, he does excuse
Hippocrates and says that he did not let him blood, because he was not sent
for at the beginning of the disease. Which signifies that if he had bin sent
for at the beginning, a vain no doubt should presently have bin opened.

Montanus in his epistle to Crato does allow letting of blood in the small
pocks and such other contagious diseases, Montan. in initio consultationum
medicarum.
so that it be in the beginning before signs of putrefaction appear: but when
it has once prevailed, then to let blood he does call it a pernicious and a
deadly thing. For nature is then checked when it should wholly be intentive to
expel the venom and infection of the disease. Fuel. consil. 67.
Fernelius, Hollerius, and Syluius, three famous and worthy Physicians,
consulting about the sweating plague called sudor Anglicus, did deliver to the
English Ambassador the use of bloodletting amongst the means to prevent the
disease, in full bodies, the bodies being first orderly purged: but the disease
having once taken hold, they advised no bloodletting, but prescribed good
cordials to expel from the heart the venomous infection. But in that which is
commonly called by the name of Plague, although the body be already infected,
yet if it be corpus pletharicum (the notes whereof are in the first Chapter of
the book next ensuing) we may be bold to begin the cure with bloodletting,
observing as near as may be the cautions before expressed, and especially
taking heed (as Montanus gives warning) that we choose the vain as far as
we can from the principal parts, Montanus medicinae vniuersalis part. 3.
from the heart, liver, and brain, for if we draw the pestilent humor unto
them he says we shall kill the patient.

CHAP. 6.
How letting of blood is to be used in phrensies, quinsies, plurisies,
inflammations of the raynes or womb, and other inward inflammations happening
often without agues.

IN the phrensy (which is a deprauing of all the principal faculties of the
brain) caused by the inflammation of the filmes thereof) Rhazes does allow
Phlebotomy in the beginning of the disease, Heurnius de morbis caepitis cap.
10. page 114.
but not if it be a hectic phrensy of any continuance. Celsus does affirm,
that the face being red and the veins swelling, a vain may be opened after
the fourth day, if strength be sufficient. But if it come of a choleric cause,
then it should seem to be ill done to let blood, because as Heurnius obiecteth
fraenum bilis est sanguis, blood is the bridle of choler. To this he answers,
Male sanguinem sine bile educeremus. imo plus bilis educimus quam sanguinis,
Hardly can we avoid blood without choler, yea rather by Phlebotomy we do bring
out more choler then blood. And if it were done but only for deriuation sake,
yet were it well done. But at what time must this Phlebotomy be used? Caelius
Aurelianus says that it must be done within three days of the beginning, and
not beyond, because in such diseases the strength of the body is in peril.
Aretaeus also says, that it ought to be done either the first or the second
day. If the phrensy begin after the fourth day, then open the vain after the
seventh day: but if it do come in the sixth or seventh day, then let no
blood, for that is a critical phrensey. A^tius says, that if the phrensy do
come with an ague any day before the fourth day, and signs of plenitude
appear, we may well open the middle vain. When the phrensy is old, letting
blood is not safe. Caelius says, that to let blood after the eight day est
iugulare homines, is nothing but to murder men. The quantity must be according
to the cause. If it proceed of inflamed blood, you may let blood vsque ad
animi deliquium, till the heart begin to fail. For there is a vehement
inflammation, a very sharp fever, and exceeding great grief, 1. Aph. 13. and
1. Aph. 23.
in which three cases Galen allows large Phlebotomy. But if the blood be much
mixed with choler, then six ounces shall suffice, or if the party be strong,
ten ounces. Aretaeus his opinion is, that if it have the first beginning from
the parts about the midriffe, then the party may bleed more largely, because
thereabouts lies the fountain of blood. What you do you must do at once, for
the disease does give no long truce. Trallianus commands the vain of the
forehead to be opened. But that Heurnius does condemn, Heurnius de morbis
capitis cap. 10.
as ministering a further increase to the discase, especially if the phrensy
come of blood: for both the blood should turn his course into the head, and
also the euacuation should be made by the very place affected, which should be
as he thinks very inconvenient. The course which Heurnius does best like of,
is this, first to open the middle vain of the arm, and after to open either
the vain of the forehead, or the vain under the tongue.

For the Quinsie or squinancie, the swelling of the throat, Trincau. de
ratione curandi partic corp. affect. lib. 5. cap. 7.
causing difficulty of breathing, and hardness of swallowing, Trincauel does
advise a speedy letting of blood; yet a glister being used before if the
disease will give leave: but if the disease (as it is a very sharp disease)
will give no space, then may we do as Hippocrates sometime did, Hippocr. 2. de
ratione victus in morbis acutis. Fuchsi. de medendis morbis lib. 2. cap. 5.
that is, first let blood, and afterward minister the Clyster. Fuchsius wills
us to open the basilica of the arm of the same side where the swelling is. But
he will have it to be done at several times by little and little, and not all
at once, least there should happen a swouning, and so a peril of suffocation:
and besides, By two sudden coolings and by fainting of the heart, the matter
may be carried from the jaws unto the lungs, and so bring inevitable danger.
Yet must not the incision be made too little, least by means of the
narrowness of the hole the good blood should be as it were strained out, and
the thick part remain within, which is the cause of the grief. If the patient
be a woman whose terms are stayed, open first the saphena, and then the vain
under the tongue. For the pleurisy, how convenient bloodletting is for it, it
is a thing so well known to all men, that there needs no proof thereof. But
on what side the vain must be taken, whether on the same side that has the
inflammation, or on the contrary side, seeing that there is amongst learned
Physicians a great controversy about that matter, I have appointed one
Chapter, to wit, the Chapter next following, wholly for the discussing of that
question. And for as much as also all the arguments laid open in that
disputation do as well concern the inflammation of the raynes and of the womb,
and all other inward inflammations as the plurisy, I have thought it good to
speak no more of the particulars here, but rather to conclude with that
general speech of Galen. To speak briefly, Gal. libro de ratione carandi per
venae sectionem.
when inflammations do begin, we must euacuate them by reuulsion (that is,
pluck it back into the parts furthest distant) but when they are of long
continuance, we must empty them out of the places affected, or as near unto
those parts as we can. For at the beginning of inflammations it is good to
turn back that which flows, but when they have remained a long time, we must
avoid and expel that which is impacted and fastened in the part affected.

CHAP. 7.
In these dangerous inflammations aforenamed, whether euacuation or reuulsion
be more necessary, and what is the meaning of Hippocrates his rule (...), to
work directly, and with a right course of flowing.

PEtrus Brissotus, and Matthaeus Curtius, two learned Physicians, the one a
Frenchman, and the other an Italian, have by many arguments proved, that in a
pleurisy the vain ought still to be opened in the arm of the same side where
the grief lies. Trincaeuel Consil. page 971.
Trincauel in his treatise which he calls rudimentum, has undertaken to
confute them. The first reason of Brisso^us is, Ratio prima Brissoti.
because in such sharp diseases, unless you help presently the party dies.
And the first scope in an inflammation is to avoid blood out of the place
inflamed, for the performance whereof the same side is most convenient.
Trincauel answers, that when the party has no full body, then that position
may well stand. But if there be a full body, then he holds with Galen, that
the scope and purpose of the Physician must be to forbid that the blood shall
not flow to the place of grief. For the flux of the blood does Galen make to
be the cause of the vehement inflammation. Gal. libr. 2. ad Glauc.
And this staying of the flowing of blood he thinks may best be done by
euacuating, so that we may also revel the same by drawing it back to the
contrary side. Brissotus again obiecteth, Ratio secunda Brissoti.
that by reuulsion there is often stirred up a pleurisy on the other side, unto
which the reuulsion is made. Trincauell does answer, that does happen by
means of the fullness of the whole body, especially of the lower parts, when
the opening of the upper veins can not avoid so much as is drawn upward out
of the inferior parts of the body: whereupon the humor following, the motion
which is made by the force of the vain cut, settling on that side, does give an
occasion of a new inflammation. And therefore when there is a plenitude in the
whole body, especially about the lower parts of the belly, he does greatly
commend the custom practiced for many years with good success by the
Physicians of Venice, to wit in this, to open the vain about the knee, or
about the anckle. And he shows, that in his own experience in the same time
that he was writing that treatise, he cured an old man of 60. years of age
(who having a body vere plethoricum, was fallen into a plurisie) by causing the
vain to be opend hard by the anckle. If Hippocrates did sometimes open the
vain in the arm of the same side where the pleurisy did lie (as Trincauel
does make account he did in the curing of Anaxion the Abderite) it was because
the disease was fully made, Hippocr. lib. 3. epidem.
and the matter already flowed. But in the beginning of the flowing of the
humor, neither Hippocrates nor Galen do allow the same kind of euacuation,
which afterward-they admit when the flux is already made. Hippocr. 6. epidem.
par. 2. aph. 19.
Hippocrates says, If humors be carried into that part which they ought not,
we must revel them, but if they flow the same way they ought, then to open the
passage to them according as every one is bent. And what his judgment is
touching this matter, you have it set down in the end of my Chapter last going
before, Vide finem ^exti capitis huius libri and finem primi capitis.
and also toward the end of my first Chapter, where are cited the words of
Galen concerning an ulcer caused of a flux, that if the flowing be vehement we
must pluck it back into the contrary parts, but when it does cease and rest
settled in a place, then is it best to derive it. Upon which point also Galen
does infer there a general conclusion. Galen lib. 4. method. therap. cap. 6.
It is a general thing that when fluxes do begin, we must use reuulsion; but
when they are settled in any affected part, then euacuate them either from the
same place, or from some other place as near as can be. He speaks there of
purging by medicines, but in the 13. and 14. book of the same method of
healing, he requires the same order likewise in letting of blood, and
repeateth again as a general axiom, Gal. method. therapeut. lib. 13.
ever make the reuulsion to the furthest parts off. So commenting upon
Hippocrates, he bids us first make reuulsions, and afterward set upon the
contraries, to make local euacuations as he himself does expound it by the
example of grief in the hinder part of the head, Gal. libr. 2. comment in 6.
epidem. prop^ finem commentar^. Gal. method. therapeut. lib. 13. (...)
Institut. lib. 2.
which is taken away by opening the vain of the forehead. And so in an other
place, if the right leg have an inflammation, he appoynteth a vain to be
opened in the left. Fuchsius has framed sundry answers to those testimonies
of Galen in the 13. book of his Methodus therapeutica. First he says, that
his general axiom, that reuulsion must be made always to places furthest
distant, can in no wise be wrested unto letting of blood, seeing that Galen
does not speak there of letting of blood, but of purgings, vomits,
cupping-glasses, and such like. I wonder that Fuchsius should make that
answer, seeing that Galen does not only often in the leaves last going before
make mention of Phlebotomy, but also when he has made this general precept
with (...), semper, always revel to the furmost, he says in the lines next
following, that he has spoken of this in his books of Plenitude and
Phlebotomy. Gal. method. therap. lib. 13.
These things are written in my books of fullness and bloodletting. Secondly,
Fuchsius says further, aliquando venae sectione ad longinqua reuellimus, sed
hoc fit in futuro morbo, sometimes we make reuulsion by bloodletting into
places far distant, but that is when the disease is to come. If Fuchsius
confess so much, then he agrees with Auic^n, Montanus, Trincauell, and such
a^ hold with them. For they all do teach that reuelling into places furthermost
distant is not always requisite, but only in the beginning, when the humor is
yet flowing, before the humor be settled, antequam sit morbus factus, before it
be a disease made, and that is indeed in futurso morbo, Thirdly, for that place
where Galen does bid that if the one leg have an inflammation, we should let
blood in the other: Fuchsius answers, that Galen does speak in that place of
scarifying, that when one leg has gotten an inflammation we must scarify the
other, because scarifying does stir up a grief and pain, and dolor
attrahit, grief draws the flux to the place scarifyed. But I marvel that
Fuchsius would not take the words as Galen has let them down. Galen speaks
plainly in that place not only of scarifying, but also of bloudletting, his
words are these: ^al. method. (...)
We must either open a vain, or scarify the places not affected, as the hand
being grieved to take the leg, or the one leg being pained, the other.

Fuchsius having objected the practice of some which first do diminish the
plenitude by opening the saphena, or else the basilica of the contrary arm,
and after do take away the relics out of the same side where the grief
lies, does cry out against this counsel of the Arabian Physicians with the
same words that Fernelius also does, ^ernel^in me^^^^ medendi (...) cap. 5.
(...) institist. 2.
What an od counsel is this to torment the patient so often, when you may
with one act ease him of his pain? But although these two were both of them
famous and learned men, yet as good Physicians as they do prescribe the act of
letting of blood to be often repeated either in one day or in days immediately
following, and yet are in very good hope that they do not thereby torment the
patient, but work much more for his ease. Hieron. Mercurial. consil. 15.
Mercurialis giving counsel to one which in a cough did spit blood, says, If
the casting up of blood do remain, it would like me well that blood should
often be let a little at once out of either arm, and therewithal rubbings and
bindings applied both to the anckles and to the knees. Montanus who does as
much reverence Auicenna, Montan. medicinae vniuersalis part secunda, page 312.
as Fuchsius and Fernelius do persecute him. For he says of him, Auicen was a
most divine man, a follower of Galen, and to be preferred before all that have
drawn their learning out of Galen: We have Greek translators (as he names
there Aetius, Paulus Aegineta, and Oribasius) but compare them with Auicen and
they are nothing. Page 393.
And a little after he says, we must know that Auicen does never speak any
thing but what was before approved by antiquity. This Montanus as in other
points he commends Auicenna, so in the several states of pleurisy he
allows his judgment, Montanus medicinae vniuersalis part. 3.
that first blood be drawn from the saphena, then from the opposite vain of
the arm, and last of all from the same side: The first takes away the
multitude; the second makes the diuersion, and the third does empty the place
affected. For the diuersion to the contrary part Montanus does not only allege
the auctority of Auicenna and the Arabians, but of Archigenes and of Aretaeus.
Aretaeus is brought in giving his reason, If there should be multitude of blood
and you should draw it from the side where the pleurisy is, either you must
draw it plentifully to fainting and swouning, and so the patient should either
dye, or get an impostume in the lungs, or else you must draw a little, and so
choke and stifle the party diseased, because (the plenitude being so great)
much more will flow then shall be avoided. Trincau. in rudimento in co^sil.
page 1043.
Trincauell in the conclusion of that treatise which he made against Brissotus
and Curtius, does describe several considerations which are to be had in the
pleurisy: If there be a great fullness of blood, and a vehement force of the
humor rushing on, and that we fear moreover least the inflammation should
overmuch increase, then we do attempt both a reuulsion, and also an euacuation
as far off as we can, and by the contrary side: but if there be no great
fullness of blood, nor great force of the flowing of humors, nor great
inflammation, then there is no need to begin with parts far off, because
less reuulsion is requisite. So he expounds the meaning of Galen, that if
the knee or the feet be taken with an inflammation, this must first be
considered, whether there be such a fullness of body as does also fill all the
upper parts, whereby there is feared an increase of the swelling, for then we
must let blood out of the veins of the upper parts. But if the repletion be
not so great, and that it be only in the inferior parts, then shall it be
sufficient to let blood out of the opposite foot. The inflammation may be so
little and light, that it will be enough to open a vain in the foot of the
same side. If the testimonies which Fuchsius does allege out of Hippocrates
and Galen be considered by these circumstances, Fuchsius Instit. libr. 2.
then shall the two opinions be easily reconciled. Galen method. (...) lib. 13.
cap. 11.
He cites Galens auctority, when the liver has begun to gather an
inflammation, the blood is both to be plucked back, and euacuated, by opening
the inward vain of the right arm, because it is direct unto it, and a great
way has a society with the vain which is called the hollow vain. Galen does
there suppose the case to be first, a liver beginning to be inflamed, and
therefore yet a light inflammation: then consider principally whether the whole
body have ^eede of euacuatiou: then consider the strength of the patient,
whether he be able to endure to euacuate once plentifully: and whether he do
stand strong in power, then by Phlebotomy in the right arm revel or take away
the blood that is carried toward the liver. This does nothing overthrow the
positions before set down. Fuchs. Instit. lib. 2. and de morbis medendis lib.
2. cap. 8. and in Apologia aduersus Brachelium.
Fuchsius every where does build mightily upon that place of Galen in his book
of Phlebotomy: In pleurisies the Phlebotomy which is used right upon the side
that is payned, does often bring a most evident help: but that which is used
upon the opposite hand, does bring either an obscure help, or else it is long
ere it come. Gal. de ratione curandi per venae sectione^.
No doubt Galen there does mean such in whom there is morbus iam factus, the
disease already settled, and of them you may see what Galens judgment is, if
you read the conclusion of the sixth Chapter of this my treatise. For ever
according to the several scope and drift of the Physician, there must be a
several manner of Phlebotomy. So in the inflammations of the womb Galen
teaches, that in the beginning of them, Gal. ad Glauconem therap. libr. 2.
when the humor is now in flowing, thou shall divert it, if thou open the
varne in the cubite. But if the humor be settled in the place, thou shall
derive it by opening the vain in the knees or in the anckles. Gal. libr. de
ratione curandi per venae sectionem.
True it is that he does elsewhere teach, that Phlebotomies in ye arm do stay
women's terms, as the letting blood in the legs does bring the terms down,
but (as Galen shows) in the beginning of the inflammations of the womb it is
not good that the terms should be provoked, Gal. method. therap. lib. 13.
because they bring down a humor to the place affected, especially in a body
that is full of humors apt to flow. When we take upon us to cure an
inflammation of the womb, if there be no other intent nor drift but to case
the inflammation, then may we open some vain in the leg: but if we take our
scope and purpose from the flowing of the humors to the diseased part, and
from the fullness of the whole body, then both to empty the plenitude, and to
pluck back the humors that are sliding down, we must (as Galen judges)
attempt it by the veins of the cubite. Fuchs. Instit. ^ibr. ^.
Fuchsius alleges also the counsel of Hippocrates, who advises in a
pleurisy to open the inward vain of the arm of the same side right upon it.
There is none that does make any question but that in the pleurisy being a
confirmed disease, and the humors having already flowed, euacuation is more
fit then reuulsion, and both may be done by the nearest place: yea, such a
manner of pleurisy it may be (as Hippocrates shows) that you can not fitly
use any Phlebotomy at all, Hippocr. 6. ^pidem. part. 3. ^ph. 32.
his words are these, There be some such as in whom in due time blood may be
let. But in others it is not so fit as in them. The impediment is unto them
which spit blood, time, the pleurisy, and choler. Fuchs. comment. (...) 6.
epidem.
Fuchsius in his Comment upon that place shows, that there be three
hindrances that do stay them that spit blood from being let blood, the first
is time, being too hot or too cold. The other two he joins together, and
thinks that he means that in the pleurisy proceeding of choler Phlebotomy
is not convenient, Trincauel ^pist. 22. ad Alexandrum Triuellum etc.
Trincauel being by occasion fallen into the consideration of that place of
Hippocrates, does show that Galen commenting upon that place, does say, that
the points concerning the time of the year and choler may well be admitted,
but that the exception about the pleurisy does seem somewhat hard, because if
any disease (the strength and age consenting) do require letting of blood, the
pleurisy does most of all require it. But (he says) the knot is straight by
Galen loosed, to wit, that the words of Hippocrates are thus to be understood,
that always he which spitteth blood must have a vain opened, unless the said
spitting of blood do come of a pleurisy, for then blood must not always be
let, but we must use such liniments as do particularly respect the pleurisy.
And afterward he shows y^ reason why it is not necessary that such as have
pleurisies, should always be let blood, because by experience he knew one
me^ded of a pleurisy without letting of blood, his pleurisy being a light
pleurisy, and void of all fear of plenitude. for the grief was but small, and
the blood was cast out by spitting: now those pleurisies are most gentle in
which blood is spit out. Hippoc epide^ lib. 6. sect. 2.
(...) in Hippocrates signifies directly, and as it were in a right line: a
benumming of the thigh right on the same side, is a sign of the stone in that
kidney, Gal. lib. 2. ad Glauconem cap. 7.
so Galen does expound it (...), it signifies according to rectitude. And in
an other place he does interpret it by the word (...), directnes. Gal. libr. 3.
d. iudicys cap. 3.
For a good sign blood must flow directly as out of the right nostrill, if
the liver or right side be affected: and out of the left nostrill, if the
spleen or the parts thereabouts be grieved. In Coacis praenotionib^^.
The contrary to (...), is (...), as Hippocrates says, blood to flow out of
the contrary side is an evil sign. Good it was for Bion being a splenetick
man to bleed out of the left nostrill, and good for Herophon after the
swelling of his spleen, to have a kernel to rise (...) of the same side. So
the auctor of the book de renum affectibus. By the benumming of the thigh
directly on the same side you shall know which rain is affected: for if there
be a benumming in the right thigh, then is the stone in the right kidney; if in
the left thigh, then in the left kidney. This (...) has place in the crisis of
diseases, but Hippocrates does never appoint Phlebotomies to be made of
necessity always, (...), directly upon the same side. Fernelius expounds
this word (...), to signify the rightnes of the fibrae or vills, ^ernel. lib.
2. ^ethod. me^end^.
as it were little thready or hairy strings, stretched out and running by the
longitude of the veins. But Andraeas Laurentius, and Reusnerus upon
Willichius, Andraeas I auentius in A^t^m. ^^usa^rus in (...).
do at large confute that opinion. For if Fernelius do make those rectae fibrae
helps for euacuation or expulsion, then does he not well, for the transuerse
fibers and not the right do serve for expulsion: and if he make them (as they
are) helps of attraction, then must they draw equally as well on the one side
as the other, because they run out equally by the length of the veins on
both sides. And the like answer they make to them which would have the word to
signify the continuing and joining together of parts, as though all the veins
of the right side were joined one to and in an other amongst themselves, and
the veins of the left side joined among themselves, and did not rather
participate and communicate one with an other. But seeing the trunk of the
hollow vain is one, the branches thereof on both sides are equally joined to
the liver. The breaking out of blood out of the left nostrill does empty as
well the right side as the left, and (as Reusnerus says) he saw often by
experience that the diseases of the spleen were helped sometimes by opening
the liver vain, and sometimes by blood gushing out of the right nostrill. And
moreover, as Andraeas Laurentius shows, there is no meeting together betwixt
the veins of the nostrils and the spleen, and yet the spleen being inflamed
(as you have heard) the blood that flows out of the left nostrill does flow
(...), directly. And therefore that word of Hippocrates is not to be referred
to the joining together of the veins one in an other, but to the rectitude of
the whole parts of the body, Andraeas Laurentius in anatom.
quia dextra dextris and sinistra sinistris sunt (...), because the right lims
to the right, and the left to the left are as it were of one tribe or kindred,
and therefore like good neighbors do one labor to help an other. Mayor est
vis in forti contentione obsessae partis quam in venarum situ, There is a
greater force in the strong contention and striving of the side that is
besieged or set upon, then is in the situation of the veins. And a good
critical sign it is when that side that is impugned, can expel part of that
wherewith it is ouercharged and oppressed. But when for any inflammation a
vain is to be opened, we have many other things to be regarded besides the
consideration of the side. We must mark well whether the whole body have a
fullness of the veins: whether the humor be flowing, or now already flowed
and settled: whether it does require euacu^tion or reuulsion or diuersion, and
which of them ^ore then other, and how these uses of Phlebotomy and the order
thereof shall best be performed, of all which points you have seen already
that the best Physicians of our age have gathered out of the best Physicians in
times past. Only I will add one observation more out of Montanus, and so an
end of this ouertedious controversy. Mont. medici. universe. part. 3.
Montantus will have in every inflammation two things principally to be
regarded, the first, membrum mandans, the member that does send the humor, and
the second, membrum recipiens, the member or part that does receive the humor.
As he gives his instance thus of the pleurisy. Let there be (says he) one of
a hoate liver, who has labored in the sun, has dronken strong wine, has
inflamed his head, has rested suddenly in a cold place, and then (as it
comes commonly to pass) by the cold the matter is expressed by the veins,
and descending by the veins it does flow down either to the higher or lower
ribs, and there follows a pain. Here the member sending is the head, and the
member receiving, the ribs. Let the place of the inflammation be in the right
side, where must we then let blood? He answers, that seeing the humor is
carried downward, if we should open the basilica of the same side we should
draw the humor more downward, and so increase the impostume and endanger the
patient. The fullness is in the head, but above the head there is nothing; if
there were, we would euacuate from it: Therefore either a deriuation must be
made to derive the humor from the head, by opening the veins which are
behind the ears, or by bleeding at the nose (which were excellent) or by
striking the vain under the tongue, or else we must follow the expert Arabian
Physicians, to let blood on the contrary side, that so by reuulsion the humor
may be drawn according to the directnesse of the situation, from the right
side to the left. But if the pleurisy do come of another cause that the flux be
not from the head, but it be the liver full of blood and choler sending humors
unto the ribs by the ascending vain, because there is a plucking of the
humors from the lower parts unto the higher, in what vain then must we let
blood? He answers, not from the basilica of the same right side, for then we
shall draw the humor to the place: but (as Auicenna does teach) either we
must draw it down by opening the saphena of the same side, or else we must
deal with the opposite side above. The rest of Montanus his opinion you have
seen before in this Chapter, where I have compared his judgment with the
judgment of others the most excellent Physicians of our age.

CHAP. 8.
Whether letting of blood may be practiced in cold diseases, as palsies,
cramps, apoplexies, and whether it may fitly be used in melancholic winds,
colicks and dropsies.

FOr the diseases mentioned in this and the two Chapters following, I purpose
not to show the censures of many Physicians, but only for every infirmity to
content my self with the auctority of one or two of whom I make best
reckoning, and so to hasten to those other points which more generally and
universally are to be considered in the whole practice of Phlebotomy. Trincauel
de ratione curadi part. corp. affect. is lib. 3. cap. 3.
Although cramps, and palsies, conuulsions, and resolutions be cold diseases;
yet Aetius, Paulus Aretaeus, and diverse do appoint to begin the cure with
letting of blood. Galen does allow it, Gal. libr. 1. ad Glauconem cap. 14.
but not generally and always. He only does admit it in these cases, and with
these conditions, First, when these cold diseases have their beginning by the
suppression of the terms or hemorrhodes. Secondly, if they be with a fever;
but then it must be done moderatly, and sparingly. Thirdly, if there be great
plenty of blood either in the whole or in the head. Hippocr. 4. de ratione
victus in morbis acutis. Trallian. lib. 1. cap. 14. Heurnius de morbis capitis
cap. 25.
For as Galen shows and also Hippocrates, by the overmuch fullness of the
veins there are made oftentimes epilepsies and apoplexies. Trallianus
begins his cure of a lethargy by letting of blood, if other circumstances
do not prohibit. Heurnius in his Chapter of conuulsions does like well of the
judgment of Aretaeus, to wit, that whether the cramp or conuulsion do come of
coldness, or by a wound, or by untimely birth, the vain in the arm is to be
opened, especially if blood be the cause; or if it be such a crick that the
neck or body can bend no way; or if it be an inflammation, or a wound. Montanus
allows Phlebotomy in epilepsies and apoplexies when they depend of blood,
Montanus medicinae vniuersalis part. 3.
but he adds this clause, hoc autem faciendum debitis temporibus praecipue
vere, this must be done in due time, especially in the spring time. For
melancholic winds caused by obstructions of the liver or spleen, Mercurialis
giving advise in that case to a Noble man of Germany, Mercurial. consil. 66.
says, first; you must think of letting blood, not that the abundance of it
does plainly show any such matter, but because other noble helps can hardly be
safely administered, unless letting of blood do go before. And in an other
place, writing counsel for a woman which had five years suffered the
obstruction of the spleen, Mercurial. consil. 104.
and was now come to a schirrus, or hard swelling, he says, I think it were
excellent well, that she should be let blood, first out of the common vain,
then out of the lienaris, and last of all out of the vain of the left foot,
so that at thrice there be in all taken a pound of blood. Trincauel his
judgment is, Trincauel consil. 15. pro melancholia hypochondriaca.
that we must abstain from bloudletting, when the melancholic humor is
dispersed into the veins of the hypochondria, and the whole body, and that
then we must rather purge or procure the hemorrhodes if the party have had them
usually before. For the Colic, Auicen does forbid bloodletting to be used in
it. Montanus writing upon the sixth Canon of Auicen, Montan. medicinae
vniuersalis part. 3.
gives the reason of it, because the colic comes of some cold and thick
matter, and phlebotomy both does make more cold, and also has no power to
avoid the thick and gross causes of the grief. Yet he adds this, But if the
colic do come by the inflammation of the colum, one of the lowest guts, by
means of blood or choler flowing to the place, in this case if you let not
blood the patient will dye.

For the Dropsy Trincauel teaches, that if it come by the suppression of some
usual flux, Trincauel de ratione curadi part. corp. aff. lib. 8. cap. 10.
as the terms, the hemorrhodes, and bleedings at nose, whereby (by the
superfluous abundance of blood) the natural heat of the liver begins to be
quenched, then the first thing in the cure must be phlebotomy. But if it come
of fleame, then omitting bloodletting, we must only seek to purge the fleame.
He makes there an objection what we must do if the terms be not suppressed,
and yet the urine do appear high colored, whether may we then let blood or
no, Auicenna prima quarti.
seeing that Auicen says, that if the urine do appear red and thick, a vain
must presently be opened? Trincauel answers, that yet we must not let blood,
because in this disease that rule of Auicen does not take place. For the red
tincture of the urine does not come by abundance of blood, but first, because
little urine is made in these diseases, therefore it is the higher colored:
for the thin juices of choler and blood, from the which does come the color
of the urine, being mingled with a little moisture, do give the greater
tincture, and make it higher colored. And a second cause of the high color in
the urine, he says, may be the debility of the raynes, which by reason of
their weakness being not able perfectly to separate the blood from the
excrement, do let some little portion of blood pass with the urine, whereby
the urine is dyed red. A third reason does Fernelius give why the color of the
urine may often deceive, because when the choler is cast out by the liver, it
does not only color the thin part of blood, but makes the urine also to
look as though the blood were inflamed, as he gives an instance by Iaundises
and Dropsies, Fernelius in method^ general de curandis sebribu^.
and concludes, They do therefore offend, which by the urine being of citrine
color, and thick, do judge straight that blood is to be let. For such an
urine does not come by the abundance or by the kindling of blood, but by the
pouring out of choler out of the liver. I will not speak here of the razing
of the stone in the raynes, and some other occasions that may be, that a little
blood issuing, may alter mightily the color of urine. This which has already
bin spoken, may put us sufficiently in mind in the matter of bloodletting, not
so much to be led by the color of the urine, as by other evident tokens which
shall be hereafter more at large declared. But when the urine does concur
with other signs; then vis vnita munita. Et quae non prosunt singula multa
iuuant.

CHAP. 9.
Whether in rheumes and distillations, and also whether in the Gout, and the
disease called Morbus Gallicus, any benefit may ensue by letting of blood.

MOntanus does make this to be one of the principal and general uses of
Phlebotomy, Montanus medicinae vniuersalis part. 3.
then to take place, When any has some notable heat of some member, by means
of which heat it does easily receive excrements, and so fall into a disease;
as if there be a heat of the raynes, there is made the stone; if of the liver,
the iaundise; and if of the breast the salt rheum. Razes does commend in a
rheum letting of blood. Heurnius de morbis capitis page 335.
But Heurnius does restrain it with certain limits. He will not have it to be
used unless there do appear the signs of fullness of blood, as the redness
of the face and eyes, and extending of the veins, and unless the body and
head appear to be hot, and the rheum salt, with a matter not very far
differing from blood; and further, unless there be some danger of the
instruments of breathing, the lungs and the sides; then he admits
bloodletting, but as he says, sparingly, and not too much: but in a cold
rheum the sweet mitigation of blood is not to be taken away. In the Gout
Phlebotomy is not to be used, unless great fullness do of necessity urge
thereunto. There may this reason be given of it, because that thin
distillation, which flows from the brain into the joints, and being there
thickened and settled does cause the gout, does not fall down by any vain,
Fernel. co^sil. 12.
as Fernelius shows in his answer to the Physician Bucherius, Aliter
Montanus consil. 132.
but does distill from the brain to the neck and shoulders, and from thence to
the feet parts consecuta subcutaneas, having gotten for passage the parts
under the skin, and because it is thin, does flow vnsensibly. Bucherius
thought, that because in the blood that he saw drawn out of veins there
appeared sometimes phlegmatic matter to flow out with the blood, therefore
that fleame slipping out of the veins might be a cause of the gout. But
Fernelius does confute him, and shows that that which swimmeth so whitish in
the basen is a kind of phlegmatic blood, such as does abound in the disease
called Leucophlegmatia, and that it is so far from sliding out of the veins
into the joints, that it can not be drawn out of the veins by strong
medicines. For that fleame which is fetched out of the body by purgings and
vomits, does not come from the veins, but it is wholly either from the brain,
or from the stomach, or from the bowels. He adds, I think this to be one of
the greatest errors of the common sort of people, that in all diseases they
place the faults of the humors no where else but in the veins, and when the
question is of humors, they understand nothing of those which do abound in
other places, but only of those which are mingled with the blood in the veins.
Although the cause and nourishment of the gout does not flow from the veins,
yet if the party have a full body, it will be very dangerous for him to omit
letting of blood, for that attenuating and resolving diet (which by means of
his disease he must use) will make his plenitude the more perilous, unless
having first purged his body, he do also cause some vain to be opened. The
like reason does Fernelius give in his curing of morbus Gallicus, Fernelius de
lue ^en^rca page 108.
after that he has advised the body to be twice or thrice purged, he says
that also he must be let blood as his fullness shall require, and sterngth
permit, for so not only the inward parts and whole body shall be cooled, but
also the dangers of plenitude, which may be stirred up by the use of
attenuating and resolving things, shall be thereby avoided. What vain must be
chosen in the gout when bloodletting is thus found requisite, Gal. libro de
ratione curandi per venae scciionem.
Galen does declare toward the end of his book of Phlebotomy. In the gout we
must open the vain^ in the cubite, but in the falling sickness, and in that
swimming in the head which makes all things seem to go round, we must do it
rather in the legs. But how does this agree with that place which I have
alleged before out of Galen in my seventh Chapter: Gal. method. therap. lib.
13.
If one leg have an inflammation, scarify and let blood in the other. Humors
do seem with greater difficulty to ascend then descend, and (the hollow vain
in the lower part of the body dividing his branches equally to both the legs)
it should seem that the leg is not only the fittest place (according to
some) (...), to divert or revel, but also the meetest place to make
euacuation. Fuchsius says, Fuchsi instit. lib. 2. sect. 5. cap. 5.
that Galen does command in the gout to let blood in the arm for two causes,
first, because both the legs in that disease are afflicted, though not both at
once, but per vices, one after an other: and secondly, because in the gout the
blood does only offend in plenty, and is not so putrified and vicious, as it is
in a hot and red inflammation. But seeing the chiefest intent of Phlebotomy in
the gout is to euacuate the fullness of the whole body, it may therefore seem
especially for that cause most fit to open a vain in the cubite. As for the
matter of the disease, it is rather avoided by a good fit diet, dry, and
moderately warm, and the use sometimes of things that do extenuate and
resolve, then by seeking to draw out either the cause, or the nourishment
thereof by the use of Phlebotomy.

CHAP. 10.
Whether letting of blood be fit for such as have hoa^ livers and cold
stomachs, as also for such as have itches and scabs, and such other faults of
the skin. Further, whether it be good for the disease called of the seafaring
men the scuruy, and for the cachexia or bad habit of body: and finally, what
and how many are the drifts and scopes of letting of blood.

MOntanus in his conference had with a Doctor called Sonzinus, Montanus (...)
132.
about a man which had bin lately a soldier, who was judged by his busy fierce
practices, by the redness of his face, and by the fullness of the veins about
the eyes and other places, to have a hot brain, a hot heart, and a hot
liver, and by the red sand and heat of urine appeared also to have hot
raines: and yet having so many parts hoa^ had y^ stomach cold, by means of the
heat of the liver, wasting and consuming the fatness of the cawle or sew,
which should conscrue and keep in the due natural heat of the bowels: and
who also by these occasions for want of good concoction, had many rheumes and
distillations, making his body very soluble, by means of their slippery
descending, which otherwise in regard of so many hot parts must needs have bin
very costiue: he says, Here I would commend principally bloodletting to take
away the heat of the liver and of the inferior parts, the body being first
gently purged by cassia. Yet if the infirmity have continued long, and brought
the body to a great weakness, Trincauel will then in no case admit
Phlebocomy. Trincauel consil. 4.
For giving his advise to one which had a boat and a dry liver, but a moist
stomach, and who was troubled with plentiful thin spitting, with pains in
the joints and lassitude of the whole body, he says, In this body so spent
with leanesse and lingering sickness, and moreover so full of crudities, I dare
not so much as once make mention of letting of blood. As for the itch, which is
thought by Melinus a learned Physician to be the same which Galen calls after
Hippocrates, Gal. desanita te tuenda lib.
(...), spontaneae lassitudines. The same Physician Melinus being himself
fallen into it, when the other Physicians about him, and a Chirurgian (who was
procured to come by the French kings Ambassador) did all earnestly persuade
him to be let blood, and showed what good they had done in the like cases by
bloudletting: Melinus did refuse to yield unto it, clea^ing steadfastly to the
judgment of Galen, who in this impediment of the itch and scabs will have
either no blood to be taken at all, or else very little, and that rather to
pluck back then to euacuate. The common opinion of Chirurgians was, that the
more corrupt the blood was, the greater quantity he might spare of it. Ibid.
But he relied wholly upon that auctority of Galen, Of these kinds and degrees
of sanguisication, some little differ from blood, some more, and some most of
all. In those which on either side differ but a little from blood, you may
boldly use Phlebotomy. In them which differmore, do it more warily, but in them
which are most departed from blood use it not at all. (...).
If the good blood be little, and the other humor much, then abstain from
letting blood: but if the humor be little and the blood plentiful, then
boldly use Phlebotomy. Melinus though he knew these conclusions of Galen, yet
because the case was his own, and did so nearly concern himself, he sent a
letter to Fernelius; ^ernel. (...). 46.
laying open the whole case unto him, and desiring him that he would declare
his judgment concerning this matter. Fernelius sub^^ribeth to the opinion of
Melinus, and shows, that in a pure plenitude of blood the fullness may safely
be deminished by Phlebotomy, but in an impure plenitude that has a cacochymia,
or vicious humor mingled with it, the fullness must be a little eased by
opening a vain sparingly, and by distances of time, and the rest of the
impurity must be taken away by purging. But then does blood ^etting most harm,
when the ill humor is bred (as it is most commonly) by the fault of the liver
and stomach. For the blood (though impure) being taken away, a much more impure
does succeed. He gives instance of the iaundise, the cachexia, and that kind
of dropsy which makes the flesh spungie, and the whole body to swell. For the
iaundise in a full body, it may sometimes be used either when it comes by the
overmuch heat of the liver according to Montanus, (...) 30.
or when it comes by the obstruction of the gall according to Fuchsius. The
ca^hexia, or bad habit of body is perceived as Trincanel shows by many
outward signs, which are commonly these: Trincau. de ratione curandi part.
corp. affect. l. b. 11. cap. 8.
the swelling of the face especially under the eyes, the countenance and whole
body discolored, a swelling in the belly, such moist and waterish pussings up
of the legs and feet, that if you press in your finger it will leave a dent
or hole, the mouth always full of spittle, vomitings up of some watery matter,
and nippings about the heart. The scuruy, seeing (as Wierus declares) it
comes of the obstruction of the spleen, Johannes W^crus ^ract. de sco^buto.
whereby the thinner part of melancholy is carried upward, and with a sharp
corrosion does infect the gummes, and the grosse^ part thereof falling down
does infect and spot the legs. I shall need to say no more of it then I have
set down already in the eight Chapter concerning the obstructions of the
spleen, and experience has taught us sufficiently, that much ease may come
unto it by the right and advised use of Phlebotomy. Baldwin Rous. in
commentartolo (...) magni^ lienibus Hipp.
Baldwinus Roussaeus declares what vain (in his judgment) is most fit to be
opened in the scuruy. If the humor be not fallen down, he counsayleth blood
to be let out of the middle vain of the left arm: but if the melancholic
juice has already flowed down to the hips, then open the vain of the knee,
or of the anckle. I leave it to the reader to examine and measure this advise
of his, as well by those principles and grounds which I have discussed at large
in the seventh Chapter of this present book, as also by those circumstances
and other obscruations, which I shall have occasion to entreat of hereafter in
the former five Chapters of the book next following.

Thus you have in this first book the first scope and intention of
bloodletting briefly laid open, to wit, in what infirmities the greatness of
the discase does require a vain to be opened. For (as first Hippocrates,
^ippocr. 4. de ^tione vict. ^ut. 19.
and after him Galen does declare) there are three especial points to be
marked in the drift and purpose of letting of blood. ^alen. de rati^e curandi
(...) venae sect. ^p. 9.
The first is called by them the greatness of the disease, whether it be
present or to come, whether acute, or of long continuance, (...). Epid sect. 3.
^ap. 3.
if it be great, dangerous, strong, or grievous. The second is a flourishing
age, neither too young, (...). Epid. 1. 29.
nor too old, for the undergoing of that remedy. The third is the strength of
the powers of the patient. True it is that Galen does sometimes name diverse
other scopes and intents in the matter of Phlebotomy. ^al. method. ^^tedendi
lib. 9. ^ap, vlt.
In his method of healing he reckons eight, There are in this opening of a
vain many scopes and observations, 1. The first, nature and temperature of the
party, 2. his manner and custom, 3. his age, 4. the place of abode, 5. the
time of the year, 6. the constitution or the state of the heavens, 7. the
affection of the disease which we have in cure, 8. the strength of the patient.
Galen de rati^ne curandi ^er venae secti^nem cap. 6.
Sometimes he names ten besides the age, as in his treatise of Phlebotomy:
If in respect of age they be neither children nor old folks, then consider of
Phlebotomy, having a regard especially to these first scopes and drifts, 1. 1
the quantity and quality of the plenitude, 2. 2
the strength or weakness of the powers, 3. 3
the natural habit of the whole body, 4. 4.
and the time of the year, 5. 5.
and the region or place of habitation, 6. 6
the former life, whether the party so affected have used a fullness of meats
and drinks, and especially such as are of great nourishment, 7. 7
custom or discontinuance, 8. 8
what motions and exercises he has used, 9. 9
whether he have had heretofore any euacuations, which are now withholden
against custom, 10. 10
and moreover besides all these, whether the party be lean or gross. All
these varieties does Galen bring into a briefer division, and reduce them into
two several heads: first, such scopes as declare whether blood be to be let or
no: and secondly, such as show what quantity of blood is to be taken. To the
first, do appertain the three general scopes of Hippocrates, and to the
second sort do belong also all the rest. Galen. ibid.
For so be the words of Galen: Therefore by the disease, and the age, and the
powers, we know that blood is to be let, but the quantity of the euacuation is
to be gathered not only by these, but by all the other intentions.

The second book of Harwards Phlebotomy, concerning the rules and
circumstances which are to be observed, when for the prenenting or curing of a
disease any vain is to be opened.
The first Chapter.
Whether the party that is to be let blood have that d^^bented plenitude, which
is called of Physicians corpus plethoricum, and how the feuerall kinds of
plenitudes may be known.

THe principal thing (whereof consideration is most to be had in letting of
blood) is named of most writers to be magnitudo morbi, the greatness of the
disease, of which I have no purpose now to write, seeing it is in a manner the
whole matter subject of the book already ended. When it is found by the nature
of the disease that a vain is to be opened, then we are next to examine the
constitution of the party from whom the blood is to be taken, and especially by
all signs and tokens exactly to weigh whether he have corpus vere plethoricum,
a body ouercharged with the fullness of the veins, Gal. lib. 2. de composit.
medica neat. se^^^du^^ (...).
or rather with excess of humors over the whole body, as Galen does define
it, Plenitude is an abundance, or an excess of humors thoroughout all the
body. (...).
There are two sorts of plenitude, the one is called ad vasa, in respect of the
vessels containing, and the other ad vires, (...). Gal^bidem in initio.
in respect of the power, not to be able to bear those humors that are. The
plenitude quoad vasa, is made by Galen to be of two sorts, the first he calls
simply a plenitude, which he defines to be the four humors being
proportionably increased. The second kind he calls a plenitude, with an
addition, or a plenitude compound, when some other humor besides blood does
abound more then it ought. These I will not stand upon, because I have already
deciphered them in the first Chapter of the first book. There remains only
here to set down the marks and evident signs, whereby they may best be
known when the patient comes in presence. Brigthus in therapeut.
If there be a fullness of blood in respect of the veins and other vessels,
Plethora ad vasa.
then the color both of the face and the whole body will be much inclined to
red, after any strong motion the veins will swell, and the arteryes beat, a
sweat will easily break out, a weariness does oppress the body and lims,
which are loath to move by reason of their own weight, the hand can hardly be
clutched together, the drawing breath will be very thick after exercises. In
the fullness in respect of ouercharging the powers and strength these things do
happen, Plethora ad Vires.
the motions of the body and lims are somewhat slower, the sleep is heavy but
troublesome, the party does often dream that he is ouer-charged with some
burden, and that he can not stir himself, and he feels likewise a
weariness and heaviness as is in the former, but it is without those full and
distented veins. Other signs of blood abounding.
If the blood do particularly exceed in these plenitudes, then some do add
moreover these signs, the pulse thick, full and soft, the laughters great, the
head inclined to aches, the body somewhat costiue, the spittle sweet, the
urine red and thick, the dreams either of colors red, or of things amorous,
and in women their terms usually in the first quarter of the moon. When any
other humor does abound, it is called a cacochymy. Signs of choler abounding.
A cacochymy is an abounding of any other humor but blood. If choler do
abound, the color of the face and eyes and whole body will be pale, or yellow,
or of a citrine or tawny color, the party will be watchful, and of little
sleep, griefs will be most on the right side, vomitings will be often, the
thirst much, and the appetite to meat faint, the pulse will be slender, hard,
and swift, in the mouth sometimes a bitterness, the urine of a fiery color,
and with little ground or sediment, the dreams will be much of matters of
fire, and the terms unto women happen most in the second quarter of the moon.
Signs of fleame abounding.
If fleame do abound, the color of the face and body will be white, the body
it self weighty, fat, soft, and cold, the taste weak, the griefs most about
the ribs, stomach, or the hinder part of the head, the pulse slow, soft, and
weak, the urine pale or white, sometimes thin, and sometimes thick, with
much grounds or sediment, the sleep sound and much, the dreams either of
drowning, or watery matters, and the terms unto women usually in the old of
the moon. Signs of melancholy abounding.
If melancholy do exceed, the color of the face and whole body will be
brown, dusky, and blackish, sometimes equally, and sometimes somewhat
bespotted, fears will come needelesly, and sorrows without cause, the pulse
will be hard, the urine will be thin and white, and sometimes when melancholy
does avoid it will be thick and black, or black and blew, or somewhat greenish,
the sleep troublesome, and full of fearful dreams, and the terms to women
commonly after the full. I could here rehearse many other signs (whereof
Leuinus Lemnius does make mention) drawn from the fashions, Leuinus I emnius
in libris duobus de complexionibus.
studyes, and manner of life of the party, to make trial of every one by the
manner of his gate, by the devises of his brain, and by the performance of his
actions, but then I should (perhaps) make some to think too well and some too
ill of themselves (although in deed hardly will any think too ill) and I
should increase this latter book into a greater quantity then is now my
purpose to perform. Briefly, I conclude this first point concerning the
plenitudes, with the censure and judgment of Galen, Gal. method. therap. lib.
13.
who when he has brought them all to two general heads, When the humors are
equally increased they call it in Greek plethos, or plethora, but when the
body is full of yellow or black choler, or of sleame, or of thin whayish
moystures, then they call it not plethora, but eacochymia: He does presently
after show how they must be helped, and amongst the remedies of plethora he
makes letting blood the principal. Plethora is cured by letting of blood, but
for cacochymia, he makes the chiefest remedy to be purging. But cacochymia is
cured by that purging which is proper and peculiar to every several abounding
humor. If this cacochymia be also with a dis^ented fullness, then must also
Phlebotomy be used, but sparingly only, so much as may ease the plenitude,
Fernel. consil. 46.
and rather (as Fernelius does advise) ex interuallis detrahendo quam vniuersim
and affatim vacuando: sublata plenitudine praecipiti and periculosa, reliqua
impuritas and cacochymia purgatione eximenda est. But of this already in the
last Chapter of the former book.

CHAP. 2.
Of the consideration of the temperature of the party, what it is by manner of
diet, or by exercises, or by place of abode, or by custom and habit, or by
constitution of body.

IT is not without good cause that Fuchsius loath require in Phlebotomy,
Fuchsius instit. sect. 5. cap. 4.
that an especial regard be had in it of the diet which the party has used,
whose vain is to be opened, for if he have used much surfe^^ing, and so gotten
an abundance of raw humors, he is then not to be let blood, as he secketh to
prove out of those words of Galen: Gal. libr. de (...). ratione per venae
sectionem.
To intemperate men, winebibbers, and gluttonous surfetters, thou shall bring
small profit either by purging, or letting blood. Although the purpose of Galen
indeed is not in that place to deny purging and letting of blood to them,
which by surfeiting are already filled with raw humors (as Fuchsius does seem
to apply it) but to show that it is a needless enterprise, and a very lost
labor to apply unto intemperate men these sovereign remedies, seeing that
they have gotten such a custom and habit of riotousnesse, that they will
presently fill themselves again with all noisome humors; for so does Galen
there give his reason. For they which do use an intemperate diet, do quickly
gather an abundance of raw humors, and therefore we must not so much as
endeavor to heal them. Besides excess and surfeiting, a due regard must be
had whether the party that is to be let blood have used (though temperatly)
such drink, and especially wines, as are apt to engender much blood: for in
houses of great personages, and in cities where wine is much in use, there is
far greater necessity of letting blood, then in those country villages where
their accustomed drinks are of lesser and weaker nourishment. And especially
seeing the former living in ease and without any great exercises, do soon
gather store of superfluous humors, they may therefore admit a more liberal
bleeding, but the later continually laboring and toiling, do leave in their
bodies y^ less store of superflu^^e^, and therefore may the less endure any
plentiful Phlebotomy, Fuchs. Instit. libr. 2. sect. 5. cap. 4.
And yet as well in cities as in countries the temperature of the place of
abode may also make some difference. They which have hot and dry habitations
in sandy places, have much of their natural heat and humors spene; discussed
and scattered, and therefore must bleed less then they which dwell in more
cold and moist places, where the strength of the natural heat is not so apt
to be disperseth, provided always, that the place be not by reason of hard
weather so extreme cold, that the blood should be as it were co^geased, for
then to let blood would be very perilous, as likewise it would be inconvenient
when the constitution of the party is ouer-hoat and dry, to use any great
euacuation by Phlebotomy. Galen. ad Glauconem ^herapeutic. lib. 1. cap. 13.
Galen says, As many as are by nature boat and dry, they all do easily receive
harm by liber all euacuations. And in that place Galen in the words immediately
following does show that custom also is of great force, as to all other
things, so likewise to show what persons may best admit Phlebotomy. For they
which have bin often accustomed to it, do incur more danger in omitting of
it, then they whielt^euer were acquainted with it. Hippocr. 2. Aph. 50.
Hippocrates does give it out as a general axiom, Things accustomed though
they be bad, yet do they, (...) less then those wherewithal we were never
(...). Auice^^a: in his sixteenth. Canon of blood letting (as Montanus has
divided them) does declare three sundry dispositions of, Montanus medicinae
vntuersalis part. 3.
man's stomach, which cannot permit the opening of a vain: Gal. therap. meth.
lib. 9.
first, if there be a great and quick sensibilatie of the mouth of the stomach:
secondly, if it have a faint debilitie and thirdly, if there be a flux of
choler flowing unto it. For the first, Montanus says, of all the lims the
mouth of the stomach is made of quickest fecling, and sharpest sensibilitie,
that thereby there might be an apprehension of hunger: and being for that cause
very sino^y, it has great affinity and consent with the brain and the heart,
whereby if there be a fl^x of (...) sharp humor unto it, the brain and the
heart do straight suffer with it, and thereupon does come a fainting and
swouning. By the debilitie of the stomach he means not that weakness which
does come by distemperature, but that which comes by thedo^senesse of the
stomach, when the stomach can not bind in it self, and gather it self
together upon the meat. That looseness comes of the moisture of it, and
they which have this imbecillitie upon every light occasion, they swoune and
faint away, and are therefore unfit to be let blood. By the flowing of the
choler to the mouth of the stomach, he shows what indeed does most offend the
sensibilitie of that place, and bring not only swouning, but also other great
dangers. For as Galen writes, Galen. lib. 12. method. the^apeutices.
The mouth of the stomach by the quicknsse of the sense thereof does bring both
many other symptoms, and also swounings. From the liver and the gall there are
two passages one greater, the other less. The greater goes down to the gut,
which is called ^eiunum, and the less goes to the bottom of the stomach.
Some have but one of these passages, by means whereof many times choleric
men, because they have only that passage which goes to intestinum ieiunum, and
want that passage that should go to the bottom of the stomach, do never vomit
choler. And on the other side, other that are phlegmatic do vomit often
choler, because they have that passage which goes to the bottom of the
stomach, but want the other which should go to the gut called ieiunum. Montan.
in Canonem 17. Auicenae.
Montanus says of these, that infaelicitatem habent a generatione, they are
unhappy by the manner of their procreation and birth. Those which have the
passage wholly to the stomach, whereby choler is carried to the mouth of it, are
known (as Auicen says) by this, that they have the mouth often bitter, and do
vomit choler upon every small cause, such have porum felleum infaeliciter
compositum, the passage of the gall unluckily made. Auicen shows, that if
there be a necessity of letting blood in any that has any of these
impediments, the party has need to be prepared and strengthened before any
vain be opened. The manner how it must be done shall appear in the Chapter
following.

CHAP. 3.
Whether the body have need to be prepared before letting of blood.

IF the party (from whom blood must needs be taken) be found to have a great
sensibilitie of the mouth of the stomach (which is known by this, that if you
offer any sharp, sower, or biting thing, Montan. medicinae v^tuersalis part. 3.
such as is the juice of limons or pepper, he is straight offended) then before
he be let blood, that there may be no flux of choler to the mouth of the
stomach, you must give him a few morsels of bread steeped in some astringent
thing, as in the juice of quinces, and of ripe pears. If there be a relaxation
of the stomach by overmuch humiditie (which is known by this, that though the
body be empty, yet there is no perfect right feeling of hunger) then you must
give also of the juice of quinces: but if there be a coldness with the
humiditie, then you must add unto it some sugar, with a little cinnamon, or
some spice conuement. And if choler do slow unto the stomach by the
unluckiness of the passages of the gall, then give warm water, and s^rupus
acetosies, and provoke a vomit, and when the choler is by vomit cast out,
strengthen the stomach with a morsel of bread, and so let the vain be opened.
An other occasion may be of a needful preparation, to wit, if the party that
is to be let blood have his blood ouer-grosse and thick; for then for two or
three days before letting blood, ^uch. (...) lib. 2. sect. 5. Fernel. lib. 2.
met^^d. medend^. cap. 14.
he must use extenuating things, as a decoction of hysop, ^ep, wild maricrom,
and penyriall, in which is boiled a little white wine and honey. Fuchsius adds
further, that bathes may be also sometimes used, especially when blood must be
let in some part far from the liver, as in the hands, or in the feet. But in
a full body and in suspicion of an inflammation, the use of bathings must be
avoided as very pernicious. Trincauel. in explaratione lib. 1. Ga^ca^ ad
Gla^^^^em de art cu^atiua. cap. 12.
Trincauel commenting upon Galen, after that he has showed that bloudletting
does not require so great a concoction of humors as other euacuations do,
because blood has no need to be prepared for the bringing forth, unless when
it is too thick we do by bathings or some other means make it more thin, that
it may flow more readily, yet sometimes not only concoction, but also
euacuation by purging must go before Phlebotomy, not in respect of the blood,
but in respect of some other danger, as he gives an instance of quotidian
agues, in which there is much fleame gathered in the stomach, and many
crudities in the first veins, unless this fleame be first digested, and
drawn out of the stomach, it may be (as he proves out of Galen) that when the
veins are emptyed by Phlebotomy, Galen de sanit. tu^nda. lib. 1.
they will draw that raw fleame, and dispersing it by other veins into all the
principal parts, will make greater obstructions then before: he concludes,
therefore let first the fleame be either concocted by abstinence, or brought
out by avomit, or avoided by purging, and then ma^st thou safely open a varne.
Galen says, Galen. lib. 4. desan^tate tuenda.
In a faint body wherein is little good blood and many raw humors,
Phlebotomies do auovd the good, and as for the evil, which is contained
especially in the veins about the liver, and mid-bowels, they do pluck them
into all the body. Mont. med^cin. ^^^uers part. 3.
Montanus writing upon the eight Canon of Auicenna, does discuss this matter
at large: Let us suppose (says he) that there be a raw humor without the
mesaraick veins, yet Auicenna will have us then to absteme from bloudletting,
for the raw humor (...) drawn into the inward veins, and the obstruction is
made greater, and the fever increased: we therefore give first things that may
concoct, and not such things as may distribute into the varnes. Gal. libr. 4.
^e^anitate tuenda.
He alleges the advice of Galen, who prescribes, that if there be any raw
humors in the mesaraick veins, we should absteyne from diospoliticum
diacalaminthum, and from bathes, because they do distribute into the veins,
and that we let only sleep suffice, and the use of diatrion pipereon, because
that does concoct humors, and not distribute them into the veins. When the
crudities being concocted we come to letting blood, then Auicen does there
counsel us, Aui^m. Ca^. 8.
that if the blood be little and naught, we must take but an ounce or two, and
refreshing the patient with some meat of the best nourishment, then to take
the like again: which Montanus does think to be ye same (...), or tempering
of humors, which Galen does so much require. Gal. lib. 9. (...). med^^^^^.
This (...) temperatio humorum, is nothing else but by little and little (...),
to take away bad humors, and (...), to add and restore good humors. (...) 77.
Trincauel giving his advise about a woman who had the terms suppressed,
although he perceived her to have a reasonable full body, and to be of the
fittest age to let blood in (which he accompteth to be about the fortieth
year) yet because there was in her body abundance of raw, gross, and tough
humors, he did appoint her to absteyne from letting blood. If you take away
blood, you take away the bridle of raw matters, and make them more raw and more
gross^. He builds his counsel upon that precept of Auicenna, Take heed that
thou bring not thy patient to either of these two extremities, either to have
cold humors made raw, or to have the hoate to be brought to boil and bubble.
Montanus discoursing upon Auicenna his canons, Montanus in canonem. 8.
does require that not only in raw phlegmatic matters, but also in abundance
of choler, some avoiding of it either by vomit or purging, should go before
Phlebotomy, least the bridle, to wit, blood being gone, the fierceness of
choler should more increase. In those, in whom by reason of the tempering of
the humor blood must be let a little at once and often, Galen does wish as
well the reiterating of the purging, Galen. lib. 5. method. medendi. cap. 14^
as of the Phlebotomy. As many as shall seem to have little blood, when you
have brought them to some probable humor, you may let them blood, and then
refresh them, and again you may purge them, and afterward refresh them, and
again you may let them blood, especially them whose whole blood is like
vicious and thick slime. But he adds presently, but in them which are strong
and full of blood, you may begin in them with Phlebotomy. Fernelius methodo
gene^al^ de ^^randis schribus.
So says Fernelius, that in the fever synochus you must let blood straightway
in the beginning without any purging before. But in what particular diseases
you may begin with Phlebotomy and in which not, it is showed in their several
Chapters in my other former book.

Concerning such as do think that the body is not fit for Phlebotomy, unless
it be first cuacuated with some purging receipt or potion, the learned Massaria
does mightily condemn them which do never attempt the opening of a vain,
Alex. Massarta^^d sputationibus duabus page 202.
unless they have first once, or perhaps twice, or more often used some
purging medicine, which without doubt does trouble the fit occasion of the
remedy, and is altogether contrary to the doctrine of Galen, who does teach,
that in the beginning of diseases one of the two remedies may be fit, to wit,
either Phlebotomy, or purging* but in nouise both of them: So that if a man do
diligently mark this kind of healing, which now is commonly and every where
practiced, nothing can be devised more filthy then it, nothing more repugnant
to the decrees of Hippocrates and Galen. Mercurialis de mor^^s puero^u. lib 1.
cap. 2. page 50.
As Mercurialis in his treatise concerning the small pocks and measels does
forbid purging medicines to be received into the stomach at such time as nature
should expel the disease by the skin, because such purgations do trouble the
motion of nature, and yet at the same time does allow a clyster of barley water
one pound and a half, of oil of violets four ounces, of butter three ounces,
of red sugar candy one ounce, or of each of them proportionably a less
quantity if it be for a child, and does there condemn Nicholaus Florentinus,
for that he forbids the ministering of a clyster, at such time as the said
diseases do begin to break out: ^tercur. ibid.
for (says he) it is a fond thing to think that the motion of nature i^
hindered by clysters, seeing that they do work only in the bowels, and the
motion of nature is both near the skin, and in the veins, neither do
clysters so overthrow the po^ers that we need to conceive any fear. Even so,
for as much as in letting blood, our drift is especially either to case nature,
being ouerburdened, or to expel some dangerous causes of putred matter, by
transpirations, sweatings, euaporatings and such like, very expedient it is
that we avoid such purgings, as whereby the work of nature may be either
troubled or weakened, and content our selves with a more fit preparing, brought
to pass by glysters. It is a great fault amongst very many in England, that
they are so nice and scrupulous in receiving of a glyster, as seeming to
suspect some danger in that, which indeed is the most easy and harmless
remedy of all others. And as great a fault it is in many of our country
Surgeons, which so boldly do commonly practice the opening of veins, neither
having before any direction of learned counsel, neither being themselves
stored with those things which should orderly prepare their patient thereunto.
They which do minister purging potions at that time, when nature does begin to
move, say they do it because nature does move imperfectly, but to them
Mercurialis does answer, Mercur. ibid. page 49.
intelligere an perfect moueat, in initio non possumus, we can not know in the
beginning whether nature will work perfectly or no. The safest and surest way
is by a clyster so to ease the fullness and costiuenesse of the body that we do
not disease the emptiness and looseness of natures powers. If the impurities
and crudities be above in the stomach, then shall it be requisite before
Phlebotomy to use some vomit, Massaria lib. descop. m^ttendisang^^nem page 76.
as to take of the decoction of barley two or three ounces, of oil of sweet
almonds and oximel simplex each one ounce, of oil of dill two drams, mingle
them and give them for a potion. Or if the matter be grosser and colder, take
of the seeds of rocket, leekes, radish, and broom, each the weight of a
shilling, of the roots of asarabacca and betony, each the weight of six
pence, boil these in water so much as being well boiled will make a good
draught, and being strayned dissolve into it two ounces of ox^mel simplex and
drink it off. In hoater diseases the former will be more convenient. Fit
vomits and clysters they make a preparation speedily, and do nothing trouble
the work of nature in expelling to and by the outward parts. P^rgations if they
be strong they weaken nature: if gentle, then are they long in working, and
having some hoate qualities in them, must needs as well by their heat as by
their drawing a contrary way, trouble that work whereunto Phlebotomy is
directed. Dionysius Fontanonus de morborum internorum curatione lib. 4. cap. 2.
Fontanonus a learned Doctor of Mountpelier, writing of that synochus or hot
continual ague, which proceeds of blood inflamed in the veins near unto
the heart, after that he has appointed to begin the cure with present letting
of blood, What hour of the day soever it be, for fear least the blood do
creep unto the lungs, and thereupon should come an inflammation of the lungs,
or least it should slip into the bulk, and thereof should arise a pleurisy, or
finally least it should putrify, and so there should be made a putred ague of
a not putred, he shows after how the body must be made fit for this
Phlebotomy, not with a purging potion, least while the purgation is long in
working, the patient should receive harm by the abundance of boiling blood,
but by a clyster made after this sort. Take of the four emollitiues each one
handful, (the four emollitiues are, Heurnius method. ad p^a^i. (...). 1. page
6.
as skilful Heurnius does lot them out, 1. mallows, 2. marsh mallows, 3.
violets, or in stead thereof pellitory of the wall, or mercury, 4. branck
vrsine, or in steed thereof beets) of endive and lettise each half a
handful, ten prunes, boil all in a reasonable quantity of water until the
third part be consumed, then strain it, and take thereof one pound and a
half, dissolve into it of cassia newly extracted, and red sugar candy each one
ounce, of salt a little, and you have your clyster. In stead of the pulpe or
flowers of cassia, may be used diacassia Mesuae, or diacatholicum Nicholai, or
electuarium lenitiuum Rhasis, any quantity betwixt half an ounce and an ounce
and a half, according to the strength of the party: the most convenient oil
to be added to them is the oil of violets. In stead of the aforesaid things
the clyster may be made of a little soluble chicken-broth, goats-milke, and the
yolke of an egg stirred and mingled, and putting into it of manna and fresh
butter each an ounce first melted together, these be the ingredients most fit
for the clysters of such as are to be let blood. And if any Surgeon by reason
of his seat and place of abode be so situated, that he shall be enforced
sometimes to open a vain before the counsel of a learned Physician may
conveniently be obtained, let him be careful to have some provision of these
things in store, as he tendereth either the testimony of a good conscience in
respect of himself, or sound and perfect health in regard of his patient. For
(as before is showed) many are the harms and dangers which ensue, if at the
time of letting blood there be crude and corrupt humors in the stomach and
bowels, pressed and ready to be sucked and drawn into the veins now newly
emptyed by the administering of Phlebotomy.

CHAP. 4.
Of the age, sex, strength, and solubilitie of the party, whether old men, or
children, or women being either with child, or having their terms, may be let
blood. Also whether any having bodies either too soluble or too cos^iue may be
let blood.

FOr the beginning of old age there is no question but that blood may be let
very safely in it, if other things be corespondent. Trincauel (...) 77.
Trincauel says, that about the fortieth year of age, that is, about the
beginning of old age, we may most fitly be let blood. But Galen does make three
degrees of old age, Galen de sanit^te tue ^da lib. 5. in fine.
the first he calls (...), signifying such as have a green and lusty old
age, such as are able yet to deal in the astayres of the world. The second he
calls (...), the midst of old age, more fit for sleep and rest then for
toil and labor, to whom agrees that of the Poet, Vt lauit sumpsitque cibum,
det membra sopori. When washed he has, and food for sustena^ce received, His
li^s of rest and sleep, let seldom be bereaved. The third sort he names
(...), such as are ready to be sent away, and have one foot in the grave.
Although many be very much stricken in years, yet if they fall into those
diseases which require bloodletting (as sometimes they do) then may a vain be
opened as Trincauel shows, Trincauel in rud^mento c^^tra Brisso^um.
that in a pleurisy he did let an old man blood, being threescore years of
age, and he did happily and speedily recover: but he made choice of the vain
of the ankle, and had a due regard of the strength of the party. Galen lib. 5.
de tuenda sanitate.
For as Galen says of diet, so it may be said of Phlebotomy, if old men do
never so little exceed a due measure they take great harm, whereas young men
though they transgress very much, yet their harms are of short continuance.
Fernel. lib. 2. methodi medendi. cap. 11.
Fernelius records of Razes, that by an occasion of a vehement pleurisy he
did open a vain even in crooked old age, but the old verse must be remembered,
Aetatis mediae multum de sanguine toll,
sed puer atque senex tollet vterque parum.
Middle age mickle,
Old and young little.
As for children how old they must be before they can admit Phlebotomy,
Platerus de ^ebribus page 105.
Platerus says, If they pass once ten years old, if danger of an
inflammation do hang over them, I would be bold to open a vain. Fernelius does
adventure further, Fernelius methodi medendi libr. 2. cap. 11.
for when he has set down the example of Auenzoar, who with good success did
open a vain in his own son being three years old, he after makes mention
of his own practice, This we do commonly prove, that in the sixth or fifth year
of age three or four ounces of blood does end the pleurisy and such grievous
diseases. He adds his reason, because they do often bleed at the nose and
find help, and why should not art imitate nature? He concludes, There is no
age which cannot endure some measure of euacuation. Montanus does give two
reasons why children should not be let blood. Montanus medicinae ^^^uersalis
part. 3.
First, because blood is as it were the food of children, seeing that thereby
they are not only nourished, but also do grow and increase. Secondly, because
when blood is taken away, one part does succeed in the place of an other, vt
non fiat vacuum, because there can be nothing clean void and empty, and
thereby the body is made either windy or thin and spungious, and all the
powers resolved, as there he proves by the auctority of Galen. Galen thera^.
method. lib. 12.
But no doubt although Galen do rehearle children amongst the number of them
which are not fit to be let blood, as when he forbids Phlebotomy to those
which are apt by nature to have the pores open as children, Galen. method.
therap. libr. 9.
and likewise when the constitution is very hoate and dry; also to all which
are of a thin habit of body, and moreover to them which have the mouth of the
stomach either troubled with a sharp flux of choler, or weak, or of more
sensibilitie then it ought to be: his purpose is not utterly to condemn
letting of blood in all these sorts of people, when upon urgent necessity they
are driven to it, but to show that it must be done as seldom as may be, as
sparingly as may be, and always carefully endeavoring to remedy and meet with
that impediment and danger for which the prohibition was made, and whereunto
that nature is found most subject. For in an other place Galen allows
Phlebotomy in children. Galen. libr. de ^atione curandi per Phlebotomiam.
Some Physicians think that children have no strength, but they think amiss:
we may let them blood if the disease be great. But Galen does in the same place
except (...) young children, and he calls them (...) young children, until
they come to be fourteen years old, and until that age he does not permit
their veins to be opened. Gal. method. medendi. lib. 11. 14.
But if the hot ague (which he has spoken of in the line before) shall be in
a young child not yet fourteen years old, it is not good to use Phlebotomy,
for in such warm and moist bodies every day there flows out and vapoureth or
sweateth out very much of the substance of the body. Hippocrates also does not
allow Phlebotomy in young children, H^ppocr. 1. de (...) victu^ (...) b. 45.
because their strength is soon overthrown. Quickly does the power decay in
children, by means of the store which they have of stowing out, but it will
continue sufficient in flourishing age. Many do exclayme upon Galen, as though
his practice of Plusick were too strong and violent for the present estate of
man's nature. But we see in this point that Hippocrates and he are a great deal
more wary and circumspect, and more loath to ouercharge the strength of man
then many of our late practicioners. I think it far more safe to follow
them, then to be so rash as to imitate those Spanish Physicians, of whom
Massaria does report, Alex. Massaria descopi^ mitt^ndi sang. page 55. Aver.
(...). 7. Col. c. 3.
that they use to let blood in infantibus vix annum secundum aut tertium natis,
in infants scarce two or three years old: or that bold Auenzoar, of whom
Auerroes writes, that he let his son blood, being but three years old: or
yet to think that the experiments of Fernelius, Fuchsius, (...) metho^ (...).
2 cap. 11.
and Valeriola, who adventured to let blood at five or six years old (though
perhaps sometimes they wrought good effect) are therefore to be commonly tried
again by us. For the reason which Fernelius does allege, that seeing that by
eruptions of blood out of the nose, they find often case, and therefore the
Physician must imitate nature. Massaria answers, Massaria. page 56.
that he has often observed that those eruptions of blood in children have not
bin healthful to them, but have bin occasions of dropsies, and of bad habits
of body. And for the experiments which (as they say) have often done good, he
accompteth that either they were rather of fortune then of any good reason, or
else that the help was such as whereby they were better uncured then cured. For
many may have for a time a mitigation of pain, for which afterward they may be
sorry for many years following. But if young infants (who undoubtedly may
sometimes fall into hoate agues called synochi, and that also with abundance
of blood) may not have their veins opened, what course is then to be taken
with them in those fevers, which can hardly be taken away without diminishing
of blood? Mercurialis does appoint two helps for them, (...) lib. 2. (...). 1.
and lib. 2. ap. 2.
the one by cuppings, and the other by leaches. The leaches being applied aut
natibus aut cruribus, they do draw out blood by so small holes, that there is
no danger of was^^ng any vital spirits. As for cuppings, whereas Rafes does
defend that they may be used unto children at five months old, Cases libr. de
es^e. cap. 4. tuicenna 4. doct. 5. ap. 21.
and Auicenna will not have them used until the infants be at least a year
old. Mercurialis judges it more safe to stick to the opinion of Auicen, not to
use them till the children be a year old, and that with these three
conditions, first, that the child be full of blood, and of good strength,
secondly, that they be rather applied to the legs then to the upper parts,
because blood drawn from the lower parts does not so much impair the strength
nor wast the spirits, as that which is drawn in the upper parts: Mercurial. de
(...) 2. Cap. 2.
and thirdly, that there never be taken above one ounce or two at the most. In
the Chapter following he adds an other caution, to wit, that if we seek to
draw blood out of places far off, we apply such cupping instruments as have
wide and large mouths; but if we purpose to draw from near places, then to
use such as have narrow mouths, and therefore if we apply them to the legs,
they must have wider mouths, and if to the places about the loins the
narrower. Galen. lib. 12. method. medendi. cap. 1.
Galen for old age tells a pretty history of a mad Physician which ra^hly did
let himself blood. Acertavne Physician of fifty years of age, being now a
seauennight sick and not very strong, having a great pain in his head not able
to stay until some of his fellows could come to him, did in the night time
let himself blood, and his pain quickly ceased. But a long time after he was
discolored in his body, weak in strength, thin, and without nourishment* so
that hardly he could recover that habit of health which before he had.

For women being with child Montanus says, Mont^^. medici^ae universal. part.
3.
that we must greatly suspect as well letting of blood, as any other
euacuation in them, both in respect of the nourishment of the woman and child,
and also for fear of an abortement or untimely birth. Especially he will have
them to be avoided at those times when there is most danger of untimely birth,
that is, before the fourth month, and after the seventh month. For whereas
Hippocrates does permit to purge women with child, being four months gone,
until they come to seven months, Hippocr. 4. aph. 1.
but them which are younger conceived, or which have gone longer we must beware
of dealing with them; Galen commenting upon that place, does compare the child
in the mothers womb to the fruit of a tree, which when it is very young is
soon fetched off with any wind or blas^ing, and when it is very ripe, it is
ready to fall off it self, but in the middle time it will remain strong on
the tree against all storms and tempests: So the infant in the womb is most
in danger of untimely birth, when the woman is either in the beginning or
toward the end of her account. Montanus in Canon. 7. Au^ceanae.
But Montanus says, purging brings more danger then phlebotomy. Phlebotomy
is then the mere dangerous if the child be great, as is noted by Hippocrates, A
woman being with child is delivered before her time, Hippocr. 5. Aph. 30.
if that be great wherewithal she is conceived. Galen expounding that
aphorism, does give the reason of it, because the bigger the infant is, the
larger nourishment it requires. Montan. medicinae universal. part. 3.
Yet Montanus adds, that sometimes women with child do receive much good by
opening a vain especially if they be full of blood: he says, I have seen
some such women, that if they had bin let blood every month, it would have bin
without danger; and again, if they had not had sometimes a vain opened, they
would have bin so grievously sick, that there would have bin danger of an
untimely birth. When superfluous blood is taken away, the food remains more
wholesome for the child. Fernelius does more plainly oppose himself against
the axiom of Hippocrates, Fernelius method. medin^^. lib. 2. cap. 12.
and yet not in his own words, but alleging against him this censure of
Cornelius Celsus: Old Physicians did think that childhood and old age could
not endure such a help as is Phlebotomy: and they were persuaded, that the
woman which should undergo such a kind of curing, should procure an untimely
birth. But afterward experience has showed, that none of these cautions are
perpetual, Cornel. C^ls. lib. 2. cap. 10.
but that better observations are to be marked* unto which the Physicians
counsel is to be directed, for it skilleth not what are the years of age,
nor what the party does carry in the body, but what the strength is: a stout
boy, a strong old man, and a woman with child having an able body, may safely
this way be cured. As Montanus does limit and restrain this liberty,
appoynting it not to be used, unless the woman be very full of blood, so
Massaria does likewise require, Ale^. Massaria. page 105.
that the Physician should not only respect the present estate of a woman being
with child, but to forecast how she shall have sufficient nourishment and
strength to hold out, unto the appointed time of her delivery.

Concerning women having their terms, whether they may securely be let blood,
it is thus resolved by Montanus, Montanus medi^^nae vniuersalis part. 3
writing upon the seventh canon of Auicenna concerning bloodletting, that if
they have them immoderately, then may they open the vain basilica for
diuersion. But if moderately and naturally, then is Phlebotomy not requisite.
Yet he says, if such a woman have a ple^risie or a sharp fever, and be in
danger that unless the flux of blood be eased by spitting, there should come
an inflammation of the lungs, and unless the force of the humor flowing to
the breft be stayed, there would be danger of a suffocation, then must the
saphena be opened, though the woman have her flowers. For costiuenesse, I
refer the reader to the third Chapter of this second book, how it must be
corrected before Phlebotomy. Platerus de febribus page 113.
As for the flux of the body, Platerus does give a c^aueat generally, that such
persons as are apt to swou^nings should not be let blood when they have a dia
rrhaea or looseness of the body, because the flux does make them more apt to
swoune. But otherwise, letting of blood is of it self good for such fl^xts as
Auicen shows in his fourth canon, and upon it Montanus, Vt diuidit Montanus
Canores med. (...) part. 3.
because there can be no vacuuin, no void emptiness, therefore there is made
an attraction out of the whole body by succession of parts; one vain draws
from an other, until at the last it draw from the stomach, as the like does
happen in hunger. Now when the veins have drawn first one from an other, then
they from the liver, then the liver from the mesaraick veins, and the
mesaraick veins from the stomach, thereby the moisture being plucked away, the
body is made more bounden. And besides that stimulating and tickling choler
which did before pass down, and cause the flux to be more violent, is by
Phlebotomy drawn back from the bowels. But how is it then that so many upon
letting of blood do become straightway loose bodyed? Montanus does answer out
of Auicen, that it is non per se, sed per accidens, not of it self, but by
means of some other accident, as of some timorousness and fear, or else by
overmuch cooling of the body, when by bleeding, much of the strength is
resolved. Fernelius says, The raw and undigested flux which happens in a
burning fever, (...) lib. 2. (...) cap. 11.
the stomach being dissolved by the drinking of cold water, does not forbid the
opening of a vain, but a regard must always be had of the power. Alexander
Massaria does advise, that if the flux do come of venom, or any poisoned
humor, we should not let blood, Alex. Massa^ria lib. d^ cap^s (...) sangu.
because the greatest violence is then offered to the powers, and the spirits
are in danger of sainting.

CHAP. 5.
Of the state of the disease, what consideration must be had thereof in
bloodletting, and in the examining of the strength of the party which we must
regard most, the virtue animal, or natural or vital.

WHereas every disease has four several times, the first is called (...),
princi^ium, the beginning, which indureth until there appear some signs of
concoction, the second (...), (...) vel (...), incrementum, augmentum vel
ascensus, the time of the increase so long as the fits or griefs do wax more
painful: the third (...), vigor and status, the vigor of the disease, when
it stands in one stay, and neither increases nor decreaseth: the fourth
(...), declinatio, so long as the disease does decline or decrease. It
remains now to be discussed in how many of these Phlebotomy may take place,
and to which of these it is most fit and convenient. Montanus delivers this
for Galens doctrine, Montan. medicin^^ v^tue. la (...) part. 3.
In letting of blood there is no time to be attended, but at what time soever,
by reason of the fullness an euacuation is showed to be the best drift, let the
euacuation be made, whether the disease be in the beginning, or in the
increase, or in the state, so that there be not undigested meats in the
stomach and bowels: but he adds a prouiso, dummodo virtus non sit debilis, so
that the virtue and powers b^ not weak. But for the most part Phlebotomy is
most fit in the beginning of the disease. That rule of Hippocrates, Hippocr. 2.
Aph. 29.
In the beginning of diseases if any thing do seem sit to be moved, move it:
but when the diseases are at the highest state and vigor, it is best then to
rest. Galen commenting upon it, does apply it to the two great remedies, and
especially to Phlebotomy. The first canon of Auicenna expounded by Montanus is,
A vain is not to be opened in the day of the diseases motion, that is, when
the matter of the disease does boil and swell, and nature does strive to
concoct or expel it. Montanus (...).
Montanus says, there is duplex motus morbi, two manner of motions of a
disease, the one particular, which consists in the fits and paroxysines, and
the other general or universal in respect of the whole disease from the
beginning to the end, and this conteyneth the critical days, the fourth, the
seventh, the eleventh, the foureteenth, the seventeenth, the twentieth, etc.
Now we must mark how the matter of the disease is moved, whether in a
critical day or not critical, and whether it be moved because nature goes
about to concoct it, or because it is furious: If the motion of it be furious,
we must needs use euacuation. But when the motion of the disease is such that
nature does concoct the matter, then is it a day of rest, and no euacuation is
then to be attempted. And that does he make to be the meaning of Hippocrates,
that we must rest when the disease is in state and vigor, hoc est in die motus
morbi seupugnae tempore, that is, in the day of the diseases motion, or the
time of the strife betwixt nature and it. Some affirm that in the critical
day blood is not to be letten, although it prove a day of rest. But Montanus
does confute them, and does justify that rule of Auicenna, When nature does
move, move thou nothing, but when she moves not, move thou in the time of
her motion. The time of natures motion it the critical day, and therefore in
the critical day we must stir the body. But therein the Physician must be
very wary and circumspect, for if nature have moved in the fourth day (which is
the declarer of the seventh) then may we not euacuate in the seventh day. And
if in the seventh there appear any motion, we must not move in the eleventh.
But if in the critical day nature do neither move, nor show some good token
and proof that she will move, then may we endeavor to move by Physic.
Afterward upon the twelfth canon Montanus reprooueth them which affirm that
blood is not to be let after the fourth day of the sickness, Montanus in
canonem Auicennae 12. Gal. method. therap. lib. 3.
and proves out of Galen, that in some infirmities a vain may be opened a
hundred days after the beginning thereof. But in sharp fevers we let blood
only in the beginning, because after the fourth day the powers do fail, and
for that cause he says Hippocrates does appoint, In sharp diseases use
euacuations in the beginnings. Hippocr. 1. Aph. 24.
Trincauel likewise does apply unto Phlebotomy that other axiom of
Hippocrates, Hippoc. 1. Aph. 22.
non esse vacuandum in principio nisi turge^^ morbus, that we must not purge in
the beginning unless the disease be furious and vehement. Trincauel epist. 22.
ad Aloisiam Criuellum Massaria. Gal. in fine lib. 3. com^ret. in 6. de morbi^
vulg.
Turgere dicuntur qui adeo concitato motu agitantur vt prae illorum molestia
agrotus non possit quiescere, quod magni morbi est indicium, those diseases are
said to rage or swell, which are carried with such violent motions as that the
patient can take no rest, and qui ad excretionem festinant, which would feign
break out. He brings in the example of Galens own practice, which (as he
records of himself) when he was sent for unto a man sick of the pleurisy,
(...) 3. (...) 44.
when he saw first that he avoided blood by spitting, and secondly, that (as
the patient being asked did confess) he felt but little grief on his side, he
used some applications to him, but would not let him blood, because it was a
most gentle kind of pleurisy. But how may the former part of that aphorism of
Hippocrates be applied to Phlebotomy, (...) 22.
Purge things concocted and ripe, but not while they are raw? Is concoction
first to be expected before we can use Phlebotomy? Fernelius and Fuchsius do in
this point bitterly inue^gh against Auicen, (...) libr. 2. (...) cap. 13.
for that he forbids a vain to be opened unless the humors be first
concocted. (...) 2.
Their reasons are especially these, first, because in sharp and violent
diseases, and where there is abundance of blood, it must needs be dangerous to
defer: secondly, though the disease be not sharp, yet may the multitude of
blood of it self do har^ne, if it be not presently eased: thirdly, because
when signs of manifest concoction do appear, then (as Fernelius holds) we
must deal no more by letting blood, but the rest of the cure must be finished
either by purging, or by deriuing means, as in agues, by sieges, vrines, and
sweates, in a ripened pleurisy by spitting; in inflammations of the liver, if
they be in cauo hepatis, by soluble medicines; if in gibbo hepatis, by things
diuretic, or causing urine. And (the more to condemn Auicen) Fernelius does
plainly avouch, that letting blood is most fit then when signs of crudittes
do appear: He means of c^ud* tates morbo^ae, which remain so long until the
disease be overcome.
At what time so ever, yea if it were the twentieth day of the sickness, if
signs of cruditie do appear, we may open a vain: for we measure Phlebotomy
not by the number of days, but by the concocting of the matter, and the
dissoluing of strength: If neither of those do happen, Phlebotomy may be used.
Montanus interprets the meaning of Auicenna, Montanus (...) Canon. 11.
Au^^ennae.
that when he will not have blood to be let before concoction, he does aim
especially at such diseases in which a thick gross humor does abound, as in
quotidians, and melancholic fevers, whose humor being tough and raw, would be
made more rebellious if blood were taken away. First therefore he will have that
humor to be concocted and euacuated, and then if it be thought convenient to
open a vain if the blood be corrupt, and in great plenty. Trincau. in
explanatione lib. 1. ad Glau. cap. 12.
Trincauel makes this to be the chiefest concoction that is required before
letting blood, in respect of the blood it self, to wit, when it is too thick
to make it more fluxible, as is before in the third Chapter of this book.
There are two kinds of concoctions, the first called properly (...), when
natural heat does turn the food into due nourishment, containing under it
those three sorts or degrees of concoction mentioned by Galen, Galen libr. 4.
desanitate (...)
whereof the first is called by him the concoction in the stomach and bowels,
wherein the purer part is sent toward the liver to be made blood, and the
impure is cast out by siege. The second, the concoction in the veins, wherein
the moist whitish juice being by the mesaraick veins carried to the liver, and
by the liver turned into blood, is by the veins and arteryes perfected and
distributed into all the body, in respect of the purer part thereof, to wit
blood (as it conteyneth the principal juices) and seed, and the impure is by
the veins (...), conveyed into the bladder, and from thence cast out by urine.
The third, the concoction in the flesh, wherein the purer part of the blood
being by the veins and arteryes carried into all the body, is by an other
separation in respect of the purer part thereof turned into substance and
spirits, and the impure is cast out by sweat, as Weckerus names three kinds
of excrements appertayning to the three degrees of concoction, Weckerus (...):
dotar. ^pecial. ^ag. 416.
excrementa primae concoctionis stercora; secundae, vrinae; tertiae sudores and
exhalationes. These three concoctions being finished, the best part of the
nourishment is assumilated and made one to the flesh, body, blood and spirits
of him that is to be nourished. Galen says, Galen. lib. 4. desanitate ^uenda.
When the third concoction is ended there is an assimilation made to the part
that is to be nourished. These concoctions and the several degrees thereof do
all deal with that matter quae est benigna and familiaris, which is good and
familiar unto the party that has received it. There is an other kind of
concoction called (...), 1. Epid. sect. 2. com. 44. 4^.
or (...), wherein natural heat does deal with a matter not that is good and
familiar, but such as does cause disease, and does seek either to assimilate
some part of it if she can, or else to make it either less hurtful to the
body, or more fit to be expelled. These two distinct kinds of concoctions when
natural heat can not or does not perform what it would or should, then they
leave distinct kinds of crudities, 2. De rat. v^ct. morb. acut. 44.
as Galen shows, speaking of choleric crudities, as those whom the Grecians
call (...), whatsoever (says he) is of pature overcome is called by
Hippocrates concocted, and what soever nature can not yet overcome is called
crude and raw, as he gives in the same place an instance of purulent matters
in inflammations, of spittle, of rheumes, and of watrish humidities (such as do
pass out in those vrines which are called vrinae crudae) and in choler, which
being raw (he says) it is yellow, sharp, and ill savoring; but being
concocted, it is more pale, and not so ill smelling. As for spittings and snot,
such they may be that they may be the excrements of this later kind of
concoction, Hippocr. 2. Aph 23. acuti morbi diebu^ 14. (...).
and such they may be that they may be excrements of the last degree of the
former kind of concoction. How these several kinds of concoctions are to be
respected in purging, and whether in acute or sharp diseases we may give
minoratiue or purging receipts before there appear signs of concoctio^ of the
matter of the disease, I do handle at large in my second part of the great
Physic remedies called Cathartice. As for Phlebotomy, seeing that the chiefest
intents thereof are to ease the overmuch fullness of the body, or to pluck
back or divert a humor from or to some place, we are not so much to wait for
the concoction of the matter of y^ disease (unless it be the overmuch
grossness of thick blood) as to mark the concoction of nourishment, that the
first degree thereof be done, and the second well forward. For if we let blood
when the stomach or first veins are full of indigested crudities, they will
pass into the veins which are emptyed and make greater obstructions. As
violent exercises upon full stomachs do disperse and distribute raw humors
into the body to the much hurt of the body, so does also Phlebotomy, and
therefore that may partly be applied unto it which Galen has written of
exercises, Galen desanitate (...) lib. 2.
Then is the best time when the meat before taken is perfectly concocted and
digested in respect of the two first concoctions. The way to know this time is
by the color of the urine. A waterish urine does show that the juice which is
sent out of the stomach and bowels into the veins, is yet raw and undigested.
The f^ry, red, and choleric urine shows, that the juices are long ago
conco^led already. That which is moderately pale, is a sign of the second
concoction even now finished. I have showed already in the end of the eight
Chapter of my former book, that in many diseases the color of the urine may
deceive, and in what cases it may most deceive: I need not therefore here to
speak any more thereof, but only to point out those other circumstances and
signs, which together with it are jointly to be weighed and considered. To
know perfectly the state of the body, Galen does in one place join with the
color of the urine five other things to be heedily regarded. Galen desani^
(...) 4.
First, we must ponder what diet the diseased body has lately used, (...)
for sundry sorts of meats and wines may cause many alterations in the urine.
Secondly, whether he have bin wont naturally to abound with many ill and
vicious humors, and whether any outward signs thereof have appeared by itches,
pustles, ring-wormes, swellings, inflammations, and such like. Thirdly, whether
any accustomed or natural euacuations have lately ceased, as vomits,
hemorrhoides, fistulaes, fluxes, bleedings at y^ nose, terms, sweats, and such
like. Fourthly, whether they having bin accustomed heretofore to avoid
superfluities by Physic, and have of late neglected it, and not used such
purgings, vomits, and bathes as heretofore they have done. Fifthly, to examine
not only the urine, but other excrements, as egestions, spittings, sweates, for
as he says a little after, The sweat declares what humor abounds in all
the body, for it is whiter, paler, or yellower, according as the humors be
more or less phlegmatic, or choleric, and if the humors be pu^rified the
savor of the sweat will greatly bewray it. But in matters that do concern
the veins (as does especially Phlebotomy) Galen will have us especially to
respect the urine. We have no effectual and evident sign to discern the
superfluities that are in the veins, Gal. ib^dem pa^lo (...).
but only that which is by urine. If the humor be altogether crude and raw,
the urine will be thin and watery, and neither have any hypostasis or
sediment, nor have any cloudy matter hanging in the (...) but when it is
concocted, these things do appear, and besides, some thin clouds do swim
upon the top. Sic Hippoc^. libr. (...)
If the thin and thicker parts do quickly divide, and that the sediment be
white and smooth, and in every part equal, that shows that straightway care
one can speak the word nature will euercome all. If it be longer care the
separation be made, longer it will be care the humors be overcome. But if in
the urine there be no separation at all, but that it remain still as it was
made, or else if it do break it be with a bad sediment, then is nature weak,
and has need of some other help to digest the humors. Many other signs
there are of crudities, as the small quantity of vrines, signifying that by
their rawnesse they are hardly sent out. Likewise the thicknes of urine,
showing abundance of raw humors, and thereupon deprivation of concoction.
Further, Inequal^ie and distemperature of the pulles, are signs of morb^s^e
crud^ates.
the ill contents in urine, and the inequality of the palses, but these and
many other signs of diseasy crudities must not stay us from letting of blood
if the greatness of the disease do require it, and the party have a full body,
and sufficient strength: Fernel met^od. lib. ^. method. medend^. cap. 13. cap.
14.
but rather as Fernelius shows when signs of crudities are, we must use
Phlebotomy as the remedy. Only touching our food last taken, let the stomach,
bowels, and (if it may be also) the mesaraick veins be cleared from raw and
corrupt humors, and let such a time be chosen wherein also the disease has
most quietness from the motions of the paroxysmes. The greatest rest is in the
middle time of the intermission or remission, for so shall we be in no danger
of drawing the inflammation into the greater veins (whereby of an intermitting
fever may be made a continual) and the powers also of the patient shall least
be endangered. But seeing so often Galen and all Physicians in the matter of
Phlebotomy do still make their prouiso^s that the powers be not dissolved,
Galen. libr. de ratione per venae sectonem.
a question may here be moved of what powers they do especially speak, and
how the strength of those powers shall be known. Galen describes three powers
in man, Galen. method. (...) lib 9. cap. 10. (...) 5. ca. 7.
the first he calls the natural or nutritive power, that has his fountain
in the liver, and conteyneth under it the attractiue power, the retentiue, the
expulsive, and the fourth the alteratiue power, which is generally to turn the
nourishment into substance and particularly to make blood. The second virtue or
power is called the vital power, having the seat in the heart, giving life to
the whole body, and conseruing the essence of the vital spirits. The third he
calls the animal or rational power, having the seat in the brain, and
bringing forth sense, motion, and understanding. Each of these three powers
have their particular instruments to work by. To the natural power do serve
the veins, to the vital the arteryes, and to the animal the sinews. Now
which of these powers in letting blood must most be respected? No doubt there
must a care be had of all, Galen. method. medendi. lib. 9. cap. 10. Gal. lib.
de curatione (...) sectionem cap. 6.
for as Galen says there, If any one of them do perish, it must needs be that
all the rest shall perish also. And giving precepts of letting blood, when he
has taught how we shall try the animal power by the voluntary motions, and the
vital by the pulses, and the natural by good or bad nourishment, or by good
and bad color, he concludes generally, when these powers are strong, let
blood. So whereas Hippocrates does bid us when diseases are in the vigor to
rest, Hippocr. 2. Aph. 29.
and not to use phlebotomy or purging (for so Galen does expound it) Galen does
give the reason there of it, because the animal power is then weak and in
danger, although the vital and natural be strong. Yet certain it is that the
vital power is that which chiefly we are to observe in Phlebotomy, as he does
elsewhere at large declare, The greatest dignity of all is that which
concerns the actions of the heart, Galen method. (...) lib. 7. cap. vitimo.
and of all most needful to be considered in them that are sick. He does in
that place compare the operations of the liver and of the brain with the
vital powers of the heart, but he will have the heart to be principally
respected. In extreme apoplexies the animal powers are decayed, yet because
the vital powers are not extinguished Phlebotomy is allowed, and does often
work good effect. That is the cause that Galen does give out that precept in
his book of Phlebotomy: Galen de ^aratione per venae sectionem cap. 11.
In all these former rules thou must still have an eye to the strength of the
party touching his pulses. By that word (touching his pulses) he shows both
that the vital power is most to be regarded, and also does point out the
means how we shall take trial of it, Other signs of strength sailing, by the
pulses, are showed after Chapt. 8.
to wit, by the distemperature and the inequality of the pulses.

CHAP. 6.
Of the time of the year, the time of the constellation of the planets, and
the time of the day most fit for letting of blood.

THe best time of the year for Phlebotomy is known of all men to be the
Spring, according to that aphorism of Hippocrates, Hippocrat. 6. (...) 47.
The Spring must be the time of letting blood and purging. The Autumn is in
fitness the nearest unto the Spring. The extremity of the heat of summer is
most dangerous as Galen says, having named a little before the canicular
days. Gal. ad Glauconem therap. lib. 1.
They which are sinisterly euacuated in very hoate times of the year, do
perish either with s^ounings, or with resolutions. The extreme cold also of
the winter will not permit Phlebotomy; or if it do, it must be little: Montanus
gives the reason, because the body is overmuch cooled, Montanus in (...)
and is also made so thin, that the cold does strike into the inward parts,
whereby are brought diseases of very long continuance. Galen will have them
which are usually sick in the spring time to be let blood in the beginning of
the spring, but such as most commonly have their sickness in the summer time he
would have them to open a vain in the end of the spring a little before summer
begin. The fittest time for letting blood is when the sign (as we call it) or
the moon is in Aries, Sagittarius, Cancer, Libra, Scorpio, Aquarius, or
Pisces, unless in any of these signs the moon do predominate in that place
that is to be let blood, as in Aries the head, Taurus the neck, Gemini the
shoulders and arms, Cancer the breast, stomach, and ribs, Leo the heart and
back, Virgo the belly and bowels, Libra the raynes and loins, Scorpio the
secrets and bladder, Sagittarius the thigh, Capricornus the knees, Aquarius the
legs, Pisces the feet. There must also a regard be had of the age of the party
that is to be let blood, for to them which be growing or young, the first
quarter of y^ moon is most meet. To middle aged people, the second quarter.
To the declining age, the third quarter; and to old age the last quarter. The
complexion also must be respected. If the party be choleric let him blood when
the moon is in Cancer, Scorpio, or Pisces. If phlegmatic, let the moon be in
Aries, Sagittarius, or Pisces. If melancholic, then let the moon be in Libra,
Aquarius, or Pisces. It is ill to let blood when the moon is in the full or in
the change, or within three days either before or after. It is ill also when
the moon is in conjunction or opposition with Saturn or Mars. Further, it is
ill when the moon is in conjunction or opposition with Venus or Mercury
combust, or in a quadrate aspect with Saturn, Sol, or Mars, unless the aspect
be passed at the least eight degrees. But it is good to let blood when the
moon is in a trine or sextile aspect with Jupiter, Sol, Venus, and Mercury,
but especially with Jupiter and Venus, with whom all aspects are good,
provided that they be not combust. In cases of extremity there is no staying
for signs or aspects, for (the necessity of the disease compelling) I have my
self opened a vain the sign being in the same place, and yet with good
success. But if a man have liberty to make his choice of the time, I hold him
unwise that will not take it as near as he can agreeable to the ancient
grounds and principles of Astronomy. It appears very many ways that God has
given a power to the heavens, and an influence to the Stars and Planets,
which do mightily work in the things here below, not to induce any
necessities, but to dispose the inclinations, so far as God has appointed
and determined. Math. 4 2^. Ma^h. 17. 15.
Origin does report the judgment of Physicians, Humida moueri in capite
secundum aliquam compassionem ad lumen lunare quod humidam habet naturam, That
moist things are moved in the head according to the sympathy of the moon
which has a moist nature, but he thinks rather that some unclean spirit
does observe the divisions of the situations of the moon and work by them.
Sermus lib. 1. de medic^na. Merc^r. lib. 2. de morbis puerorum cap. 3.
But Serenus, and after him Mercurialis do give this the reason, because they
which are conceived or borne in the wane of the moon are much subject to the
falling sickness. Howsoever it is, it is sure not without some cause that they
are called lunatic, that is moonish, or mooned. And behold also the power of
the Moon in the ordinary flowers of women, who are otherwise also sometimes
too much subject to that variable and tempestuous planet. Job does attribute
unto the Pleiades a sweet influence to cause the kindly spring, Job. 38. 31.
and to Orion a power to cause raines and showers, but so, that God does loose
or hold back the bridle at his only will and pleasure. And weigh those words
spoken in the creation of the Sun and Moon, Genesis 1. 14.
let them be (said God) for signs and for appointed times, and for days, and
for years. I do utterly condemn the abuses of Astronomy, as first when men
will make them signs of southsaying, to foretell things to come, and so to
take that unto them which is proper to God only, as it is in the Prophet: (...)
41. 23.
Show us the things that are to come that we may know that ye are gods. God
says, I w^ll destroy the tokens of the s^othsayers, and make the wise
coniecturers fools. The will of God is free and sovereign over all his
creatures in every moment to order, alter, rule, and dispose them as seems
best to his heavenly wisdom. Fata mouere deus, tollere fata potest. We see in
one battle, P^ucerus.
or in one time of pestilence (God being angry with sin, or permitting the
Devil to rage) many thousands do dye at one time, which no doubt most of them
were borne in diverse manners of constellations of planets: Weaker natures are
subject to the stronger, and particular causes are subject to the general.
(...) lib. 12. (...)
Saint Augustine says, In the lives of them which are borne twins, in their
actions, casualties, professions preferments, and in their very death there is
so great a diversity, (...)
that many mere strangers are more like one to another, then those which in
birth were separated with a very small distance of time, and sown as it should
seem by conjunction in one and the self same moment. It was a damnable
opinion amongst the Chaldaeans to make the constellations of the stars to be
a table of all fatal laws* as though the whole life of man were written
therein. As Tarutius Firmianus being skillful in the Chaldaean sciences, took
upon him by the manner of Romulus his life and death, to calculate what time he
was borne, that because he wrought such acts, and dyed in such a manner,
therefore he must needs be borne such a year, and such an hour. The
superstitions of the Chald^eans were such, that they would not build a house,
nor attempt any journey, nor so much as put a new garment upon them but they
would first have a regard of the constellations and planets. These fond and
wicked abuses of astronomy I do wholly reject and disallow. But in the use of
Physic seeing that a great part thereof does concern the flowing and issuing,
the staying and the passing away of humors, and that it is found by the terms
of women, by the fluxes and refluxes of the seas, and many other ways, that
the moon has by the maker thereof certain influences given unto her, much
auaylable to the avoiding and correcting of humors; I do not think but if it
be found by the experiences of former ages, that at sometimes and in some
signs or aspects her forces are more violent then at other, we may have some
consideration thereof, and make choice of such as are most meetest for our
purpose, even as the husbandmen may also take such times for their grafting,
sowing, planting, and such like, as by the proofs of all nations have appeared
to be fittest for the fruitful growing and propagation thereof. To return now
to our argument of letting blood, seeing that as I have showed the sign may
sometimes seem to be good, and yet by other aspects the same may be
controuled, what course is then to be taken when for want of good helps we can
not come to the knowledge of the aspects? Surely then our best way will be to
observe the manner of the weather. When the weather is settled to be very dry,
then are not humors apt to flow, but in open and moist weather we find them
very fluxible. Fernelius says, The north wind utterly forbids letting
blood, Ver^el. lib. (...) cap. 11.
only the south wind does best admit it in the cold time of winter. The time of
the day is made by Galen, Gal. de venae (...) ca. 14. (...) 2. sect. 5.
and out of him Fuchsius, to be the fittest within an hour or thereabouts
after the party is risen, after the yesterdayes meat is pretty well digested
and the body eased as well by stool as by making water. (...) us me^ medena^
(...). 2. cap. 13.
Fernelius says, in suffocante pleuritide and angina quouis tempore fiat. If
the disease be an intermitting ague, I have showed in the last Chapter that the
fittest time is the middle betwixt two fits at what time of the day soever it
be, and the party must a little before be dicted thereafter. Montanus says,
Montanus in (...) de (...) de stu^^o^orum santtate (...) lib. 1. cap. 22.
If he look for the fit in the morning, let blood in the evening before.
Marsilius Ficinus will have scholars, who abounding with blood do use
Phlebotomy to prevent diseases, to use it both morning and evening, but at
either time a little, four ounces in the morning, and as many in the evening,
because it is dangerous to avoid too much blood at once, but of this in the
eight Chapter.

CHAP. 7.
On whether side the vain is to be taken when we let blood to prevent
diseases, or to avoid or derive their matter: also what vain must chiefly be
chosen for sundry infirmities.

ON what side the vain must be taken in great and dangerous inflammations
where there is cause of reuulsions, I have showed already in the seventh
Chapter of the former book. It is not denied, but that in some cases it is
requisite that the vain should be opened in the same side, where the
inflmmation lies. But if any do urge a necessity that it must needs be ever
on the arm of the same side. Trineauel de ratione curandi part. corp. ass.
lib. 6. cap. 4
Trincauel does ask one question: Si in muliere supprimantur solitae
purgationes and ex ea occasion superuenerit pleuritis: Item si ex retento
sanguine ex hamorrhoidibus fluente (vt ait Hippocr. 6. epid. and in libro de
humor. quod quibus sanguis ex haemorrhoidibius fluere solet, illi neque
pleuritide neque peripneumonia capiuntur) quae vena iam secanda? illane quae
costis affectis communicate, an potius alia impellens particula? but of this
already, I hope, sufficiently in the Chapter above named. The doubt is now on
what side the vain must be opened when we do it to prevent diseases, the old
verse is commonly known:

Aestas Ver dextras, autumnus hyemsque sinistras. The spring and summer right
side vains would have, But autumn and the winter left do crave.

But here we must take heed that we use not too much to let blood on one side,
for that thereby we see many to be brought to particular palsies, and to lose
the use of one eye or care, or the strength of one arm or side, partly because
the longer that superfluous humors have found a vent in one place, the more
apt they are to have recourse to the same place; and if they have not their
former passage, they will easily either make obstructions, or breed some
inconvenience; and partly because the letting blood too much on one side, may
perhaps cool that side more vehemently then is requisite. If therefore thou
have bin heretofore let blood on the one side, thy best way is the next time to
take the other side, and to labor by all means that the humors may flow
equally, and that they may be carried with no greater force toward thy one side
then thy other. When there is need of euacuation and deriuation and not
reuulsion, then does Galen appoint us to take the vain always on the same
side. (...)
If the right side of the womb be grieved, avoid blood out of the right hand
or right leg; and if the left side be enflamed, then take the side that is
right with it: for that is the meaning of the (...) of Hippocrates, to wit,
that we open the (...) hepatica and lienaris directly, for they ar^ nearest to
the affected parts, and most right upon it. And in an other place, (...)
The euacuation out of the nearest va^nes and which are common to the place
affected, is both best and easiest.

As concerning what vain is to be opened, (...)
this rule is most generally prescribed, that if the parts beneath the neck be
grieved, we must open the inward vain of the arm called generally in^erna, or
basilica, or axili^ris, and more particularly if it be in the right arm called
recoraria, or hepatica, in the left henaris, this is opened commonly on the
left side, if the heart, lungs, or spleen be affected, and on the right side
if the liver or stomach be affected. If the parts which be afflicted be above
the neck, then we open the outward vain called externa, or humeralis, or
cephalica.

The middle vain called communis, (...)
or cardiaca, or nigra, or fun^: brachi^, or mediana, is then usually opened,
when either one of the other does not appear, or else when the infirmity is
as well beneath as above the neck, for this vain takes part of both the
other. For the lower parts about the hips, bladder, or womb, take the vain by
the knee, or by the anckle. The raines as they are placed in the nuddest, so
(as Fuchsius shows) they do partake with both. For if the inflammation in the
raynes be new, and that there be abudance of blood, then may you take the vain
in the arm: but when it is a confirmed disease, such as is called nephritis,
then open the vain either in the knee, or in the anckle. If any ill humor be
settled in those parts which are between the raynes and the flanck, (...) 9.
Fernelius does appoint that if the party have corpus plethoricum, then first
we should open the basilica of the same side, and afterward the saphena. But if
the body be not plethor^cum, then he says the only saphena shall sustice, that
is, the inward vain of the foot, for as the outward is called sciatica, so
the inward saphena.

If you will not have the blood to come fast and speedily, then for the
cephalica you may take his branch betwixt the thumb and the forefinger. And
for the basilica you may take the vain by the little finger called saluatella,
or titillaris, which is a branch of the basilica. For deriuation to derive the
matter of a grief, if it be in the forepart of the head, take the vain of
the forehead; if in the eyes, the broad veins at either corner; if in the
ears, the vain under the ear; if in the laws, that which is under the
tongue; if in the lungs, or spleen, or breast, or heart, the inward vain of
the left arm; if in the liver, the right basilica. Often the same veins will
serve both for reuulsion and euacuation, as Galen shows, speaking of an
inflammation of the liver. (...)
We must both pluck back and also avoid the blood which is carried to the liver
by Phlebotomy, opening the inward vain of the right cubite, because directly,
and with a broad way it does communicate with the hollow vain: if that do not
appear, open the middle vain: if that also (...) be perceived, then take the
other third which remarneth. Platerus de s^bus page 114.
This speech of Galen makes me more willing to subscribe to the opinion of
Platerus, who defends that in letting blood we must rather choose that vain
which does most swell with fullness of matter, then to make any difference
betwixt the veins of the arms, seeing in one place about the throat they come
all from the hollow vain, and which vain has best relation to the parts most
ouercharged, the fullness thereof will sufficiently make manifest.

CHAP. 8.
What manner of incision must be made* how large, how small, how deep, what
quantity of blood may be taken, and therein of the me^ning of Galens word to
let blood unto (...), deliquium anim^.

IT is a notable advertisement of Hippocrates, Hippocr. (...). 2. 33.
We must open passages, as the nostrils and others, but it must be what we
must, and how we must, and of what sort, and what way, and when, and how much
we must, as sweats, and all other things. This precept of circumstances, as it
appertains generally to all euacuations, so does it greatly take place in the
matter of Phlebotomy. I have showed already the greater part of these
circumstances, it ramayneth here that I describe only the manner how, (...).
lib. 2. (...) cap. 15.
and the quantity how much. Fernelius advises the Chirurgian to take diligent
heed that he strike not either a place swelling with some windiness, or an
artery, or a tendon in stead of a vain. The tendones be instruments of moving
in the top of the muscles, made of sinews and ligatures, and knitting them to
the bones, they be harder then sinews, and vet not so hard as ligatures. The
artery being pressed down will show it self for a vain; which if it be cut,
He means it can very hardly be hea led: see the beginning of the (...)
Chapter.
it will neither come together again, nor heal, but that part will be taken
with a mortification, and become as dead and senseless. He counsa^leth also
the Chirurgian, that when he has settled the launcer in one hand, leaving out
no more of the end or point then what is sufficient to pearce, and has with
the other hand so taken hold of that part of the body that is to be let blood,
that he may strengthen and hold steadfast the vain with his thumb, then let
him put forward h^ launcer fair and softly without any hastiness gently, and
no further in then is sufficient. Fuchsius In^^itut. lib. 2 sect. 5.
Fuchsius wills that if the vain be trembling and not constant for the
percing, the next place must be bound as well above as also beneath: And
although the vain be well opened, and the blood flow freshly, yet in the
middle of the flowing set your finger awhile upon the wound, both that the
strength may be more refreshed, and less scattered, and also that the corrupt
blood may the better be brought out of the inward parts unto the place where
the vain is opened. Fernel lib. 2. methodi medendi. cap. 15
Fernelius gives one general rule to know what veins must be opened a little
overthwart and somewhat sidelong, and which must be opened right along the
vain. If the vain be in a joint, then let the pearcing of it go a little
sidelong, because in the moving of the joint the sides of the incision if they
go right with the vain would gape, and so would the wound be the longer in
growing together. But in the head, hands, and feet if the incisions go right
with the vain he says they heal the sooner, because there y^ sides do still
close together. Of what bigness the orifice of the wound must be, it is
discussed by Montanus writing upon the ninth Canon of Anicen. Montanus
^edicinae vni^ersal^^ part. 3
A little hole (says he) is best to conserve the strength of the party, both
because the most that then comes out is but thin and waterish, and also
because the blood goes not so speedily out, whereby the heat and spirits are
not so suddenly exhausted. But a little orifice has on the other side a great
discommoditie, in that it makes no euacuation of the thick and gross parts.
So likewise a great orifice has one good benefit in avoiding gross humors:
but it has an other great danger, that by a too sudden and ouer-liberall
effusion the virtues and powers may be clean overthrown. If the blood be
subtle and power weak, let the hole be little: but if the blood be thick and
the virtue strong, then let the hole be great. Auicen teaches, that when we
let blood to preserve from sickness, then must the orifice be great, because
the powers are yet constant; and likewise when we let blood in the winter or
cold weather, because then the coldness of the air does keep the spirits from
flying too fast out. But in the summer or hot weather, he will have the
orifice to be narrower, because the blood is commonly then more subtle, and
heat does help much to dilatation and passage. If it fall out to be temperate
weather, then to proceed in the mean betwixt both. The verses of the
Salerline school are to be understood of full strength and powers,

Fac plagam largam medioc^^^ter. (...) exeat vberius. liberiusque cruor. Make
well and wide thy blow,
That blood and fumes may largely flow.
Hippocrates says, (...)
In places where (...) no danger, and where the blood also is gross, use a
broader launcer, for so the blood will pass, otherwise not but take heed of
going too deep. (...)
Fernelius shows some dangers, Under the inward vain lies an artery, under
the middle a sinew, and under both do lie the tendones of the muscles. If any
of these be pierced, there may ensue much grief, and sometimes great danger.
The cephalica may be opened with least peril of all the veins which appear
in the cub^^e. Now for the quantity of blood how much may be taken at once, I
have had occasion to declare much already concerning that point, when I
entreated in my former book of Phlebotomy in particular diseases, I mean not
therefore now to stand much upon it. (...)
Montanus upon the fourteenth Canon of Auicen, does appoint that in old
diseases when by long infirmity the blood is become gross, we must take but a
little blood at once, and reiterate the bloodletting often, and still in the
mean time to nourish y^ patient with a good moistening diet. If the blood
appear to be whitish, then (as Auicen will have it) you must let out none at
all, least a cachexia, or bad habit or dropsy do thereupon ensue. (...)
Insti^^^ 2. sect. 5.
Fuchsius does give unto a Chirurgian three general notes, whereby he shall
guess when is the fittest time to stay the bleeding, first, by the change of
blood: secondly, by the force of flowing, waxing more faint: and thirdly, by
the change of the pulses. The first, that is the change of the blood both in
color and in consistence, must then especially be attended and waited for,
when the grief or inflammation for which we let blood, is near unto the place
where the vain is opened. H^ppoc^. lib. 2. (...) 10.
For Hippocrates shows, that in a pleurisy the blood which is nigh unto the
inflammation, does far differ from that which is contained in other parts of
the body, being by the vehement heat much altered: so that if the blood of the
rest of the body be phlegmatic, it will be about the inflammation red; and if
the rest be red, it will be about the inflammation adust and burnt. This change
of the blood is not always to be tarried for, for it may be that either the
strength is not able to endure it, or else that the phlegmone is such a malign
and impacted humor, that it will hardly give place. In these cases we must
cease before the blood do change, and the rest is to be withdrawn by a second
phlebotomy. The other note to know when it is time to stay the blood, is by the
violence of the flowing, now waxen more slow and feeble, for that shows that
the strength and powers are ready to decay, (...) Iustit. lib. 2. sect. 5.
especially if palenesse of the face, and dazeling of the eyes do begin to draw
on. But the most certain sign of all when we must stay the blood, is the
changing of the pulse: for if of thick it become thin, if of great it become
little, if of vehemently strong it become weak and obscure, if of equal it
become unequal; it presageth that the powers are now ready to be dissolved.
The safest way in letting blood is, to be sure to be within compass, what
wants may easily be supplied by reiterating, but what is taken too much can
not so easily be restored. Here an other doubt may arise, when either for the
toughness of the hamour, or for the weakness of the party, the blood is let
not at onc^, but at several times, how near those times ought one to succeed
an other. Fern^lius says, (...) lib. 2. met^^d. med^ndt.
In diseases that universally afflict the body, the best is, to let blood twice
in one day: but in the griefs of particular parts, the reiterating must be
longer deferred, to wit, to the second or third day. Ficinus counsaileth such
as by studyes are grown melancholic, (...) sanitate (...) lib. 1. cap. 22.
to be let blood if they feel a plenitude, and he appoynteth it to be done
twi^e in one day in the morning and in the co^ning, but at either time
sparingly: for he says, blood is the temperer of melancholy, the nourisher of
the spirits, and the treasure of life. Mont. medicin. (...) part. 3.
The like speech has Auicen in his third canon, where he adui^^th men that are
troubled with a long lingering disease not to be too wastfull of their blood,
because a long journey remains to them, and therefore they had need to
gather store of good strength, he adds this precept, Keep blood as a
precious treasure. Galen. lib. 1. ad Glant. cap. 11.
In that quartaine ague which comm^th ex atra bile, and in other infirmities
coming of the like cause, seeing that the atra bilis may come as well of blood
or fleame, as of choler or melancholy, the black blood shows that it
proceeds of blood adu^t, and therefore a more larger Phlebotomy is permitted
unto it then unto any other atra bilis, which shall proceed of choler, fleame,
or melancholy adust. But otherwise the common opinion of Chirurgians (who
think that generally the corrupter the blood is, the more plentifully they may
let it flow out) is utterly condemned by Fernelius, You must not when the blood
is more impure or raw, Feruel. libr. 2. method. medend. cap. 17.
or is estranged and departed from his own nature, then take so much the more
away, after the manner of common bad Physicians: but by how much more the
humors are departed either on this side, or beyond the nature of blood, so
much the more sparingly and leasurely you must let that blood s^ow: and when it
shall be found to be very far from the form and shape of blood, then must
you altogether ab^taine from Phlebotomy, for where there is little good blood,
there must needs the strength be weak. The corrupt blood does seem very fit
to be expelled (as Galen says.) That which is corrupt is against nature, Gal.
method. (...) lib. 9.
and that shows that it ought to be taken away. The constitution therefore of
the body does show that this ought to be our scope and drift, to euacuate the
matter either by Phlebotomie, or by purging, but on the other side the
weakness of the powers will suffer neither of them. How must we do then in
these great contrary occasions? Galen makes answer, Ibid. lib. 9. (...) M.
We must in these contrary occasions and drifts by little and little avoid the
bad, and by little and little restore the good, which healing of evil humors
is called of Physicians Epicrasis, or good tempering of humors. Why does Galen
then in the same leaf a little before in continual agues called synochi,
advise to let blood (...), until the heart faint, as likewise he does in many
great inflammations in his comment upon Hippocrates? Hippocrat. (...) 23. (...)
lib. 9. (...).
He shows himself the cause in that place where he entreats of agues, he
does appoint it to quench the vehement inflammation, and does mean that it
shall be as much as possibly the strength can bear. Montanus discoursing upon
the fifth Canon of Auicenna, says, (...)
that Galen does command sometimes to let blood vsque ad syncopen: but I
think that in that point either he was deceived, or else that they which did
commit to writing his speeches (for he wrote little himself) did not well
remember his words. I read sometimes in Galen. that upon unseasonable and
excessive letting of blood, (...)
or any other immoderate euacuation, a syncope or dangerous swouning may ensue,
but I can no where find that he appoynteth to let blood vsque ad syncopen,
unto a cutting off of all the powers by swouning. The fainting unto which in
some cases he does require Phlebotomie to be extended, is called by Hippocrates
and him not syncope, (...) 239.
but sometimes (...), sometimes (...), and sometimes (...). Some do make
(...), and (...), to be more particular faintings of some affections and powers
of the heart and brain, and (...), to signify a more general dissipation of
the vital spirits. But Galens words do plainly overthrow that fond
distinction. For having named the words (...), he adds immediately: (...).
Gala. ad (...) cap. 14.
Physicians are wont to give both these names to one thing, as they signify
indeed one and the same matter. And that they both do differ from syncope, he
does show plainly when he teaches, that gross humors, when by their
toughness they do obstruct, or by their multitude oppress the passages of
transpirations, Gal. method. medendi lib. 12. cap. ^.
they cause syncopas or swounings. But if those gross humors do neither
obstruct nor oppress, then they bring no syncopas or swounings, but they bring
a certain faint^es, (...) the Grecians call Leipoply^hia, or (...). The
^etting of blood even unto fainting, which Galen does allow sometimes in great
inflammations, and certain hot fevers (as I have before declared) must be
done very warily, and with great consideration: for many are the harms and
dangers which may ensue thereby, if it be rashly or unadvisedly practiced, as
in one place Galen does plainly and plentifully lay open unto us: Galen.
method. medendt. lib. 9.
I saw two men dye in the very hands of the Physicians, fainting indeed away,
but never recovering again. Many although they dye not presently, yet
afterward they come to it by the decaying of their powers, and if they had bin
euacuated without dissoluing the strength they should not have perished. And
some also their powers being by immoderate euacuation dissolved, do fall into a
long lingering disease. Others for all their life time afterward have then
whole temperature of their body overmuch cooled, being never able to recover
that harm which he has gotten by avoiding too much blood. By which coldness
some have lived afterward ill colored, and with bad habit of body, and easily
annoyed with every small thing, and others by the same means have bin taken
with deadly diseases, dropsies, streightnes of breath by stopping of the
lights, wea^^nes of liver and stomach, apoplexies, and dotings. There are many
unskillful Surgeons which do think and defend that for the quantity of blood,
how much may be spared, they need no other observation, but to let the blood
to run upon their nail, and so long as they see it to be gross and corrupt,
so long* to let it flow. It they take this course with some diseases, they may
utterly overthrow the strength of their patient. They which have much corrupt
blood, have little good; and they which have little good blood, must needs have
little strength; and such as are of weak powers, may soon by a great quantity
of bleeding receive unrecoverable mischiefs. Gal. de ratione curandi per venae
sectionem cap. 6.
Galen shows, that when it happens that crude humors are gathered in the
body, a great heed must be taken what quantity the strength will endure. For
the powers being already dissolved in such constitutions of crude humors, are
wont by Phlebotomy to fall into such extremities, as out of which they can
never again be recovered. And therefore a little after he shows what in this
case his own practice was: Gal. ibid. cap. 12.
In them which have a multitude of raw humors I do avoid a little blood, and
do straightway give a little water and honey well boiled together, with some
extenuating thing, as hysop, wild marierom, and sometimes calamint; and then I
take away a little more blood, sometimes the same day, and sometimes the day
following, in which giving again some of the aforesaid medicines, I take away
blood again, and the third day likewise twice. Galen often when he names
crudities or raw humors, speaks not of the two first kinds of crudities, to
wit, first meats undigested, and secondly, when any hurtful matter does not
obey the laws of nature, (of which two I have spoken already) but of a third
kind of crudities, In the fifth Chapter of this second book.
when any thick or cold humors do abound in the body, for so does Galen
describe all those humors to be crude or raw which are in the body besides
blood, Galen lib. 4. de sanitate tuenda cap. 4. and 1. de aliment. facul. cap.
2.
of a thick or cold substance. The more they depart from blood the less blood
may be spared, and sometimes they depart so far from blood, as in dropsies
and in some agues coming of the abundance of raw humors, that there is no
place at all left for Phl^botomy. Massaria. page 77. Galen. (...) 6.
If in any place Galen does deny and forbid letting of blood in abundance of
corrupt humors, (as he does sometimes, Aph 47. and Comme^t. (...) 2. (...) 8.
and lib^^. de sanitate tuenda. cap. 4. Gal. method. medend. lib. 9. cap. 11.
allotting unto them rather purgings then phlebotomie) we must account it to be
done not in respect of the vicious humors, for Phlebotomy is common both to
good humors overmuch abounding, and to ill humors overmuch annoying, it is
as Galen and Auicen do make it, a remedy both against the superfluity of
blood, and also against the vices of blood, Auicen. (...). 1. fen. 4. cap. 1^.
Gal. (...) per venae se^^ ^nem. cap. 9.
but Galen does prohibit it only in regard of the weakness of the strength, for
so does he expound himself: These three scopes, to wit, the greatness of the
disease, the strength of the powers, and slourishing age, are sufficient for
Phlebotom^: for when such a multitude of raw humors ^^gathered that it
forbids Phlebotomy, yet th^^ my former conclusion is not reproved, for in
such there is no strength sit for it. Gal. ibid. cap. 13.
But (as he says afterward) If these two scopes, to wit, the greatness of the
disease, and the strength of the powers be present, there (...) no such or so
great abundance of raw humors, as that it ought to forbid this remedy of
Phlebotomy. Auicen, although ^n some choleric diseases he deny letting of
blood, and wills it to be kept for a treasure, yet in firmer strength in the
cure of a kind of S. Auicen. lib. 4. f^n. 3. tr. 1. cap. 9. and 10.
Anthonies fire coming of burning citrine choler mixed with mela^choly, says,
Necessaria est Phlebotomia vt vacu^tur sanguis cholericus, Phlebotomy is
necessary that the choleric blood may be au^yded. Galen also allows letting
of blood not only in continual agues coming of blood inflamed, but also in
that burning fever called Causo, coming of choler putrefying in the veins, as
Massaria does prove out of the second book de crisibus, Massaria. page 82.
Gal. com. in 1. aph. 23.
and out of his words upon the Aphorisms, which are these: In most burning
agues letting of blood even unto fainting does straightway cool the whole
habit of the body and extinguish the fever, and also in very many the belly is
wont to be made soluble, and sweates are accustomed to flow, by which deed
some are altogether delivered from their ague. And he does confirm it also by
the testimony of the most ancient and excellent Physician Philotheus, who
commenting upon the same Aphorism, uses these words: Philotheus in Comment.
in 1. Aph. 23.
In whom we may let blood even unto fainting, it is manifest that it is in
them who are sick of burning fevers, and yet not them all, but those in whom
the powers are strong. But why dowe let blood in them even unto fainting,
seeing that burning fevers are kindled by humors putrified? The putrefaction
conteyneth two things, to wit, the matter putrified, and the badnes of the
quality. Blood being let even unto fainting, does both diminish the quantity of
the matter, and moreover extinguish the sharp and inflaming quality, for by the
fainting of the courage the body is cooled. And finally he does convince the
same by reason, seeing that by blood breaking out at the nostrils, the said
burning fevers are oftentimes healed. Those Physicians which are of opinion
that in this burning fever blood must be let only a little for euentilation
from four to six ounces, long citra lipothymiam, Vide Brigthi therapeuticam
in tractatu de causone. Vide bic supr^ page 11.
far less then that which does bring lipothymye or fainting of courage
(whose advise is that which I have mentioned in the second Chapter of my first
book) I think they do counsel it chiefly in respect of the weakness of the
powers which oftentimes does accompany this fever, and then they dissent not
much from Philotheus, who does not permit lipothymies in all, but only in them
whole virtues and powers are firm and strong. Whether the humor be more
thin and choleric as in choleric agues, and in phrenzies, or whether it be
more cold or thick, as in apoplexies, epilepsies, and lethargies, I have showed
in my first book, that Phlebotomy may have in them a profitable use. (...). 29.
Galen (when all other Physicians withstood him) did let a woman blood
ple^tifully, when the blood came out in color and thicknes like to liquide
pitch or tar. In every opening of a vain an especial consideration must be
had what humor it is that does most endanger the disease. (...).
For in splenetick infirmities it is profitable to avoid well the thick
melanecholick blood, and to stay it if it be thin, because the thin has a
good necessary use, the better to keep the thicker from obstructions: but
still the chiefest respect must be had of the strength of the party. If the
blood be not a thick black melancholic blood causing some melancholic
disease, but otherways corrupted, and greatly degenerating from the nature of
blood, Phlebotomy also may take place, but warily and sparingly, and pervices,
by little and little, diminishing the ill and restoring the good, ever assuring
our selves that the less store there is of blood, the more feeble is the
strength, and in no wise thinking that the trial of the blood appearing ill
upon the thumb, may be a sufficient warrant to the Surgeon, to continue the
more boldly the bleeding of his patient. Cold constitutions may not endure much
diminishing of blood, Hipp. 1. ^p^. 23.
and those lipothymies, which Galen and Hippocrates do allow sometimes to cool
in extreme heates, are short faintings for a time and not utter deiections and
ouerthrowings of the strength and powers. If the blood be loath to come,
Fuchsius declares chese helps: first, unloose a little the band: secondly, let
him clutch some thing hard in his hand drawn together: thirdly, let him force
himself to them and cough, and last of all bath the incision with warm water.
Some do account it the readiest way both to make the vain to appear well, and
to make the blood issue well, is to lap about the lower part of the arm from
the place of incision downward a boat linen cloth three or four times folded.

CHAP. 9.
What order must be taken with them that are let blood, as well in the act it
self to prouent s^ounings, as also afterward for their government and diet.

WHen the patient has bled what is found to be sufficient, if there be any
danger of fainting, then must his body be placed in such manner as is most ^it
for a perfect case and rest, so that no one limme or part may be put to any
labor. Mont. medici universe. part.
Montanus upon the tenth Canon of Auctco^^a does affirm, that this shall be
best performed if the party be laid down upon a bed with the face upward: For
all the sinews in the body the instruments of motion have their beginning from
the joints of the backbone, and therefore the sinews of him that lies upon
the back do rest, and do suffer no violence. Fuchsius Institut. li^ sect. 5. ca^
Fuchsius is of the same judgment, Let the patient so lie with his face
upward, that all the parts of the body may lean upon the basis or groundworke,
to wit, the backbone. ernelius me^od. medendi br. 2. cap. 16.
Fernelius bids, that if the patient begin to faint away, it will be a good
course to sprinkle a little cold water into the face, or to put unto the nose a
cloth or piece of bread moystened in wine and vinegar, or by tickling the jaws
within the mouth to provoke a vomit. But he says, Praestantissimum est aegrum
prosternere, The best thing is to lay the body down all along, meaning no
doubt the same manner which is already described. Though in this case of
fainting the party must be laid down, yet must he not be suffered immediately
to sleep. The Salernitane school commends rest, Omnibus apta quies, est
motus saepe nociuus, yet does it on the other side forbid sleeping for six
hours after bloodletting.

Sanguine subtracto sex herij est vigilandum.
The appointing of six hours watching is thought by many good Physicians to
be somewhat more then needs. uchsius instit. b. 2. sect. 5. ^ap. 12.
Fuchsius requires that within an hour or two after bloodletting the party
be refreshed with a little food of good nourishment, and within two hours
after (he says) there is nothing does hinder but that he may sleep, so that
they which stand by do look unto it that he do not roll himself upon that
arm in which the vain was opened, and that the hands do not loosen from that
place which was pierced. ernel methoi medendi. b. 2. cap. 16.
Fernelius his opinion is, that in one hour after bleeding the party may take
food, and within two hours after he may safely sleep.

Further, ^uchs. Instit. ^b. 2. sect. 5. ^^p. 12.
he that is let blood must have a great care, that (as Fuchsius says) he avoid
all strong labors and contentions both of body and of mind for certain days
following, and that he use for a while an exact diet, not beginning rashly or
greedily with too much at the first, but increasing by little and little, least
if he fall too hastily to a full diet, either the natural heat being
diminished be not able to concoct it, or else the veins being made more empty
should draw into themselves those undigested crudities. Montan^^^ in Can. 17.
Auicennae medicinae vniuersalis part. 3.
Montanus interpreting the seventeenth Canon of Auicen, grants, that they
which are of strong powers, and of a hoate stomach must be fed, because their
hot body does consume much nourishment every day, but he says, they must be
fed with an abiding and substantial nourishment, not with that meat which is
of quick nourishment, because such food would quickly be connerted into fumes,
and dry away. Give unto a country labourer the flesh of chickens, and it will
straightway be resolved and turned into fumes and choler. Auicen in that canon
does appoint the meat either to be broyled upon coals, or to be roasted
speedily with a quick fire, whereby the inward moisture may not be so much
consumed, for in his judgment, Nulla caro est deterior quam quae paulatim
assatur, quia interius and exterius exsiccatur, There is no flesh worse then
that which is roasted ouer-softly, because it has the moisture dried up as well
inwardly as outwardly, yet must it be sufficiently either roasted or boiled: for
as Galen says, Gal. lib. 4. de sauitate tuenda cap. vlt.
It is not possible that either bread too little baked, or flesh imperfectly
boiled, should be well and profitably concocted in the stomach. His purpose is
in that place to show what diet a man must keep when for some inflammation he
has bin let blood. First he will have him for two or three days to abstain
from wine, and to use in the mean time sometimes ptisane, and sometimes other
drinks moderately cooling, or if in the third day he take wine, it must be
small and white, using for a while a diet that shall nourish good juices, but
in no wise procure overmuch heat: But chiefly of all we must take heed of
nourishing again too plentifully at the first, for they which upon such
euacuations do return straightway to their former diet, have their habit of
body filled with raw humors, which the whole weight of the body does draw into
it self before they can be well digested in the stomach and in the veins, and
therefore we must not fill the body hastily after Phlebotomy, nor ouer-charge
any part with more then it may be able well to concoct, even as if the body be
wasted and consumed with long abstinence, it is not good presently to fill it
again too plentifully, for (as Galen says there) Many when they have their
habit of body extenuated, unless they do afterward feed moderately, they
gather many superfluities into the whole habit, and get thereby no small
diseases. ^uchs* Instit. ^br. 2. sect. 5. ^ap. 12.
Fuchsius does sharply condemn the gross abuse amongst Dutch men, which would
God it were not too common amongst us, together with other the dutch carowsings
and excesses: Detestable is the custom of the Germans, which for the most
part do never feed more sumptuously, nor drink more liberally, then
immediately after bloodletting. And not only must the party that is let blood
be careful inwardly for his diet, but also outwardly he must apply such
fomentations, cataplasmes, and ointments, as are most fit for the grief, for
the which his vain was opened. For it is a foolish and fond conceit of many,
who think that if in pleurisies, or other inflammations of the lungs, liver,
raines, or other parts they once have a vain opened, they need not then to
take any further care. If there be any such inflammation or impostume, there
must with Phlebotomy many outward applications be also annexed. M^thodus
generalis curandi in flammationes (...) apostemata. 1. (...) (...) dolorent
sedantia.
As first anoyntings and plasters made of things, called (...), anodyna, which
do cease pain and grief, as oil of camomill, oil of dill, meal of barley,
meal of beans, fengreek, ducks grease, capons grease, oil of sweet almonds,
wormwood, mingling with them some cooling things, as oil of quinces, oil
roset, or oleum omphacinum, vnguentum rosaceum, or vnguentum santalinum. If
these prevail not, then if the impostumation have need of suppurating to be
brought unto matter (as it has if the pain being not able to be assuaged do
increase more and more, for the augmenting of the pain shows how long you
must use suppurating things) to help suppuratio^, make your cataplasmes or
ointments of such things as they call (...), 2. per (...) suppu^antia.
as oil of lillyes, fresh butter, hogs grease, goose grease, mallows, marsh
mallows, brookelime, wheat meal, oil of camomill, oil of sweet almonds,
mirth, frankincense, and safron, or in stead of these diachylon cum gummi
Vigonis. But with these, if the pain be very great, you must always join
some astringent things, as roses, plantaine, the meat of quinces, and the oil
of mastick. When the matter is fully ripened, which is known by the decreasing
of the pain (for as Hippocrates says, 2. Aph. 47. While the matter is in
ripening, the pains and the fevers are greater, then when it is already
ripened,) 3. per (...) euelle^tia and extra^entia.
then break it by applying outwardly such things as are (...), as doves doung,
mustard seed, nettle seed, leaven, roots of briony, hermodactyls, and old
oil, with a little turpentine. And at the time of the breaking, take inwardly
some of a decoction made of furmiterre, and the roots of germander, eating some
salt thing upon it, and lying down upon the sounder side. Also at the same
time hold in your mouth a pill made of three parts, hiera picrae, and one part
colocynthis, to cause a forcible spitting, not ^wallowing the pill, but holding
it awhile in the mouth. When it is broken (which will appear by manifest
signs in the urine, siege, or spittle) then use those things which be called
(...), ^ per (...) antem terentia.
which do mundify and have a clensing force, as inwardly hydromel or honyed
water, with the decoction of barley, hysop, horehound, chichpease, licorice,
and some red sugarcandy dissolved into it: And if there be an ague, then you
must mingle also with these things the four great cold seeds, the seeds of
cucumbers, gourds, citruls, and pompions. You may apply also outwardly a
plaster made of some of your aforesaid decoction, adding to it the meals of
beans, lupins, and barley. The inflammations of the lungs (which are known by
a difficulty of breathing without pain, and by a gravity and distension of
the bulk with a cough, but without any feeling of grief, unless the membranes
of the lungs, being along the breast knit to the breast, be inflamed) are cleansed
by spittle, and also by urine, and by siege. The inflammations of the hollow
part of the liver (which are known by a great pain somewhat lower, and by an
aptnes to vomiting and loathing of meat, but joined with an immoderate thirst
of drink) are cleansed best by the siege. The gibbus hepatis, or the upper part
of the liver bending somewhat compass downward, joining to the midriffe, out
of which the hollow vain does issue, if it have an impostume, (which being
very great will appear to the handling, unless the body be ouer-fat or
fleshy, or else it is known by a pain of the right side reaching up higher
toward the throat, and causing much grief in fetching breath) is cleansed
best by urine. The inflammations of ye raines (which are known by a pain
nearer the back bone, and an astonishment of the loins and thighs on the same
side that the kidney is inflamed, together with some vomitings, and with
vrines, often, but painful) when they are fit for clensing, are cleansed also
the same way, to wit, by a moderate use of the diuretica, or things causing
urine, as the roots of garden parsley, Petroselinum Macedonicum, kneeholme,
and Sperage, or electuarium Iustini, but remembering still that if there be an
ague, you join with them the aforesaid great cooling seeds, or the less
cooling seeds, of lettise, endive, scariole, and purslayne. If the
inflammations be of the spleen (which may be known and felt by the swelling
of the left hypochondrium, about the short ribs on the left side) and do
suppurate (which happens very seldom) they may cleanse the same way that the
liver does, but you may do well to add to the outward receipts the oil of
capers, and the oil of tamariske. If the inflammation be a pleurisy (which is
known by a pricking pain joined with the shortness of breathing, and a cough
and continual fever, the pulse being hard and rough like a saw) you may
intermix in the clensing of it such things as do best avoid the cause of it.
For Galen shows, Gal. libr. de constitutione artis medicae. Fuchs. and Trall.
capitibus de pleuritide. Trine. in explanatione lib. 2. Galeni de differentijs
febr. lect. 44. Trine. de ratione curandi part. corp. aff. lib. 6. cap. 3. Gal.
4. de pulsibus cap. 8. and 12.
Aliam pleuritidem ex sanguine, aliam ex bile, aliam ex pituita ortum habere,
That some pleurisies do come by blood, some by choler, and some by fleame.
Fuchsius and Trallianus make some to come of melancholy, but Trincauel shows,
that that must needs be either never, or very seldom, because melancholy is of
a thick and earthly substance, and can hardly pass into that thick, solid and
skinnie membrane, which does vnderbinde the ribs. He further declares, that it
comes most often of choler, according to that assertion of Galen, Plerumque
pleuritis fit a bilioso succo, peripneumoniae a pituitoso, For the most part a
pleurisy comes of a choleric humor, and the inflammation of the lungs of a
phlegmatic. What things do best help the avoiding of these humors, you shall
see in the end of the Chapter next following. Last of all, when the matter and
cause of impostumes is cleansed away, you must use (...), ^. per (...)
conglutinantia and cicatricem inducentia.
things that do conglutinate, consolidate, heal, and cicatrize, as inwardly
sugar rosate, bole armine prepared, and a little of the decoction of cumfrey,
but outwardly oil roset, oil of myrtils, and the white of an egg, adding
some hypocistis, acatia, coriars sumach, mastick, aloe, sarcocolla, sanguis
draconis, and frankencense. It shall be good also to drink some of a decoction
of vulnerary herbs, as sanicle, bugle, selfeheale, herb two pence, virga aurea,
great valerian, and padelion, strayned, and again boiled with some sugar.

CHAP. 10.
How defects and errors are to be supplied and amended, and how the Physician,
or in his absence the Chirurgian may know by the blood being a little while
reserved, what course is further to be taken with the patient.

GAlen shows, that a certain young Physician (for according to the french
proverb, Ieunes medecins cymitieres bossus, vieux procureurs process tortus,
Young Physicians and old advocates, the one do make uneven churchyards, and
the other many crooked actions) when he had bound the arm of his patient,
Galen* method. medendi. lib. 5.
and by the binding an artery did appear high up, he struck the artery in
stead of a vain, a yellowish blood and thin and hoate did straightwayes
shoot out, and that with a certain leaping and skipping. Galen when he
understood thereby that an artery was cut, did first apply a fit plaster to
stay the bleeding, and afterward an other to heal the incision, for he
defends there and avouches by his own experience, that a wounded artery may
be healed. Fuchsius does interpret, that (...), which comes out of arteryes,
to be sanguis rubicundus and igneus, a fiery red blood. Fernel. method. meden d^
lib. 2. cap. 16.
Fernelius thinks, that the fittest plaster to lay upon a wounded artery, is,
to be made of aloe, myrrh, franckencense, bole armine, and the white of an egg
mingled with the hair of a hare. Galen appoints the plaster to remain on
four days without remoouing. And in the same place does charge especially,
Gal. therap. meth. lib. 5.
that whatsoever is laid to a wounded artery be of a very drying property. So
much does the artery require more drying things then the veins, as it is by
nature of a more dry constitution. If a sinew or a muscle be pricked, ^uchs.
Instit. lib. 2 sect. 5. cap. 9.
there will follow an astonishment and a conuulsion or crampe, or else a great
pain, and some swelling, and in this case Fernelius shows our course must
be, Fernel. lib. 2. method. medeudi. cap. 15.
not to suffer the wound to grow together until it be first delivered from the
inflammation and swelling, and the way not to suffer it to grow together, is,
to bath it with warm oil. After three days you may suffer it to heal up,
putting upon it a little turpentine mingled with Euphorbe. Ibid. cap. 17.
Fernelius immediately after does show, Fuchs. instit. lib. 2. sect. 5. cap. 11.
as does likewise Fuchsius, how by the blood having a little while rested, we
may much perceive what humor does most abound in the patient. When the sawcers
wherein the blood is contained, have bin set up some little time in a place
where neither wind nor sun beams may come unto them, if the blood be thick
and viscous, such as is the cause of obstructions, then it will soon congeale
together, and being touched, it will stick somewhat to the finger. If it be
long in congealing and waxing hard, then is the blood to be accounted very
thin: but if when it is cold it wax not hard at all, then is it all together
either waterish, or putrifyed. Much whayish and yellowish water swimming upon
or by the blood, does show either too much use of drinking, or the liver weak,
or the raynes feeble and obstructed. The spume or froth that swimmeth upon it
(unless it come by the violence of the flowing) it shows the heat and
inflammation of that humor whose color it caryeth, as the red froth
signifies the heat of blood, the yellow of choler, the white of fleame, and
the blackish and bluish of melancholy. The color of the blood continuing red,
is a sign of good and profitable blood. If it be pale, it signifies choler;
if white, fleame; if greenish, burnt choler; if of a leaden color, pernicious
melancholy; if it be of diverse colors, then it is showed that diverse humors
do abound. There is sometimes a certain fatness like a spiders web
swimming upon the blood: If it be in a full body, it signifyth a blood prone
unto fatness; but if it be in a lean body, it comes of the consuming and
wasting thereof. If the blood do smell ill (as it falls out but seldom) it
is a sign of a very great putrefaction. Fernelius shows, Fernelius methodi
medendi lib. 2. cap. 3.
how in the blood you may behold all the four humors, Cum sanguis concrenit
serum per summa innatat vrinae haud absimile, bilis est tenuis and florida
concreti sanguini^ pars suprema, melancholia subsidet, sanguis rubentior and
petuita pallidior media tenent: When the blood is congealed, there are five
things offered unto our view. The tenue serum or whayish part swimmeth upon the
top, much like unto urine. The choler is the thin and flourishing highest
part of the congealed blood. The melancholy falls down to the bottom. The
blood is the redder part, and the fleame is the whiter part of that which does
possess the midst betwixt the choler and the melancholy. Gal. lib. 2. de
crisibu^. cap. 12.
Galen says, what soever is most unctuous and light in the blood is choler but
what is most gross, and as it were dregs, which by overmuch heating is
dried up, that is melancholy. Fernel. lib. 2. method. medend^. (...). 17.
Fernelius does advise us not only to mark the color and contents, but also
when the blood has settled awhile, to compare the little basins one with an
other. If all be like, it is likely that all the rest in the body is like unto
it, and that only the multitude did offend. For although the blood be never so
good, yet if it be in overmuch plenty, it may grieve the body, offend the
senses, and bring very many dangers. If all the blood be ill, or if the first
be good and the last ill, it shows that many humors do yet remain to be
rooted out by good diet, and by fit euacuations, or else if the bloodletting
be in a great inflammation, then the last blood being worse then the first,
does often declare, that the very matter of the disease is avoided, and the
euacuation made fully complete. So likewise if the last blood be better then
the first, it is a good sign of a perfect euacuation. If the blood be powered
afterward into warm water that the substances of it may be severed one from an
other, Fernelius ibidem.
it will declare much unto us. The whayish thin part will be so confounded
with the water, that you can not discern the one from the other. The thinner
part of blood will also be mingled with the water; but yet so, that by the
color thereof you may have a good judgment of the nature of the humor. The
thicker and fibrous part of the blood will shrink to the bottom, which shall
be judged to be pure and agreeable unto nature, if it be bright, thin,
somewhat whitish, and cleaving well together; but if it be thick, it declares
that the blood in the body is thick. If it be black or infected with any bad
color, it shows with what humor ye blood is oppressed. If it cleave not
together but do easily fall asunder, it is an argument of very great
putrefaction. When thus the humor abounding is known, and therewithal a
consideration had of the state, quality, and nature of the disease, if it be
found that there is still a continuance of the pain or grief, then must we
either use those things which do gently correct the humor appearing to abound,
or else (if time and occasion require it) harken to that practice which
Hippocrates does commend in many of his writings (as Galen does collect out of
him) When humors are increased with a just proportion amongst themselves, Gal.
in comment. 2. Aph. 8.
he indeuoureth to bring help by Phlebotomy, but when some one humor amongst
the rest is superfluous, then does he give a fit medicine for the purging of
it. If Choler abounding do yet annoy the body, How to avoid Choler.
then either delay it with syrupus acetosus, syrup of limons, and syrup of
citrons, or with some brothes or drinks wherein are boiled lettice, purslaine,
endive, the white flowers of water-lilly, sorell, stubwoort, and dandelion,
joining with them some sperage and germander; or else purge it, either with
some simple, as Rewbarbe a dram, or cassia an ounce, or manna an ounce and a
half, taken either in some of the aforesaid broth, or in a decoction of
tamarinds and prunes, or else by a compound, as syrup of roses two ounces, or
syrupus de cithoreo cum Rhababaro one ounce and a half, or diaprunum
compositum, or diaprunis laxatiue, or by electuarium de succo rosarum, any of
them a little under half an ounce. If superfluous fleame do seem still to
bring danger, How to anoyd fleame.
then either diminish it without purging, by syrup of hysop, syrup of horehound, syrup of maiden hair, oxymel simplex, oxymel squillaticum, and by
ptisanes of barley water, wherein are boiled some elicampane, foelefoote,
licorice, and annise seed, or else purge it either with simples, as with
infused and strayned agarick about three drams, or with colocynthis about
twenty grains, or with elaterium as much, being well gathered light, white
and bitter, or with tithymall leaves dried and prepared, one dram, or else
with some compound, as with the powder of hiera picra made into pills, with the
juice of baulme or sage about two drams and a half, or by pills de turbith, or
pillulae stomachicae, of either one of them about one dram, or diacarthami
half an ounce. Or if the disease have bin so lingering, and the humors be
become so tough and clammy, that scammoniate things may be used, you may give
of Diaphoenicum, or of electuarium Indum maius, of either one of them about
half an ounce. Where I use the word (about) my meaning is still that in the
young, or in the very weak and feeble you must take a little less, and in the
stronger sort a little more then the quantity here specifyed, but otherwise
usually and commonly to aim, as near as may be, to the weight and dosis here
mentioned and prescribed. How to avoid melancholy.
If melancholy abounding do seem to aggrauate the impediment, then either
avoid it without purging by syrupes of borage and buglosse, syrup of agrimony,
or syrup of fumiterre, or by some broths or drincks wherein are boiled baulme,
rosemary, and the flowers thereof, tamariske, dodder, hartstoong; the four
cordial flowers, to wit, of roses, violets, borage, and buglosse; also capers,
and ceterach, called of some fingerferne; or else purge it either by a simple,
as by Seen in powder one dram, or by Seen in decocton half an ounce, or by
polypody or epithyme, of either of them about half an ounce, steeped, boiled,
and wrong out, or by black Hellebore about half a dram, or by lapis Armenius
washed a dram; or else by some compound, as by diasena Nicholai, somewhat
more then half an ounce, or confectio Hamec mayor about half an ounce, or
syrupus de pomis Rondelet^ about an ounce and a half. How to avoid mixed
humors.
If mixed humors do afflict the body, then either to mitigate them compound
your aforesaid syrupes and decoctions, taking one moity of one, and an other of
an other, or otherwise proportionably mingle them, as the humors do more or
less abound, or else to purge them, do the like by the forenamed purging
receipts, or take of Diacatholicum somewhat more then half an ounce, or hiera
Ruffi, the quantity of a chestnut dissolved in broth, or in pills take pillulae
aggregatiuae, or pillulae de tribus, of either one of them about a dram. At
what times these and such other like purgings shall be accounted most fit, and
what several circumstances are to be observed therein, as well at the very
instant of the ministering thereof, as also in the preparing of the body before,
and the guiding of it after. These are points which I do handle at large in the
Cathartice, or second part of the great Physic remedies mentioned in my
Preface: wherein as I have already gathered most of the chiefest ^xiomes and
aphorisms out of many famous Physicians of all ages, concerning these and such
like questions appertayning to the purging of humors, and in some sort also
disposed them; so do I purpose also (godwilling) to deliver them hereafter to
the view of the world, as soon as leisure shall permit to transcribe, and
friends advise to publish.

Soli vni, trinoque deo sit tota tributa
Laus, cuius coeptum dextra secundet opus.
FINIS.
The Index.
The questions and matters concerning letting of blood have no need of any
Index, seeing they are in the Preface to the Reader gathered into a brief
sum, and the Chapters poynted out where every particular is handled. But for
as much as many diseases and griefs are touched here by occasion and obiter in
sundry several places, that one place may the better explane an other, and
sometimes also supply, confirm, and second one an other; and moreover that the
Book may be more ready for the use of the reader, I have thought good to add
alphabetically the names of the infirmities and impediments, for which in these
two books are found many counsayles and remedies.

A.
Agues diaries Page 13. 4. Agues continual of blood inflamed p. 6. 70. 108.
Agues burning p. 11. 12. 113. Agues epialae p. 16. Agues quotidians p. 65. 17.
4. Agues tertians exquisite p. 16. 17. 21. 22. Agues tertians bastard p. 19.
22. Agues quartaines p. 18. 16. 21. 23. 4. 107. S. Anthonies fire p. 112.
Apoplexies p. 44. Arteries wounded p. 103. and lib. 2. cap. 9.
B.
Bladder insia^ed Page 100. 101. Bl^ck choler and melancholy* h^w differ p. 20.
19. 1^^. Blood abounding how known p. 57. 58. Blood ouergrosse and thick p.
64. 113. Blood corrupt p. 107. 108. 110. 114. See humors corrupt and raw.
^urning fever p. 11. 12. 113.
C.
Cacochymia p. 59. See humors corrupt. Cachexia p. 52. See habit bad. Choler
abounding how known page 58. and lib. 2. cap. 10. Choler abounding how avoided
and purged book 2. Chapt. 10. Choler avoided by bloodletting p. 22. 27. 112.
113. Children what to take in steed of letting blood p. 73. 74. 75. 76. 78.
Costiuenesse how helped by clysters p. 69. 70. 71. Co^ick p. 45. Concoction
wanting how known book 2. chap. 5. Conu^lsions p. 43. Continual hoate fever
p. 6. 70. 108. Crudities p. 111. See raw humors. Crudities how known book 2.
chapt. 5.
D.
Diary fevers Page 13. 4. Dropsey p. 45. 52.
E.
Ears payned p. 101. Epiala fever p. 16. Epilepsies p. 44. Eyes payned p. 10.
1
F.
Falling sickness p. 44. Fevers of sundry kinds, See Agues. Fleame abounding
how known page 58. and book 2. chapt. 10. Fleame abounding how avoided and
purged p. 67. 69. and book 2. chapt. 10. Fullness or full habit of body p. 2.
57. 98. Fluxes of body p. 79. 80.
G.
Gall of ill constitution p. 63. Gout p. 47. 48. 49.
H.
Habit bad p. 52. Heart payned p. 100. 101. Heart fainting, See swounings.
Headache p. 101. Head inflamed Page 42. 110. Hips payned p. 100. Humors
corrupt and raw whether admit Phlebotomy p. 51. 52. 60. 65. 66. 67. 71. 107.
108. 110. 111.
I.
Iaundise p. 52. Inflammations and impostumes how cured book 2. chapt. 9.
Intemperancy p. 60. and book 2. chapt. 9. Itches p. 51.
K.
Kidneys inflamed causing stone p. 39. 47. and book 2. chapt. 9. Kidneys
inflamed p. 100. 101.
L.
Legs payned p. 28. Liver hoate and stomach cold p. 50. Liver inflamed p. 100.
101. Liver inflamed in cano book 2. chapt. 9. Liver inflamed in gibbo book 2.
chapt. 9. Liver full of blood and choler causing pleurisy p. 42. 100.
Looseness of body p. 79. 80. Lungs inflamed p. 35. 100. 101. and book 2.
chapt. 9.
M.
Melancholy and black choler how differ p. 20. 19. Melancholy abounding how
known p. 58. and book 2. chap. 10. Melancholy abounding how purged and
avoided p. 107. and book 2. chap. 10. Melancholy winds p. 44. Mixed humors
how purged book 2. chapt. 10.
N.
Nostrils bleeding sometimes ill p. 75. sometimes good, p. 39. 40. 114.
O.
Old and lingering diseases p. 105. 107. Old age whether to be let blood or no
p. 72. 77.
P.
Palsies Page 43. Phrenzies p. 27. Plague or pestilence p. 23. 25. 26.
Pleurisy upon what several causes it comes p. 42. and book 2. chapt. 9.
Pleurisy when and how let blood in it. p. 31. 35. 37. 72. 98. 99. 106.
Pleurisy when not let blood in it p. 38. 39. Pleurisy how outwardly helped
book 2. chap. 9. Pulses distempered what signify p. 9. 10. 11. 106. 7.
Q.
Quartaine fevers. p. 16. 18. 21. 23. 4. 107. Quinsies p. 29. 98. Quotidian
fevers p. 65. 17. 4.
R.
Raynes inflamed p. 100. 101. Raynes inflamed causing stone p. 39. 47. Raw
humors whether admit letting-bloud p. 51. 52. 60. 65. 66. 67. 71. 107. 108.
110. 111.
S.
Scabs p. 51. Scuruy p. 53. Spleen obstru^ted p. 44. 53. 100. 101. Spleen
inflamed p. 39. 40. book 2. chap. 9. Splenetick blood p. 23. 113. 114.
Spitting blood p. 34. 38. Spirits inflamed p. 7. 9. Stone in the raynes p. 39.
101. 100. Squinancies p. 29. 98. Stomach weak and loose Page 62. Stomach
impure p. 64. 69. Strength failing p. 109. Sweating sickness p. 26. Swounings
p. 62. 63. 79. 109. 110. Suffocation p. 2. 35.
T.
Tertian fever exquisite p. 16. 17. 21. 22. Tertian fever bastard p. 19. 22.
V.
Vomits how to be made when the stomach is impure or molested with corrupt
humors p. 64. 69. Vrines betokening crudities book 2. chapt. 5. Vrines
deceiving p. 45.
W.
Women having their flowers or with child whether fit for letting blood p. 77.
79. Women with flowers suppressed p. 99. Womb inflamed. p. 37. 100.
Y
Yellow and thin blood p. 21. 114. Yellow iaundise p. 52.
Faults escaped.
Page 2. line 22. for 1. Aph. 1. read 1. Aph. 3.

Page 11. line 22. for rough, read cough.

Page 71. line 12. for to an ounce and a half according, read, to an ounce
according etc.

Page 110. line 2. for c^lipsis, read celysis.


