A New Letter of NOTABLE CONTENTS.

With a strange Sonet, entitled GORGON, Or the wonderful year.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf, 1593.

TO MY LOVING FRIEND, JOHN Wolf, Printer to the City.
Mr. Wolf, Good News was ever a welcome guest unto me: and you do well in the
current of your business, to remember the Italian Proverb; Good Tidings would
be dispatched to ride post, as Ill Tidings may have good leave to be a
footeman. The nimblest Be is a slowworme in expeditions of importance, or
co^gratulation: and the dullest Snaile the meetest Ambassador to be employed
in messages of damage, or condolement. You have lately, (as appears by your
Indices of the sickness, and so many other Nouels) very tidely playde the Bees
part: and so continue, as you love me, or your self: unto whom I wish a rich
hiue, and many hony-moones. Since I received Parthenophil, Shores wife, and the
Articles of accord, or truce in France, (for which I render you as many
thanks, as there be Articles): I have now also this instant of September,
perused your queint, and cunning Discourse of Remonstrances to the Duke de
Maine: with that other new-new Pamflet of the late Turkish assiege of Sysseck
in Croatia, the old Liburnia, famous for serviceable Ships. And take no less
pleasure in the sound Declaration of the plain Germane, a credible
Historicgrapher, then delight in the sly Information of the fine French, a
glicking Remembrancer. It is not the external, but the internal form, (call
it the Pith, or the marrow, or the life-bloud, or what you list) that edifieth:
and undoubtedly the Christian world has pregnant cause to prostrate the
feruentest Zeal of their devotions to his almighty majesty, that has brought
France, and Croatia to those terms of Truce, and Triumph. A happy Truce, if a
happy truce: and an honorable Triumph, if durable. I say, If, and If, because I
have known many a Truce, like Scammony, that weakeneth the liver; or Cassia,
that enfeebleth the raines; or Agarick, that overthrows the stomach; the
stomach, that must work the feate. And who has not either by Experience, or
by hearsay, or by reading, known many a Triumph, like Sena, that breeds
wind; or Rubarbe; that dries overmuch; or Euforbium, that inflameth the
whole body; the body, that must strike the stroke? Take-away that
overthrowing, or weakening property from Truce: and Truce may be a divine
Scammony, Cassia, or Agaricke, to purge noisome, and rebellious humors. Oh
that it might be such a Purge in France. Correct that ventositie, or
inflammation, that accompanies Triumph: and Lo the gallantest Phisique, that
nature has affourded, wit devised, or magnanimity practiced, to abate the
pride of the enemy, and to redouble the courage of the friend. No Tobacco, or
Panacea so mightily virtuous, as that Physique. Oh that it might be such a
Physique in Croatia, in Hungary, in Almany, in the whole Christian world.
Immensum calcar Gloria: the golden spur of the brave Grecian, and the worthy
Roman. Policy is Politic: and will not easily be coosened with the musk of
the Perfumer, though musk be a sweet Curtesan; or allured with the sugar, and
honey of the Cook, though sugar, and honey be dainty hypocrites; or enueigled
with the goldleaues of the Goldsmith, though gold-leaues be eloque^t and
bewitching Orators; or deluded, that is, betrayed with any coolerable
counterfesance, howsoever smoothly enticing, or gloriously pretending. Private
medicines are often adulterate: but public medicines will admit no
sophistication: and Policy must be well-aduised, before it swallow-downe the
gilded pills of flattering pretext. France has been taught to be cautelous
in Truce; which has eftsoons sucked the sweetness of a Judas kiss: and
Croatia may learn to be provident in Triumph; which has often fealt the
ioyfulnesse of a Sampsons post. Neither France can be too ielous; nor Croatia
too pressed; nor Hungary too fierce; nor Almany too hardy; nor any nation too
circumspect, that is beleaguered with such puissant, and obstinate foes. The
house of Guise has long hawked and practiced for a great Crown: the Duke de
Maine has chopped upon a main-cha^ce: Opportunity is a marvelous warrior: The
king of Spain a mighty enemy: the Pope, an unreconcilable adversary to a
Protestant Prince: the Turk a horrible foe to Christian states; and not to be
daunted, or dismayed with two, or three petty foiles. Petty foiles incense
choler, and enrage fury; not allay courage, or disarme power. Were not man a
man in himself, and God above all; alas, what security in a fallible Truce: or
what repose in a mome^tany Triumph? Yet every Truce is respectively welcome:
and every Triumph a Pageant of manfull valor, and a Iubile of divine favor.
For my poor part, (a single Interest in so great affairs) I am as
affectionatly glad to find Victory on the better side, as I have often been
compassionatly sorry, (or shall I say? stomachously angry), to read how
pitteously the Christian host has been beaten by the Turkish Army, a brave
Army, but Turkish. Whose puissance has long been, and still is the dishonor
of Christendom; and whose Empire cannot wax, according to their aspiring
deseigne, but Christ's kingdom must wane, according to some lamentable
Examples. Surely the Onely-wise (for whosoever is comparatively wise, He is
absolutely wise) ordains all for the best: and they perish for, or thorough
their own Folly, that perish. Homer in humanity has affirmed it: and the
Bible in divinity has confirmed it. Howbeit true Wisdom is valiant in
adversity: and right Valiancy wise in prosperity: both ever like themselves,
and unlike the puffes, or bubbles of the world; that know how to disguise, or
afflict, but not how to redress, or solace themselves. Hope never dispaireth:
and no such resolution, as the resolution of Faith: a virtue of more wonderful
emproouement by thousands, then the most miraculous grain of mustard-seede;
or whatsoever Nature ingendreth, Art frames, or Exercise atcheiueth most
powerable. Zeal has been, and may be a marvelous Conqueror, even beyond the
brauest Confidence, or fiercest Fury: and Faith was ever the wonder of wonders,
where it was. Christ favors a stout, and invincible Constancy in any good
cause: and in his own cause, (maugre the mainest forces, or suttlelest
Policies of Mahomet, or the Devil,) he will finally make them victorious,
with Triumphs of joy, and Trophyes of honor, that fight his battles with
the heart of Zeal, and the hand of Courage. Who honors not the glorious
memory, and the very name of the renowned Lepanto: the monument of Don John of
Austria, the security of the Venetia^ state, the Halleluia of Christendom, and
the Welaway of Turkey? Christ bless his sta^dard-bearers, with many Lepantos,
and Syssecks: and make his militant Church, an host triumphant. It has often
been the meditation of One, that with a politic, and divine Analysis, has
looked into the successiue proceedings, and fatal overthrows of Tyrannyes: if
Mahomet, and his Alcoran cannot stand, but Christ, and his Euangely must fall:
when the Great Turk, continually encroaching, (according to his graund
intendiments, and ambitious deseigne,) is busiest in his hoatest harvest of
engrosing and coheaping kingdoms, and with a most greedy appetite
runneth-headlong to devour the Christian world at a bit; Lord have mercy upon
thee, o little-little Turk. Pride may exalt his hawty presumptions, and
Prowess advance his terrible bravery: but there is a God in heaven: and they
cannot laugh long, that make the Devil laugh, and Christ weep. Meane-while it
were pity, Sysseck should want the glory of such an immortal Memorial, as
some noble, and royal wits have bestowed upon the euer-renowned Lepanto.
Excellent Virtue, for a due reward, deserves excellent Honor: and brave
Valor, for worthy imitation, would be bravely extolled: as Orpheus glorified
lason; Homer, Achilles; Virgill, Aeneas; Ariosto, Charlemaine; Tasso, Godfry of
Bollen; and so forth. Especially at such an encountering, and surprising Time,
as must either floorish, like the Palm of the mountain; or fade, like the
Lilly of the valley.

You know, I am not very prodigal of my discourse with every one: but I know,
unto whom I write: and he that has read, and heard so many gallant Florentine
Discourses, as you have done, may the better discern, what is what: and he
that publishes so many books to the world, as you do, may frame unto himself
a private, and public use of such conference. Few they are, that are
qualified to surpass, or equal those singular Presidents: but they few would
be retained with a golden fee, or interteined with silver Courtesy. Some I know
in Cambridge; some in Oxford; some in London; some elsewhere, died in the
purest grain of Art, and Exercise: but a few in either, and not many in all:
that undoubtedly can do excellently well, exceedingly well. And were they
thorowghly employed according to the possibility of their Learning, and
Industry, who can tell, what comparison this tongue might wage with the
most-floorishing La^guages of Europe: or what an inestimable crop of mostnoble
and sovereign fruit, the hand of Art, and the spirit of Emulation might reap
in a rich, and honorable field? Is not the Prose of Sir Philip Sidney in his
sweet Arcadia, the embrodery of finest Art, and daintiest Wit? Or is not the
Verse of M. Spencer in his brave Faery Queen, the Virginal of the diuinest
Muses, and gentlest Graces? Both delicate Writers: always gallant, often
brave, continually delectable, sometimes admirable. What sweeter taste of Suada,
then the Prose of the One: or what pleasanter relish of the Muses, then the
Verse of the Other? Sir John Cheeks style was the hony-bee of Plato: and M.
Aschams Period the Siren of Isocrates. His, and his breath, the balm and
spicknard of the delightfullest Tempe. You may guess, whose meter I would
entitle the harp of Orpheus, or the dulcimers of Sappho. And which of the
Golden Rivers flows more currently, then the silver stream of the English
Ariosto? Oh that we had such an English Tasso: and oh that the worthy du Bartas
were so endenisoned. The sky-colored Muse best commends her own heavenly
harmony: and who has sufficiently praised the hyacinthine and azure die, but
itself? What colors of astonishing Rhetorique, or rauishing Poetry, more
deeply engrained, the^ some of his amazing devises; the fine dittyes of an
other Petrarch, or the sweet charms of pure enchantment? What Did-margariton,
or Dia-ambre, so comfortatiue, or cordial, as Her Electuary of Gemmes, (for
though the furious Tragedy Antonius, be a bloody chair of estate, yet the
divine Discourse of life, and Death, is a restoratiue Electuary of Gemmes) who^
I do not expressly name, not because I do not honor Her with my heart, but
because I would not dishonor Her with my pen, whom I admire, and cannot blason
enough. Some other Paragons of bewtifullest Eloquence, and Mirrours of
brightest wit, not so much for breuities sake, as for like Honors sake I
ouerskip: whose only imperfection is, that they are touched with no
imperfection. Yet Hope is a Transcendent, and will not easily be imprisoned, or
impounded in any Predicament of ancient, or modern Perfection: which it may
honor with due reverence, but will not serve with base homage. Excellency has
in all ages affected singularity: and Ambition how impetuously buckled for the
mastery? And albeit wit have a quick sent, that will not be coosened, and
Judgment a sharp eye, that cannot be bleared: (the Morning Star of
Discretion, and the Evening Star of Experience have a deep insight in the
merits of every cause): yet still Hope has reason to continue Hope, and is a
white Angel sent from heaven, as well to enkindle Vigorous Zeal, as to awaken
lasie Slougth. A wan, or windy Hope, is a notable breake-necke unto itself:
but the grounded, and winged Hope, which I someway perceive in a few other, no
way conceive in miselfe, is the ascending scale, and Milk-way to heavenly
excellency. When I bethink me of any singular, or important effect, I am
presently drawn into a consideration of the Cause; and deem it a childish
vanity, to dream of the End, without Means. The prompt and pliant Nature, is
the dawning of the Crimsen morning: the right Art as fine a workman, as
Daedalus, and as nimble a Planet, as Mercury inspiring Imitation may climb
high: how often has fiery E^^^tion won the golden spurs, and run his
Victorious race, like the shining Sun in his resplendishing Chariot? Pregnant
and incestant Exercise hatcheth miracles. Practice was ever a curious
platformer of rare and queint Theorickes: and is it not still possible for
Practice, to devise as exquisite patterns, as ever were invented, and even to
contriue new Idees of singularity? The encounter of Virtue, is honorable: and
what more commendable, then the Conflict of Art? It is only that divine Hope,
embellished with those Ornaments of skill, and inspired with those blessings of
heaven, that must excel itself; and advance the worthiest Valor, that ever
atcheiued Heroical Exploits, or leuyed Argonauticall Prizes, by land, or sea.
Peerless wits may hourd-vp the precious treasure of their Invention, and
store-vp the gorgeous furniture of their Eloquence, till Prowess has
accomplished mightier wonders upon Earth. At this present what can Admiration
find, either more resolute for courage, or more puissant for valor, or more
honorable for success, or more wonderful for imitatio^, the^ the small ba^des
of the brave Rupertus against the Turk; or the little troops of the brauer
French King against his domestical, and foreign enemies?

I might say more, were the place fit: but what written Token shall I return
for so many Printed Tokens? One hand washes an other: and it apperteineth unto
him, that takes something, to give something. I am reasonably furnished with
choice of other stoare at this instant: but I will not accloy you attonce: and
my least; but Newest Trifle (for that is the meetest name) shall serve in
supply of a small requital for your greater News. I term it a Trifle for the
manner: though the matter be in my conceit, superexcellent; in the opinion of
the world, most admirable; for private consideration, very notable; for
public use, passing memorable; for a point, or two, exceeping monstrous. And
that is the very disgrace of the Sonnet, that the Style nothing counteruaileth
the Subject, but debaseth a strange body with vulgar attire, and disguiseth a
superlatiue Text with a positive Gloss. As it is, it is your own to dispose,
or cancel at pleasure: and albeit the writer promise nothing, (for promise he
accounts an Obligation), yet if he fortune to surprise you with a sorry
amends, let it not be vnwellcome, that comes in the name of good will; and
such a good will, as is less affraide of the Plague, then of Unthankfulness.
He that is desirous with the first, to be continually made acquainted with your
public Intelligences, from, or of whatsoever kingdoms, or States; will have
a mutual regard of friendly correspondence, by some return of private Nouels,
or other recompense; as any his vacation yields leisure, or any his
opportunity presents occasion.

Touching his present Exercises, or other actions, you know enough, that know
why the Ass sleeps, and the Fox winketh. Or recall to mind our sweet
Table-philosophy of the for dead Libbard, a very gentle, and silent creature;
and you need no other inckling. Peradventure somebody may find, that the
roughest, and awkest things are not so cu^bersome to other, as they may prove
irksome to themselves. There is a learned kind of Fear, that preuenteth many
mischiefs: and they are iudiciously wise, (howsoever valiant, rich, or
powerable,) that dare not use other otherwise, then themselves would be used.
Men may stand upon brauing terms, and puffe-vp their own swelling veins: but
when wilfulness is in the tide, Discretion is in the ebb. Some have repented
them no less, then four and twenty houers in a day, and a night, for one
froward word. Suerly a man were better shift his footing, then stand stiffly in
his own light: and who would not rather say to his Tongue, Tongue thou art a
liar; or to his pen, Pen thou art a fool; then vndooe himself utterly,
and shame himself everlastingly? You might hear of the new Treaty, or motive:
and it is not the first time that I have discovered a brood of wits, like the
famous well in Idumea; whose water one quarter of the year, was as muddy, as
the muddiest kennell: an other quarter, as bloody, as the bloudiest
slaughterhouse; the third, as green, as the greenest grass: the fourth, as
clear, as the cleerest conduict. Every exchange for the better, does well:
and it is a good sign, when pudled waters grow clear, if they grow clear;
and disordered wits become tractable, if they become tractable. Have they not
cause to doubt, that know the variable nature of that Syrian well: and have
seen so many dogged things return to their vomit? A good bargain, and a
gentle Offer would not be refused: but he that co^sidereth the fittes of
April, and the panges of September, has reason for a demurrer: and he that
has seen as lunatique creatures, as the Moon, must be pardoned, though he
suffer not himself to be coosened with the legierdemaine of a iugling Convert.
Did I never tell you of a grauer man, that wore a privy coat of
interchaungeable colors; and for the Art of Reuolting, or recanting, might
read a Lecture to any retrograde Planet in Heaven, or Earth? Is it not possible
for a wild Ass of a fugitive and renegate disposition, in such a point to
resemble the tamest Fox? Or are not Books with unstayed readers, and running
heads, like unto those wondrous waters, that being drunk of birds, as
Theophrastus reports, or of sheep, as Seneca writes, changed them from
white to black, and from black to white? After a stern and ruthful Tragedy,
solemnly acted, who deeplyer plunged in sober, and melancholy dumpes, then
some good fellows; that from a pleasant, and wanton Comedy, finely played,
return as merry as a criket, and as light as a feather? When the sweet Youth
haunted Aretine, and Rabelays, the two monstrous wits of their languages, who
so shaken, with the furious feauers of the One: or so attainted with the French
Pockes of the other? Now he has a little mused upon the Funeral Tears of
Mary Magdalen; and is egged-on to try the supplenesse of his Patheticall vein,
in weeping the compassionatest and diuinest Tears, that ever heavenly Eye
rained upon Earth; Jesus, what (...) of Supererogation have they achieved?
Riot^ (...) was wont to root so deeply, that it could hardly (...): and where
reckelesse Impudency takes (...) not very hastily to be dispossessed. I was
say^^^ (...), to a Spring of rankest Villainy in February (...) Divinity in May?
May they not sur^^^ (...), that wonder how Machiauell can teach a Pri^^^ (...)
to be religious? An other question, or two (...), were at my tounges end. But
what (...) talk any-more of Paradoxes, or impossibilities, when He, that
penned the most desperate and abominable Pamflet of Strange News, and
disgorged his stomach of as poisonous rancour, as ever was vomited in Print
within few months is won, or charmed, or inchaunted, (or what Metamorphosis
should I term it?) to astonish carnal minds with spiritual meditations,
upon one of the most sacred and godfull arguments, that the holiest devotion
could admire, in the profoundest trance of rapt and Seraphicall Zeal? I will
not stay to marvel at the miracles of predominant Causes: the Holy Ghost is an
omnipotent Spirit, that can mollify the flyntyest mind, and breath a soul
of Heaven into a heart of Hell. If unfeignedly he has stripped-of the snakes
skin, and put-on the new man, as he devoutly pretends; let him be constant,
and not blaspheme his most-reuerend Savior with counterfeit Tears: if he
plays at fast, and loose, (as is vehemently suspected, by strong
presumptions) whom shall he cunnycatch, or crosbite, but his Castaway self,
as holly, as a holly-hock? But I thank God, I have something else to dispute:
and if young Apuleius be not still the son of old Apuleius, and Pierce still
as divine, as a wild Vine, I have said nothing: but commend the sweet art of
relenting Humanity, and embrace the good nature of a good Nature, that sheddeth
the pure Tears of Repentance. The more notorious the offense, and the more
vnsatisfiable the Injury was; the more favorable, and liberal he is, that
with honest terms, and reasonable conditions may easily be entreated to pardon
the same; that is, to bestow a great benefit insteade of a great revenge, and to
loose the exercise of many weeks, to gain the recovery of one lost son. The
best is, I am not yet a Fly in the cobweb of the Spider: and in a mating age,
none are free from the check, bu^kinges. Or if kings peradventure find
themselves somewhat shrewdly mated, alas we poor subjects must be content to
be checked: and may daily learn of our betters, to smoother with patience,
that we cannot quench with order, and will not extinguish with disorder.
Socrates professed nothing: and I profess less then Socrates: yet this I
profess. He that neither cockereth himself, nor loves to be lulled, or
smoothed-vp of freindes, can lightly put-vp the heauiest load of an enemy: and
he can hardly be daunted with nipping words, that is not easily dismayed with
pinching deeds. An vnguiltie minae knows not what the trembling of the Heart
means: and a sound Conscience is a brazen wall against the mainest battry of
Spite, or Feude. Were there no other Philosophy, but Experience, and a settled
resolution to proceed according to Reason in general, and Occasion in
special: every guiltless eye that seeith any thing, seeith his own
Confirmation in the Confutation of his guilty adversary: whose Vain railinges
are sibbe to other Vanities, that cannot endure, but either Vanish like smoke
in the Air; or mealt-away like snow in the Sun; or grow stale like disguised
fashions; or dissolve themselves into their materiam primam, that is, into
Vanity, and shame. Had I found any one material article, or substa^tiall
point against me, I must have imputed some part of the blame to miselfe: but
finding nothing in all those pestilent and Virulent sheets of wast-paper, but
meere-meere forgeryes, and the Devil in the horologe; might I not justly say?
I have cause to use, as I am used: or have I not reason to stand upon terms of
consideration? Did I not intend to deal a bountiful alms of Courtesy, who
in my case would give ear to the Law of Oblivion, that has the Law of Talion
in his hands; or accept of a silly recantation, as it were a sorry plaster to
a broken shinne, that could knock Malice on the head, and cut the windpipe of
the railing throat? Pierces Supererogation, (that was an arrow in my hand, a
clogg in your,) is lest beholding to the penknife: Nashes S. Fame has somewhat
more of the launcelet: the Reply of the excellent Gentlewoman is the fine
rasour, that must shaue-away every rank hair of his great courage, and little
wit. I was long-since aweary with beating the Aier; and take small pleasure in
washing the Asses head: or what should I term that bootelesse, and irksome
business? But it is that heavenly Creature (for so she will approve herself)
that can coniure-downe the mouth of Villainy into hell-mouth; and will do it as
resolutely, as she can do it peremptorily, Unless a co^petent satisfaction be
speedily tendered to my co^tentme^t. It were pity, that divine handy-worke
should be employed but to a divine piece of service, either to gain a
relenting soul, or to castaway an obstinate body. If she be prevented by a
voluntary submission of the offendour; to do a thing done, were a superfluous
labor; and to undo a man undone, an unmerciful cruelty. A thing as contrary
to the shining loveliness of her mild disposition, as the bitterest bitter
seems repugnant to the sweetest sweet. The brauest man is such a personage,
as I have elsewhere described: A Lion in the field, A Lamme in the town: A
Jove's Eagle in feude, an Apollos Swanne in society: A Serpent in wit, A Dove in
life: A Fury in execution, an Angel in conversation. What has the brauest
man, that she has not: excepting the Lion in the field of Mars, which she has
in the field of Minerua: whose war she wageth with a courageous mind, an
invincible hand, and the cunning array of the worthy Old Man in Homer. His talk
was sweet; his Order fine; and his whole menage brave: and so is hers: but for
a dainty wit, and a divine humanity, she is such a Paragon, as may compare
with the excellentest of Homers women, and pledge the honorablest of his
Goddesses. She is a right bird of Mercuries winged chariot: and teaches the
liuelyest cocks of the game, to besturre them early, to crow gallantly, to
march comely, to fight valiantly, to consort kindly, and to live in any estate
honorably. No flower more floorishing, then her wit: no fruit more mature
then her judgment. All her conceits are illuminate with the light of Reason:
all her speeches bewtified with the grace of Affability: all her writings
seasoned with the salt of Discretion: all her sentences spiced with wittines,
persumed with delight, te^pered with proffit: no leaven of Experience more
sauory, the^ all her platformes, and actions: nothing more mellow, the^ the
whole course of her life. In her mind there appears a certain heavenly
Logique: in her tongue, and pen, a divine Rhetorique: in her behavior, a
refined Moral Philosophy: in her government, a souerain Policy: in every
part of her proceeding a singular dexterity: and what pattern of skill, or
Practice, more admirable then the whole? Let it not seem incredible, that
shall enact and accomplish more, the^ is signified. The manner of her wrath, or
disdain, (yet I believe, she was never froward with any, nor ever angry but
with One; who^ only she scorneth, and before who^ she never contemned any,) is
somewhat like the counter-tenour of an offended Siren; or not much unlike the
progress of the resple^dent Sun in the Scorpion. Her favor is liker triacle
for the heart, the^ ypocrase for the mouth: her disfavor like the Moon
withdrawing the cheerely beams of her bounteous light in a cloud: her hatred
(if she can hate, for I verily think she never hated, but One) like the
flashing weapon of the fiery Aier. She is not lightly moved: but what she
resembles, or represents, when she is moved, could I as visibly declare, as
she ca^ vigorously utter, I would deem miself a piece of an Orator. And I
were more then Tullyes perfect Orator, if I could display her excellent
perfections, whose mind is as full of rich gifts, and precious Jewels, as
Newyeares-day. Yet her goodliest ornament, and greatest wonder, is the sweet
humility of that brave courage. But in remembering her, I forget miself: and
what a tedious Letter is here for him that maintains a chargeable family by
following his business: Had I not found you desirous of some particularities
touching Nashes S. Fame, and the Gentlewomans Reply, when you delivered unto me
Pierces Supererogation in Print: I had dispatched ere now. But now you must
lend me patience, until I have disbalased my mind. Concerning her endighting,
whereof I have already given you a taste, or smacke in Pierces Supererogatio^:
as in the harmony of her mind, so in the melody of her Verse, I seldom or
never descry any note outoff tune: and it is not the first time I have termed
her Prose, the tinsell of finest Art, and sweetest nature. What notes I find
above Ela in the One: and what counterpoints of exquisite workmanship I admire
in the other: it shall elsewhere appear, in a Dialogue, entitled Pandora, or
the Mirror of singularity. Might I see the finest Art, and the sweetest
nature in person, I would report me to the Censure of their own souerain
mouths; the best Judges in their own peerlesse faculty. There falls not a
sentence from her quill, without sap, and pith: and every Periode of her
style carries marmalad and sucket in the mouth: and every argument of her
invention, sauoreth of most sauory reason. No chain so linked, as her
Conclusions: nor any Cristall so co^spicuous, as her Method. Her whole
discourse, is the cream of the milk; the comb of the honey; the juice of the
grape: and the marrow of the bone. The bestowing of her perfections at
occasion, a dainty choice, and fine, marshalling of every excellency, curiously
sorted in their proper places: like the gorgeous wardrobe of Helena, or the
precious Iewellhouse of Cleopatra, or the cunning stillhouse of Maedea, or the
comely distributing of the neatest and gallantest furniture in the ritchest
Economy. What needs more? Her beginning, like the purest Oil in the crown
of the midst of the rondelet: her proceeding, like the souerainest wine in
the butt: her ending, like the sweetest hoony in the bottom of the hoony-pot.
Her intention was defensive, not offensive: and had any thing been tolerable in
that scurrilous and villainous declamation, assuredly she would a thousand times
rather have excused the matter, then accused the maker. Humanity, is ever
willinger to love, then to hate, and so is she: Courtesy, much forwarder to
commend, then to disprayse; and so is she: Clemency, infinitely proner to
absolve, then to condemn, and so is she. For she is a personal Humanity, a
mere Courtesy, and a Clemency incorporate. But when she saw the foul mouth
so shamefully runne-ouer, without all respect of manners, or regard of
honesty, or pretense of Truth, or color of Reason: Gentlemen, quoth She,
though I lack that you have, the Art of Confuting; yet I have some suddes of
my mother wit, to sowse such a Dish clowte in: and if sowsing will not serve
the turn, I may hap find a pair of Pinsons, as sharply co^ceited, as S.
Dunsto^s tongues, that led the Devil by the nose Autem, up and down the house,
till the roaring beast bellowedout like a bull-beggar. And as for his terrible
crackes of Gunpowder terms, never lend credit to the word of A Gentlewoman, if
I make not old mother-Gunpowder of the newest of those rattling babyes. And if
steeping in Aqua fortis, will infuse courage into his goose-quill; why man, I
will dowse thee over head, and ears in such a dowty Collyrium, as will inspire
the Picture of Snuff, and Fury, into the Image of S. Patience. I have not been
squattering at my papers for nothing: and albeit I cannot paint with my pen,
like fine Sappho, yet I can dawbe with my incke, like none of the Muses: and am
prettily provided to interteine S. Fame with a homely gallimaufry of little
Art, to requite her dainty slaumpaump of little wit. A poor kitchen may be as
good an Artist for the stomach, as a poor dairy: (alas, that ever S. Fame
should be so whitled): and it shall go hard in my Cookery, but the sillibub of
his stale Invention shall be wellcommed with a supping of a new fashion, and some
strange sirrupe in co^mendam of his meritorious works. Though a railer has
more learning, the^ a shrew: yet Experience has a fillip for a Scholar:
Discretion a tuck for a fool: Honesty a bobb for a K: and my mortar, a pestle
for Assa fetida. Let him be the Falanta downe-didle of Rymes; the Hayhohalliday
of Prose; the Walladay of new writers; the kutthroate of his adversaries; the
gallows of his companions; the only broker of Pamflets; or what he can for
his sweltring heart: my battring instrument is resolute, and has vowed to bray
the braying creature to powder. We must have at least three Peccautes of Pierce
Penniles; and three Misereres of the Confuting Tospot: or Lord have mercy upon
thee, three thousand times-wofull wight. I am loath to struggle for the
Moone-shine in the pudled water: but if we must needs buckle for nifles, and
grapple for naughtes; though I cannot tell, whither I can bounse him, like a
barn door, or thumpe him, like a drum of Flushing: yet I may chance rattle
him, like a baby of parchment, or kneade him like a cake of dowe, or chearne
him like a dish of butter, or girke him like a hobling gig, or tatter him like
a thing forspoke^, or someway have my Penny-worthes of his Penniles wit. Nay,
if the Princock must be playing upon them, that can play upon his warped
sconce, as upon a tabor, or a fiddle: let himself thank himself, if he be
kindly thummed. Sirrah, I will sta^pe an unknown grape, that shall put the
mighty Bordeaux grape to bed: and may peradventure broach a new Tun of such
nippitaty, as with the very steame of the nappy liquour will lullaby thy five
wits, like the senses of the drunkenest sot, when his brains are sweetliest
perfumed. I fit thee with a Similitude for thy capacity: or belch a new
Confutation against the long tongues of the Stilliarde, and some twenty
Tauernes in London. I could be content, a drunken Prose, and a mad Ryme, were
thy deadlyest sins. But they are sweet youths, that tipple their wits with
quaffing of knavery, and carowsing of Atheism. If there be no other iollityes
at home, or braueries abroad; it is happy for them, that were borne with those
prizes in their throats.

And welfare a srolicke Courage, that will needs be the Tower of Babylonian
Conceit, and with a mighty Bullwarke of Supererogation gloriously confound
itself.

The rest of her speeches, and writings; are to be recorded, or suppressed, as
it pleases the Horn of these pelting sturres: who may happily find the Trompet
of Peace, as suer a Soldier in case of necessary defense, as the Drum of
War, or the Swash of Feude. Some that have perused eloquent books and
researched most curious writings, have not seen goodliest variety of
vernished phrases, and burnished sentences, then in her style: which was not so
gorgeously decked, and so fairly limned for naught. Howbeit as in some
public causes, better a mischief, then an inconvenience: so in many private
cases better an inconvenience, then a mischief. Though an Orient Gemme be
precious, and worthy to be gazed-vpon with the eye of Admiration, yet better an
Orient Gemme sleep, then a Penitent man perish: and better a delicate piece of
Art should be layd-aside, or vnwouen like Penelopes web, then an immortal piece
of Nature be castaway. She loves not to confute, that confuteth itself: and
I hate to confound, that confounds himself. She in the Court of Ciuility
has learned, to embrace ame^dement with the arms of Courtesy: and I in the
school of Divinity am taught, to kiss repentance with the lips of
Charity. I affect not any colorable insinuation, in glosing or smoothing
terms of formal accord: but misery accompany my actions, and the mercy of
heaven be my unmerciful enemy, if I desire not with a longing heart, to wreake
my teene upon wild vndiscretio^ by requiting good for bad, and converting the
wormwood of just offense into the angelica of pure atonement. The only
reason of my demurrer, is my assurance: which consists rather in diffidence,
then in credulity, and cannot warrantise itself what will be done, until it
is done. He were very simple, that having so heavy causes of diffide^ce, and so
light causes of credulity, would run hastily into the trapp, or suffer
himself to be presently entangled in the snare. Parley is a subtle Sophister:
Flattery a tickling sollicitour: and Persuasion an inchaunting witch. I cannot
but listen unto them with an itching ear, and conceive as it were a tang of
pleasure in mine own displeasure: but without Legempone, words are wind, and
without actual performance, all nothing. Had I not more Premises of distrust,
then promises of trust; or were he not ever to be presumed a bad fellow, that
has once played the bad fellow with a witness, (nothing but contrary proof
can reuerse that judgment): yet Lawyers love real cautions: and they that
would be loath to be enticed by white, and defeated by black, are curious of
their security. Truce was ever a redoubtable friend: and Suspicion has cause
to look upon Reco^ciliation with a ielous eye. Reconciliatio^ is a sweet word:
but entire Reconciliation a rare thing, and a strange restoratiue: whose
sweetness lies not in the tip of the tongue, or in the neb of the pen, but in
the bottom of the heart, and in the bowels of the mind; the mind that daily
emproueth itself, the only deep Politician, and inscrutable hypocrite. Whose
inwardest secrets notwithstanding, are not so profound, or close, especially in
the shallow breast of inconsiderate youth, but they may in sort be sounded, and
discovered by a cunning observation of Circumstances. Some essential points I
reserve to miselfe: bur M. Wolf knows, and who knows not? great Penmen,
and Pamflet-marchants play much upon the advantage of the time, and care not
who be their enemy, so the Term be their friend. Which of us can tell, but
there may lie the drift, and great Policy of the new motion? I have earnestly,
and instantly craved personal conference: but that should seem to make little
for his purpose; or might have been granted with less suite. All must be done
by the mediation of a third, and a fourth; and such an intercourse, as I may
probably have in some jealousy, though I conceive well of the interposed
persons. There has already been a large expense of time: and charges
continually run: and matters of more importance lie dead in the neast: and
the burned finger has reason to startle from the fire: and he that has been
once abused, would not willingly be abused twice: and Security cannot be too
precise, or scrupulous: and I would there were no Cunny catchers in London.
Till a public injury be publicly confessed, and Print confuted in Print, I
am one of S. Thomas disciples: not ouer-prest to believe, but as cause causes:
and very ready to forgive, as effect effects. They that know the danger of
Truces, and the couen of Treatyes, vt supra, must beg leave to ground their
repose upon more cautels, then one; and to proceed in terms of suspense, or
Pause, till they may be resolved with infallible assurance. For mine own
determination, I see no credible hope of Peace, but in War: and could I not
command, that I desire; I am persuaded, I should hardly obtain, that I wish.
I love Osculum Pacis; but hate Osculum Iudae: and reverence the Tears of
Christ; but fear the Tears of the Crocodile. Shall I be alittle plain?
Methinkes the raunging Eyes under that long hair, (which some would call
ruffianly hair) should scarsely yet be bathed in the heavenly Tears of
Christ, or washed in the divine Tears of Penitence. Irish hair, and weeping
Irish are no white Crows in these countries: and although there be no Wolfes
in England, yet there be Foxes in the hole. I would be loath to aggrauate the
least, or greatest particular against a Penitential soul: but still to haunt
infamous, or suspected houses, tauernes, lewd company, and riotous fashions, as
before, (for to this day his behavior is no turnecoate, though his style be a
changeling) is a greater liberty in my small divinity, then accords with that
devout, and most holy-holy profession. Lord, how curious was the wiser sort
even of the heathen Philosophers, in the neat, and exquisite choice of their
pure diet, undefiled society, Virgin manners, Unstained discourses, and
unspotted actions? What so clarified, as their wit: so purified, as their
mind: so sweetened, as their conference: so virtuous, as their instruction: so
powrefull, as their experiments: so exemplary, as their life: so unblemished,
as their fame? I know not, who weeped the Funeral Tears of Mary Magdalene: I
would he that sheddeth the Patheticall Tears of Christ, and trickleth the
liquid Tears of Repentance, were no worse affected in pure devotion, then
those Philosophers in moral Conversation. Were I not content, in some little
hope of his final recovery either in deed, or in show; to do him a
meritotious savor by concealing his utter discredit: I could easily, and would
notoriously, make him ashamed of some his late Sayings, and Doings: o Lord,
how Unbeseeming the Tears of Christ: and Alas, how likely to forerunne a
miserable destiny? Let him reform his public, and redress his private
enormities, and with a sincere vow I swear him friendship: or let him rest
quiet, and I am quiet. Otherwise I may possibly be induced, to pay him home
with an immortal revenge, that has plagued his own tongue with desperate
blasphemies in jest: o Christ, of how horrible consequence, without Tears in
earnest? There is a great distance betwixt Hell, and Heaven: the Devil, and
God: Rakehells, and Saints: the Supplication to the Devil, and the Tears of
Christ: the Strange News of Villainy, and the miraculous News of Repentance:
the Herald of War, and the Ambassador of Peace: the public Notary of Lies,
and the Register of Truth: the Devils Orator, and Christ's Chancellor.
Though Green were a Julian, and Marlow a Lucian: yet I would be loath, He
should be an Aretin: that Paraphrased the inestimable books of Moses, and
discoursed the Capricious Dialogues of rankest Bawdry: that penned one Apology
of the divinity of Christ, and another of Pederastice, a kind of harlatry, not
to be recited: that published the Life of the blessed Virgin, and the Legende
of the Errant Putana: that recorded the history of S. Thomas of Aquin, and
forged the most detestable Blackebooke, de tribus Impostoribus mundi. O monster
of extremityes; and o abomination of outrageous wit. It was his glory, to be a
hellhounde incarnate, and to spoil Origin of his egregious praise: Vbi been,
nemo melius: vbi male, nemo peius. Some surmounting spirits love to arreare a
huge opinion of their excessive validity pro, or contra. Hyperbolicall Virtues
(it is Aristotle's Epithet) are heavenly miracles: and hideous Excellency an
heroical wonder, like the Labors of Hercules, and the Bountyes of Errant
Knights: but superlatiue knavery is a rank Villain; and Ugly Blasphemy, a
foul Devil, tormented with his own damnable mouth. It is not puffing, or
blustering in bombasted terms, or Babilonian Phrases: but the fine and sweet
course of Virtue, of industry, of Beaudesert, of Valor, of true bravery, that
performs worthy actions, and purchases the honor of the world. If Humanity
will needs grow miraculous, it must fly with the wing of Divinity, not
flutter with the plume of Atheism, or hoise the sail of Presumption.
Whosoever despises the Majesty of heaven, or plays the Democritus in Gods
cause; be his wit never so capon-crammed in Vanity, or his heart never so
toade-swolne in surquidry: is the abiectest vermin, and Vilest padd, that
creeps on the Earth. If there be no such matter in the world, all the better:
if there be, woe be to the Autours of their own Confusion: and blessed they,
that take-forth a good lesson from other men's miscarriage. Happy, and ten
thousand times happy that inspired Heraclitus, that powreth-out the most-tender
affectionate Tears of Christ, with the flowing eyes of Zeal, and the melting
eloquence of his bowels. Other Oratory would be feeid, as it persuades; or
thanked, as it edifieth; or honored, as it rauisheth hearts with a powrfull
impression; or admired, as it steals souls with a divine sacrilege. He is
the perfect Orator, that figureth and represents every thing in Art, as it
is in Nature: that dispatcheth light points roundly; handeleth weightier
matters more substantially; in the grauest subject proceeds with due
reverence; and of faith discourses faithfully, of heaven heavenly, of divinity
divinely, of Christ like Christ. Dalliance in the sagest, and highest causes,
is an absurdity, and like a ridiculous Vice in a Tragedy, or a poisonous
Serpent in Paradise. Non est bonum, ludere cum Sanctis: cum Christo ludere,
execrabile. Aretin was a reprobate ruffian: but even Castilio, and Macchiauel,
that were not greatly religious in conscience, yet were religious in policy:
and there is no kingdom, or Commonwealth upon Earth, so profane, or
barbarous, but either in conscience is, or in Policy seems religious, or
cannot possibly maintain any durable state. I would every Autour, that has
done no better, had done no worse: and it were to be wished, that some
desperate wits were not so forward, to disbowell the intrails of their own
impious minds. Plinyes, and Lucians religion may ruffle, and scoff awhile:
but extreme Vanity is the best beginning of that bravery, and extreme Misery
the best end of that felicity. Green, and Marlow might admonish other to
advise themselves: and I pray God, the promised Tears of Repentance, prove not
the Tears of the Onion upon the Theater. If I knew no more, then I utter; I
would hope no less, then I wish: but hearing what I hear, and conceiving what
I conceive, I would be unfeignedly glad, he should exceed my expectation: and
when he has resolved my incredulity with a little actual performance, I will
not fail to render him right, with extensiue favor. For my particular, let
his professed Paenitet appear, by any reasonable, or tolerable satisfaction,
without fraud, or collusion: and I am no way rigorous in revenge, or obstinate
in displeasure. Meanewhile it is happily not amiss, to consider by the way, that
Truth begets hatred; Virtue Envy; Familiarity cotempt; Favor pride; Pardon
recklesnesse; and Credulity damage, or danger. A strange case, that so good
Moothers should bring-forth so bad daughters: but Improbitie, or Iniquity, (or
what should I term that naughty humor?) is the fifth Element of the world: and
Consultation were better to sit safely between Yea, and No, then to fall
suddenly with a hasty No, or to stand weakly with a simple Yea. My Affection
is ready to subscribe to any indifferent articles of accord: (for bona fide I
affect agreement) but my Reason has reason to pawse awhile; and a scruple, or
two of some depe^dence, may seem to say No. But even those two Negatiues,
(upon a firm, and Vndefeasible security, sine dolo malo,) would be conformable
enough, to conclude an Affirmative; and will not stick at any Transaction, or
Composition, that is not Unreasonable. To make short, (for no Iett, or
Loadstone so attractiue, as Lines, that draw unto them so many selfe-offering
sentences: and I have already vnmeasurably exceeded my stint) he that longs
to enjoy the fruit of private amity, and public favor, hastes not to
embrace the blossom, or to dote upon the shadow. His only final request,
and affectionate prayer is, that howsoever poor men be used, the dear Tears
of Christ, and the cheap Tears of Repe^ta^ce, be not abused. All is well,
that ends effectually well: and so in some have he ends, that wishes you
entirely well: and for your instruction can assure you, he needs not send to
Athens for honey, or to Spain for sugar, or to Italy for Anniseedes, or to the
Orient for saunders, or pearls; that may find as fine, and dainty choice,
nearer hand. I can say nothing for miselfe, whose date is expired: but I dare
ascertaine you, three drops of the Oil of roses, or three drops of the Mercury
of Buglosse, will enstrengthen the brain, or comfort the heart more, then six,
and six ounces of their common sirrups. A greater difference betwixt
artificial, and rude styles; refined, and drossy wits; skillful, and
ignorant judgments; auailable, and unprofitable works; I commend to the
consideration of the Press, with a right h^^^ty Farewell. This 16. of
September. 1593. Your assur^^^ wherein he may pleasure you, Gabriell Haruey.

Sonet. Gorgon, or the wonderful year.
St Fame disposed to cunnycatch the world,
Vproar'd a wonderment of Eighty Eight:
The Earth addreading to be ouerwhurld,
What now auailes, quoth She, my balance weight?
The Circle smyl'd to see the Center fear:
The wonder was, no wonder fell that year.
Wonders enhaunse their power in numbers odd:
The fat all year of years is Ninety Three:
Parma has kissed; De-maine entreates the rodd:
War wondreth, Peace and Spain in France to se
Brave Fickenberg, the dowty Bassa shames:
The Christian Neptune, Turkish Vulcane tames.
Navarre wooes Room: Charlmaine gives Guise the P^^^
Weep Powles, thy Tamberlaine voutsafes to dye.
L'enuoy.
The hugest miracle remains behind,
The second Shakerley Rash-Swash to bind.
A Stanza declaratiue: to the Lovers of admirable Works.
Pleased it has a Gentlewoman rare,
With Phoenix quill in diamont hand of Art,
To muzzle the redoubtable Bull-bare,
And play the galiard Championesses part.
Though miracles surcease, yet Wonder see
The mightiest miracle of Ninety Three.
Vis consilij expers, mole ruit sua.
The Writers Postscript: or a friendly Caveat to the Second Shakerley of Powles.

Sonet.
SLumbring I lay in melancholy bed,
Before the dawning of the sanguin light:
When Echo shrill, or some Familiar Spright
Buzzed an Epitaph into my head.
Magnifique Minds, bred of Gargantuas race,
In grisly weeds His Obsequies waiment,
Whose Corts on Powles, whose mind triu^ph'd on Kent,
Scorning to bate Sir Rodomont an ace.
I mused a while: and having mused a while,
Jesus, (quoth I) is that Gargantua mind
Conquered, and left no Scanderbeg behind?
Vowed he not to Powles A Second bile?
What bile, or kibe? (quoth that same early Spright)
Have you forgot the Scanderbegging wight?
Gloss.
Is it a Dream? or is the Highest mind,
That ever haunted Powles, or hunted wind,
Bereast of that same sky-surmounting breath,
That breath, that taught the Timpany to swell?
He, and the Plague contended for the game:
The hawty man extolles his hideous thoughts,
And gloriously insultes upon poor souls,
That plague themselves: for faint hearts plague themselves.
The tyrant Sickness of base-minded slaves
Oh how it dominer's in Coward Lane?
So Surquidry rang-out his larum bell,
When he had girn'd at many a doleful knell.
The graund Dissease disdained his to ade Conceit,
And smiling at his tamberlaine contempt,
Sternely struck-home the peremptory stroke.
He that nor feared God, nor dreaded Diu'll,
Nor ought admired, but his wondrous self:
Like Iunos gaudy Bird, that prowdly stares
On glittring san of his triumphant tail:
Or like the ugly Bugg, that scorned to die,
And mountes of Glory reared in towering wit:
Alas: but Babell Pride must kiss the pit.
L'enuoy.
Powles steeple, and a hugyer thing is down:
Beware the next Bull-beggar of the town.
-- Fata immatura vagantur.
FINIS.
Errata.
Slight faults are soon corrected, as that of, fine marshalling, without a
Comme, in the leaf C. or any the like: but in the same leaf there escaped a
gross error, to be corrected thus:

Her beginning, like the purest Oil in the crown of the rondelet: Her
proceeding, like the souerainest wine in the midst of the Butt: Her ending,
like the sweetest hoony in the bottom of the hoony-pot.


