TWO TREATISES. I. The Purchase of Grace, showing the Excellency of Christ,
and the Graces of His Spirit. II. The Souls Delight in Gods Tabernacles,
showing the Excellency of Time, spent in Duties of GOD'S Solemn Service.
Instances in the chief, viz. Prayer, Word, and Sacraments.
Motives and directions for right performance. Lastly, The chief Usurpers of
time discovered, with apt remedies against each of them. The Contents of the
Book are Methodically expressed in the Margent, which to the diligent Reader may
serve instead of a TABLE.

By William Harrison, Mr. of Arts, and Minister of the Gospel at Canwicke
near Lincoln.

LONDON, Printed by the Assign of T. P. for Philemon Stephens, and Christopher
Meredith, at the Golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1639.

THE PVRCHASE OF GRACE. A Treatise, Shevving the excellency of Christ, and the
Graces of his Spirit, the true Gold. Rules to discover the Gold of true Grace
from counterfeit. The Christians true riches, in the enjoyment of this Gold.
With Directions how, and of whom to purchase this wealth.

PROVE. 3. 13. Happy is the man that finds Wisdom.

VER. 15. She is more precious then Rubies, and all the things thou can
desire, are not to be compared with her.

MAT. 25. 9. Go to them that sell, and buy for your selves.

By William Harrison, Mr. of Arts, and Minister of the Gospel at Canwicke
near Lincoln.

LONDON, Printed by the Assign of T. P. for Philemon Stephens, and Christopher
Meredith, and are to be sold at their Shop, at the Golden Lion in Paul's
Churchyard. 1639.

TO The Right Worshipful the Master, Wardens, Assistants and Communalty of
the Mystery of the Mercers in London, my right worthy friends and Patrons, etc.
Right Worshipful, etc.
MOst lamentable it is to see men's eager pursuit of earthly vanities, and their
woeful neglect, and contempt of true saving grace, which is durable riches. To
which two, may be fitly applied that which was said of Saul and David (the two
first Kings of Israel) sc. that the one has slain thousands, and the other
ten thousands: both which arise chiefly (as I conceive) from men's ignorance,
or the want of the knowledge, of the worth and excellency of piety and true
fear of God, or saving grace. For (as our Savior said to the woman of
Samaria, Ioh. 4. 10.) If thou knew the gift of God, etc. So if they knew
these gifts of God, in the true resplendent nature of them; if men were but
acquainted with the worth, and excellency of this precious, and golden
commodity of true saving grace, they would not labor so immoderately for the
meat that perishes, but for the meat that endures to everlasting life (as
our Savior himself speaks, Ioh. 6. 29.) yea, they would not be so cumbred
(with Martha) about many things, whilst, in the mean time, the one thing
needful is neglected; but rather (with Mary) choose the better part, which
should never be taken from them, Luke 10. 42. To this end, I at first fastened
my meditation upon this portion of Scripture, and took into my serious
consideration this clause of holy Writ, yea, and have still fixed my saddest
thoughts upon this golden Counsel of our blessed Savior, wherein the great
Counselor of heaven and earth does give his blessed advise to the sons of
men, whom he generally finds like the Church of Laodicea, sc. wretched, and
miserable and poor, and blind, and naked; now unto all such, whom he finds
in this woeful and wretched condition, He propounds this sweet and heavenly
counsel and direction (which is the ground of this ensuing discourse)
contained in the words of this Text, Rev. 3. 18. I counsel thee to buy of me
gold tried in the fire, that thou may be rich. Wherein our Savior directs
us unto the true riches indeed, and commends unto us, the worth and
excellency of Himself, his merits, and graces of his Spirit, that they are all
of a right precious nature, and of great worth and value, even gold tried in
the fire, and such as will truly enrich us unto life eternal. In prosecuting
of which Text, I have run this course, and endeavored to show the great
worth, and transcendent excellency of true saving grace, that it is most fitly
resembled to Gold tried in the fire, yea, indeed to be far preferred before
it, and that in sundry respects; yea, not only the worth and excellency of
grace it self, but also the admirable worth of such as do enjoy this precious
Jewel, that all such are most excellent, and golden persons indeed, as coming
of golden parentage, having a golden portion and inheritance, and also golden
attendants, having the holy Angels of God daily to pitch their Tents round
about them, for their safety. Farther, by way of application, I have earnestly
pressed, and persuaded unto the duty of examination, that we should all try,
what metal our graces are made of; whether they be of a right golden nature,
yea, or no. And because herein we are all of us naturally backward, I have
therefore endeavored to enforce the duty by sundry Motives, drawn from the
consideration of the difficulty of the duty, the danger of being mistaken, as
also, the possibility of performance, and comfort that will hereby redound unto
us, when the work is once thoroughly performed. And that we may not be
deceived about it, nor gul'd with Satan's devices, in a business of such
importance, I have therefore also endeavored to manifest and discover the true
marks and characters of this golden metal; together with the comfortable, and
happy estate and condition of all such, as do enjoy this precious commodity.
2. I have endeavored to prove, that all such as have true grace, are
absolutely, and incomparably the richest persons in the world; and that piety
is the best, and surest way to make us truly and spiritually rich. So that, if
there be any that are ready to say; Who will show us any good? Let such come,
and see the shortest, and yet the surest way to get wealth, yea, durable
riches, and righteousness. Lastly, if any be so far wrought upon, as to cry
out with those in the Gospel, Lord, evermore give us this bread, this wealth,
this precious treasure; I have therefore, in the last place, endeavored to
discover the direct means to obtain it, and that is, Buying. And the rather
to encourage us, to the making of this happy bargain for our souls; I have
here described the excellency of the Chapman, that is ready to sell us this
rare commodity of saving grace. Here you shall also find a description of all
the particulars, requisite to the making up of this bargain with Christ. Here
you shall find the price of true grace, and the great variety of such
customers, as are ready (in appearance) to bargain with this spiritual and
heavenly Chapman: Here have you the sum and substance of this TREATISE.
Whereunto I have adjoined another of like argument; showing the worth and
excellency of the time that is spent in Gods service, or in the use of the
means to get grace; which seems fitly annexed to the former Treatise: for if
true saving grace be a jewel of such worth; then time spent in the use of the
best means to get grace, must needs be the best spent time: For how can any
(that earnestly thirst after saving grace) spend their time better, then in
diligent attendance upon the Word of Gods grace, which is able to build us up
farther and farther, and to give us an inheritance among all them that are
sanctified, as the Apostle speaks, Act. 20. 32? Oh how justly may a man take
up a lamentation, in regard of the general defect amongst men, in the woeful
mis-spending of their precious time! Men do even take care, how to pass away
that precious time, which is never to be recalled, but of it self passes away
as the most swift Ships. Now the desire of my soul, is not only to bewail
this dangerous sin of wasting and mis-spending of precious time; but also to
do my best endeavor, to reform this general and monstrous abuse this way. To
this end, I have endeavored to stop the stream, and to turn the water into
the right channel, by giving direction for the right spending of our precious
time; and have earnestly labored to evince thus much, sc. That time spent in
Gods service, is absolutely and incomparably the best spent time; and therefore
have earnestly persuaded, that we should not only begin to serve God betimes,
even in our youth, etc. but also that we should be constant and abundant in the
duties of Gods worship and service, after we have once begun. Concerning all
which, I have given sundry motives and directions. Lo here the sum and
substance of the whole book, and of both these Treatises; which as they seem
fitly united together; so being (upon occasion) to look abroad in public, they
seem to be most fitly Dedicated to you, the Worshipful Company, or body of
the Company of the mystery of Mercers. To you therefore (Right Worshipful,
the Master, and Head of this beautiful and comely body, consisting of great
variety of Worshipful and worthy members,) do I offer and present this my
poor and unworthy present: which (notwithstanding) if the manner of handling,
was correspondent to the matter it self, I durst then presume to say, it was
right worthy of you; though in respect of the manner of illustration of them, I
have justly and fitly called unworthy. To you therefore are these fruits of my
poor labors dedicated, by whose encouragement, the Author himself has been
supported, and better enabled to proceed in the work of his Ministry. Accept
therefore, I pray you, of this poor paper, as a public testimony to the
world, of my thankful acknowledgement of your noble favors toward me, and
kind and special respect unto me. By perusal whereof, you may happily be
encouraged to proceed in the good work, which you have begun, so mainely
importing, not only my good in particular, but also the good of sundry others,
who will have cause (I hope) to bless God for you, that he has been pleased
to make you the worthy instruments of upholding the means of grace among them;
yea, and to establish for their good, the spiritual Market of their souls,
that they may now come and buy freely, bread, milk, and wine, without money,
and without price, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 55. 1, 2. Yea, the desire of
my soul is, that these first fruits of my labors may taste and relish so
sweetly in the palate of your souls, that you may hereby see cause, never to
repent you of the pains which you have take, and the cost which you have this
way expended; but may still be persuaded to continue your loving respects
toward me, and your zeal to the cause of God, which is hereby greatly
advanced and furthered by you, and so discharge the trust committed to you by
that late famous, and admirably charitable and worthy Gentleman, Mr. Richard
Fishburne, who committed money to your trust, to be both religiously and
charitably employed. Which trust, how faithfully you have discharged, (as it is
best known to God, and to your own consciences, which are as so many thousand
witnesses) so I my self am not ignorant of your noble and worthy proceedings;
but out of my experience, to my comfort, and your credit, am able both to
speak, and to write of your fidelity and liberality, which you are wont to
use in these cases: besides also, that I am well acquainted with your dealings
with others besides my self, on this behalf. Most gladly therefore do I take
hold on this opportunity, to manifest unto the world, my thankful
acknowledgment of your special respect to me, in this case, and of this your
noble courtesy. As the benefits therefore which I have received from you are
public, and manifest unto so many: so likewise do I desire, that my
acknowledgement hereof should not only be real and hearty, but public also.
For I have not yet forgotten (though so many years ago) how freely and
kindly I was chosen by you, to participate in the fruits and pledges of your
love, after (with all diligence) you had sufficient trial, both of my
sufficiency, and also of the unblameablenesse of my life and conversation; as
touching both which, I trust you have ever since been fully satisfied. In most
grateful manner also I do acknowledge, with what peace and quietness, for
sundry years together, I freely did partake in ^he fruits of your love toward
me; neither was I ever at any time sithence disturbed, or molested by you; but
rather most kindly supported by you, against the molestation of others; yea,
and for the present, amidst the dangers and difficulties, wherewith I am not
only pressed, but oppressed also, my chief hope and expectation of relief in
this case, (next under God) is wholly from you; neither do I well know what to
do, but mine eyes are upon you; and not only mine, but also the eyes of
sundry others, both in City, and Country, are steadily fixed on you,
expecting what the issue and event will be. Go on therefore nobly still, and
with your wisdom and undaunted courage, vindicate the cause in hand, and
clear those difficulties and great encumbrances, which are lately fallen upon
the Rectorie (which I do enjoy) and consequently, upon my self: whereunto let
these poor labors of mine encourage you, together with the goodness and
amiable beauty of the cause it self. For if true saving grace, be of such
rare worth and value; then surely the cost and pains that is bestowed to
uphold the means of grace, must likewise needs be well employed. These
Treatises were several Sermons, preached in the Country among the people
committed to my Charge: and good reason me thinks it is, that I should give
some special account of my labors to you, from whose hands, I have received
the greatest part of my maintenance, and that constantly, for more then seven
years together. Which endeavors of mine, if plain and homely, are
notwithstanding thus far justly to be excused, namely, that they were preached
to a plain Country people, which though of good affection and inclination
toward piety, (I hope) are yet but of mean and small capacity, and
understanding in the things of God. Besides, my care has ever been, rather to
speak to the hid man of the heart, in a plain way, then tickle the ear with
a neat discourse, perhaps not understood, and therefore without all benefit and
profit. Besides, no marvel if these Sermons want ornaments, when the Anthour
himself was scarce supplied with necessaries; the greatest part of my means,
at that time, being wholly taken from me; so that some small pittance only of
outward means was left me; though God in his goodness has graciously (by
your hands principally) provided for me. This I propound, not only by way of
just excuse, for these my impolished labors, but also to preserve alive, and
keep awake your pity and compassion toward me, and to stir up your zealous
care and diligence in the cause of God, which seems some way endangered: yea,
hereby you shall deeply engage a number of poor souls to pray for you, when
they perceive the constancy of your love, toward both them, and me, in
supporting of me, by way of maintenance, that I may still impart the Word of
life among them, and go on still to fulfill the Ministry, which I have
received of the Lord JESUS. Thus leaving these things to your grave and loving
consideration; I commend the book unto your reading, and your Worships to the
protection of the Almighty, and both your selves, and it, unto his blessing. I
humbly take leave, and rest

Canwicke this 1. of July. 1638. Your Worships, ever to be commanded in the
Lord, WILLIAM HARRISON.

Imprimatur.

Tho. VVykes.
October. 15. 1638.
THE Purchase of Grace.
CHAP. I.
REV. 3. 18. I counsel thee to buy of me Gold tried in the fire, that thou
may be rich.
SVch is the gracious disposition of the Almighty, The context and coherence.
and so sweet is his carriage toward his dearest servants, that he does
usually most comfortably reveal, and communicate himself unto them in their
extremities, he has his Cordials ready against the sick fits of his children,
he loves to comfort the abject, to bind up the broken hearted, to speak
peace to the afflicted: witness the carriage of our Savior toward Saint John,
that beloved Disciple, always beloved, but most manifested in his afflictions;
when does the Lord reveal himself to him, so sweetly and fully, but in his
banishment, when he was banished into the Isle Patmos, Revel. 1. 9. then, and
there was he ravished in the spirit, upon the Lords days; ver. 10. then comes
the great, and yet sweet voice of Christ, with a charge to write, and send it
to the seven Churches of Asia, ver. 11. unto Ephesus, and unto Smyrna, unto
Pergamos, and unto Thyatira, unto Sardys, and Philadelphia, and unto Laodicea,
unto these seven, the Evangelist dedicateth this book of the Revelation, chap.
1. 4. John, to the seven Churches of Asia: and unto each of these he directs
(as from Christ) a several Epistle.

Now the words which I have read, are part of the Epistle written to the Church
of Laodicea; which continues from ver. 14. to the end of the Chapter. The
Epistle it self consists of three parts.

1. A Proemium, or inscription of the Epistle, ver. 14.

2. A Narration, or subject matter of the Epistle, unto ver. 22.

3. A Peroration, or conclusion, Verse the last.

Again, in the second part, or Narration, we have three things.

1. A Reprehension, increpation, or objurgation, ver. 15. 16, 17.

2. An Exhortation, or direction, v. 18. 19.

3. A solemn promise, or protestation, ver. 20. 21.

Now the words which I have read, are part of the exhortation, or direction.
And in general, they hold out our Saviors advise, or Counsel to the Church,
wherein he fitly prescribes, several remedies for all their infirmities, a
salve for every sore: They were wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind,
and naked. Now in this verse we have a remedy for all these.

1. Here is gold, to enrich them.

2. White Raiment, to cover their nakedness.

3. Eye salve, to anoint their eyes, that they might see.

I intend to insist only upon the first of these, which contains a remedy for
their poverty, and wretchedness. I counsel thee to buy of me gold, tried in
the fire, that thou may be rich.

Which words are the advice and counsel of our blessed Savior (the great
Counselor, Isa. 9. 6.) to this Church of Lao^icea, and in them to us also, and
to all true Christians to the end of the world.

Now (me thinks) in this I should have every man's attention; for behold, we
have here a Lecture of thrift, a way, nay the only way to be made truly rich:
There be many that say, who will show us any good, Psalm. 4. 6? Behold, here is
for you Summum bonum, the chiefest good, Gold, yea, Gold tried in the fire,
gold to enrich you; gold and better then gold, durable riches, that which will
make you rich indeed, rich toward God, as our Savior speaks, Luke 12. 21.

Now for the parts of the Text. Here is direction to get a precious and
excellent commodity, Division and parts of the Text.
metaphorically set out unto us, under the name of gold. Wherein we have more
particularly described. 1. The worth and excellency of it, gold tried in the
fire; that is, a precious, rare, spiritual commodity, which is like gold
tried in the fire. 2. The means to attain it, and that is, buying; it must be
bought. 3. The Chapman of whom we must buy it, and that is Christ, buy of me,
says our Savior. 4. The end of buying, that thou may be rich, which
argues still the worth and excellency of the commodity. And so you see the
parts of the Text, and the words divided.

2. Explication
For the explication and sense of the words. The words are metaphorical; the
Chapman, the Commodity, the Bargain, the Profit, all is spiritual. 1. The
Chapman is Christ, even (...) and (...), that sends the Epistle to this
Church, He is the Chapman. 2. The commodities to be bought here, are the graces
of Gods Spirit, or (if you please) Christ himself, and the graces of his
Spirit; that accompany salvation; which are fitly compared unto gold tried in
the fire; and that in many respects (as we shall see by and by) The bargain,
or buying, is spiritual, and so are the riches here mentioned, spiritual
riches, such as will make us rich toward God.

The words thus opened and explained, 3. Doct.
do hold out unto us these three Propositions, or points of Instruction, or
Doctrine.

1. That Christ Jesus, 1. Doct.
and the saving graces of his Spirit, are fitly resembled and compared unto
gold, yea pure gold, Gold tried in the fire.

2. That this gold, 2. Doct.
is the only means, to make us spiritually, and truly rich.

3. That all that would have this precious commodity, 3. Doct.
must buy it of Christ.

First, of the first of these, sc. this, Doctrine 1. That Christ and the saving
graces of his Spirit, are fitly compared unto Gold, tried in the fire.
That Christ Jesus, and his merits, together with the saving graces of his
Spirit, are fitly resembled unto gold, yea, gold tried in the fire. Hereupon it
is, that the Tabernacle and the Temple were both so adorned with gold, because
they were the Types of our Savior, and the graces of his Spirit, Exodus 37. 6.
1 King. 7. 48. There was the Table of gold, and the Altar of gold, and the
Bowls, and the Tongs, and the Snuffers, all of pure gold, etc. And why all
this, but to teach us, that Christ, and the graces of his Spirit, are fitly
resembled to gold. Mark the answer of Christ's Spouse, to the daughters of
Jerusalem, Cant. 5. when they asked, What is thy beloved more than another
beloved? observe her answer, Ver. 10. My beloved is white and ruddy, the
chiefest of ten thousand, Ver. 11. His head is as the most fine gold, He is
like unto most fine gold, yea, gold tried in the fire. So the Church clothed
with the merits of Christ, and adorned with the graces of his Spirit, is
covered (as it were) with cloth of gold, Upon thy right hand did stand the
Queen, in gold of Ophyr, says the Text, Psalm. 45. 9. that is, clothed with
Christ, and the graces of his Spirit, which are pure and precious, like the
gold of Ophyr. And so again, Ver. 13. The Kings Daughter is all glorious
within, (that is, the Church is glorious in Gods account) Her clothing is of
wrought gold; this is very direct.

Now the Reasons of the point might be many; Reason.
I will but instance in some few of many.

Gold tried in the fire, Precious, like gold.
is very precious, of great worth and value: so is Christ, even in his lowest
estate, when he seems most despicable, and worthles; yet is he, even then,
most precious; disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious, says
the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 4. and v. 6. Behold, I lay in Sion a chief corner
stone, elect, and precious; though the Jewish builders rejected this Stone, yet
was he exceeding precious in Gods account. And as Christ himself is precious,
so are the graces of his Spirit; such as wisdom, and knowledge, and faith, and
love, etc. these are precious jewels, and therefore fitly resembled unto gold.
See what the holy Ghost says of Wisdom, Pro. 3. 13, 14. Happy is the man
that finds Wisdom, and the man that gets understanding: for the
merchandise thereof, is better then the merchandise of silver; and the gain
thereof, is better then fine gold: she is more precious then Rubies, etc. See
here the precious nature of spiritual, and heavenly Wisdom. The like may be
said of faith, and other graces. Hence that phrase, of precious faith: To all
that have obtained like precious faith with us, says the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1. 1.
If you ask, how precious this grace is: He answers, That the trial of our
faith is much more precious then of gold that perishes, 1 Pet. 1. 7.

Secondly, 2. Reason. Fit to pay debts, or keep out of prison.
Gold is of especial use to pay debts, to keep, or redeem out of prison: so
are the merits and blood of Christ; they redeem us from hell, and death: ye
are bought with a price, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6. 19, 20. What price? not
silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without
spot, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, says the Apostle, 1
Cor. 1. 30. Who of God is made unto us, wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption; O golden Christ! by the help of whose merits,
we pay the Debts which we owe to our heavenly Father; yea, by this gold are we
redeemed, and set at liberty from the prison of hell, and from the bondage and
slavery of sin and Satan.

Thirdly, Gold tried in the fire, is very pure, 3. Reason. Because pure, like
gold.
and clean, there is no dross left in it: so is Christ pure, as well as
precious: so are the graces of Gods Spirit, true grace is pure grace, pure
faith, or faith unfeigned; pure love, without dissembling, sincere or pure
truth, without hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 1. 5. Now the end of the Commandment is
charity, or love, out of a pure heart, and a good, or pure conscience, and
faith unfeigned; faith without mixture, that is pure faith, such faith and love
are golden graces indeed: Let love be without dissimulation, says the Apostle,
Romans 12. 9. there is pure love indeed: it is an excellent place, 1 Pet. 1. 22.
Seeing that ye have purified your souls, in obeying the truth, through the
Spirit, unto unfeigned love of the brethren; see that ye love one another, with
a pure heart, fervently: here is pure gold indeed, wrought by the pure Spirit
of God, there is the Author of it: in obeying the truth, there is the
isntrumental means of it: pure, and unfeigned love, out of a pure heart, there
is the fruit of it.

Fourthly, 4. Reason. Because fit for purchase.
Gold tried in the fire, is fit for purchase, it commands what the earth can
afford: so do Christ, and his merits, and graces, they do purchase Heaven
for us; Heaven is an inheritance, and given freely, in respect of any merits of
ours, but merited, and purchased for us by Christ; He is our great purchaser,
He purchases Heaven for us, and in our name, and is gone to take possession
for us, and to prepare a place for us there. He purchased it for us by his
merits; hence that phrase, Ephesians. 1. 14. Until the Redemption of the purchased
pessession, says the Apostle. And when he had purchased it for us, He went to
possess it, and prepare a place for us, Joh. 16. 3. I go to prepare a place
for you. So that a man interested in Christ's merits, and adorned with his
graces, is fit to make a purchase of Heaven. So that Christ, and his merits,
are in this respect also fitly resembled unto gold; they make a golden
purchase, or purchase a golden place in Heaven for us.

Fifthly, Gold is of an excellent use, for ornament and beauty, 5. Reason. In
respect of beauty and ornament.
as well as for purchase and profit: thus the Tabernacle and Temple were
adorned with gold, to make them glorious, and beautiful; so is the Church, by
the merits, and graces of Christ, become a glorious Church; Psalm. 45. 13. The
Kings daughter is all glorious within: How comes that to pass? Surely by the
gold of Christ's merits and graces: for it follows, Her clothing is of
wrought gold; there is her chief ornament: so do the graces of Gods Spirit,
they do even adorn us in Gods account, faith, and love, and meekness: O
woman great is thy faith! Mat. 15. 28. there is her ornament; I have not found
so great faith, no, not in Israel, says our Savior, Mat. 8. 10. there is the
Centurions ornament: so of Abraham; faithful Abraham; a man strong in the
faith, and gave glory to God, Romans 4. 20. Golden Abraham, there is his
ornament: Moses the meekest man upon earth, Numb. 12. 3. Now the man Moses was
very meek, above all the men which were upon the face of the earth; there is
his ornament: an ornament indeed, and that of great price, even in the esteem
and account of God himself: observe it, 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4. see the Apostles
direction to wives, how to adorn themselves, with better ornaments, then gold
and silver; Whose adorning, let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting the
hair, and wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel, that is, costly
apparel; these are poor ornaments; what then? that we shall see, v. 4. but
the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the
ornament of a meek, and quiet spirit, which is in Gods account, a thing of
great price; lo, a man or woman's chief ornament! If we would (in stead of
rich and costly apparel) put on the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, and
readily pass by such wrongs and injuries, as are offered unto us, it would be
a far better, and a much cheaper ornament, then gold, and silver, and all the
fine clothes in the world. So that even in this respect also, Christ, and the
graces of his Spirit, are fitly resembled unto gold, yea, gold tried in the
fire.

Sixthly, 6. Reason. Of sweet smell. Dulcis odor lu^^^^e re qualibet.
Gold has a very good smell, a sweet savor: however, it is true in respect of
the gain of it, for that has a sweet smell, in the most men's account: so has
Christ, his merits and graces have a sweet smelling savor in the Lords
account; even the sacrifice of Christ, the offering himself up in sacrifice to
God for us, smelled sweetly in the nosthrils of God. It is a sweet place to
this purpose, Ephesians. 5. 2. And walk in love, (there is our duty) as Christ
also has loved us, (there is our pattern) and has given himself for us,
(there is the expression and demonstration of it) an offering, and a sacrifice
to God, for a sweet smelling savor: the sweetest smelling gold is not herein
comparable to the sacrifice of Christ. Yea, and not only his sacrifice, and
merits, but also the graces of his Spirit, have also a sweet smelling savor;
such as faith, and love, and charity, etc. See what the Apostle says of that
sweet grace of charity, Phil. 4. 18. see what the Apostle testifies of the
charity of these Philippians; Having received the things which were sent from
you, an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to God:
for that a charitable heart, is an heart worth gold, even in this respect; For
with such Sacrifices God is well pleased, says the Apostle, speaking of this
very grace, Heb. 13. 16.

Seventhly, Gold is the means to make men rich: so does Christ, and his graces;
7. Reason.
as we shall see in the next point.

CHAP. II.
Containig the two first Uses of the point, sc. Instruction, and Reprehension.

NOw the Uses of this point are many, Uses. 1. Instruction.
and of special weight and worth; it is of use, both for Instruction, and
Reprehension; and also for Examination, and Exhortation.

1. This Doctrine serves for Instruction. The knowledge of this truth, leads
and directs us to the knowledge of other truths.

For first, Is true saving grace fitly resembled The worth, and excellency of
true grace.
This shows then the worth and excellency of true saving grace; it is a far
more excellent and precious commodity, then men usually account it; else our
Savior would never have called it Gold, yea, gold tried in the fire. So that
an heart full of saving grace, is worth a purse full of precious gold; it is as
precious as gold, yea, much more precious then the most fine gold. Thus much
the wisest Solomon, (that knew the worth of both) expressly tells us, Pro. 3.
14. where speaking of wisdom, (that is, spiritual and heavenly wisdom,) he
says, It is more precious then fine gold. The like the Apostle says of true
saving faith, It is much more precious then gold. Give me leave to show you the
worth of true saving grace, that it is more precious then the most precious
gold and silver in the world: and this I will manifest in these six
particulars.

1. Gold is but of a fading, Grace better then gold.
perishing nature Pet. 1. 7. That the trial of your faith, 1. Gold is fading
and perishing, but grace is permanent and lasting.
being much more precious, then gold that perishes: but on the contrary, Grace
is that which endures unto everlasting life. Ioh. 6. 27. Hereupon the wise man
calls it durable riches, Pro. 3. 18. So that in this case, that of the Psalm
may be fitly applied, Psalm. 102. 26. They shall perish, (that is, all sublunary
things are of a perishing condition,) but thou, O Lord, and thy saving grace,
shall endure even for ever. Riches, and gold, and silver are very fickle, and
uncertain, they do often betake them to their wings, and fly away, as an
Eagle toward heaven, says the Wise man, Pro. 23. 5. And charge the rich, that
they trust not in uncertain riches, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6. 17. Riches,
and gold, and silver, are very uncertain, but grace is very permanent and
lasting; it is that good part which shall not be taken from him, or her, that
has it, Luke 10. 42. Therefore true saving grace is better then gold, even in
this respect.

2. Gold and silver, can neither comfort 2. Grace is able to help in the day of
wrath.
in the day of Gods wrath: many do make gold their hope, in this case, and
trust in the multitude of their riches, but they are all utterly deluded in
this case; see Zeph. 1. 17. I will bring distress upon men, says the text;
yea but I have abundance of gold and silver, (says the rich man) mark now,
what follows even in the very next verse, (as it were on purpose to prevent,
and blow away this vain confidence) verse. 18. Their silver and their gold,
shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the Lords wrath; but the whole
Land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy. No, no, Riches avail not
in the day of wrath, but Righteousness only delivers from death, as the
Wise man has told us long ago, Pro. 11. 4. True saving grace, will afford
both comfort in, and also deliverance from the fury of Gods wrath. When the
Lord has a purpose to bring an overflowing scourg upon any Nation, or people;
he has a special respect (not to the rich, and wealthy, but) to such as are
godly and religious; The Lord has chosen to himself the man that is godly,
Psalm. 4. 3. He has set such an one apart for his own use, all such must have a
mark set upon their fore- (...) store of gold and silver, and yet be hated and
abhorred of God for all that, as Cain and Judas: but he that has true saving
grace, such as faith, and love, and the fear of God, etc. has ever special
favor and acceptance with God. It is an excellent speech of the Apostle to
this purpose, Act. 10. 35. Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of
persons; but in every Nation, (not he that is rich, and full of gold and
silver, but) he that fears God, and works righteousness, is accepted with
him. See here, that righteousness, and the true fear of God, are far better
then gold and silver in this respect. Indeed, among men, riches prevail much,
gold and silver are in great esteem; for men look only upon the outward
appearance; but the Lord sees not as man sees, but beholds the heart, if
that be well qualified, there is hope of acceptance with God; but otherwise,
all the gold and silver in the world will not do it. 1 Samuel 16. 6. 7.

Grace leads to glory.
A man may have great store of gold and silver, and yet perish eternally, and
loose his soul for ever: but so cannot he do, that has true saving grace, as
faith, and such like, and persevereth therein unto the end: He that believes
shall never perish, but have everlasting life, Ioh. 3. 16. As he that believes
not, is condemned already; so he that truly believes shall never be
condemned, but has already passed from death to life. Oh the precious
excellency of saving grace, in this regard, it saves the soul! Heb. 10. last.
We are not of them that draw back to perdition, but of them that believe to
the saving of the soul. What were a man better, if he had all the gold and
silver in the world, if he loose his soul; according to that of our Savior,
Mat. 16. 26. What is a man profited if he should gain the whole world, and
loose his own soul? as the rich Glutton, Luke 16. and the Churl, Luke 12. 19,
20. but God said unto him, Thou fool, this night shall they fetch away thy
soul, and then what art thou the better for all thy gold and silver, etc? But
rather, giving all diligence, add to thy faith, virtue; and to thy virtue,
knowledge, etc. for so an entrance shall be made unto thee, exceeding
abundantly, into the everlasting kingdom of Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 5. with v.
11. Grace therefore is far better then gold also in this respect; it is able
to save a soul from death, and cover a multitude of sins, Jam. 5. 20.

Secondly, 2. Instruct. Gracious and Religious people most excellent.
Is true saving grace so fitly resembled unto gold? This shows the worth and
excellency of all true Christians; such as have store of true saving grace,
they are the excellent upon earth, Psalm. 16. 3. In a word, they are golden
persons, they wear cloth of gold for their apparel; their clothing is of
wrought gold, Psalm. 45. 13. they are even golden persons. Job 23. 10. He
knows the way that I take, and when he has tried me, I shall come forth like
gold; golden Job! So that in these cases, most true is that of Solomon, Prove:
12. 26. The righteous is more excellent then his neighbor: I tell you, there
is as much difference, as between gold and dross; Psalm. 119. 119. Thou shall
cast away the wicked like dross: Dross is scarce good enough for the
dunghill, when the gold is laid up in the chest. So that in this case, it is
evident, that every godly poor man, is better then any ungodly rich man
whatsoever. See upon what ground and warrant I speak it; Pro. 28. 6. Better is
the poor, that walks in his integrity, then he that is perverse in his
ways, although he be rich: there is as much difference between them, as
between the chafe and the wheat, Psalm. 1. 3. and what is the chafe to the
wheat? says the Prophet, Ier. 23. 20. Yea, as between gold tried in the fire,
and dross: golden David, though in the poor barren wilderness; but drossie
Nabal, though in rich and plenteous Carmel: drossie Dives, but golden, because
godly, Lazarus. By this we see, who are the noblest and richest persons in the
world, even they that are most godly, and religious. Grace ma^eth a man more
precious then gold; even more precious then the golden wedge of Ophir, Isa. 13.
12. Gods people are precious persons, they are even the Lords jewels, Mal. 3.
17. And they shall be mine, says the Lord, in the day that I make up my
Jewels. See thou a man that fears God, that has true saving grace; thou
may say, oh there goes a jewel of God, a golden person, there is a soul
worth gold, yea, far more precious. So that the estate of Gods people is
far more glorious (if well considered) then the estate of the wicked, how
full of pomp, and bravery soever they may seem to be. Give me leave to show
you this briefly, in four particulars.

1. They come of far more glorious and 1. They come of excellent parentage.
they have the God of heaven and earth for their Father. Matthew. 6. 9. they can
truly say, as Isa. 63. 16. Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham know
us not, and Israel be ignorant of us, yet thou art our Father. But as for the
wicked, it is not so with them they come of base and unworthy parentage; their
Father is an Amorite, and their mother is an Hittite: yea, worse then so, they
are children of wrath; yea, The wicked, children of wrath.
children of Satan: the Devil is their father: see how expressly Christ
himself does avouch this to the Jews, Ioh. 8. 44. Ye are of your father the
Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. But, oh the golden parentage
of such as are religious, and believe in Christ; To them he gives power to
become the Sons of God which are borne, not of flesh and blood, nor of the
will of man, but of God, Joh. 1. 11, 12, 13. Even Christ himself, and all true
believers, have all but one Father: the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, is
also the father of all true believers. Mark that sweet speech of our Savior,
immediately before his ascension; But go, and tell my brethren, behold, I
ascend unto my Father, and your Father, and unto my God, and your God, Ioh. 20.
17. So that Gods people are most noble persons, because they come of most noble
parentage.

Are borne to a most excellent inheritance.
then any ungodly person whatsoever; they have a golden inheritance; they are
the members of Christ, and children of God, and inheritours of the kingdom of
heaven; whereas all ungodly persons, they have but worldly and earthly houses,
and inheritances; unless they repent they can never inherit the kingdom of
God, 1 Cor. 6. 9. But oh the blessed inheritance, that is reserved for such as
are godly and religious; they inherit no less then a kingdom, Luke 12. 32.
Fear not little flock, for it is my Fathers pleasure to give you a kingdom;
yea, a kingdom which they have by inheritance, as being the co-heires with
Christ, Mat. 25. 34. Come ye blessed children of my Father, inherit the
kingdom, which was prepared for you from the beginning of the world. It is a
most excellent inheritance, 1 Pet. 1. 3. 4. Blessed be God, etc. which
according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope,
etc. to an inheritance, incorruptible, and undefiled, that fades not away,
reserved in heaven for you, who are kept by the power of God through faith unto
salvation, v. 5. Lo, here a most precious inheritance!

A most rare and excellent portion.
for they have the Lord himself their portion, Lam. 3. 24. The Lord is my
portion, says my soul, therefore will I hope in him. I have said unto the
Lord, thou art my portion, says David, Psalm. 142. 5. Psalm. 16. 5* The Lord is
the portion of mine inheritance, and my cup: but the wicked, and impenitent,
have no interest in this portion; at best, they have their portion in this
life, Psalm. 17. 14. a portion of wealth, a portion of land, or gold and silver,
there is the outside of their portion; but besides this, they have a woeful
portion, Psalm. 11. 6. Upon the wicked, God shall rain snares, fire and
brimstone, and an horrible tempest, this shall be the portion of their cup, a
woull portion: whereas the godly, have the God of heaven and earth for their
portion.

Fourthly and lastly, Gods people have far Have most excellent attendance.
they may have a company of brave men to attend them, at the best; but the
godly have the glorious Angels to attend and wait upon them; they are all sent
forth for the good of those that shall be heirs of salvation, Heb. 1 14. So,
Psalm. 34. 7. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him,
and delivers them: They have a charge from God to that purpose, Psalm. 91. 11.
For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways:
here is golden and glorious attendance indeed, when they have the holy Angels,
Gods most glorious creatures and servants to attend them. Thus ye see, that
Gods people are golden people, and far more glorious then the wicked.

Thirdly, 3. Instruct. To justify the care and pain to get grace.
Is true grace fitly resembled unto gold? This serves to justify the pains,
and care, and diligence, of all such, as labor earnestly to get saving graces,
sc. because it is so precious. It is fitly compared unto gold, in respect of
the worth of it; yea, it is more precious, then the most fine gold, and
therefore justifiable, and commendable is the course of all those that take
pains to get true grace; yea, that prefer it before gold; for it is far more
precious, as you have heard: they that choose this, have (with Mary) chosen the
better part, which shall never be taken from them, Luke 10. 42. Let no man say
therefore, what need so much teaching, and preaching, and such running after
Sermons, etc. For it is necessary that the Word of God should be preached, Act.
13. 47. for it is the means, both to beget, and increase saving grace, which
is of a golden quality: and therefore says the Apostle in his valediction to
the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, Acts 20. 32. And now brethren, I commend
you to God, and to the Word of his grace, which is able to build you up
farther, and give you an inheritance among all them that are sanctified. It
will never leave a man, until it have brought a man into the new Jerusalem.
Go on therefore, O all ye Saints of God, Take fast hold of Instruction, let
her not go, keep her, for she is your life, Pro. 4. 13. Cleave to the
possession and practice of Gods truth, be not ashamed of it; it will make you
happy for ever. Blessed is the man, that finds me (says Wisdom) watching
daily at my gates, and giving attendance at the posts of my doors, Pro. 8.
34, 35. and mark what an excellent reason she gives for this; for who so
finds me, finds life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord. Be not ashamed
then of the Gospel of Christ; for it is the power of God, through faith, unto
salvation, says the Apostle, Romans 1. 16. O therefore let the kingdom of
heaven suffer violence, and let the violent take it by force, Diligence to get
true grace.
Mat. 11. 11. Let men strive to enter into the strait gate; it is the advice of
our blessed Savior, Luke 13. 24. Yea, let us give all diligence, 2 Pet. 1. 5.
Wherein should we give all diligence, if not in this, that is worth gold, yea,
far better then gold? They, and their money perish with thom, that think all
the gold and silver in the world, worth one days fellowship with Jesus Christ,
said that rare Italian Convert. Happy is the man that sees so clearly the
worth of true grace, that he does prefer it infinitely before all the
treasures under heaven; yea, that looks at the whole world, as a lump of
vanity, in comparison of saving grace. Such an one was Paul, Phil. 3. 8. yea,
doubtless, I account all things but dross, and do judge them to be dung,
that I may win Christ. Such a rare spark was Moses, that esteemed the
reproach of Christ, greater riches then the treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11. 26.
He looked upon things with a spiritual and a judicious eye; preferring gold
before all the dross in the world. Be not discouraged by the opposition of
wicked men.
Let not the Saints of God be discouraged, by the scoffs, and outcryes of the
wicked, nor for the opposition of unreasonable men. Who will let slip an
opportunity to get gold, because dogs will bark? In nothing be terrified by
your adversaries (says the Apostle) which is to them, a token of perdition;
but to you, of salvation, and that of God, Phil. 1. 28. Go on still, and the
blessing of Heaven go with you; for, Blessed are all that hear the Word of
God, and keep it, Grace will bring joy and comfort in death.
says our Savior, Luke 11. 28. This is that one thing needful, which sball
never be taken from you; this will go along with you to the grave, when the
worldling must leave all behind him, he knows not to whom; this, that you
have labored for saving grace, shall afford you comfort in death, and matter
of rejoicing in the day of the Lord Jesus. Observe that excellent speech of the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 1. 12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly
wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world:
this will afford comfort, and help in time of need, when all worldly hopes
and helps do utterly perish, and come to naught: an excellent place to this
purpose, in Heb. 4. 16. Let us go boldly to the throne of grace, etc. that we
may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. It is not gold,
but grace, that is able to help in time of need. O let us neither be
strangers to the throne of grace, nor the Word of grace, but daily converse
with both; this is the way to be happy both here and hereafter. He that gives
all diligence to get grace, shall not loose his labor; therefore says the
Apostle, giving all diligence. add to your faith. virtue, etc. for so an
entrance shall be made unto you abundantly, into the everlasting kingdom of
Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 5. 11. It is the advice and counsel of our blessed
Savior in this place, I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire,
that thou may be rich: and so other where, Labor not for the meat that
perishes, but for the meat that endures unto everlasting life, Ioh. 6. 27.
and, first seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, that is, labor,
by getting entrance into the estate of grace, to get assurance of interest in
the kingdom of glory, Matthew. 6. 33. O never think it in vain to serve God,
for in due time ye shall reap, if ye faint not. Observe that speech of
David, Psalm. 24. 5. Who shall ascend into the Hill of the Lord, and who shall
dwell in his holy place? even He that has clean hands, and a pure heart,
etc. Let no man say then, I have labored in vain, for God is not unrighteous
to forget your godly labor in this kind, Hebr. 6. 10. Let me therefore
encourage and press you, in the words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 58. Therefore
my beloved brethren, be steadfast, and unmovable, always abounding in the
work of the Lord, for as much as ye know, that your labor is not in vain in
the Lord.

Secondly, Use 2. For Reprehension of such as neglect, and despise the means
to get grace.
Is true saving grace, like gold tried in the fire? This serves to reprove all
such, as will take no pains to get it, but do utterly reject and scorn it,
as the most idle and unnecessary thing in the world. Carnal men and women, are
not of the opinion of our blessed Savior, they do not see any such worth, or
golden virtue, or excellency in saving grace; there are a thousand things,
which they prefer before it, for the natural man, receives or perceives
not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him (he
thinks it a foolish thing to be so religious, and so diligent to get grace)
neither can he know them, for they are spiritually discerned; says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 14. yea, the wisest and most discreet natural man, is
directly of this opinion. The learned Grecians did account preaching
foolishness, 1 Cor. 1. 21. although indeed, it be the wisdom of God, and
power of God, and that unto salvation. Thus when Moses tells Pharaoh, that
he must needs let them go three days journey, into the Wilderness; Ye are
idle, ye are idle, says he, Exodus 5. 8. He thought Idleness the occasion of
their desire: yea, that is the opinion of every natural man, he thinks, and
says (at least in his heart) that it is in vain to serve God, Your words have
been stout against me, says the Lord, what have we spoken so much against
thee? say they, Mal. 3. 13. Now observe the Lords answer, Ver. 14. You have
said, it is in vain to serve God. So those in Job 21. 14. were even directly
of that opinion, Now o the monstrous folly and madness of these men! they
prefer dross, before Gold tried in the fire. What would you say, if you saw
a man have an heap of gold laid before him of the one side, and an heap of
Chafe, or Feathers, etc. on the other, and should see him neglect the gold,
and set his mind, only upon the chafe and feathers? It would make a man cry
out, with the Apostle, O foolish Galathians! Gal. 3. 1. Here is the very
picture of all such, as prefer sin, and wealth, and the trash of this
world, before saving grace and the power of godliness, look upon the profane
worldlings that were bidden to the marriage feast of the Kings Son, Luke 14.
18. They all with one consent, began to make excuse, (they were all just of one
mind, they were resolved not one of them to come at the feast,) the first
said, I have bought a piece of ground, and I must needs go and see it, I pray
thee have me excused, Ver. 19. and another said, Folly of such as neglect to
get grace.
I have bought five yoke of Oxen, and I must go and prove them, I pray thee
have me excused, Ver. 20. and the third said, I have married a Wife, and
therefore I cannot come: there was no looking for him. O the folly of these
men, to prefer such vain and trivial things, before such a rare and
heavenly banquet, Here is even our very case, there are a thousand things that
we prefer before Christ, and grace, and therefore are unworthy of either:
Matthew. 10. 37. Alas! we are all mightily to blame this way, we are careful and
cumbred about many things, when the one thing needful is wholly neglected:
one, is for pleasure; another, for profit; another, for revenge; another, for
his lusts: and the golden wedge of true saving grace, in the mean time is
wholly neglected. What would you think of that man, that is all for the
present, and nothing for the future? all for Summer, nothing for Winter? Here
is the case of all such as are wholly for the body, but not at all for the
soul: look into the glass of the Gospel, and there ye shall see the
picture of such a fool set out to the full, by our blessed Savior, Luke 12.
There was a rich man (and therefore perhaps a wise man in his own, and the
worlds account,) yea, he did not think to spend all his time in getting, but
at last, when he thought he had enough, he resolved to be merry with it, and
suck the sweet of it, ver. 19. He said unto his soul, soul, thou have goods
laid up for many years, eat, drink, and be merry: here was 1. Wit, to get
wealth. 2. Wit, to enjoy it, and suck the sweet of it: and yet mark what the
Lords opinion was of this man, ver. 20. But God said unto him, Thou fool, this
night shall thy soul be required of thee, and then what shall become of the
goods which thou have provided? where was his folly? surely in this, that he
had spent all his time to get wealth, in the neglect of his soul, in the
neglect and contempt of true and saving grace, and therefore he was a most
notorious fool in the Lords account. Nay, what shall we say of such then, as
are so far from seeking grace, in the use of the means; that they do reject
the means of grace, when it is offered; and thrust it from them, and do
utterly despise and hate it: mark the condition of these men, Pro. 13. 13. He
that despises the Word, shall be destroyed, yea, Pro. 29. 1. He that having
been often reproved, and yet hardens his heart, that man shall be destroyed
without remedy; In the mean time, they are far from salvation, Psalm. 119.
155. Salvation is far from the wicked: Why so? for they regard not thy
Statutes: So that he that regards not the Statutes of God, is far from
salvation: a woeful thing, if it be but duly considered: Oh the woeful estate
of all such! They do judge themselves unworthy of everlasting life. A strange
place we have to this purpose, Acts 13. 47. It was necessary, that the Word of
God should be first preached unto you; but since ye thrust it from you, and
do judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life; behold, we turn to the
Gentiles. So that here we see plainly, that they that have the Word of God
preached, and the means of grace offered, and yet reject it, and thrust it
from them, they do judge themselves unworthy of everlasting life, and at last,
the means shall be taken from them: yea, the estate of these men is so
fearful, and lamentable; that had I the tongue of men, and Angels, or the
pen of an Apostle, I could never set it out to the full: see the
inexpressible woefulness of their condition, that despise the Gospel, 1 Pet.
4. 17. The time is come, that judgment must begin at the house of God: and
if it begin at us, what shall the end be of those that obey not the Gospel
of God? No marvel if I cannot tell, ye see the Apostle Peter could not tell,
or would not take in hand to express it; as if the estate of such, was
miserable above all that a man can speak or imagine. Nay, at the last day,
when they look for the most comfort, they shall find most horror and
bitterness; In stead of a Savior, Christ shall come at the last day, with his
holy Angels, in flaming fire, to render vengeance on all them that know not
God, and obey not the Gospel, says the Apostle, 2 These. 1. 8, 9. o woeful
thing to consider, when (instead of Come ye blessed) they shall hear the
woeful and thundering voice of Christ, denouncing this terrible Doom against
them, Matthew. 25. 41. Go ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels, and no marvel neither, if they be thus punished, and
do bring such swift damnation upon themselves; for it is a fearful sign,
that all such are lost, and reprobates, for whom the blackness of darkness is
reserved for ever; 2 Cor. 4. 3.
Jude Ver. 4. for if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are l^st, says
the Apostle, Contempt of the means of grace, a fearful sign of perdition, or
reprobation.
whom the god of this world has blinded, yea, a fearful sign of
reprobation, in this case, as does appear by that place of the Apostle, 2 Timothy
3. 8. As Iannes and Iambres with-stood Moses; so do these men resist the
truth; men of corrupt minds, and reprobate concerning the faith; the express
words of the Holy Ghost; yea, they are such, of whom the Lord has sworn in
his wrath, that they shall never (unless they repent) enter into his rest, as
we may see, Psalm. 95. 9, 10. etc. O the foolish, and frantic madness, of
all those, that neglect and despise such a precious Jewel, as true saving
grace: which for the worth of it, is fitly compared to gold, yea, gold tried in
the fire, yea, much more precious then the finest gold in the world.

CHAP. III.
Containing the use of examination.

THirdly, 3. Use. Examination, whether we have true grace, yea, or no.
seeing true grace, is fitly resembled unto gold: this should teach us
diligently to try, and examine our selves, whether we have any true grace in
us, yea, or no; for true grace is of a right golden nature. Now that we may
not deceive our selves; let us try what metal our graces are made on, let us
deal with our graces, (as knowledge, and faith, and love, and obedience) as
men use to deal with their gold; let us try them thoroughly, whether they prove
right current gold, yea, or no; 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves, whether ye
be in the faith, or no* whether your faith be a right saving faith, yea, or no;
That the trial of your faith, being much more precious, then gold that
perishes, 1 Pet. 1. 7, As if he had said, try your faith, whether it be of the
right precious metal, of a saving metal, which is indeed much more precious
then gold. Yea, not only our faith, but every other work of grace in us, must
be examined and proved, Gal. 6. 4. But let every one prove his own work (the
work of grace in his own heart) and then shall he have rejoicing in himself
alone, and not in another. What good will it do us, to know, that another
man's gold is weight, and current gold, if we be ignorant of our own? Let us
therefore try our graces, whether they be of the right stamp, pure, current
gold, yea, or no. Now for the perfecting of this use, give me leave to show you.

1. Some Motives, to persuade us to.

2. Some marks, to direct us in this trial.

1. The Motives that may persuade us, to this exact trial and examination of
our graces, are principally these four.

1. The difficulty of the work.

2. The danger of being mistaken.

3. The possibility of prevaileing.

4. The comfort that will redound to a man, when the work is once thoroughly
performed.

And first for the difficulty of the work, Motive 1. Toperswade us to examine
whether we have true grace, sc. the difficulty. All sorts of men apt to be
deceived in judging in this case.
we had need to use all diligence to make sure work in this case, because it
is a work of great difficulty, for a man to be assured in his soul, that the
graces which he has, and the gold he possesses, are saving graces, and pure
gold, yea, or no: for if we look into experience, we shall find some men
utterly deceived, in judging of the estates and condition of their own hearts;
some judging better of themselves then there is cause; and some again thinking
worse of themselves then they need to do: so that of both these, that of the
Proverb may be fitly verified: Prove. 13. 7. There is that makes himself
rich, (as if he had a whole purse full of gold) and yet has nothing: and there
is again, that makes himself poor (as if he had no gold at all) and yet
has great riches, the one fearful, and timorous, without cause; and the
other bold and confident, upon a false ground: according to that of the
Wiseman, Prove. 14. 16. A wiseman (that is a godly man, and one that truly
fears God) fears, and departs from evil. The wicked deceived.
He fears, and he doubts; that his estate is not so good, as all this
while he has taken it to be; and thereupon he like a wise man, takes
occasion, more and more to depart from evil: he walks, and makes straight
steps to his feet, Hebrews 12. 13. But the fool, (that is the profane
person, the beggar, that is utterly destitute of true ^aving grace, that has
not so much as one piece of true gold in his heart) rages, and is confident;
he rages, and he rayleth, and he swaggereth, and yet he is confident, he
shall go to heaven, as soon as the best of them all; for thus he reasons
for himself: I confess, I speak amiss many times, I speak idly, and
wantonly, and profanely, and swear sometimes, when I am angry, and now and
then, I do that which is naught; but I thank God, I have as good an heart
toward God, as the best of them all, therein I am confident: so this man is
utterly deceived in judging of the state and condition of his heart toward
God. So that ye see the work is exceeding difficult: yea, see an experiment
of this, in this Church of Laodicea, Revelations 3. Godly deceived in thinking
he has no grace, when indeed he has.
what she thought of her self, is evident, Verse 17. Because thou say, I am
rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing; and know not that
thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked: this is the
condition of many a poor soul in the world. On the other side, many an one
thinks far worse of himself, then there is cause: how many a sincere heart
does deeply charge it self with hypocrisy, and thinks himself to be a
very beggar, or a bankrupt, in respect of any gold of true grace? None so apt
to complain of the want of true grace, as he that has the greatest measure,
at least, he that has good store in sincerity. And the reason of this
difficulty, is partly the devils cunning, and partly the deceitfulness of our
own hearts; these are two notable juglers, and they often concur, to deceive
all sorts of people in this case.

Besides, grace is a very secret thing, it is very rare and precious; Grace a
Treasure, hid in the field.
he is a man of a thousand that has it: Saint Peter calls it, The hid man of
the heart, 1 Peter 3. 4. And a treasure hid in the field, Matthew. 13. 44. Gold
while it is in the Oar, is not so easily discerned, until it be melted; so
is true grace: but corruption is manifest (especially to such as have true
saving grace) therefore says the Apostle, Galathians 5. 19. The works of the
flesh are manifest. But when he speaks of the fruits of the Spirit, verse 22.
he says no such thing of their manifestation, but only describes what they
are. So that an humble Christian, especially in case of temptation, or some
spiritual desertion, has such an eye to his corruptions, is so intent upon
them, that he discerns not the work of grace in his own heart, which to the
judicious eye of another, is very manifest; he sees so great an heap of
Chafe in his soul, that he thinks the grain of true grace is wholly
absent, because it is hidden; he sees such a great heap of Ashes in his
heart, that he thinks the fire of true grace is utterly extinguished, and
gone. See an experiment of both these, in the Pharisee, and the Publican, Luke
18. 11. etc. what a rich man was he in his own conceit? But the Publican, how
poor was he in his own opinion? he could see in himself nothing but s^^ne
and corruption, and therefore he cries out, ver. 13. o God, be merciful to
me a sinner: as if he had said, o Lord, I am a sinner, a very grievous
sinner, nothing but a very lump of sin, a fardle of corruption, and if thou
be not merciful unto me, I shall perish for ever. But what is the opinion of
our Savior as touching both these? that ye shall see, verse 14. I tell you;
this man (that is the Publican) went down to his house, justified rather than
the other, that is, but not the other. Besides, there is another thing that
makes it so exceeding difficult, Much counterfeit grace in the world
that is, that there is such a deal of counterfeit grace in the world; as ye
know there is much counterfeit gold in the world, and that so like true gold,
that it cannot be discerned, until it come to be melted: so there is a great
deal of counterfeit knowledge, and faith, and obedience, which cannot be well
discerned, until it come to the melting, in the fire of affliction: the
Formalist comes so near to the state of grace, that he is tried only in
time of temptation, as our Savior intimates: Matthew 13. 21. For when
tribulation, or persecution arises because of the Word, by and by he is
offended; yea; this is the only way to try them, as the Lord himself seems
to intimate, Jer. 9. 7. Behold, I will melt them, Melting, the chief means to
discern which is the true gold.
and try them, for how shall I do for the daughter of my people? I will try
them, by melting of them. If we see a serving man follow two Gentlemen, it is
hard to say, whose man he is, until they part: so, while the Gospel and
prosperity go together, it is hard to know, which of these we serve, until
they part, as in time of persecution; then he that cleaves to a naked Christ,
a naked persecuted Gospel, he is the man that has true grace indeed. This
makes it to be so exceeding difficult, for a man to be sure that he has true
grace, because there is so much counterfeit grace, and Copper-gold in the
world. There is a knowledge that puffs up, which a man may have in abundance,
and yet be without charity, and saving grace, 1 Cor. 13. 2. Counterfeit faith,
as Simon Magus had, Acts 8. and yet an hypocrite. Counterfeit sorrow for sin,
and repentance, such as Cain, and Saul, and Ahab, and Judas had, and yet was
but the sorrow of the world, causing death. And so for love, Some kind of
Innocence, without true grace.
and fear, and joy, and the like. Yea, (which is most strange) it is possible
for a man to have a kind of integrity, and innocence, and yet be destitute of
true saving grace, for all that, as Abimelech, and Paul, before his conversion.
1. For Abimelech, when God told him, that he was but a dead man, because of
Sarah, because she was another man's wife: what says he to God in that case?
Genesis 20. 5. In the integrity of my heart, and Innocence of my hands have I
done this; yea, the Lord himself grants, it verse 6. Yea, I know, that thou
did this, in the integrity of thy heart, that is, his heart was upright thus
far, that what he did, he did it ignorantly, and through mistake; for he
confessed, that he knew adultery to be so heinous a sin, that he would not
have taken her, if he had known she had been Abraham's wife: but indeed,
Abraham was chiefly to blame, in saying, at best by way of concealment, that
She was his Sister.

So, see what Paul says of himself, Acts 23. 1. I have lived in all good
Conscience, until this day. How could that be, considering that he had been
such a furious persecutor, and one that even breathed out threatenings, and
slaughter against the servants of God? Yes sure: because, alas! all this he
did it ignorantly, in unbelief, 1 Timothy 1. He did not know them to be the
Saints of God, but he thought them to be a Sect, that was every where
persecuted, and spoken against; and therefore he thought it was his duty, to
do what he did in that case, as appears, Acts 26. 9. I also my self
thought that I ought to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus of
Nazareth; so that thus far his heart was always upright, that he thought, even
in persecuting, and kil^ing the Saints, that he did God service, as our
Savior foretold, John 16. 3. And therefore in this regard also it must need be
exceeding difficult, for a man to be sure his gold is good metal, and that his
grace is true, and it is easy to be mistaken. And this is the first Motive to
persuade us to this examination, in regard of the difficulty; which I have at
large manifested unto you.

Secondly, 2. Motive. The danger of being mistaken.
The second Motive that may persuade us, to this diligent search, and
examination, is, the danger of being mistaken in this case. If a man be
mistaken in a trifle, in a small piece of silver, a matter of small moment, he
cares not for it: but for a man to be mistaken in a great piece of gold, that
is dangerous; much more, if a man turn all his wealth into gold, and then be
cozened in that, he is utterly undone. Now here is our very case, all our
spiritual wealth, and riches, does consist in the gold of our graces; and
therefore if they be counterfeit, a man is utterly undone for ever; for a man
that is deceived with counterfeit gold, incurreth a double danger especially;
first, That it will not pay, nor pass current in purchase, and bargaining, and
so he loses his purchase. I remember what is said of the silver, that Abraham
weighed to Ephron the Hittite, whereby he purchased the field and cave of
Machpelah, Genesis 23. 16. Abraham (before witness) weighed him the silver, even
four hundred Shekels of silver, current money with the Merchants. So our gold
of graces, must be good gold, of good weight; else they will not pass current
in bargaining, which is a great loss. But this is not all. For secondly, a man
that has counterfeit gold, is in danger to be called in question about it, how
he came by it, and perhaps he had it of several parties, and they strangers
too, and so he may be accused of counterfeiting the Kings coin, and loose his
ears, yea, perhaps his life, and soul too, in this case. O what a woeful
thing will it be, when a man comes at the last day (as he thinks) with a
purse full of gold, that is, an heart full of grace, and it prove false and
counterfeit! he is then undone for ever. See how some will show their gold at
the last day, Mat. 7. 21, 22. Lord, Lord, here is my gold, here is my grace. He
will say; Depart from me, I know ye not, I allow not of your grace, your gold
is counterfeit; here is a woeful estate.

Thirdly, 3. Motive. The possibility of prevailing, notwithstanding the
difficulty.
because as the duty is difficult, and it is a dangerous thing to be mistaken:
so (on the other side) notwithstanding the difficulty, yet it is possible, for
a man that has true grace, to be sure that he has it. Though it be very
difficult, to know which gold is good, and will pass for current, it is not
impossible; else God would never require this duty, of searching of us, under
the time of the Gospel, if it were a thing altogether impossible; Let every
man prove his own work, Gal. 6. 4. And let a man examine himself, (sc.
whether he have any true saving grace, yea, or no, 1 Cor. 11. 28.) This
appears also by experience, and the examples of Gods Saints, that have been
rich toward God, they have been assured upon good grounds, that their gold
was good, their graces were such as did accompany salvation. David, and Job,
and Paul, and others, were assured that they had saving grace, that they were
filled with the fruits of Righteousness, and that notwithstanding the great
store of counterfeit gold, that was in the world in their days, yet they were
sure, that theirs was current: and so may we, by the same privilege of mercy,
be as well as they. Besides, the truth of this appears farther; because it is
possible for a Christian to be assured of sundry other, as great matters as
this, such as election, vocation, justification, adoption, and redemption, and
heaven it self.

First, Reason.
It is possible for a man to be assured Of the possibility of being assured,
that we have true grace, because we man be assured of our vocation, and
election.
1 These. 1. 4. Knowing, brethren, beloved, your election of God. They knew they
were elected and become vessels of mercy: and how did they come by this
assurance? surely not by any special revelation only, but by an ordinary
means, sc. their effectual vocation, and yielding sincere and hearty
obedience unto the Gospel; for so it follows, Ver. 5. For our Gospel came not
unto you, in word only, but in power, and in the holy Ghost: they had obeyed
from the heart the Gospel that was preached unto them, and by that they might
know they were elected. And why may not we be assured of our election, upon the
like ground, as well as they? So, Col. 3. 12. Put upon you (as the elect of
God, holy and beloved) bowels of mercy, humblenes of mind, etc. It is
possible, for a man to be assured that he is elected, and beloved of GOD. How?
surely, if he can find those marks of election (in himself,) which are there
manifested and expressed. So, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Give diligence, to make your
calling and election sure. Where the Apostle shows, that if we give
diligence, it is possible for us to be assured of our election. But how? Surely
by making our vocation sure, by the holy fruits, and effects of it. So then, if
a man may be assured of his election, and that by his effectual calling and
conversion: then much more may a man be assured of his graces, that they are
sincere; of his spiritual gold, etc. that it is sound, and good, and not
counterfeit. He that may be assured of his election, may, much more, be
assured, that he has true saving grace in him, that his gold is right, and
pure, and not counterfeit.

Secondly, 2. Reason. 2. Of our justification.
It is possible for a man to be assured of his justification, and of the free
and full pardon, and forgivenes of all his sins. Romans 5. 1. Being justified
by faith, we have peace with God. Yea, but were they assured of it? for they
might be justified ( in foro Dei) and yet not know it? Yes, Certitudo spei.
they were assured of it, to their joy and comfort, Ver. 2. And we rejoice. in
hope of the glory of God. So, Isa. 45. 24. Surely, shall one say, in the Lord
have I righteousness and strength. So that a man may be assured of his
justification, much more, that his gold is not counterfeit.

Thirdly, 3. Reason. Because we may be assured of our Adoption.
A man may be assured of his adoption, that God in Christ is his Father, and
that, notwithstanding all his infirmities, he is the dear child of God, and
in special favor with him: I say, it is possible for a man to be assured of
this, and out of doubt, in this case of so great importance. Isa. 63. 16.
Doubtless, thou art our Father, though Abraham know us not, and Israel be
ignorant of us, yet thou art our Father. Ye see how confidently they speak,
they were out of doubt of it; and so may we, as well as they, by the testimony
of Gods blessed Spirit, that neither can, nor will deceive us. Romans 8. 16. The
Spirit (of God) it self bears witness, with our spirit, that we are the
children of God. And if a man may be assured he is Gods child; why should it
not be possible, for him to be sure, that the gold of his saving graces, is
sincere, and will not deceive him.

Fourthly, 4. Reason. Because we may be assured of our Redemption.
It is possible for a man to be assured of his redemption, that even his soul
is washed in the blood of Christ, and of his interest in the great work of
Christ's Redemption. We may be assured of our Redemption.
Job was assured of his Redemption, that Christ was his living Redeemer, Job
19. 25. For I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the
later day upon the earth. So Paul was assured, that Christ was his Redeemer,
and that he gave himself for him in particular, Gal. 2. 20. The life that I
now live, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave
himself for me, says the Apostle. If a man may be assured of his redemption,
much more that his graces are sincere etc.

Fifthly, 5. Reason. That when we die we shall go to heaven.
A man may be assured, that when he dies, he shall go to heaven: see what the
Apostle says, 2. Cor. 5. 1. We know that when this earthly house of our
Tabernacle, shall be dissolved, we have an house of God, not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens. (i. e.) We know, that when these bodies of ours, which
are made of earth, shall turn to dust, the soul shall go to heaven, to that
place which Christ has prepared for us. So the Apostle S. John, 1 Ioh. 3. 14.
We know, that we are translated from death to life, (we are as sure when we
die, we shall go to heaven) But how? What? by revelation? No sure, but because
we love the brethren. He that is assured that he loves the brethren, may be
sure when he dies, he shall go to heaven; much more, that he has true grace.

Sixthly, 6. Reason.
A man may be sure, that the goodness and mercy of God, shall follow him, That
Gods goodness and mercy shall follow us all our days.
all the days of his life; and consequently, of his continuance in the state
of grace; much more, that his graces are sound and sincere; Psalm. 23. 6.
Surely, Goodness and Mercy shall follow me all the days of my life. He that
can be assured of this, may be much more sure, that the gold of his graces are
not counterfeit.

And so I come to the fourth, 4. Motive. The comfort that will redound to the
soul, when the work is once thoroughly performed.
and the last Motive, that may persuade us to this trial, sc. the comfort that
will hereby redound unto our souls, when the work is once thoroughly
performed: Gal. 6. 4. Let every one prove his own work, says the Apostle,
and then shall he have rejoicing in himself, (sc. that his graces are sincere)
and not in another. A man that has had his gold called in question, and yet
proves sound, and current, oh it fills him full of joy and rejoicing. Let
this persuade us to try our graces, that we may partake of that joy and
comfort, which will hereby redound unto us; which is (as the Apostle speaks, 1
Pet. 1. 8.) A joy unspeakable, and full of glory. A peace that passes all
understanding, Phil. 4. 7. Let the expectation of this sweet fruit of joy,
which will accompany our endeavors this way, make us fall to this work, of
searching our selves with all diligence. O what a comfort to Hezechiah (in that
extremity) that he was assured, and durst appeal to God, that his heart was
upright! Isay 38. 3. Remember, Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before
thee, in truth, and with a perfect heart. So this also supported Job, Job 23.
10. He knows the way that I take; and when he has tried me, I shall come out
like gold: there was his comfort, that his graces were of a right golden
metal, though his friends conceived otherwise of him, and charged him deeply
with hypocrisy; yet he knew, that God knew his graces were sound, and upright:
oh let us, in time, make the like search, and trial of our graces, that he
did, that we may have the like comfort, and ground of rejoicing, that he had.
So, this was the Apostles comfort at all times, whatsoever befell him, yet he
knew that he was truly gracious, 2 Cor. 1. 12. Our rejoicing is this, the
testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity; not
with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in
the world: A man that is assured, that he has an heart full of true saving
grace, will have more true comfort in it, and more solid joy, then if he had a
great chest full of gold. An heart full of grace, will afford far more joy,
and comfort, then a purse full of gold. And this is the last Motive, that may
persuade us to this trial, and diligent examination, whether our grace be
sincere, and such as will not deceive us.

Now for the second general point, The Nature and Marks of true grace.
that I propounded for the perfecting of this point, sc. the Marks and Signs
of true grace; they are indeed many; but I will keep close to the Metaphor,
which we have in hand, and give you some few, for your satisfaction in this
case.

First, 1. Mark. True grace will make a man's face to shine in every condition.
true and pure gold, gold tried in the fire, will show the luster and
brightness, both in the fire, and water: so true grace, will teach a man how
to carry himself in every estate and condition. Here was the trial of Paul's
grace, golden Paul (after his conversion) in all estates, Philippians 4. 11. I
have learnd in what estate soever I am, therewith to be content; both to be
full, and to be hungry; to abound, and to suffer need. Though it be a more
blessed thing to give, rather then to receive; yet he that has true grace, is
skillful in both, his face will shine in every condition.

He that has true grace, will manifest it by his gracious carriage in every
condition, both in prosperity, and adversity; if he be rich, he is bountiful,
and liberal, he is Rich in good works, and lays up for himself a good
foundation, 1 Timothy 6. 17. If he be poor, he shows his golden nature in
another kind, in humble submitting to the will of God, It is the Lord, let him
do what seems him good, said golden Ely, 1 Samuel 3. 18. In his patience, and
thankfulness, he kisseth the rod, and thanks his father, even for his love in
correcting. He is like a well cut Dye, every way square, which way soever ye
cast it, cast it easily, it will be square; cast it violently, it remains
square still: so will a gracious heart, show its purity, in all estates, and
conditions. Look upon Job, in his twofold condition, and ye shall find him
pure gold, in both; look upon his demeanor, in the water of prosperity, when
he even swome in Rivers of prosperity; oh how bountiful was he, how full of
good works? Job 30. Chap. 31. By the Lords own testimony, A man that feared
God, and eschewed evil: none like him in all the earth, Job 1. 1. 7. What a
gracious testimony from God himself? Then look upon him in the fire of
adversity; rich Job, bountiful and liberal; poor Job, patient, and
thankful, Job 1. 21. The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, blessed be
the Name of the Lord. True it is, he showed some dross in the melting; but
look upon him when he came out of the fire, oh then he was pure gold indeed!
this he was assured of while he was melting, Job 23. 10. He knows the way
that I take, and when he has tried me, I shall come out like gold: golden Job
indeed, when he came out of the furnace of affliction. But now the wicked, as
they are but dross, Psalm. 119. 119. so they show their drossie nature in every
estate: if they be rich and wealthy, then they are proud, and confident, and
given to oppression, ready to deny God, and trust in their wealth: and if they
be poor, then they steal, and take the Name of the Lord in vain, Pro. 30. 8,
9. They are dross still in every condition; the more God melts them, the
worse they are: Why should they be smitten any more, for they do fall away more
and more? Isa. 1. 5. See an experiment of this, in that close-hearted hypocrite
Ahaz (for all his fair shows) he did show himself but dross, both in
prosperity, and adversity: the more he prospered, the more he sinned: if he be
victorious, he ascribes the victory to himself, and his friends, and the gods
of Damascus must be sacrificed unto, and a pattern of a new Altar must be
fetched from thence, 2 Kings 16. 10. Well, if God take him in hand, and begin
to melt him in the fire of affliction, he finds him dross still; so that he
was forced at last to cast him away, and set a mark upon him, for notorious
dross altogether, that none should ever take him for gold any more, 2 Chr. 28.
22. And in the time of his distress, he sinned yet more, against the Lord.
This is that King Ahaz: brand him up, score him up, set a mark upon him for
ever, for most notorious d^osse indeed; because, the more he was afflicted,
the worse he was; the more he was melted, the more plainly he appeared
still to be nothing but a plain lump of dross. I pray let us try our selves
by this mark, if we can carry our selves aright in every estate, it is a sign
we are pure gold; if not* we have cause to suspect our selves, to be but
dross. Look upon the golden Martyrs, in all ages; see what pure gold they
proved themselves, especially, in the fire of affliction: consider these golden
Christians, Hebr. 10. 34. They suffered with joy, the spoiling of their goods,
knowing that they had in heaven, a better, and a more enduring substance, we
glory in tribulation. Here was bright shining gold indeed, gold tried in the
fire, as it is in our Text.

Secondly, 2. Mark. True grace gotten by Gods Ordinances.
Right current gold, is that which comes from the right place, from the Kings
Minting house, and has his Majesty's stamp upon it; when they brought the
Tribute money to Christ, Mat. 22. 20. he enquireth immediately, Whose Image, or
superscription has it? and they tell him, Caesar's: So look upon the gold of
those graces which thou have, and seriously consider, whence thou had them,
and how thou came by them: Did they come from the Minte of Gods Ordinance?
Were they begotten at first, and are they still nourished in thee, by these
means? Did thou get them, by prayer, and attending at the posts of
Wisdoms gates? then it is a good s^gne, thy gold is good, thy graces are
sincere; because they are begotten, and increased by the Word of Gods grace,
Acts 20. 32. Thus Paul sends them still to the Minte, to get more grace, and
to try their graces. And now, brethren, I commend you to God, and to the Word
of his grace, which is able to build you up farther, etc. And so for the Throne
of grace, Hebr. 4. verse 16. Let us go boldly to the Throne of grace, whereby
we may find mercy, and grace, to help in time of need; I pray let us try our
graces by this touchstone. How did we come by our graces? By what means were
they begotten in thee? And how are they nourished, if not by these means? And
it may be, thou can give no account how thou came by them: I begin straight
to suspect them; for you know it is suspicious, for a man to have goods, and
know not how he got them. Consider thy faith then, Art thou sure it is
precious? Of the right stamp? More precious then gold? Then sure it came from
the Minte, it was given thee from above, Philip. 1. 29. To you it is given, not
only to believe, but also suffer, etc. If it be right faith, it was begotten
by the Word of faith; Romans 10. 8. For faith comes by hearing, and hearing
by the Word of God. But he that boasts of his faith, and tells me that he
has believed ever since he could remember; as if the gold of faith, grew there
by nature; I would no more believe, he had true faith, then I should think he
said true, that should boast, that he had a purse full of gold, which came out
of his purse bottom, and grew there by nature. I pray let us examine our
selves by this mark, true gold comes from the Minte: and so does true grace,
from the Minte of Gods Ordinances: if it grew in thine heart by nature, or is
begotten, and nourished in thy heart by any other means, thou have great
reason to suspect, that such gold is but counterfeit, etc.

Thirdly, 3. Mark. True grace is full weight, and will make a man universal
in his obedience.
Gold tried in the fire, if it come from the right Minte, is current money with
the Merchants, As Abraham's silver was, which he weighed to Hephron the
Hittite, Genesis 23. 16. Now gold is not current with the Merchant, (though it
seem pure for the matter) if it want weight, and therefore Abraham weighed his
silver, before the people of Ephron: so true grace is good weight, give it but
the allowance of the imperfection, in respect of degrees, and it is full
weight, in respect of parts; both in regard of the subject, wherein it is, and
the object of it; weigh it in the balance of the Sanctuary, and it will be
found weight; for he that has true grace in every part, grace in the head, or
understanding faculty of the soul, and grace in the heart, in the will, and
the affections, he is sanctified throughout, 1 These. 5. 23. in his whole
spirit, soul, and body; so that true grace is universal. Now an hypocrite,
whose grace is but counterfeit, whose gold is Copper, shows it self
defective in one kind or other. If he have a little knowledge swimming in the
brain, and therefore is able to speak well, as if he had grace; yet this
works no reformation in the outward man, there it wants weight; he is
profane still, he lives in the secret practice of some known ungodliness,
he has some Rimmon, with Naaman; some Delilah, with Sampson: but the golden
Christian, is universally gracious, head, and heart, and life: as a child newborn, has all the members of a man, though they be but weak, and it is long
before he can use them. Or if the hypocrite have so much seeming goodness, to
gild over his outward behavior, that he seems to be a right golden Christian
indeed; yet if it be not true grace, it reformeth not the heart; whereas true
grace purifieth the heart, Acts 15. 9. If God begin to wash a man, he begins
with the heart, Ier. 4. 14. Wash thy heart from wickedness, o Jerusalem: true
grace washes, not only the hands, but also the heart. Here was Simon Magus his
defects, if ye look upon his outward profession, he is turned Christian, he
keeps company with the Christian Apostles, he was also baptized, as a badge
of Christian profession, etc. But where was the fault? Surely within: his heart
was unsound, and rotten, notwithstanding his gilded out side, Acts 8. 21. Thine
heart is not right in the sight of God; And pray God, if it be possible, the
thoughts of thine heart, may be forgiven. He was but like a fair Aple, that
was, notwithstanding, rotten at core.

2. True grace is universal, and full weight in respect of the object of it,
that is, it will cause a man to yield obedience to all Gods Commandments. He
that has true grace indeed, will desire, and endeavor in all things to live
honestly, Heb. 13. 18. But counterfeit grace is not current, in this regard;
also, herein it wants weight, as it did before; an hypocrite is not
universal in his obedience, he is no good Catholic in this respect, he does
but pick and choose; some duties he likes, but other he cares not for; some
sins he avoydeth, but other he makes no conscience of. Compare David and
Iehu together, and they seem, at first, to be both golden Kings, zealous men,
and courageous Magistrates; but then again, weigh their gold severally, in the
balance of the Sanctuary, and then ye shall find, that Iehu's wanted weight.
First, look upon David's aim in his obedience, and ye shall find it
universal, Psalm. 119. 6. Then shall I not be confounded, when I have respect
to all thy Commandments: here is down weight.

But now weigh Iehu's gold, in the same balance, and ye shall easily perceive
that it was found too light; like Balthazar, Daniel 5. observe it, 2 Kings 10.
When the Spirit of GOD had set out Jehu's zeal to the full, and given him his
allowance and all, yet he cries out still, that it was too light, verse 31.
But Iehu took no heed to walk in the Law of the Lord with all his heart; for
he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam; and therefore GOD gives him his
temporal reward, sc. the thing that he chiefly aimed at, sc. the kingdom for
himself, and his children for a time, and so sends him packing.

Let us try our gold by this mark, let us weigh it in the Balance of the
Sanctuary. Does our grace show it self in every part? Are we like the Church,
Psalm. 45. 11. All glorious, both within, and without? All gracious, in heart,
and life? Here is a good sign our gold will pass current, with the Merchant,
because it is full weight, in this regard. Then again, are we universal in
our obedience? Do we endeavor to walk in all the Ordinances, and
Commandments of God blameless? as was said of Zachary and Elizabeth, Luke 1.
6. Do we desire in all things to live honestly? Here is precious gold indeed,
even gold tried in the fire.

Fourthly, 4. Mark. True grace will abide the fiery trial, will make a man
hold out in time of persecution.
True gold will abide the fiery trial. Here is the true trial of gold, when
it comes to be melted: Jer. 9. 7. I will melt them, and try them, for what
should I do for the daughter of my people? So that is true grace, that holds
out in the fire of affliction; hence that phrase of the Apostle, in 2 Pet. 4.
12. Beloved, think it not strange, concerning the fiery trial, as if some
strange thing happened, but rejoice rather, etc. because here is the true
trial of your graces, that they are of a right golden nature indeed. This was
Jobs comfort, Job 23. 10. He knows the way that I take, and when he has
tried me, I shall come out like gold. O golden Job, that was able to abide the
fiery trial! So look upon the Apostles in the fiery trial, when they were
mocked, and threatened, and imprisoned, yea, and grievously scourged too, yet
see how cheerful, and constant they were, for all that? Acts 5. 40, 41. They
departed from the presence of the Council, rejoicing, that they were accounted
worthy to suffer shame, for his Name. Here was right gold, tried in the fire;
see how bright they shine, when they newly come out of the furnace. Of such a
golden temper was Paul: How courageous, and undaunted in tribulation? Troubles
for Gods cause, did not trouble this good man; for when the Holy Ghost
testified of him, that bonds, and afflictions abode for him, Acts 20. 23. But
this does not trouble me, neither is my life dear unto me, that I may finish
my course with joy, and fulfill the ministry, which I have received of the
Lord Jesus. Yea, when Agabus the Prophet foretold his afflictions, so that his
friends began (even with tears) to dissuade him from going up to Jerusalem,
Acts 21. 11, 12, 13. Mark his courageous answer, a golden resolution: What
do ye weeping, and breaking my heart? I am ready, not only to be bound, but
to die at Jerusalem, for the Name of the Lord Jesus. True gold will abide the
fire; he that has true grace, will be constant and faithful even unto death,
and will cleave unto Gods service in time of danger, as well as in time of
safety. See an experiment of this, in Daniel, and the three noble Jews.
First, for Daniel, he did not content himself, to serve God only in time of
safety, but also in time of the greatest peril and danger, ( Dan. 6. 10.) for
when he knew that the writing was signed, he went into his house, etc. and
prayed, and gave thanks before his God, as he did aforetime; though he
adventured his very life in this case, to be cast into the Lions den. So that
ye see, that Daniels graces were pure gold indeed; he was the same in time of
danger, that he was before time, in time of safety. So for the three noble
Jews, Daniel 3. When they were threatened with the fiery furnace, if they would
not worship the Kings golden Image; mark their courageous answer, that same
golden resolution of theirs, Ver. 17. Our God, whom we serve, is able to
deliver us, etc. But if he will not, be it known unto thee, O King, that we
will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden Image which thou have set up:
and so were cast into the hot fiery furnace. Here were three precious pieces of
gold, that were ready to abide the fiery trial.

But as for the wicked, it is not so with them: they may have a fair golden
show, until they come to the melting; but no hypocrite can abide this fiery
trial: herein the true Christian out-strippeth the temporary; as our Savior
shows evidently, Luke 8. with Mat. 13. 21. Yet has he no root in himself,
but endures for a season: Why so? He answers, For when tribulation, or
persecution arises, because of the Word, by and by he is offended. He is not
able to abide the scorching heat of persecution, in, and for the good cause of
God. So that this fire of persecution, is fit to try every man's work, whether
it be gold, and silver, or hay, and straw, or stubble. Pertinent is that of the
Apostle, to this purpose, in 1 Cor. 3. 12, 13. Now if any man build upon this
foundation, gold, silver, etc. or wood, hay, or stubble; every man's work shall
be made manifest. How? Because it shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall
try every man's work, of what sort it is. That is true grace indeed, that
abides the fiery trial.

But a question may here, Quest.
not unfitly, be moved, sc. Whether an hypocrite may not hold out, even unto
death, and abide the trial of the fire?

Yes. He may stiffly hold out, Answ.
and persist in some course that he has begun, and rather give his body to
be burned, then forsake it. This the Apostle seems to intimate, 1 Cor. 13. 3.
Though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profits me
nothing. But yet, first, it is not in, or properly for the good Word of God,
that he thus suffers; but as a busy body, out of some odd humor, or proud
factious disposition. Now it is properly the cause, Causa, non poena facit
Martyr^^^. S. August.
and not the punishment, that makes a martyr; and therefore says our Savior,
Mat. 13. 21. When tribulation, or persecution arises because of the Word, he
is offended. A Christians suffering, is, and must be well grounded upon the
Word, else he suffers not as a Christian, but as a busy body, 1 Pet. 4. 15,
16. Secondly, If his cause, in which he snffereth be good, yet he suffers
without charity, not out of love, either to God, or his truth; but out of
self-love, and so is worth nothing. So that he that will hold out in a good
cause, even unto death, and that in obedience to God, and out of love to his
truth, the graces of such a man are pure gold indeed.

CHAP. IV.
Containing the use of Consolation.

THirdly: This Doctrine serves for comfort, 3. Use. Of consolation, to such as
have true grace.
and consolation, to such as are truly godly, and religious: whatsoever thy
condition be, for outward things, yet it is splendid and glorious within, thou
art truly rich, rich toward God: an heart full of saving grace, is more worth
then a purse full of gold. Put case that (in respect of any temporal wealth)
thou can truly say with the Apostle, Acts 3. 6. Silver, and gold have I
none: yet, if thou have plenty of true saving grace, thou art a rich man in
Gods account, full of spiritual wealth, thou art rich toward God, Luke 12.
22. which is the best riches in the world; God esteems thee more highly for
thy inward wealth, sc. that thou art truly golden, and religious, then men can
despise thee for thy outward poverty: and know this also for thy comfort, that
though the foolish, blind world, do despise thee for thy poverty; yet God
thinks never a whit the worse of thee in that regard; for he regards not
the rich, more then the poor, Job 34. 19. Yea, he thinks better, of every
godly poor man, then he does of any ungodly rich man whatsoever, Pro. 28. 6.
Better is the poor, that walks in his integrity, then he that is perverse
in his ways, though he be rich. A godly poor man is able to say with the
Apostle, in some measure, 2 Cor. 5. 1. We know, that when the earthly house,
of this Tabernacle, shall be dissolved; we have a building of God, not made
with hands, eternal in the heavens. But the wicked (though never so rich, yet
if he be impenitent,) shall be turned into hell, and all that forget God. Yea,
every godly poor man, that is rich in grace, and endued with the true fear of
God, finds better acceptance with God, then any ungodly rich man whatsoever,
Acts 10. 35. Of a truth I perceive, that God is no respecter of persons, but in
every Nation, he that fears God, and works righteousness, is accepted with
him, says the Apostle. Oh how this should comfort us, against the reproaches,
and aspersions of the world, sc. that in the mean time, God himself does
kindly accept of us, and has us in singular love for his Sons sake; yea,
will manifest this love one day, before men, and Angels, in bestowing no less
then a Kingdom upon us, Luke 12. 32. Fear not little flock, for it is my
Fathers pleasure, to give you a Kingdom: yea, the great and glorious Kingdom
of Heaven, is provided, as well for godly poor men, as for the richest persons
in the world, Jam. 2. 5. Hearken my beloved brethren (says the Apostle) has
not God chosen the poor of the world, rich in faith, and heirs of the
kingdom, which he has promised to them that love him? Oh how this may comfort
us, in regard of outward poverty? It will keep no man out of heaven, that has
an heart full of the golden graces of Gods Spirit, no more then outward wealth,
of it self, can keep a man out of hell. Luke 16. The rich man (there)
notwithstanding all his wealth, was deeply plunged into hell, and Lazarus, even
poor Lazarus, was carried, by the Angels, into Abraham's bosom. Only be sure,
that the gold which thou have, is true and right gold, and not counterfeit. And
therefore again, and again, I exhort every one, that desires to have
interest in the comfort now propounded, that he be sure, he be not deluded, nor
gulled in this case, with feigned gold, and counterfeit metal, in stead of
true saving grace indeed. Now, because it is, on the one side, so easy a thing
to be deceived, and withal, so exceeding hard and difficult for a man to be
well assured, that his graces are sincere, (besides what you have already heard
in the former use) I will give you two or three other signs, by which you may
understand, that the golden graces of Gods Spirit in you, are sound, and not
counterfeit.

First, 1. Sign. He that has true grace, will use it to Gods glory, and the
good of others.
He that has true grace, right gold indeed, will be careful to use it to Gods
glory, and the good of others; he is no niggard of it, nor lays it up in a
Napkin, but is very free, and liberal, in communicating what he has, for the
benefit of others: he is not content to be religious himself alone, but does
earnestly desire, and carefully endeavor, that others may have true grace, and
become religious, as well as himself; and his very speeches, and whole
carriage, will manifest no less. Psalm. 37. 30, 31. The mouth of the righteous
speaks wisdom, his tongue will be talking of judgment, the Law of his God
is in his heart, none of his steps slide. Such a man, follows that golden
rule of the Apostle, Col. 4. 6. Let your speech be always gracious, seasoned
with salt, such as may minister grace to the hearers; when thou art converted,
strengthen thy brethren, says our Savior, Luke 22. 32. Lo the concomitant,
and inseparable consequent, of true conversion. See this disposition in diverse.
That man, that has true grace himself, earnestly desires and endeavors
that others may be truly good, as well as himself. See it in one, that had
very little time to live after his conversion, and that is, the Thief on the
Cross, Luke 23. 40. He vindicateth our Saviors innocence, confesses his own,
and his fellows just punishment, earnestly labors the conversion of his
companion, that as they had lived wickedly, so his earnest desire was, that
they might both die penitently; Fear thou not God, (says he, rebuking his
fellow) seeing thou art in the same condemnation? (i. e.) Oh, fear God,
repent, and turn truly to him, etc. So that, as he prayed for himself unto
our Savior; so he sought earnestly the conver^ion, and spiritual good of his
partner. I might likewise instance in David, Psalm. 51. 13. Then shall I teach
thy ways unto the wicked, and sinners shall be converted unto thee. No good
man is content to go to Heaven alone, but earnestly desires company. The
woman of Samaria, tells her neighbors of our Savior, when she was
thoroughly wrought upon, and converted her self. I might give you sundry
instances to this purpose; but I will content my self with one only, and that
is the Apostle Paul; see what a special care, and respect he had for the good
of others; observe that speech of his, Romans 10. 1. Brethren, my hearts desire,
and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved. This made him so
abundant in labors, especially in traveling to preach the Gospel; because
he earnestly desired, and endeavored the conversion of others. Yea, such was
his earnest desire this way, that he seemed to prefer the salvation, of his
Countrymen the Jews, before his own eternal happiness, and salvation. An
admirable place to this purpose, is that which we have, Romans 9. 3. For I could
wish my self separate and accursed from Christ; for my brethren, my kinsmen,
according to the flesh, yea, he sought earnestly the conversion, and salvation
both of Jews, and Gentiles, even every man, if he could possible, Colos. 1.
28. Teaching, and admonishing in all wisdom, that I might present every man
perfect in Christ Jesus. Yea, consider the speech of his to Agrippa, Acts 26.
27, 28, 29. Almost thou perswadest me to become a Christian, says the King.
See what an admirable answer he returns (speaking out of the abundance of
gracious love, and the heavenly affection that was in his heart) I would to
God, that not only thou, but all that hear me this day, were both almost, and
altogether such, as I am, except these bonds. O golden Paul! Oh gracious soul,
that is desirous, that other, even all others were truly religious, as well as
himself! I pray let us all try our selves by this note. Where is our care, and
earnest desire for the good of others, especially our families, and those that
are committed to our charge? Yea, what cause have they to consider this, that
are so far from endeavoring the conversion of others, that they do labor to
quench those beginnings of true grace, which they see in any; Yea, and are
enemies to Gods people, only for their piety; and hate them, because they
follow the thing that is good? Well, (to say no more in this case) the truth
is, this argues, that these men are not only empty, and void of all true
grace, but even full of the spirit of Satan, and Antichrist: it is even unto
such a fearful token of perdition, as the Apostle speaks, Phil. 1. 28.

Secondly, 2. Sign. He that has true grace, is still desirous of more.
he that has true grace indeed, is not content with that measure of grace,
which he has for the present, but earnestly coveteth after more: for though he
be no niggard of it, yet he is withal a good husband with it, and labors
daily to increase it; yea, he is the more liberal in this case, and is the
more ready and willing to impart what graces he has, for the good of others,
because he knows, that it is one special way and means, to augment, and
increase his store. For as a great deal laid up in a napkin, will quickly come
to just nothing: so a little well improved, will quickly be increased, as our
Savior says fitly, in this very case, Matthew. 25. 31. For unto him that has,
shall be given, and he shall have abundance, None so desirous to grow and
increase in grace, as they that have good store of grace already: he that has
thirty, is very desirous of sixty; and he that has attained to sixty, is
not well contented, until he have an hundred fold. Oh that we would try our
selves by this note. Would thou be sure, that the grace which thou have is
not counterfeit, but sound and good? Where is then thy desire to grow and
increase in it? Do thou daily labor to grow in grace? 2 Peter 3. 18. Do
thou covet earnestly the best things? Art thou still desirous of more? etc.
Certainly this is a very comfortable sign that thy graces are sincere.

See an experiment of this in Paul. After he had once gotten some of this
heavenly gold of true grace, he was never satisfied with the measure which he
had, but was still desirous of more, always aiming at perfection; observe it,
Phil. 3. 13. This one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind,
and reaching forth to those things that are before, verse 14. I press toward
the mark, or the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Let such
try themselves by this Sign. that think that they have holiness, and
Religion enough, and that it is not good to be too forward; none of these are
afraid of having too much gold, which is far more dangerous; for a man cannot
have too much true saving grace, though he may have more wealth, then he can
well tell how to use. He therefore that thinks that he has grace enough
already, and is afraid of having too much, it is a shrewd sign that he has no
true grace at all. Let us therefore strive to manifest the truth of our graces,
3. Sign. He that has true grace, (...) the Word ^f grace; (...) begotten and
e^creased.
by our earnest des^re, and careful endeavor to get more.

Thirdly and lastly, for conclusion of this point. He that has true grace,
has respect to the Word of Gods grace, by which it is begotten and increased,
1 Pet. 2. 1. As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye
may grow thereby; How do we stand affected to Gods Ordinances? What account
do we make of prayer, public, and private? What reckoning of the Sacraments,
those seals of righteousness? In what esteem have we the Word faithfully
read and preached, which is called, The Word of Gods grace, Acts 20. 32. And
now brethren, I commend you to God, and to the Word of his grace, which is able
to build you up farther, etc. He that is careless and disregardfull of this,
can have little assurance of the work of true grace, being wrought in his
heart. They are scarce newborn, that love not the means, and instruments of
their new birth, or regeneration. Look upon all those golden persons recorded
in Scripture, and you shall find what a singular affection they have ever
borne to the Word, read, and preached. Job esteemed it more then his necessary
food, Job 23. 12. Jeremiah says, It was to him the very joy, and rejoicing of
his heart, Ier. 15. 16. and David's affection in this case was admirable, and
extraordinary, Oh how I love thy law! It is my meditation continually, Psalm
119. 97. It was dearer to him, then thousands of gold and silver, sweeter then
honey, and the honey comb, etc. So that, he that despises God's holy
Ordinances, and the means which God has appointed for the begetting, and
increasing of true grace in the hearts of his people; out of doubt he has not
the spirit of David in him; he is rather empty, and destitute of the golden
graces of Gods Spirit, then filled with the fruits of righteousness. Let us
therefore try our selves impartially, and faithfully, by these signs that we
have heard; that we may be assured the gold of grace which we have, or seem to
have, is true gold, and not counterfeit, and such as will deceive us. You that
find your selves stored with this precious commodity, bless God for it, and
be thankful; for true saving grace is, like Gold tried in the fire, pure,
and precious.

And thus much shall serve for the first point.

CHAP. V.
Containing the second general point.

ANd so I come to the second point, Doctrine 1. All that have true grace, are
most truly and spiritually rich.
which is to be observed in these words, sc. this. That the gold of true saving
grace, is the only way, and means to make us truly, and spiritually rich, Buy
of me gold, that thou may be rich, says our Savior. Lo, here the chief
way, and means to become truly and spiritually rich, this is durable riches,
and righteousness, says the Wise man; Proverbs 3. 15. Yea, true grace is the
means to make a man rich toward God, it is the speech of our Savior, Luke
12. 21. So is he that gathers riches for himself, and is not rich toward
God: where we see, that it is possible for a man to be plentifully furnished
with worldly riches, and yet be a poor man in the Lords account.

2. That true saving grace is a Jewel of such excellent and precious worth,
that it is able to make a man rich toward God, truly, and spiritually rich
indeed. And there is also great reason for it. For,

1. Because true saving grace, 1. Reason. Because it does entitle a man to
Christ, and all h^s riches.
does entitle a man to the Lord Jesus Christ, with all his inestimable wealth
and riches, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22. where speaking to such, as were religious, and
had true grace, he says, All is yours, whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or
Cephas, etc. All is yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's; Yea, the
very unsearchable riches of Christ, do belong to such as have true saving
grace, Ephesians. 3. 8. Oh the unsearchable riches of Christ! o the infinite
fullness of grace, that is in Christ! In him dwells the fullness of the
Godhead bodily: yea, there is all fullness in Christ for ever, in him it
dwells, Colos. 1. 19. Now all this belongs directly to such as fear God,
and are truly religious, Of his fullness we have all received, and grace for
grace; John 1. 14. Yea, the Lord Jesus Christ became poor, on purpose to make
us truly rich, 2 Cor. 8. 9. Ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, who,
though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that we, through his
poverty might become rich, says the Apostle. He that has special interest in
Christ, with all his riches, must needs be most truly and spiritually rich: but
he that has true saving grace, has this special interest in the unsearchable
riches of Christ; and therefore such an one must needs be most truly, and
spiritually rich.

2. He that has true saving grace, 2. Reason.
has the God of heaven for his portion. He that has true grace, has the God
of heaven for his portion.
Now how can he be poor that has such a portion? This is the very case of
every man, that has true saving grace, sc. that he has the God of heaven for
his portion, Lament. 3. 24. The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore
will I hope in him. So, Psalm 16. 5. The Lord is the portion of mine
inheritance, and of my cup: where we see, that such as have true grace, have
the Lord himself for their portion; yea, they may be assured that he is so,
Psalm. 142. 5. I cried unto the Lord, and said, thou art my refuge, and my
portion, in the land of the living? He that is assured in his soul, that he
has the God of heaven and earth for his portion, is most truly and
spiritually rich, even toward God: But he that has true saving grace, may be
assured that he has the God of heaven, and earth for this portion; and such a
man is most truly and spiritually rich.

Thirdly, 3. Reason. Has a true right and title to heaven.
this precious gold of true saving grace, does entitle a man to heaven, for his
inheritance. He that has true grace, may be sure (when he dies) he shall go
to heaven, 2 Cor. 5. 1. We know, that when this earthly house of this
tabernacle, shall be dissolved, we have a building of God, not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens. Hence is that speech of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.
3, 4. Blessed be God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. which has
begotten us again to an inheritance, immortal, and undefiled, that fades not
away, etc. To the same purpose is that speech of our Savior, Matthew. 25. 34.
Come ye blessed children, of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you,
from the beginning of the world. This is the very case of every man that truly
fears God, and has true saving grace, they are the members of Christ, the
children of God, and inheritors of the kingdom of heaven; observe it, Psalm.
24. 3, 4. Who shall ascend into the Hill of the Lord? and who shall dwell in
his holy place? who shall be a member of the Church militant on earth, and
also a member of the Church Triumphant in heaven? He that has clean hands,
and a pure heart, etc. See here the description of that man that has interest
in heaven for his inheritance. So also, Revel. 22. 14. Blessed are they that
do his Commandments, for they shall enter in through the gates, into the
City, sc. of the New Jerusalem, etc. Yea, how poor or despicable soever their
condition and outward estate may be here on earth, Jam. 2. 5. Has not God
chosen the poor of the world, rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom, which
God has promised to them that love him?

Fourthly and lastly, 4. Reason. He that has a comfortable right and title to
the things of this life.
He that has true saving grace, and special interest in Christ, has a
comfortable right and title to the things of this life, which God conferres
upon him, yea, unto all the good things of God, whether spiritual, or
temporal, all is theirs; Gods ordinances are theirs, Gods Ministers are
theirs, all the good creatures and blessings of God are theirs, yea, even those
that seem to have nothing (if they have true saving grace) have interst in,
and possession of all things. Observe that speech of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 21,
22, 23. All is yours, whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or life, or
death, etc. all are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Here we
see, that Christians, and such as have true grace, are no beggars, but the
richest persons under heaven. They that have true grace, and title to Christ,
have a comfortable right and title to all the good things of God, spiritual,
and temporal, all is theirs, yea, (which is most strange) all is the true
christians, even in possession, 2 Cor. 6. 10. As having nothing, and yet
possessing all things: Lo, here the wealth and riches of all true Christians,
even when they seem to have nothing, they have all things in possession: so
that get Christ, and get all, Romans 8. 32. God that spared not his own Son,
but delivered him to the death for us all, how shall he not with him freely
give us all things? And therefore all such as have true grace, are the richest
persons in the world, though enjoying little, yet in a contentation and
competency abounding in all things: Theophyl. in loc. Gal. 4. 15.
The houses of all good men being open to the Apostles.

First, Use. Instruction Hence see how much the world is deceived, in judging
of the estate of Gods people.
This serves to teach us how much the world is deceived, in judging, and
censuring of the estate, and condition of Gods people. Oh! the world thinks
Gods people to be the poorest, and basest, yea, and most despicable people in
the world; whereas here you see, that they are best furnished with that most
precious commodity, which is able to make them truly and spiritually rich,
even rich toward God. Do but consider of what rich parentage they come, they
have the God of heaven and earth for their Father, the Lord for their portion,
and their helper, and heaven it self for their inheritance; yea, and all the
Ordinances, and Ministers, and all the good things of God, are theirs, and
therefore they are absolutely the most wealthy, and the richest persons in the
world: they are indeed the poor of the world, yet rich in faith, and
inheritors of the kingdom of heaven; yea, howsoever the world judges of them,
they are the most precious and honorable persons in the world, in Gods
account: they are such, of whom the world was not worthy, Heb. 11. 37, 38. See
the high esteem that God has of all such as are religious, Isa. 43. 5. Since
thou art precious in my sight, and honorable, and I have loved thee, says
God. They are the most precious and honorable persons in the world, in Gods
account. See then how the mis-judging world is deceived in this case, in
accounting Gods people to be the scumme and offscouring of the world, whereas
indeed they are the most glorious and most honorable persons in the world; The
righteous is more excellent then his neighbor, Pro. 12. 26. sc. that is not
righteous, yea, and a far richer, and a better man in Gods account; as, Pro.
28. 6. Better is the poor, that walks in his integrity, then he that is
perverse in his ways, although he be rich. A godly poor man is far better,
yea, (which is strange) far richer in Gods account, then any ungodly rich man
whatsoever; for he is rich in Christ, rich in faith, full of the golden graces
of Gods Spirit; and therefore the world is utterly deceived, that do judge the
contrary, and think, and esteem most basely of him.

Secondly, Use 2. Comfort Gods people, in respect of the disgrace that is cast
upon them.
This serves to comfort Gods people, in respect of the disgrace, and pressure
of worldly poverty. The poor is hated even of his neighbor, Pro. 14. 20.
Poverty, is of it self sufficient, to bring Gods people into contempt, and
hatred; yet let Gods people, and such as are religious, comfort themselves in
this case, upon these ensuing particulars.

First, 1. Ground. Truly rich in Gods esteem.
That howsoever the world speaks, or esteems of thee, yet thou art truly
rich in Gods account, full of spiritual wealth, and riches, even rich toward
God; as our Savior himself speaks, Luke 12. 21. Rich in faith, Iam. 2. 5.
though perhaps poor, in respect of gold and silver; rich in hope, yea, full of
spiritual wealth and riches in possession; all Gods ordinances, the Word, and
Sacraments are thine, Gods faithful Ministers are thine, yea, the graces of
Gods Spirit are thine; all the promises recorded in Scripture, are thine
inheritance; Who through faith and patience inherit the promises, says the
Text, Heb. 6. 10. So that hence it follows, that Gods promises are the
Christians inheritance. Look into the rich wardrobe of Gods promises, and then
consider how rich you are therein; and certainly, it will exceedingly comfort
you, in regard of worldly poverty.

Secondly, 2. Ground. God regards no man simply for his outward wealth and
riches.
Consider, that as ^od regards no man that more, simply for his wealth and
riches; so he thinks never the worse of any for his poverty, if he be
otherwise truly godly, and religious. Observe it, Job 34. 19. He regards not
the rich more then the poor, says the Text, sc. for his riches, riches avail
not in that case, nor can procure any the least acceptance with GOD; only the
true fear of God, and faith in Christ, is that which does procure acceptance
with God, Acts 10. 35. Of a truth (says the Apostle) I perceive, that God is
no respect^r of persons, but in every Nation, he that fears God, and works
righteousness, is accepted with him; sc. how poor soever they may be, for
outward things. Oh! how this may comfort us, in respect of the disgrace, and
contempt that is cast upon us, by the world; sc. that God himself does highly
esteem, and kindly accept of us. The Lord makes choice in special manner, of
such as are godly, and religious; Psalm. 4. The Lord has chosen, or set apart
for himself, the man that is godly: yea, how poor soever he be, if he be also
poor in spirit, the Lord will never reject him, but freely make choice of him
to be his son and servant; Iam. 2. 5. Has not God chosen the poor of the
world, rich in faith? Only let our care be to be rich in faith, and then let
us never doubt of finding acceptance with God, notwithstanding our outward
poverty. Here is the second ground of comfort for all godly poor ones, sc.
that they find far better acceptance, and favor with God, then any ungodly
person whatsoever. It is not poverty* but sin only, that can separate
between God and us: Your iniquities (not your poverty) have separated between
you and your God: only beware of sin, and then assure thy self, that
poverty can never separate between thee and God.

Thirdly, 3. Ground. God is ready to hear the prayers of godly poor men, as
soon as those that are r^ch.
Consider that God is as ready to hear the prayers of a godly poor man, as
any rich man whatsoever: not riches, but grace only is prevalent on this
behalf, Ioh. 9. 31. We know (says the blind man) that God hears not
sinners, sc. how rich soever they be, but if any man be a worshipper of God,
and a doer of his will, him he hears, how poor soever he be for outward
things. See a direct proof for this, Psalm. 10. 14. The poor commits
himself to thee, for thou art the helper of the friendlesse: yea, this should
encourage others, when they consider this, Psalm. 34. 6. This poor man cried,
and the Lord heard him, says the Text. Not poverty, but sin and iniquity
is that alone, that stops up the ear of God, against our prayers. The Lord,
of his special goodness, prepares for the poor, Psalm. 68. 10. yea, The Lord
hears the poor, says the Text, Psalm. 69. 33. The Lord will fulfill the
desire of such as fear him, (though they be poor) he will hear their cry,
and will help them. Here is another special privilege, wherein Gods poor
ones have as much interest, as any the richest persons in the world: yea, the
promises of being heard, Mat. 7. 7. Isa. 65. 24. do belong to Gods poor
people, as much as to the richest or wealthiest persons under heaven. Here is
the third ground.

Fourthly and lastly, 4. Ground. A godly poor (...) may go to heaven, as
soon as the rich.
Consider, that a godly poor man, may go to heaven, at his death, as soon as
the richest person in the world. It is grace only, and not riches, that will
bring a man to heaven at the last: and therefore be of good comfort, O thou
godly poor man, for thou may go to heaven, as soon as the richest miser
in the world; yea, and sooner too, and with far less difficulty. How hardly
shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of heaven? says our
blessed Savior. It is mavelous hard, and difficult for a rich man to enter
into the kingdom of heaven; for rich men are apt to trust in riches, and
depart from the living God, 1. Tim. 6. 17. or else they are apt to be proud of
their wealth, and riches, and so deny God. This made holy Agur, even afraid of
riches; Pro. 30. 8, 9. Give me not poverty, nor riches, etc. Why not riches?
What hurt could there be of being rich? Yes, says he, not riches, least I be
full, and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? Like unto proud wealthy Pharaoh,
Exodus 5. 5. Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice, to let Israel go? I
know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go; lo here the fruit of
unsanctified wealth and riches, yea, rich men are most apt to forget God, Deuteronomy.
8. But now a godly poor man, is free from temptations of this kind; a godly
poor man is in no such danger, runs no such hazard, either to be proud, or
deny God, or forget God, or the like, etc. But on the contrary, his poverty
being sanctified, is a special means to subdue, and beat down these lusts,
and to mortify these unruly corruptions: poverty in his outward estate,
through the good hand of God, is a means to make him poor in spirit, and so
to dispose, and fit him for heaven; for blessed are the poor in spirit, for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven, says our Savior, Mat. 5. 3. yea, God (for
the most part) does usually pass ^y the rich and wealthy, and makes choice ^f
the poor and needy, for the heirs of ^eaven; 1 Cor. 1. 26. for Brethren, ye
see our calling, how that not many wise men after he flesh, not many mighty,
not many noble are ^alled: Who then does the Lord most or^inarily and usually
call? Surely the poor, and needy: Has not God chosen the poor ^f the world,
(says the Apostle, James 1. 5.) ^ich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom,
which God has promised to them that love him? ^ere we see, that poverty does
not indis^ose, nor unqualifie a man for heaven, but ^t him rather; such a man,
when he dy^th, goes hungry to God, or fasting, that ^he joys of heaven may
relish the better with him; or he goes naked to GOD, that the garment of
glory, and happiness, ^ay be more welcome to him. Yea, see an experiment of
this, in that Parable of the ^ich man and Lazarus, Luke 16. It was ^ot Lazarus
his poverty, nor his sores, ^or his despicable condition, that could ^eepe him
out of heaven: see what the Text says of him, Ver. 22. And it came to ^asse,
that the beggar died, and was carried by ^he Angels, into Abraham's bosom.
Neither ^ould the rich man's wealth, either help ^im to heaven, or keep him
out of ^orments of hell; The rich man also dyed, and was buried; and being in
hell in torments, ^e lift up his eyes, etc. Oh the vanity of wealth, and
riches, that can neither help a man to heaven, nor keep him out of the
torments of hell! And let no man be any way discouraged, or out of heart, in
regard of his poverty, because it is no bar, nor impediment to keep him out
of the kingdom of heaven: only let a man be sure, that he is poor in spirit,
as well as poor in estate, and labor to be as rich in faith, and as abundant
in grace, as he is poor, and destitute of outward wealth, and riches, and then
let him never doubt, but that the kingdom of heaven is as wide open for him,
as for any the most wealthy person in the world. Yea, consider farther for thy
comfort, that the Son of God himself, the Lord Jesus Christ, became poor,
to this very end and purpose, that he might enrich thee with his poverty, 2
Cor. 8. 9. For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, who though he was
rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty, might
become rich. Let no man therefore think, or fear that God will reject, or
cast him off, for his outward poverty, if he be otherwise well stored with
spiritual wealth and riches.

CHAP. VI.
Containing the third Use of the second point.

THirdly, Use 3. Exhortation to the first sort.
Seeing godly persons only, are truly and spiritually rich, This serves to
exhort us, unto sundry duties: and the exhortation is directed unto two sorts
of people. First, Such as have some measure of this spiritual wealth, and
riches. Secondly, Such as for the present are utterly destitute of this
precious gold, here set out in the Text.

First, This doctrine serves to exhort such as have true grace, (and are
truly religious,) unto a twofold duty.

First, Unto thankfulness to God for Such as have true grace, must labor to
be thankful for it.
Has God given his Son to enrich thee, and furnished thee with the graces of
his Spirit, to make thee truly and spiritually rich and wealthy? Oh! then (in
any case) bless God for it, and strive to walk worthy of such a precious
favor. I tell thee, God has not dealt so with every person: how many thousand
has God left poor, and blind, and naked* and yet has set his love upon thee,
and made thee truly and spiritually rich, who were by nature the child of
wrath, and as poor and miserable as any other? And indeed the favors of God
on this kind, should not be so much as mentioned, without special praise and
thankesgiving unto God. See the Apostolical practice of Gods people in this
kind; Blessed be God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ says the
Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 1. 3. See the like practice in Peter, to this purpose, 1
Pet. 1. 3. Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according
to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again, to a lively hope, by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance, immortal, etc.
Thus David, Psalm. 103. 1, 2, 4. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is
within me, bless his holy Name. Bless the Lord, O my soul, forget not all
his benefits: and Ver. 4. Who did redeem thy life from destruction, and
crowned thee with mercy, and loving kindnesses. Blessed be God, that daily more
and more, even lodeth us with his benefits, especially of this kind, Psalm. 68.
19. If we did but seriously consider our former poverty, and misery, and how
freely, and undeservedly, the Lord has bestowed this spiritual wealth and
riches upon us, it cannot choose but press us to thankfulness. This made Paul
thankful, 1 Timothy 1. 13, 14. I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, that he has
judged me faithful, and has put me into the Ministry, who was before a
blasphemer, a persecutor, and injurious, etc. ( i. e.) I was a poor, wretched,
and graceless persecutor of Gods blessed Saints; but the Lord (according to
the riches of his grace and mercy) has made me a rich, and glorious Apostle,
and Minister of Jesus Christ. So in the like form, and manner, he makes
mention, of Gods singular goodness to the Romans, Chap. 6. 17. But God be
thanked, that ye were the servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the
heart, the form of Doctrine which was delivered, etc. Blessed be God, that
whereas once ye were poor base slaves, and servants of sin, and Satan, God
has enriched you with the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. It is the
Lord, that Raises up the poor out of the dust, and sets him with the
Princes of his people. It is the Lord, that makes poor, and makes rich: oh
then bless God for his singular goodness toward thee, in that he has so
enriched thee, with the golden merits of his dearest Son, and the excellent
graces of his holy and blessed Spirit.

Secondly, 2. Duty. To grow in grace.
Seeing true saving grace is the chief and only means to make us truly and
spiritually rich; this serves also to exhort all such, as have any measure of
true saving grace, to labor to grow in grace, and endeavor to increase in
this spiritual wealth and riches. O let us imitate the rich misers of the
world, that are never satisfied, with what they have, but still hunger and
thirst after more: here is a most lawful, and commendable kind of avarice;
Covet after the best things, 1 Cor. 12. 31. Covet after Christ, and earnestly
thirst after a more near communion with him, and the graces of his thrice
blessed Spirit. But grow in grace, says the Apostle, 2 Pet. 3. 18. So Paul to
the Thessalonians, 1 These. 4. 1. We beseech you, brethren, and exhort you, by
the Lord Jesus Christ, that as you have received of us, how ye ought to walk,
and to please God; so you would abound still more and more. The like
exhortation, he directs to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15. last, Always
abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as ye know, how that your
labor is not in vain in the Lord. Never think that you shall loose your
labor in this kind. Up, therefore, and be doing, labor to grow in grace, and
the Lord will be with us, and will bless our endeavors. Now for the
perfecting of this point, give me leave, briefly to show unto you, first, The
Motives that may persuade us, and secondly, The chief means to help and to
direct us to grow in grace.

First, 1. Motive. To persuade us to labor to grow in grace.
Because God commands it; secondly, because the Lord commends it; thirdly, the
Lord is much honored by it; fourthly, the Lord will most surely reward it.

First, Let us labor to grow rich in 1. Because God commands it.
and not content our selves with some small measure of piety, because the Lord
(as you have heard) does expressly require it, 2 Pet. 3. 18. But grow in grace,
etc. Now the very bare command of God, should be unto us an argument of
sufficient strength, to persuade us to obedience. See how the Lord propounds
his very ^are command to Iosuah, as an argument of sufficient strength, to
persuade him to be of courage, and to abandon all carnal fears, Ios. 1. 9.
Have not I commanded thee? be strong, and of a good courage, etc. So here: Have
not I commanded thee? Oh therefore grow in grace, and labor to increase in
godliness. This is the Lords express command, an evangelicall precept, and
therefore let us, in any case, make conscience of it, because the LORD
requires it.

Secondly, 2. Motive. Because the Lord expects it.
Because the Lord himself expects it, he looks for it at our hands. It is
not enough to get some grace, but he expects our growth, and increase in it.
When God has once planted a Vineyard, he looks that it should bring forth
grapes, as, Isa. 5. 2. yea, he daily, and yearly expects it, Luke 13. 7.
yea, the Lord Jesus goes into his garden, of purpose, that he may see how the
trees flourish, and prosper, Cant. 6. 10. I went down into the garden of
Nutts, to see the fruits of the valley, to see if the Vine budded, and the
Pomgranates flourished. The Lord expects and looks for fruitfulness at the
hands of his people. Yea, further, the Lord expects, and looks for fruits,
in some measure, answerable to the means he has used, and the pains which he
has taken to make them fruitful; Heb. 6. 7. The earth that drinks in the
rain, that comes often upon it, and brings forth fruit, meet for them by
whom it is dressed, receives blessing from God. Oh let us therefore, let us
labor to be rich in grace, and full of good works, that we may not frustrate
the LORDS expectation.

Thirdly, 3. Motive. Because the Lord commends it.
As the Lord commands, and expects it; so the Lord does highly commend, and
prize it, when it is so. See how the Lord commends the diligence of those
servants, that had increased their Talents, by the holy employment of them,
Luke 19. 17. Well done, good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful
in a few things* I will make thee ruler over many things, etc. Oh what an
encouragement in this? sc. that though when we have done all that we can, we
do but our duty, neither can we do that perfectly, yet the Lord in mercy,
is ready to encourage and commend us, if we do our best endeavor. Here is
the commendation of a right tree of Righteousness, that they are such as
flourish, and increase still more and more, Psalm. 92. 12, 13. The righteous
shall flourish like a Palm tree, and grow like a Cedar in Lebanon. Such as be
planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of the house of
our God. They shall bring forth fruit in their age, and they shall be fat and
flourishing. Here was the commendation of the Church of Thyatyra, Revel. 2. 19.
I know thy works, and thy love, and thy faith, and patience, and thy works,
that they are more at last, then at first. Thou do still grow in grace, and
art every day better and better. The Lord takes notice of our growth in grace,
and does most highly commend, and prize it.

Fourthly, As the Lord commends it, 4. Motive. Because the Lord is much
honored by it.
so he is much honored by it. It is the glory of the Master of the Vineyard,
that the Vine flourishes, and is fruitful. It is the glory of the husbandman,
that the earth brings forth fruit in abundance. It is the glory of the chief
Shepherd, when the sheep bring forth thousands, and ten thousands. Hereupon
is that speech of our Savior, Ioh. 15. 8. Herein is my Father glorified, that
ye bring forth much fruit. The more fruitful we are in grace and piety, the
more glory redoundeth to God; Mat. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men,
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father, which is in
heaven. Hence is that prayer of the Apostle, Phil. 1. 9. 11. And this, I pray,
that your love may abound, still more, and more, in knowledge, and in all
judgment. Why so? see that, Ver. 11. And that ye may be filled, with the
fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, to the praise, and glory
of God. Oh this, above all other considerations, should persuade us, to labor
to grow rich in grace, because it tends so expressly, to Gods glory, which is
the chief end of God himself, in all his actions, and that which we should
aim at especially, in all our proceedings, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Whether ye eat, or
drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God, says the Apostle;
and therefore we should (in all equity) ply that work most, that tends
most to his glory.

Fifthly, 5. Motive. Because the Lord will most freely and fully reward it.
The Lord will most surely reward it. Let no man ever think, that it is in
vain to serve God, but if we be faithful in doing God service, let us never
doubt of his fidelity, and bounty in paying our wages. Always abounding in
the work of the Lord, for as much as ye know how that your labor is not in
vain in the Lord, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. last. He that is faithful in
Gods service unto death, may be sure of the Crown of life, Revel. 2. 10. God
is absolutely the best Master, and piety the best Mistress, that a man can
possibly serve: Godliness is profitable unto all things (says the Apostle)
having the promise of the life that now is, and of that to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8.
Let us but see the reward of piety in some few particulars.

First, 1. Benefits of growing in grace. 1. It will assure us of our election.
An earnest endeavor to grow in grace, and thrive in godliness, will assure a
man of his election. It is the advice of the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Give
diligence to make your calling and election sure: no better means to do it,
then by an earnest desire, and careful endeavor, to grow in grace; our growth
in grace, is not only an argument of the truth of our grace, but also a good
pledge, and token of our election: faith and holiness is a fruit of our
eternal election. Hence it is, that true saving faith is called, The faith of
Gods elect, Titus 1. 1. This should make us earnestly to cry out with the
Disciples, Luke 17. 5. Lord increase our faith, because it is such a pledge of
our election; for, As many as were ordained to eternal life, believed, Acts
13. 48. Holiness is the very end of our election; We are chosen in Christ
Jesus, before the world, that we might be holy, and without blame before him
in love, Ephesians. 1. 4. Hence is that sweet, and excellent parenthesis of the
Apostle, Col. 3. 12. Put upon you therefore (as the elect of God, holy, and
beloved) bowels of mercy, etc. So that the more faith, the more piety, the
more bowels of mercy, etc. the more evident pledges, and tokens of our
election. Oh how this should persuade us to grow in grace, that we may thereby
make our calling, and election sure unto our selves; an admirable, and most
desirable benefit.

Secondly, 2. Benefit. The better able to do good to others.
The richer we are in grace, the better able shall we be to do good to others,
and also to discharge the duties, belonging to the places wherein God has set
us. Wisdom is good with an inheritance, says Solomon; so, no doubt it is
without an inheritance; but yet he that has wisdom with an inheritance, is
the best able to express, and make use of his wisdom; so, 1 Timothy 6. 17.
Charge those that be rich in this world, etc. that they be rich in good works,
as if they had the best opportunity; so, much more, they that are spiritually
rich, that are full of the golden graces of Gods Spirit, they have an
opportunity to be rich in good works, and are, or may be, the better fitted,
and enabled, to do good to others. This made our Savior himself, so rich in
good works, so plentiful in works of piety, and charity: He went about
continually doing good, teaching, and preaching the Gospel of the kingdom,
and healing every sickness, and every disease amongst the people, Mat. 9. 35.
And why so? Surely, because he was full of grace, Ioh. 1. 14. This made
Barnabas, such an admirable instrument of Gods glory, in doing so much good at
Antioch; see how the Text reports it, Acts 11. 23. Who when he was come, and
saw the grace of God, he was glad, and exhorted them all, that with purpose of
heart they would cleave unto the Lord: Why so? what made him so zealous and
ready to do good? That you may see, Ver. 24. For he was a good man, and full of
the holy Ghost, and of faith; and much people joined themselves unto the Lord.
He that is truly and really good himself, is the fittest, and best able to
do good to others. See here another benefit, that may persuade us to grow in
grace.

Thirdly, 3 Benefit. Assurance of interest in the kingdom of glory.
An earnest desire, and careful endeavor to grow in grace, will give us, not
only entrance into the kingdom of grace, but also assurance of interest in
the kingdom of glory. See a direct place for this purpose, 2 Pet. 1. 5. 11.
Wherefore giving all diligence, add to your faith, virtue; and to your virtue,
knowledge, etc. add one grace to another, grow in the number of graces, and
grow in their measure too; If these things be in you, and abound, says the
Apostle, Ver. 9. see the benefit of this, Ver. 11. For so an entrance, shall be
made unto you abundantly, into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ: here is an entrance into the kingdom of grace, which also assures us,
of our interest in the kingdom of glory; Romans 6. 22. Having your fruit unto
holiness, and the end everlasting life. True holiness, and growth in grace,
4. Benefit. Non propter, sed secundum opera. The more grace here, the more
glory in heaven.
is the plain, and direct way to true happiness, and everlasting life.

Fourthly and lastly, The more grace, and holiness, we attain unto here, the
more glory and happiness is reserved in heaven for us: for though God do not
reward us for our works, yet he will certainly reward us according to our
works; so that the more diligence in Gods service, the more glory hereafter.
This seems most clearly intimated, in that Parable of the Talents, Mat. 25.
he that gained most, had best reward: Unto him that has, shall be given, and
he shall have abundance, Ver. 29. He that is most abundant in the work of the
Lord, shall be sure to have abundance of wages. Let this also persuade us to
grow in grace, that our reward in heaven, may be the greater. They that do
much in Gods service, and suffer much in the good cause of God, shall have the
greater reward in heaven; Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, says our Savior to
his Disciples, for great is your reward in heaven, Mat. 5. 12. They that take
great pains in Gods service, shall have an eternal, and an exceeding weight
of glory, for their reward, 2 Cor. 4. 7. This encouraged Moses, Heb. 11. 26. He
esteemed the rebuke of Christ, greater riches, then the treasures of Egypt;
for he had respect to the recompense of reward, says the Text.

Now the means, Means of growth in grace.
that we must use, that we may grow in grace, are especially these two; first,
The right use of Gods Ordinances; and, secondly, Holy meditations.

First, 1. Means
The right, and conscionable use of Gods ordinances; The Word, and Sacraments,
and Prayer. Lo, here the best way, and means to grow rich in grace, and full
of spiritual wealth.

First, 1. The word preached the maanes to grow in grace.
The Ministry of the Word read, and faithfully preached, it is the Word of
eternal life, Ioh. 6. 68. the means to quicken a dead soul at first, and the
chief means to preserve the same spiritual life, and to help us to grow,
and increase in grace. Two singular, and most pertinent testimonies we have
for this purpose. The one, 1 Pet. 2. 1. As newborn Babes, desire the sincere
milk of the Word, that you may grow thereby. The ministry of the Word, is not
only the means of our regeneration at first, (1 Pet. 1. 23. Iam. 1. 18.) but,
is the means also to help us grow up unto perfection; Desire the sincere
milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby, says the Apostle. The other
testimony, to this purpose, is that of the Apostle Paul, in his valediction to
the Church of Ephesus, Acts 20. when he was to depart from them, and foresaw
that they should see his face no more, never enjoy his bodily presence, or
hear him preach again; see what he especially commends to their daily use,
and constant practice, Ver. 32. And now brethren, I commend you to God, and to
the Word of his grace, which is able to build you farther, and to give you an
inheritance among all them that are sanctified, etc; ( i. e.) give daily
attendance to this, ply this task, follow this work close; for the Word of
his grace, will build you up still farther, and farther, and will never cease
working in you, until it bring you to heaven, and translate you from grace to
glory.

Secondly, 2. The Sacraments.
The right, and religious use of the Sacraments, of Baptism, and of the Lords
Supper, (these seals of righteousness) will exceedingly further our progress
in piety, and growth in grace. How can a man, that is of a good constitution,
feed on dainties, and wholesome food, and not grow strong, and well liking by
that means? so, how can a man, eat the very body of Christ, and drink his
very blood, in the Sacrament, (as every worthy receiver does, spiritually) but
he must needs grow strong, in the grace of Christ Jesus; For my flesh is meat
indeed, and my blood is drink indeed, says our blessed Savior? Ioh. 6. 35.
And hereupon he infers, Ver. 56. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood, dwells in me, and I in him, that is, such an one has special
communion with Christ, and interest in all his merits, and the benefit of his
obedience, active, and passive, which how can he enjoy, but he must needs grow
in grace?

Thirdly, 3. Prayer.
Prayer is a chief Ordinance of God, by no means to be neglected, nay, which
must be used, as a means to bring Gods blessing upon the former: this is the
way, and means to make the Word, and Sacraments effectual unto us: so that in
the neglect of this means, little benefit is to be expected from the diligent
use of the former, so that he that would grow in grace, must be a daily
petitioner at the Throne of grace, and direct his course to the God of all
grace, by prayer, for the increase of the graces of Gods Spirit in him. For, as
every good, and perfect gift, comes from above, at the first, Iam. 1. 17. So
the increase of those gifts, must needs also proceed from above. He only that
begins the good work of grace in his Elect, at the first, is only able to
perfect that work which he has begun; Phil. 1. 6. And therefore, as the
Apostle was confident, concerning them, so let us be fervent, and importunate
in our requests to him, for our selves, that as he has begun the good work
of grace in us, so he would increase it in us daily, and bring it unto
perfection. Thus the Apostles direct their course unto Christ, by prayer, for
the increase of their faith, Luke 17. 5. The Disciples said unto the Lord, Lord
increase our faith. Thus Paul for the Philippians, Phil. 1. 9. 11. And this I
pray, that your love may abound still more and more, in knowledge, and in all
judgment; and that ye might be filled with the fruits of righteousness.
Increase of grace (as well as grace it self) must needs be the gift of God;
For of him, and through him, and from him, are all things. says the Apostle,
Romans 11. 36.

Secondly, 2. Means Meditations.
The second general means, that we must use to grow in grace, is holy
Meditations. This has furthered the growth of grace in Gods Saints heretofore,
they have been abundant, and constant in pious and holy meditations; Psalm. 1.
4. A godly man's delight is in the Law of the Lord, and it is his meditation day
and night. So, this was David's constant practice, Psalm. 119. 97. Oh how I love
thy Law, it is my meditation continually! But what are the special things,
whereof we must meditate, if we desire to further our growth in grace? I
answer; they are especially these four.

First, 1. Meditation. Of the worth of true grace.
Let us seriously consider the worth, and excellency of true saving grace,
which appears in the Text; it is like gold tried in the fire, the most pure,
and most precious jewel, that is in the whole world: all earthly things, in
the want of this, are but dross, and dung, Phil. 3. 8. But for your more full
satisfaction, as touching the worth of true grace, consider, the second Chapter
of this Treatise, being the first Use of the point. And surely, if men did but
once see the beauty, and truly understand the worth of true grace, they could
not choose, but be exceeding desirous of it. They would covet after it, if
they were once persuaded, that it is the best and rarest jewel in the world.

Secondly, 2. Meditation. The necessity of it.
The necessity of true grace, it is absolutely necessary, to the very being of
a Christian, and not to his well-being only. Oh then let us labor for grace,
and growth in grace, because it it so necessary, that a man is no Christian,
that is without it; and it is also so necessary, that it is impossible to be
saved without it: They must have their fruit unto holiness, that will have the
end everlasting life, Romans 6. 22. Holiness must needs go before, if
happiness follow after: grace and glory are inseparable, yea, they are the
same, as some Divines observe; for grace is glory inchoate, and glory is
grace consummate. It is so necessary, that it is impossible to see God without
it, Heb. 12. 14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which it is
impossible to see God. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they (and they alone)
shall see God, says our blessed Savior; see Psalm. 24. 4, 5. Revel. 22. 14,
15. etc.

Thirdly, 3. Motive. 3. The equity of it.
Consider the equity of it, it is very fit, and equal, that we that do
profess our selves to be Gods children, shall labor to become like unto our
heavenly Father. He is the God of all grace; oh let us therefore labor to grow
in grace, that we may be like him, Ephesians. 5. 1. Be ye followers of God, as
dear children, and walk in love, etc. 2 Pet. 1. 17. As he that has called
you, is holy, so be ye holy, in all manner of conversation; for it is written,
be ye holy, for I am holy. Yea, we should labor to be perfect in holiness, 2
Cor. 7. 1. Perfecting holiness in the fear of God; that herein especially we
may resemble our heavenly Father, who is the God of all grace, and holiness.
Be ye perfect, as your Father which is in heaven is perfect, says our
Savior, Mat. 5. last. So that the more holiness, the more like to God, and
the better evidence, and assurance that we are his children.

Fourthly, 4. Motive. To consider the admirable growth of grace that has been
in the Saints of old.
Let us meditate, and seriously consider of that great measure of grace that
has been in Gods Saints of old, and how far we come short of them. There is
Abraham, renowned for his faith, yea, he was even strong in the faith, Romans 4.
20. Samuel for integrity, Moses for meekness, the meekest man upon the earth,
Numb. 12. 3. Jacob for wrestling with God in prayer, Hos. 12. 4. Job for his
patience, James 5. 11. David for sincerity, A man after Gods own heart, in all
things, save only in the matter of Vriah; and Paul for courage, and all the
graces of Gods Spirit whatsoever, etc. Now, alas! how far short do we come
of these Saints of God, in all these? What a small measure of faith have we, in
respect of Abraham? How far short are we of Jacob, for a gift in prayer, and
a spirit of supplication? How far do we come behind Job, for his patience?
David, for sincerity? and Paul, for every thing? Oh how this would whet us on
to labor for more grace, when we see how far the Saints of God have
out-stripped us, and gone before us. Oh how this would increase our diligent
endeavor, to grow in grace, if we would forget such as are behind us, and
look earnestly at those that have gone before us, it would make us, to press
earnestly, for the price of the mark of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus, Phil. 3. 13, 13. These are the chief means that we must use, that we
may be rich in the golden graces of Gods Spirit. Thus now for the first sort,
to whom the Exhortation is directed, sc. such as have true grace, in some
measure, already. Let such, first, be thankful, and bless God for it, that
has given them the graces of his Spirit, to enrich them; secondly, let them
labor to grow in grace, and thrive more and more in this spiritual wealth and
riches.

Secondly, 2. Sort. Such as have no grace, must labor for it.
For such as have no grace, for the present, let such be exhorted to labor for
it, let them see the worth of it, is like gold tried in the fire; that it is
the only means to make them truly and spiritually rich: only such as are
truly godly, are truly rich, rich indeed, rich toward God: wicked rich men
are wretched, that are in the midst of all their wealth, and riches: Oh
therefore, you that want true grace, labor for it: Ioh. 6. 27. Labor not for
the meat that perishes, but for durable riches, Pro. 3. 16. which that you
may attain unto, attend with reverence unto the next point, which is, to buy
it of Christ, Buy of me, etc.

CHAP. VII.
Containing the third general point.

I Counsel thee to buy of me, 3. Point.
gold tried in the fire, that thou may be rich. And so I come to the third,
and last lesson, 3. Doct. All that would have true grace, must buy it of Christ.
that we are to learn from hence, which is, That all those, that would have
the precious gold of true saving grace, must buy it of Christ. Buy of me (says
our Savior) this gold tried in the fire, that thou may be rich. In handling
this point, I will run this course. First, I will speak some thing by way of
confirmation, that we may believe it. Secondly, By way of explication, and
application, that we may understand, and make a right use of it.

First, 1. Confirmation.
For confirmation, observe a double proof for this purpose; first,
Testimonies; secondly, Reasons and Arguments to enforce the Doctrine.

First, 1. Testimonies.
For Testimonies, observe it in these few particulars; first, Pro. 23. v. 23.
Buy the truth, and sell it not, says the Wise man. Truth of grace must be
bought at any rate, but sold at no rate. True saving grace, is a precious
commodity, to be bought by all those, that desire to enjoy it. To the like
purpose is that we have, Isa. 55. 1. Hoe, every one that thirsts, come ye to
the waters, buy wine, and milk, without money, and without price; the water,
and wine, and milk of true saving grace, must come by purchase: true it is in
regard of it self, it is the free gift of God, but in regard of our own
endeavor to get it, it must be bought: and to show the truth of this, the
price it self is declared to be without money, and without price: so Mat. 13.
44. The kingdom of heaven, is like unto a treasure hid in the field, which
when a man has found, etc. he goes, and sells all that he has, and buyeth
that field: which also does evidently confirm the point that we have in hand.
To the same purpose is that speech of the five wise Virgins, Mat. 25. 9. But
go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for your selves; where we see, that
they that want the oil of true saving grace, must not borrow of others, but
go unto such as sell, and buy for themselves; which is very direct for the
purpose. Now if any shall ask further, who is the chiefe-chapman, of whom we
must buy this precious commodity? I answer in the words of the Doctrine; That
all that would have the gold of true saving grace, must buy it of Christ, He is
the chief Chapman in this case. And so I come to the second proof, which was
propounded at first, for the confirmation of this point; sc. Reasons grounded
upon Scriptures.

Reasons.
Now the Reasons are especially these five, The excellency of the Chapman, of
whom we must buy it, who is
that is most fit and ready to sell this precious commodity, to such as want
and desire it,) so that as the excellency and necessity of it, should
persuade us to buy the commodity: so the excellency of the Chapman, should
persuade us, to buy it of Christ, which is absolutely, the rarest chapman in
the world. This I will endeavor to describe, and manifest, in these five
particulars.

First, 1. Reason. 1. A Chapman of a most sweet disposition.
Christ is a Chapman of a most loving, and sweet disposition, He is (even in
this respect,) The chiefest of ten thousand, Cant. 5. 10. Men usually love to
buy of such Chapmen, as are of the best disposition; a wise, meek, and loving
disposition in a Chapman, will persuade many, at least to cheapen a commodity.
If we would buy of such an one, let us bargain with Christ; for he is a
Chapman of a most sweet disposition, for wisdom, for meekness, for love, etc.
We may all go to school to him; yea, he himself inviteth us to learn, Mat.
11. 29. Learn of me, for I am meek, and lowly in heart, and ye shall find
rest to your souls. He is such a Chapman, as is ready to lay down his life
for his customers, Ioh. 13. Let this rare disposition of his persuade us to
bargain with Christ,

Secondly, ^. Reason. Exceeding faithful, and one in whom is no guile.
If any man want true saving grace, let him buy it of Christ, because he is an
exceeding faithful Chapman, to all that shall deal with him. Some men drive
away their customers, by churlish speeches; but Christ does beseech us to buy
his commodity, 2 Cor. 5. 20. Some again loose their custom, for want of
fidelity, they are apt to cheat, and cozen such as rely upon them, and want
skill to discern the worth of the commodity; but Christ is faithful, if he
once pass his word, (that the commodity is good, and such as will serve thy
turn,) thou may safely rely upon him, for he is faithful, and will not
deceive thee; there was never any guile to be found in his mouth, he never
deceived any. Solomon cries out of the want of such chapmen, Pro. 20. 6. But a
faithful man* who can find? it is a rare thing to find such a man, that will
not deceive us: but see here a chapman indeed, in whom there is no guile,
nothing but fidelity, and truth it self; God is faithful, who will not
suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, 1 Cor. 10. 13. So faithful
is he that has called you to buy this precious commodity, and will not
deceive you, 1 These. 5. 24. He is such an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no
guile, Ioh. 1. 47. Neither is there any guile to be found in his mouth, 1 Pet.
2. 22. Let this also persuade us to bargain with Christ.

Thirdly, 3. Reason. Rich and wealthy, and therefore has great choice
Christ is a very rich Chapman, and full of wealth, so that he has great
choice for his customers; He has a shop so furnished, that we can desire, or
want nothing, but he is well furnished with it; He is full of grace and truth,
Joh. 1. 14. Yea, it has pleased the Father, that in him all fullness should
dwell, Col. 1. 19. Yea, in him dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily,
Col. 2. 9. there is a fullness of all kind of commodities that we can stand in
need of; fullness of wisdom, and knowledge, fullness of faith, and love, etc.
in a word, all fullness dwells in him, does constantly abide in him for ever;
here is a shop stored with precious commodities of all sorts whatsoever: Oh the
unsearchable riches of Christ! Ephesians. 3. 8. Let this also persuade us, that if
we want true saving grace, in whole, or in part, to go to Christ for it, and
buy it of him; If any lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, Jam. 1. 5. So if
any want true saving grace, let him buy it of Christ, that is excellently
furnished, abundantly to supply our wants, for all the treasures of wisdom,
and knowledge, and all other saving graces of Gods Spirit, are laid up in him.

Fourthly, 4. Reason. Because he has no respect of persons, but regards the
poor more then the rich.
If any want true saving grace, let him buy it of Christ, because he is no
respecter of persons, he regards not the rich more then the poor. Worldly
chapmen, that have great dealings in the world, they show most respect unto
those, that are great ones, Lords, and Ladies, etc. a poor man is forced many
times to stay long, before he can be served, (neither do I simply condemn
this among men) but it is not so with Christ, Acts 10. 35. Of a truth, I
perceive that there is no respect of persons with God, but in every Nation, he
that fears God and works righteousness, is accepted with him. Yea, he
regards not the rich, more then the poor, Job 34. 19. Wealth and riches are
of no validity in this respect; nay, which is most strange, he regards the
poor, more then the rich, in some cases; he makes choice especially of them,
Iam. 2. 5. He bargaineth rarely with such, as are great, and wealthy, 1 Cor. 1.
26. Not many noble, not many wise men after the flesh, are called; He passes
by the wise, and prudent, and great persons of the world, and bestows his
best commodities, on those, that in the worlds account, are very babes, Mat.
11. You would wonder to hear of such a man, that having his shop full of great
persons, and spying some poor man stand waiting at door, should neglect all
the great persons present, and speak to the poor man, and say, What would
thou have, o thou poor creature, I will dispatch and serve thee first of all:
yet, thus deals Christ, many times, with his poor customers, that have
nothing to pay, but only hunger and thrist after the commodity. See upon what
warrant I speak it; Luke 1. 53. He has filled the hungry with good things,
and the rich he has sent empty away. Who ever heard of such a Chapman, that
before he will bargain, will be sure he is poor to whom he sells his
commodity, and prefers him before those that are wealthy, and rich? Yea, he
will scarce so much as once look at the rest. See a strange place for this
purpose, Isa. 66. 2. But to this man will I look, even to him that is poor,
and of a contrite heart, etc. The poor humbled soul, that has neither money,
nor money worth, is, of all others, the most welcome to Christ; yea, such are
especially invited to him, Mat. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and
are heavy laden, and I will refresh you, says our blessed Savior. See what a
strange message our Savior sends in answer to John the Baptist, when he
sent his Disciples to know whether he was the Christ, that should come into the
world, or they should still look for another, ( Mat. 11. 4, 5.) Go, and tell
John, what things ye have heard and seen: The blind see, the lame walk,
etc. lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the
poor have the Gospel preached unto them. He came himself chiefly to preach
the glad Tidings of the Gospel to the poor; Isa. 61. 1. The Spirit of the
Lord God is upon me, therefore has the Lord anointed me, he has sent me to
preach good tidings unto the poor. He loves especially to part with his
commodities unto the poor; and therefore he is a rare Chapman, with whom there
is no respect of persons at all, unless it be in this, that he regards the
poor more then the rich: wherein he differs from all other chapmen in the
world, that are of a contrary practice and opinion.

Fifthly, 5. Reason. Free and kind, affoording good wares exceeding cheap.
He is a very free, and a most kind Chapman, to his poor customers, he
sells his commodity very cheap, if he see that the party be fit to receive
it, and stand in great need of it; he never breaks with him for price; yea,
he is resolved, rather he shall have it without money, and without price. Men
usually deal otherwise; if they see that a man's necessity is great, that it
is such a commodity, which he cannot be without, nor attain unto otherwhere,
they will make him pay for his need; and if he want ready money, he shall pay
still the dearer: but so it is not with Christ, the more he sees that a man
stands in need of grace, and is sensible of his want that way, the cheaper
he sells his commodity, to such a person: nay, he will rather give it him
freely, then send him away empty; Isa. 55. 1. Hoe, every one that thirsts,
come ye to the waters; and he that has no money, come, etc. without money,
and without price. So, Revel. 22. 17. Whosoever will, let him take of the Well
of the water of life freely. You would all think him a mavelous kind man,
that should deal thus with a poor Customer; Here is your commodity, I assure
you upon my credit, it will serve your turn, but have you any money to pay for
it? No. Have you any pawn, or money worth? No. Will any sufficient man, pass
his word for you? No. I have no such credit in the world. What then, will you
work it out? No sure, I have no hands to work, until I have this commodity,
I can do nothing, Ioh. 15. 5. Without me, ye can do nothing, says our
Savior. All this is very hard, What, will you pay me, if I will take your own
word to this purpose? No surely, I dare not promise that, I am scarce ever
likely to pay you, if you do trust me. Well then, if there be no remedy, take
it for God have mercy, even take it freely for nothing: He will either trust
him, or give it him freely without price, rather then send such a poor soul
empty away. Thus you see another strong reason to persuade us to bargain with
Christ, he sells cheap, yea, he gives freely to the poor soul, that is
sensible of his want of the commodity. Indeed, if he meet with a rich chapman,
that comes rather to cheapen, (for fashion sake, then buy for necessity,) he
then sets such a price upon his wares, that he is sure cannot be reached by
such a barterer. See an experiment of this, in the young man that came to our
Savior, and would needs know the price of his commodity, Mat. 19. 16. Good
Master, what good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life? Come Sir, I
like your commodity, What is your price? What? I see, you would be doing; come
I will set you a task, I perceive you are full of money; you will be buying;
well, I will set you a price; Keep the Commandments, Ver. 17. see Ver. 20. I
have observed these things from my youth, what lack I yet? Here was a man full
of money, he will pay down all upon the nail, before he stir his foot.
Sir, if this be your price, here is your money: or at least, the most of it;
what must I pay more? then see what a rate he sets him, Ver. 21. If thou will be perfect, go, and sell that thou have, and give to the poor; and thou
shall have treasure in heaven, and follow me. Here was a great price indeed, he
thought it would utterly undo him, and so he went away (grieved) without his
commodity. But otherwise, his rates are very easy, to such as have an earnest
desire to bargain.

CHAP. VIII.
Containing the first Use of the point.

1. NOw for the use of the point: Use 1. Instruction
To teach us how to bargain with Christ.
Reprehension; thirdly, Consolation; fourthly, Exhortion and Direction: of
these in order.

If all that would have true saving grace, All that would bargain with Christ,
must be
must buy it of Christ; This should persuade us, to labor to know how we may
bargain with Christ, for this precious commodity; and to consider, how a man
must be qualified and fitted for this purpose; that we may make this golden
purchase, of true saving grace. There is no buying of any precious commodity,
without knowledge of the price, and sundry other particulars, that necessarily
conduce to the making up of the bargain. Attend therefore (I pray you) whilst
I show you the price of this treasure, and inform you, how they must be
qualified, that would make this golden purchase of true saving grace. This I
will endeavor to manifest in sundry particulars.

First, 1 Direction sensible of their want of true grace, and poor in spirit.
If we would bargain with Christ, we must labor to be sensible of our want of
true grace, we must see our necessity in this kind, we must be sensible of
our spiritual poverty. He will be no good chapman, that feels not the want
of his commodity, before he go to buy. A man will never come to the price of
a rich treasure, that finds not the want of it. When a man comes thus
resolved to the market, I must have food, or else perish with hunger; I must
have apparel, or starve, for want of covering; such a man will bid like a
chapman, he will sell all that he has, before he return empty away. Blessed
are the poor in spirit (says our Savior) for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven, Mat. 5. 3. We are all poor by nature, but we are not sensible of our
poverty: we have a conceit, we are rich, and full of wealth, and are not so
poor and miserable, as we are indeed. Here was the folly of this Church of
Laodicea, Ver. 17. of this Chapter: Thou say, I am rich, and increased with
goods, and have need of nothing; and know not, that thou art wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked: she was poor, and miserable, but
she perceived it not, she was not sensible of it, and this kept her from buying
of Christ: therefore says our Savior, I counsel thee to buy of me, gold, to
enrich thee; for indeed thou art miserably poor, although thou perceive it
not* thou art blind, as well as poor, and not sensible of thy poverty. A man
is not fit for Christ, until he be sensible of the want of him. Thus, Romans 7.
24. Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death?
Ver. 25 Thanks be to God, through Jesus Christ. We must know, out of our
experience, what it is to be a sinner, before we be fit for a Savior. It is
an excellent speech of our Savior, to this purpose, Mat. 9. 13. I came not to
call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. Why? Are we not all sinners? Yes
sure, but all are not truly sensible of sin; all do not groan under the
weight and burden of it: by sinners, in this place, our Savior means,
humbled, distressed, grieved, perplexed sinners; for such alone he knew were
fit to accept of a Savior; such as are weary, and heavy laden, Mat. 11. 28.
Such an one was David, Psalm. 38. 3. Mine iniquities are gone over mine head, as
a weighty burden, they are too heavy for me. Here was a sinner, sc. an
humbled sinner, such an one, as was fitted for mercy. I came to seek, and to
save that which was lost, says our blessed Savior, in Luke 19. 10.

Now all are indeed lost, both in Adam* and in themselves; but all are not
sensible of the danger of a lost estate: but by lost persons, our Savior
means such as are lost in their own apprehensions: such an one was the poor
Publican, Luke 18. 14. He stood a far off, as not worthy to come near the
place of Gods special presence: he durst not so much as look up to heaven,
against which he had sinned, but smote upon his breast, and cried out, saying,
O God be merciful to me a sinner: As if he had said, O Lord, I am a sinner, a
very lump of sin, a fardle, or bundle of corruption, if God be not merciful
unto me, I shall perish for ever. Here was just such a sinner as our Savior
there speaks of: one qualified, and fitted for mercy. Just such another was
the Prodigal, what sends him to the market of his fathers house, but the
sight and sense of his poverty, and extreme necessity, Luke 15. 16. How many
hired servants in my fathers house, have bread enough, and to spare, and I
perish with hunger? Hereupon he resolves, Ver. 17. I will arise, and go to
the market, I will go to my father, and say unto him, etc. A poor man that
wants bread for his family, and for himself, will go to the market in any
case, though the days be short, the ways foul, and the weather stormy, and
tempestuous; for, says he, better be wet to the skin, then perish for want
of bread: yea, and such a man will have bread, if it cost him all that he has
in his purse, and can borrow: so in this case, he is fit to bargain with
Christ, that is sensible of his extreme need of Christ, and his graces, and
is ready to cry out with the Prophet in another case, Isa. 6. 5. Woe is me, I
am undone, if I have it not. Blessed are they that are thus poor in spirit,
for they are fit chapmen for Christ, and shall never be sent empty away.

Secondly, 2. Direction See the worth of true grace.
All that would bargain with Christ, and make this golden purchase of true
saving grace, must labor to see the worth, and excellency of true saving
grace, as well as their own want of it. He is fit to buy grace, that prizeth
it highly, and prefers it, in his esteem, before all the world. Oh the
worth, and excellency of true saving grace, one dram whereof is more
precious, then all the whole world besides! Do but observe how the holy Ghost
describes it, Isa. 55. 1, 2. It is bread, wine, milk, fatness for the soul,
it is that which will satisfy, and give full content to the soul of man. If a
man had the whole world besides, yet he might, nay, he must needs perish
without this. On the contrary, this will bring a man to heaven, if he were as
poor as Lazarus. Now he is a fit Chapman for Christ, that sees the worth, and
excellency of this precious commodity. This our Savior shows, Mat. 13. 44.
The kingdom of heaven, that is, Christ, and the graces of his Spirit, are very
fitly compared to a treasure hid in the field, which when a man has found, sc.
and sees and perceives it to be a treasure, is sensible of the worth of it,
then immediately he hides it, and casts about with himself, how he may buy
that field. Such a fit Chapman was Paul, after his eyes were enlightened; see
what a price he sets upon Christ, and the graces of his Spirit; Phil. 3. 7,
8. The things that were gain unto me, the same I accounted loss for Christ;
yea, doubtless, I do think all things but loss, for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I accounted all things loss, and
do judge them to be dung, that I might win Christ. All worldly vanities are
loss, and dross, and dung to the soul, that is rightly fitted for Christ.

Thirdly, 3. Direction An earnest desire, or an hunger and thirst after it.
An earnest and eager desire to enjoy this preci^us commodity, which is
compared unto hunger, and thirst in the Scripture. This cannot but follow upon
the two former. This is also so necessary, that there is no bargain without
it. Mat. 5. 6. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness,
for they shall be satisfied. The Lord Jesus ever satisfies the hungry soul
with goodness, says the Psalmist. See how directly this is required, and how
earnestly it is pressed: see it in, Isa. 55. 1. Hoe, every one that thirsts,
come ye to the water: so, Revel. 22. 17. Let him that is a thirst, come. And
that speech of our Savior, Ioh. 7. 37. If any man thirst, let him come unto
me, and drink. You see, that only the thirsty souls are invited to Christ:
a man without this spiritual thirst after grace, is likely to be sent empty
away; it is hunger, and thirst then, that fitteth us for the graces of Christ,
Luke 1. 53. He has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he has
sent empty away: such only are likely to prize it, such only will be
thankful for it, such only are likely to make a right use of it, such only
will take pains to procure, and be at great cost to obtain it; and therefore,
they that would bargain with Christ for true saving grace, must hunger and
thirst after it: yea, such an one will be earnest in prayer to God for it, he
will pray with fervencie, and therefore is sure to speed in his request; Pro.
2. 2. 3. If thou cryest after knowledge, and lif^est up thy voice after
understanding; if thou seek for her, as for silver; and searchest for her,
as for hid treasure: then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and
find the knowledge of God.

Fourthly, 4. Direction Diligence in frequenting the place of sale.
Diligence and constancy in frequenting the place of sale; this also must
needs follow upon the three former directions. For, he that is, first, sensible
of the want of grace; secondly, knows the right worth of grace; thirdly, and
hungreth and thirsts after it, cannot but in the fourth place, with all
possible diligence, and readiness, frequent the place of sale.

Buying, presupposes going to the market. He that would have true saving
grace, must diligently, and constantly frequent Gods house, and Ordinances. He
is worthy to go without his commodity, that will not frequent the place of
sale. A wise man will watch for an opportunity to procure that commodity,
that will serve his turn; he will come one market day after another, until he
be furnished: and he is a blessed man that does thus, and that in the
judgment, and opinion of wisdom her self: observe it, Pro. 8. 33. Blessed
is the man that hears me, watching daily at my gates, and giving attendance
at the posts of my doors. Happy is that man that daily frequents Wisdoms
markets, and diligently attends in Gods house and Ordinances. Thus was Paul's
direction to the Elders of Ephesus, he sends them still to the market, Acts
20. 32. And now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the Word of his grace,
which is able to build you up farther, etc. Here is the means both to get, and
increase grace. This made Gods Saints love Gods house and Ordinances so
exceeding dearly. Let me instance in David, David's love to Gods house and
Ordinances.
in stead of all the rest: oh his admirable love to Gods house and Ordi^ances!
Psalm. 26. 8. Lord, I have loved the habitation of thine house, and the place
where thine honor dwells: he was a constant frequenter of this spiritual
market: yea, see how he manifested his wonderful affection that way, he was
even sick when he was kept from the market. Give me leave to inform you of
one singular passage of his, to this purpose, Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I
desired of the Lord, and that I will require, and seek after, (but one thing
David? surely then, that is a matter of some special importance. It may be
another kingdom, or such another crown, as that which was taken from the King
of Rabbah? No surely, it was no such matter; but only this, sc. liberty to
enjoy the benefit of Gods house, and Ordinances, he desired only to keep the
market) sc. That I may dwell in the house of the Lord, all the days of my
life, and enquire in his Temple. As if he had said, Lord, what a do is here in
the world with many, one would be rich, and another would be honorable, this
man is for pleasure, and that for profit: well, let them take all, so that I
may enjoy the liberty of Gods house and Ordinances, the means of grace, the
pledges of Gods favor; let me have but this one thing alone, and let them take
all the rest. This is David's one thing. And no marvel, if he was thus earnest
in this case; for David's one thing, is the one thing needful, and that in the
judgment and opinion of our blessed Savior, Luke 10. 42. One Thing is
needful, Mary has chosen the good part, which shall not be taken from her.
And surely there is good reason for this; here is the place of Gods special
presence, this is (as it were) the shop of Christ, here he walks, and talks
with his customers, and here he sells his precious commodities; Revel. 2. 1.
we there find him walking in the midst of the golden Candlestickes; still
present in the Church assemblies; yea, there he has promised to be present, in
a most special manner, Mat. 18. 20. Wheresoever two or three are gathered
together in my Name, there am I, even in the midst amongst them: there he
stands looking for customers, and calling in such as are ready to pass his
shop, and never so much as once thinking to cheapen his commodity, until they
hear him cry, What do ye lack, O ye poor souls? Why will ye not come
unto me, that ye might have grace here, and glory hereafter? See how he
proclaims open market, and describes his commodities, Isa. 55. 1. Hoe, every
one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, buy wine, and milk without money: I
will sell the best ware, very cheap; yea, if thou be a poor needy soul, and
have no money, I will either trust thee, and take thy word, or give it freely
without price: yea, see how he chideth them, for not frequenting his shop, Ioh.
5. 40. But ye will not come unto me, that ye might have life. Why do you lay
out your money, for that which is not bread, and spend your labor, for that
which satisfies not? Isa. 55. 2. Why do ye go where you are cheated, and
cozened, with dross, in stead of gold; and will not come at me, where you
shall be faithfully, and kindly dealt withal? And therefore again he inviteth
them, Ver. 3. Incline your ear, and come unto me; hear, and your soul shall
live. They that neglect the market, are likely to starve, and perish for want
of grace, and glory: Salvation is far from the wicked, for they regard not
thy Statutes, says David, Psalm. 119. 155. He that despises Gods Ordinances,
is far from salvation. This is the fourth thing requisite for the making of
this bargain with Christ, sc. Diligence, and constancy in frequenting the
house of sale.

Fifthly, 5. Direction Pay the full price.
He that would bargain with Christ, must pay the price of it, to the worth of
the commodity, though it cost him all that he has. Now we come to the very
price of the Jewel. A natural man will think it too much, but the truth is,
it is an excellent peni-worth; for he must part with nothing, but what he has
of his own, and what he may well spare; He goes, and sells all that he
has, and buyeth that field, says our Savior, Mat. 13. 44. Let no man think
it dear, because he must sell all that he has, before he can buy it of
Christ; for, alas! what does our Savior mean by, All that he has? but that
which he has of his own; not his wealth, nor his wit, nor his life, (save
only in some cases,) but all that he has, that is, all his sins, all his
lusts, all his earthly members, his corrupt and vicious affections, his actual
transgressions: these he must needs sell, these he may well spare, nay, these
will be his utter ruin, if he sell them not. See how the Lord expounds it
himself, Ezech. 18. 31. Cast away from you all your transgressions, and make
you a new heart, and a new soul. Why will ye die, O house of Israel? We must
not stand dodging with Christ, but part with our sins freely, and we shall
have a most blessed, and happy exchange.

Sixthly, 6 Direction Prepare a fit vessel to put it in.
To the making of this bargain, there is another thing necessary, and that is,
That we must prepare a vessel to put it in. When a man has bought his
commodity, and paid the price of it, then he looks for his wallet, or
basket, or something to carry it home in: so that all that come to this
spiritual market, to bargain with Christ, for this jewel of true saving
grace, they must bring hearts empty, and ready to receive it. Open thy mouth
wide, and I will fill it, says the Text, Psalm. 81. 10. Come hither, says God,
let me see thy heart, open the mouth of thy heart, that it may be fit to
receive, and carry away this precious commodity. See the practice of Gods
people for this, this was David's practice, Psalm. 119. 11. I have hid thy Word
in my heart, that I might not sin against thee. So the Baereans, They
received the Word with all readiness of mind, Acts 17. 11. This was Lydia's
practice, God opened the heart of Lydia, that she attended to those things
that were spoken by Paul, Acts 16. 14. This was a piece of Maryes good
housewifery, Luke 2. 51. She kept these sayings, and pondered them in her
heart. When we come to Gods Ordinances, we must have a special care to prepare
our hearts to that purpose, that we may be able to say with David, Psalm. 108.
1. O God my heart is prepared, or, my heart is ready. My son, give me thine
heart, says Solomon, Pro. 23. 26. Yea, see how expressly the Lord required it
of old, Deuteronomy. 32. 46. Set your hearts unto all the words that I command you
this day, (i. e.) here is saving grace offered to thee in this Ordinance, let
me see thine heart, what have thou else to put it in? trust not thy memory
alone with it, but hide it, with David, in the midst of thy heart.

Seventhly, 7. Direction A care to keep it from loosing.
There must be a special care, to keep it from loosing, when we have it. If a
man go to market, on purpose to buy some precious jewel, which costeth him
all that he has, he is undone if he loose it by the way; Heb. 4. 1. Take heed
of loosing the grace of God, let it not run out, as the word imports; Prove
all things, and keep that which is good, says the Apostle, 1 These. 5. 21.
Blessed are they that hear the Word of God, and keep it. It is not the
hearing of Gods Word, but the keeping of it, that is the way to true
happiness. If a man buy never so good a peny-worth, if he loose it by the way,
it will never enrich him. Therefore after we have bought the commodity, there
must be a care to keep it; let us knit up the mouth of our vessel, by prayer,
and meditation, that we loose not our treasure.

Eighthly and lastly, 8. Direction
A care to make a right use of it, both in regard of our selves, and others.
This last direction, 2. Branches.
divides it self into two branches.

First, He that has bought true saving Make use of it for our selves, and
must labor to make use of it for his own particular. Commodities are bought
to be used; clothes to be worn; meat to be eaten, etc. so when we go to the
market of Gods Ordinances, to get grace, we must have a care to practice what
we know, Jam. 1. 22. Be ye doers of the Word, and not hearers only, deceiving
your selves. He that contenteth himself with bare hearing, leaves his markets
undone, or, at least has lost his commodity. If ye know these things, happy
are ye if ye do them, says our Savior, Ioh. 13. 17. See the use that David
would make of this precious commodity, Psalm. 119. 11. I have hid thy Word in
mine heart, that I might not sin against thee. To make grace an Antidote or
preservative against sin, is the right use of it indeed. Labor not for the
meat that perishes, but for the meat that endures, says our Savior, Joh. 6.
27. What should we do with meat but eat it? The best meat in the world, will
never nourish, unless it be eaten: and therefore says the Prophet, Come, buy
and eat, and let your soul delight it self in fatness. Eating, and
digesting, is the end of buying food; and practice, the end of hearing. The
want of this, was the fault of Ezechiel's hearers: they came to the market, and
seemed to buy good provision; but they wanted good stomachs to digest it; They
hear thy words, but they will not do them; their stomachs were cloyed
before, they had gotten a surfeit of covetousness, Ezech. 33. 31.

Secondly, Branch 2. Dispose of it for the good of others.
A care to make a right use of it, in regard of others. Men do not buy
commodities for their own use only, but also for their families, and
neighbors: the master of a family, buyeth provision not only for himself,
but for his wife, and children, and servants; yea, if he be a kind man
indeed, he will invite his neighbors, and make them partakers of his good
provision. Unto him that has (this care to employ it) shall be given, and he
shall have abundance, Mat. 25. 29. But he that lays it up in a napkin, and
makes no use of it, neither for himself, nor the good of others, shall have
it taken from him at last; and himself be punished, for want of making a right
use of it, ver. 30. But every good man is of a quite contrary disposition:
observe it in, Psalm. 37. 30, 31. The mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom,
and his tongue will be talking of judgment. Whence comes this? The Law of God
is in his heart, and none of his steps slide. He that has the law of grace
settled in his own heart, will not only take heed to his own ways, but will
labor also, to be an instrument of benefit, and good to others. See an
experiment of this, in two famous examples for this purpose. 1. That of David,
Psalm. 51. 13. Then shall I teach thy ways to the wicked, and sinners shall be
converted unto thee. So see what the Lord says of Abraham, Genesis 18. 19. I know
Abraham, that he will command his children, and servants, to keep the way of
the Lord. He will not only walk holily before God himself, but also will do
his best endeavor, to reform his family, and put away iniquity from his
tabernacles. See the practice of this, in that Samaritan Convert, Ioh. 4. 20.
when our Savior had dealt effectually with her; see what a care she had to
impart this precious commodity, for the use and benefit of others, she ran
into the City, and said to the men of that place, Come, see a Man, that has
told me all that ever I did: Is not he the Christ? She uses the best, and the
most effectual argument that she could possibly think of, to bring them to
Christ. She reports him to be a Man that could tell wonders; that she might
persuade them to come unto Christ, and be wrought upon, as well as her self.
Here is the right use of grace received, to employ it, not only for our own
use, but also for the benefit, and profit, and comfort of others.

CHAP. IX.
Containing the second Use of the point, sc. for Reprehension.

SEcondly, Use 2.
This serves in the second place, for Reprehension of diverse sorts of
Chapmen, that come justly to be reproved in this regard.

First, All popish, and profane persons amongst us, 1. Sort. Such as do
despite the place of sale, or come not to the market.
that utterly reject Gods Ordinances, and despise, and contemn the Word
faithfully preached, etc. these are such as come not to the market, they
frequent not the place of sale, but either totally, or for the most part,
absent themselves: Ye will not come unto me, that ye might have life: You
might have grace, and spiritual life for your souls, if you would but come,
and fetch it, Ioh. 5. 40. But your destruction is upon your selves, your blood
will be required at your own hands, you have even pined and starved your
souls, by your gross neglect of the market, where you might have had
provision, and food for your precious souls; which are now, like to perish for
want of food, Hoe, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, etc. Isa.
55. 1. This is an evident sign, that they neither know the worth of grace, nor
find the want of grace in themselves, but like the Church here, think they are
rich, and filled with goods, and stand in need of nothing, and know not, that
they are wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked: woe be to
these rich, and full souls, for they are like to be sent empty away, if they
do come; and sure to perish for ever, if they do not come. Oh that all such
would lay to heart those terrifying Texts of our Savior, Ioh. 8. 47. He that
is of God, hears Gods Word: ye therefore hear them not; because ye are not
of God. It is a fearful sign of reprobation, obstinately to refuse the
hearing of Gods Word faithfully preached. Oh that all popish, and profane
persons would consider this: it is a fearful sign they are none of Gods. The
other heartshaking place to this purpose, is that of our Savior, Ioh. 16. 26.
My sheep hear my voice, and follow me, and I give unto them eternal life.
This is the very eare-marke of a sheep of Christ, that he hears Gods Word,
and Christ's voice. It must needs therefore be the Character of a Goat, to
refuse, and reject it: there is no medium between sheep, and goats, Mat. 25.
31. and see the condition of the goats, that stand on the left hand of Christ,
at the last day; hear thy woeful doom, (if thou be of that number) Ver. 41.
Go ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil, and his Angels.
Oh consider this, ye that forget God, and refuse to hear his voice, least one
day He tear you in pieces, when there is none to deliver you, Psalm. 50. 22.

Secondly, 2. Sort. Such as mispend their i am there.
Some come indeed to the market, but it is only to look about them, or
confer with their acquaintance, and so spend their time, in walking here, and
complementing there, and never once cheapen the commodity, that is there to be
sold: these are negligent, and careless hearers. I have observed how strangely
men spend their time in the Church assemblies; some walking, and whispering;
some jeering, and laughing; some sleeping; some reading upon a book, while the
Minister is either praying, or preaching: do such men spend their time well at
market? for shame sleep not at market: surely you may come to have your purse
picked, Sleeping at market, dangerous.
while you are asleep: certainly, the devil does even watch for such an
opportunity; while you sleep, the devil steals away your markets, and
sows tares in stead of the pure grain of true grace, which you might have
had sown in your hearts, if you had watchfully and carefully attended. Take
heed, and beware of careless hearing: remember the Baereans practice, in this
case, for you imitation* Acts 17. 11. They received the Word, with all
readiness of mind; they came, not only to the place of sale, but were very
busy in cheapening the commodity, which they meant to buy: woe be to all
careless hearers, that come to gaze, or talk, or sleep at Church, and so
come to market, not to buy, but to look about them.

Thirdly, Some come, and seem to hearken, 3. Sort. Some ask the price only,
but b^d nothing.
but receive nothing, all runs besides: these cheapen the commodity, but
bid nothing: these are never likely to bargain with Christ; they only would
know the price of grace, and what it would cost to become religious; but they
mean not to practice any thing. These were Ezechiel's Chapmen, Ezech. 33. 31.
They came, and heard; they came to the market, and they asked the price, for
they seemed to be very serious in hearing; but they would bid nothing; they
would hear all, but do nothing, but do rather reject a good bargain, when it
is offered, and thrust it from them. Oh the woeful estate of these persons,
that do cast the Commandments of God behind their backs, and come with a
resolution only to hear and know, but do nothing. Be ye doers of the Word,
and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves, Jam. 1. 22. He does utterly
deceive himself, that thinks bare hearing will serve the turn, to bring him
to heaven: it is not cheapening, but buying, and paying down, that procures
this commodity. See the woeful estate of all such, set out in that Text of the
Apostle, Acts 13. 48. It was necessary that the Word of God, should be first
preached unto you; but seeing that ye thrust it from you, and judge your
selves unworthy of everlasting life; behold, we turn to the Gentiles: they
judge themselves unworthy of such a precious jewel, that carelessly thrust it
from them, and bid nothing for it. Here is the third sort.

Fourthly, 4. Sort. Some bid fairly, but not the full price.
Some go a little, and not only cheapen the commodity, but also bid fairly
for it, but will not come to the price; they would have it under the worth, or
not at all. These are such as are content to part with some sins, and do
many things, but will not be universal in their obedience. Now you know the
price is, All that we have, Mat. 13. 44. He that will not part with every lust,
and readily abandon every base corruption, is not fit to be a Chapman for
Christ; he is but an Higler, or a dodging companion, that will have a thing
quite under the worth, and at his own rate, or else he will none of it; he
cannot abide, to fell all that he has. Such an one was Herod, Mark. 6. 20. He
reverenced his person, and ministry, and heard him gladly, and did many
things, but would not forgo his incest. Such was Iehu, zealous in many things,
but would not forgo his Idolatry; he was loath to come off with the whole
price. See how the Spirit of God reports it, 2 King. 10. 31. But Iehu took no
heed to walk in the Law of the Lord, with all his heart; for he departed not
from the sins of Jeroboam: This he kept as a sweet morsel in his mouth, and
would not forsake it. But a good Chapman is ready to give the whole price,
will sell all that he has, that he may buy that field. This was the Apostles
practice, Acts 24. 16. Herein do I exercise my self, to have always a
conscience void of offense, toward God, and toward men. So, Heb. 13. 18.
Pray for us, for we trust we have a good conscience, desiring in all things to
live honestly. Such a Chapman was holy David, Psalm. 119. 6. Then shall I not be
confounded, when I have respect unto all thy Commandments: here is the full
price. But when a man is content to part with some sins, but not with other;
seems to make conscience of some duties, but is utterly careless in regard
of others; he does but scotch with God, he is but a dodging companion, he is
not a fit Chapman for Christ, unless he will sell all that he has, and buy
that field. Here is the fourth sort of bad Chapmen. They bid fair, but when
they come to stake down, they will have something abated of the full price, or
else no bargain: and so these go away empty.

Fifthly, Some bid fair, 5. Sort. Some promise the full price, but do after
revoke it.
and are ready to promise the full price, but when they come to pay, they
revoke the bargain, and go back with their word, and will not stand to their
promise: these are Apostata's, that do seem to be wrought upon, but fall off
again at last, and renounce the bargain: so these Chapmen fall off, for want
of constancy, these, notwithstanding all their vows, and promises, return,
like the dog to his vomit, and the sow, that was washed, to her wallowing in
the mire, 2 Pet. 2. 22. So these return to folly, Psalm. 85. 9. Oh the woeful
estate of these persons, unless they repent, and do their first works, they
are never likely to bargain with Christ, but fall off from God, by
inconstancy, and fickleness; and so, The later end of these men, was worse
then the beginning: And they had better never to have known the way of
righteousness, then thus shamefully to depart from the holy Commandment: they
were better never to have bidden one penny, then promise the whole price, but
immediately revoke it.

Sixthly, 6. Sort. Some want hearts to receive it.
Some want an heart to receive the Word; their hearts are either left a^ home,
or filled with other trash, that there is no room to receive grace: these
leave their commodity at market, for want of a vessel to put it in: their
hearts are gone after their covetousness, or rent in pieces with the thoughts,
and cares of this life, and so they go home again, utterly unfurnished of
this precious commodity; either for want of a vessel, or at least, room to
receive it, forgetting David's practice, I have hid thy Word in my heart; or
the Lords own admonition, Set your hearts to all these words* Deuteronomy. 32. 46.
These are another sort of bad Chapmen, that leave their commodities at market
for want of carriage; contrary to the Lords express command, to this purpose,
Deuteronomy. 6. 6. These words which I command thee, shall be in thy heart, etc.

Seventhly, 7. Sort. Loose their commodity.
Some are forgetful, and lose hearers, that seem to bid fair, and to receive
the commodity, but loose all, before they get home. These loose all their
labor, as well as the rest. These forget to tie up the mouth of their hearts,
by some holy prayer to God; and so loose by the way, as they return home*
contrary to that advise of the holy Ghost, Heb. 4. 1. Let us fear, least at
any time, a promise being made unto us, of entering into rest, any of you should
seem to come short, or suffer it to run out, as the word signifies. A
commodity is bought to no purpose, if there be not a care to preserve, and
keep it from loosing, when we have it. 1 These. 5. 21. Prove all things, and
keep that which is good; 1. keep it in memory, labor, not to forget it: 2.
Keep it in affection, love, and embrace it. 3. Keep it in practice, with all
speed, and diligence set about the performance of it. But contrary hereunto is
the practice of many, who seem to hear with some good affection, for the
present, but immediately their hearts are cool, and they are straight of
another temper, and the complaint of these men is only of their memory, they
have the worst memories that ever had any, but when the matter comes to be
thoroughly sifted, the fault is in their affections, and not in their memory;
like a man that having lost his markets by the way, or left them behind him,
complains of his wallet, or basket, that had an hole in it: whereas the truth
is, it was his carelessness, and not his forgetfulness; because when the
wallet comes to be viewed, and made use of for other things, it holds well
enough: so men's memories retain other vanities strongly enough, only they
forget that which should do them good in regard of their souls: these
unjustly lay the blame upon their memories, whereas the fault indeed is in
their hearts, and affections. Here is another sort of bad Chapmen, such as
loose their commodities.

Eighthly, 8. Sort. Some are robbed of their commodity, as they return home.
There is yet another sort, that are justly to be reproved, though they seem
not to be in so great fault, as the former; and they are such as are robbed of
their commodities, as they return home. These are such as seem very honest
hearers, and do many things, yea, seem to take much delight in approaching to
God; but in time of temptation, they fall away, they are quite dried up, with
the scorching heat of persecution; they are set upon by the way, and the
devil takes away that seed of grace, that was sown in their hearts, and so
at last, they return home, not only empty of grace, but wounded with sin.
Our Savior seems to set out such market-folke, Mat. 13. 32. When tribulation
or persecution arises, because of the Word, then by and by, they are offended,
and so come home wounded with Satan's assaults. Me thinks such as are driven
off by the heat of persecution, are just like unto such Chapmen, as go to the
market on foot, in a hot summers day, and put their markets in their bosoms,
but being set upon by the heat of the Sun, they unbutton their doublets to
get air, and so loose their commodities; so many set upon good duties, in
their own strength, and so at last are driven off from the service of Christ,
by the heat of persecution. Here is the eighth sort.

Ninthly, 9. Sort. Some are quarrelling Chapmen, that fall out with the party
that felleth it.
Another sort are quarrelling Chapmen, that will have the commodity at their
own price, or else they will fall out with the party that sells it, and
sets the price too dear (as they think:) These are such hearers, as cannot
abide to part with their sins, and yet hope to go to heaven, as soon as the
best: they make account, they can serve God, and sin too; God, and Mammon
too; God, and the devil too; God, and their bellies too; and therefore when a
Minister tells such corrupt persons, they must sell all that they have, they
are ready to fall out, and fight with him; They bless themselves in their
own hearts, and say; I shall have peace, though I walk after the
stubbornness of mine own heart; I hope to go to heaven without half this
ado: these are quarrelling Chapmen. Such an one was Herod, he puts John in
prison, because John would not bate him an ace, not a penny in the matter of
Herodias, Mark. 6. It is not lawful for thee to have her, says John. No,
says Herod: If I may not have my brother Philips wife, thou shall not have thy
liberty: here was a quarrelling Auditor. There are too many such as these in
the world, at this present. If a Man of God, be faithful to Christ, and tell
them, they must part with their lusts, or else have no part in Christ, nor
interest in heaven, though he prove it never so substantially, yet they will
hate him, and spite him for this, because he sets too high a rate upon this
precious commodity of true saving grace. Just such a Chapman was Ahab, see how
he quarrelleth with Elijah, and with Michajah: observe it, how he greets that
faithful Prophet Elijah, 1 King. 21. 20. Have thou found Me, O mine enemy!
Why? what was the matter? he knew, he was ready to chide him for taking away
Naboth's Vineyard, he ever looked when he should hear him say, Thou have sold
thy self to work evil in the sight of the Lord, and have shed the innocent
blood of honest Naboth. So what was his quarrel to Michajah? 1 King. 22. 8.
There is one Prophet more, but I hate him, because he never prophesies good of
me, but evil: He sells his Sermons too dear, I cannot abide him, if he do
not comply with the rest, send him to prison, and feed him with the bread of
affliction, until Ahab return. Here is unjust dealing, when men will have a
commodity at their own rates, or else quarrel with him that sells it.

Tenthly and lastly, 10. (...)
There is another sort, that do utterly cry down the market. What need so
much Preaching, and such running after Sermons? there was never good world,
since so much preaching came up, etc. These do even cry down the market, and
will neither go to Gods Ordinances themselves, nor suffer others to frequent
them. These are absolutely the worst of all that I have yet mentioned. They are
enemies to Gods people, because they follow the thing that is good: Oh that
such would consider the folly, and absurdity of their opinion, and practice,
and withal, the great danger that they are in, while they so continue. Let
them seriously consider of these two places of Scripture; the one is, Phil. 1.
28. And in nothing be terrified by your adversaries, which is to them, a token
of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God. All that oppose Gods
people, for frequenting Gods Ordinances, and the spiritual market of Christ,
are sons of perdition, (like the great Antichrist their Father) and the very
tokens of perdition, are even stamped upon them. The other place, for this
purpose, is that of the Apostle, Acts 13. 10. See what Paul that Man of God
says there to that limme of Satan, Elymas the sorcerer, that sought to turn
away the Deputy from the faith, and endeavored, either to cry down the
market, or at least to keep away the Deputy. Oh thou full of all subtlety,
and mischief, thou child of the Devil, do thou seek to pervert the
straight ways of the Lord? etc. Wilt you neither go to the market thy self,
nor suffer others? O thou child of the Devil!

CHAP. X.
Containing the two last Uses of the point, sc. for Consolation; and also for
Exhortation, and Direction.

THirdly, Use 3. For comfort to such as carnestly desire true saving grace.
If all that would have true saving grace, must buy it of Christ; This serves
for the singular comfort, and consolation, of such as verily suppose themselves
destitute, and utterly void of true saving grace; but yet, do even heartily
long for it, and most eagerly hunger, and thirst after it; let all such know,
that true saving grace is at the dispose of Christ Jesus, he is the Chapman
that felleth it. It is Christ that felleth it, who is so rare a Chapman as you
have heard.
What greater comfort then this, to know that true grace, is at the dispose of
thy Savior? Indeed, if thou did stand in need of a thing, which was wholly
at Satan's dispose, thy case was terrible; but now for thy comfort, consider,
that as thou can not be saved without grace, so this true saving grace is at
the dispose of Christ Jesus, who is the most excellent Chapman that ever was
known, or heard of. Consider the reasons of the point: He is a Chapman of a
most sweet disposition; He is very well stored, with all kind of precious, and
heavenly treasures; and He is no respecter of persons; He thinks never a whit
the worse of thee, for thy poverty; nay, He esteems so much better of thee,
because thou art sensible of thy spiritual penury; and then, how freely does
He part with his commodities? How cheap does he sell, to such as are truly
humbled? He requires nothing of thee, but what thou may well spare; He will
give thee beauty, for ashes; robes, for rags; only sell all thy sins, and
part with thy lusts, (that otherwise would keep thee out of heaven) and assure
thy self then, He will never break with thee for price, though thou have
neither money, nor money-worth, yet he will bestow this excellent commodity
upon thee, and desires only to find thee empty, and hungry: do but hunger
and thirst after it, and it is thine own. And therefore all you that feel any
want of true saving grace, go to Christ for it; and assure your selves, you
cannot be so ready to desire it, as he is to bestow it; nor so forward to
ask, as he is to give, Mat. 7. 7. Ask, and ye shall have; seek, and you
shall find; knock, and it shall be opened. Nay, farther, he is so ready to
hear thee, that he will prevent thy request, and petitions. Isa. 65. 24. It
shall come to pass, that when they call, I will answer; and while they are
yet speaking, I will hear. Do thou see ( Luke 15.) how ready the old man
was to cloth the tattered Prodigal? God is so ready to help his children:
Christ is so ready to cloth and refresh his poor members. Yea, for thy
farther comfort, consider the fidelity of this Chapman; assure thy self, he
will not deceive thee, he cannot deny himself; thou may safely repose thy
confidence in him, for matter, and measure, and time; assure thy self, he will
deal kindly, and faithfully with thee; yea, he will never fail thee, nor
forsake thee. This for Comfort, and Consolation.

Fourthly and lastly, 4. Use. Exhortation and Direction to get grace for our
selves,
For Exhortation, and Direction. If any lack wisdom, let him ask it of God,
says the Apostle, Iam. 1. 5. so say I, If any lack true saving grace, let him
buy it of Christ; go to Christ for grace at the first, yea, and go to Christ
for a farther increase of true grace; see thy want of grace, labor to know the
worth of grace, hunger and thirst after it, frequent the Ordinances, etc. and
assure thy self, the God of all grace shall be with thee. But of this in the
first use. But that which I especially desire to press at this present, is to
exhort, and direct, such as desire grace, not only for themselves, but also
even for others; godly neighbors, that would have others religious, as well as
themselves; godly masters, and parents, that would put away iniquity from
their tabernacles; and desire to have saving grace wrought in the hearts of
their children, and servants. This was godly Iosuah's care, and pious
resolution, Josh. 24. 15. I, and my house, will serve the Lord.

Now for Direction to such as are thus graciously affected, and lovingly
disposed toward others, in general, I say. Let such consider, that they must
buy it of Christ, for themselves, and their families. What they should do for
themselves, I have already showed: and what they should do for their
families, And for others.
I will now endeavor to manifest. Thus then,

First, In the general, you must have a 1 Direction general. Bring them to
the market.
When some of your family want new things, you usually take them to the
market, that they may be fitted for the purpose. This is the general
Direction, bring them to the market, see that thy children, and servants do
constantly frequent the Church assemblies; Isa. 55. 1. Hoe, every one that
thirsts, come ye to the waters. Do thou thirst after the salvation of thy
wife, or children, or servants? O then bring them to the waters, pray earnestly
to God for them, but withal, bring them to the public Ordinance. It is the
safest buying things, (either for our selves, or our families) in the public
Market place. Bring thy children, and servants to Gods house, and Ordinances.
It is not enough, to be constantly there our selves, unless we bring our
children, and servants with us. See upon what proof I speak it, Deuteronomy. 31. 11,
12. When all Israel shall come to appear before the Lord thy God, in the place
which he shall choose; Thou shall read this Law before all Israel. Gather the
people together, men, women, and children, and the stranger that is within thy
gates, that they may hear, and learn to fear the Lord thy God, etc. So then
this is the first thing in the general; do not content thy self to come
alone to Gods Ordinances, but also bring thy children, and servants with thee:
for God will not say unto thee, in that case, as he did to Adam, Where art
thou? but as unto Cain, Genesis 4. Where is thy Brother? So, where is thy wife?
and where are thy children, and servants? What make they abroad about foolish
vanities, when they should be present here in the Church assemblies? When they
should be making markets for their souls? Command them to keep the way of the
Lord, as Abraham did, Genesis 18. 19. When thou come out of thine own house,
with a purpose to go to Gods house, say unto thy family, as, Isa. 2. 3. Come,
let us go up to the house of the Lord, and he will teach us of his ways, and
we will walk in his paths. This is sweet music in the ears of God
Almighty, when we thus stir up one another to love, and unto good works.
Thus in the general.

Secondly, 2. Direction In special, prepare them before hand.
Do thy best endeavor, to fit, and prepare them before they come to Gods
public Ordinances; labor to plow up the fallow ground of their hearts, Jer.
4. 3. When you have a purpose to take your children abroad to market, you cause
them to make preparation, and to put on fair clothes, and not to come abroad
in nastie, or filthy apparel. Do so in this case, help them to put on the
wedding garment of due preparation; have a care to pray with them, and for
them. Thus Paul, Romans 10. 1. My hearts desire, and prayer to God for Israel is,
that they might be saved. Do thy best, to prepare, and fit them: for,
according to the measure of our preparation, will be (for the most part) our
profit. Oh therefore take pains with them in private, by godly advise, and
counsel, catechize, and instruct them, teach them before they come to the
market, how to lay out their money; especially, forget not to pray with them,
and for them, that they may speed well, and prosper in making holy markets for
their souls.

Thirdly, 3. Direction Bring them with thee, left they trifle away their t^^e.
bring them along with thee: and neither send them before, nor let them stay
behind thee: For, alas! children, and youth, being sent to the market alone,
will play by the way, and trifle away their time, until the market be done.
And therefore says David, Psalm. 42. 4. When I went with the multitude, I led
them to the House of God. Not as the practice of some is, that say, well, I
will go to Church, wife, make haste, and come away; she stays a great while,
before she be ready, and the children and servants as long after her, that the
market is almost done, ere the whole family come in. No, thou should rather
say, Isa. 2. 3. Come, let us go up to the house of the Lord, and labor to
see, that thy children and servants may be ready, as soon as thy self; that
they may say unto thee; as some did to David* Come, Sirs, let us go up to the
House of the Lord, Psalm. 122. I was glad when they said unto me, let us go
up to the house of the Lord: this did him good at heart, to be so excited and
exhorted.

Fourthly, 4* Direction See that they ply their business, and mind their
markets.
See that they mind their business, and ply their markets, when they are
come: let them not stand, and look about them, or laugh, or talk, as too many
do; sleep, as some do: have an eye to your children, and servants, while
they are present in the Church assemblies, that their carriage may be such, as
becomes those, that are in the special presence of God Almighty. You know
children are apt to trifle away their time, let slip the opportunity of making
their markets: Besides, they may soon come to have their purses picked, or be
cousened, and cheated of their money: there is that old Serpent, the Devil,
that watches his opportunity to disappoint them, and do them a mischief,
therefore I say, as, Luke 8. 18. Take heed how you hear.

Fifthly, 5. Direction Examine them when they come home, what markets they have
made.
To make them the more careful, and wary, you must constantly examine them,
(when they come home,) what marlets they have made, and how they have hid out
their money: this after reckoning, will make them diligent, and heedfull. So
when they come from the Church, the market of their souls, examine them what
they have learned, and what they remember, encouraging them, if they do well,
and show care, and diligence* but blaming, and reproving them, if they be
careless. This was the practice of our Savior, Mark. 4. 13. Perceive you not,
or do you not understand this Parable? How then shall you under stand all
Parables? An^ chap. 8. 21. How is it that you understand not? And how often
does he ask them? Understand ye this Parable? etc. And withal, you must
whet upon them, in private, that which has been taught in the public
ministry of the Word, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. These words which I command thee, shall
be in thy heart, and thou shall teach them diligently to thy children, and
shall talk of them, when thou lie down, and when thou risest up: press it
upon them by private instruction, teach them how to use their markets, when
they come home, how to apply this, and how to make use of that particular, for
their own good. And thus have I briefly showed how we may help our children
and servants, to bargain with Christ, for true saving grace.

Sixthly and lastly, 6. Direction Pra^er unto God, for his blessing upon the
bargain.
Be sure thou accompany all the rest of thy procedings, with humble, earnest,
and hearty prayer unto God, for his blessing upon their endeavors, for Paul
planteth, and Apollo wat^reth, but God gives the increase, says the Apostle,
1 Cor. 3. 6. God opened the heart of Lydia, that she attended to those things
that were spoken by Paul, Acts 16. 24. Go to God by prayer therefore, before
thou go with thy family to the market of their souls, and beseech him to
make good his promise to thee, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. sc. to circumcise thine heart, and
the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God. It is not amiss, to imitate
old father Jacob, when he sent his dearest Benjamin into Egypt, (because else
they must not see the man's face except their brother be with them) see how the
holy Text reports it, in Genesis 4^. 11. 13, 14. If it must be so now, thus do,
take the best fruits of the land, in yours hands; and bring the man a present,
etc. yea, ver. 13. Take also your brother, and arise, and go unto the man, and
see what follows, ver. 14. And God Almighty, show you mercy before the man,
that he may send away your other brother, and Benjamin. Here was, first the use
of all honest lawful endeavors, and then prayer unto God for his blessing
upon their journey; the old man had more confidence in his prayers, then his
presents. So when we have given our children, and servants the best direction
that we are able, let us ever conclude all with prayer to God for his
blessing, for He is that Father of lights, from whom comes every good, and
perfect gift, Iam. 1. 17. Yea, of him, and through him, and from him, are all
things, to him be honor, and glory, now, and for ever: it is the conclusion
of the Apostle, Romans 11. 36. Thus through the good hand of God upon me, I have
finished this point, wherein I have showed; That all that would have true
saving grace, must buy it of Christ. In handling of which point, I have showed;
Why we must do it, and how we must do it, and also how much they are too
blame that do it not; and lastly, I have showed some few directions* how we
may, not only make this golden purchase our selves, but also direct, and
assist such as are committed unto our charge.

Now my humble and hearty request is, to the God of all grace, for his
blessing upon these unworthy labors; And that as the pains, through Gods
assistance, have been mine: so the profit, and comfort of them may redound
unto Gods people; and all glory to God.

FINIS.
THE SOVLES DELIGHT IN GODS TABERNACLES. A Treatise, showing the excellency of
Time spent in the duties of God's solemn worship and service. Instances in the
chief of them, viz. Prayer, Word, and Sacraments.
The necessity and utilitie of seasonable, constant, and abundant exercising
those duties, with Motives, and Directions about the right performance of them.
Lastly, the chief usurpers and mispenders of precious time are discovered;
with apt remedies against each of them.

PSA. 84. 1. How amiable are thy Tabernacles, o Lord of Hosts!

VERSE 4. Blessed are they that dwell in thine House, etc.

PSA. 26. 8. I have loved the habitation of thine House, etc.

By William Harrison, Mr. of Arts, and Minister of the Gospel at Canwicke
near Lincoln.

Printed by the Assign of T. P. for P. S. and C. M. and are to be sold at
their Shop, at the Golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1639.

The best spent time.
CHAP. I.
Psalm 84. 10. For a day in thy Courts is better then a thousand.
THis Psalm, (besides the Title of it) Division, and parts of the Psalm.
consists especially of these 3. parts 1. An emphaticall Narration, or
Proposition; from ver. 1. to ver. 8. 2. The Psalmists earnest petition; from
ver. 8. to the last. 3. The Peroration, or apt conclusion; in the last verse.


1. In the first part, the Psalmist does emphatically depainte, or set out
these three particulars.

1. The beauty of Gods Tabernacle, his House, and Ordinances, v. 1. 2. The
Prophets earnest and ardent affection to them, ver. 2. 3. A description of the
happy estate of such as had liberty to frequent them; set out in sundry
particulars; to ver. 8.
2. We have the Psalmist's earnest request, in the 8. and 9. verses.

1. Darkely and implicitly propounded.

2. Prosecuted and enforced by sundry arguments; especially in the tenth and
eleventh verses.

This verse, whereof the words that I have rea^ are a portion, does contain
two special arguments, whereby David enforces his earnest desire, to enjoy
the liberty of Gods Courts, and Tabernacles.

1. Is drawn from the worth and excellency of the time so spent, in the words
of our Text.

For a day in thy Courts, is better than a thousand. 2. From the dignity of the
persons, that so spend their time. The meanest office there, is better than the
highest employment other where: even the place of a door keeper there, is
better than to dwell in the Tents of wickedness.

So that the words which I have read, The Coherence.
do contain in them an argument or special reason, why David longed so much
after the Courts of God.

And the argument is drawn a Comparatis, by comparing time spent in Gods
service, with time spent otherwise: there is a broad difference, a thousand to
one. So that if you ask David, why his soul longed so sore for Gods Courts?
He answers; because, A day in Gods Courts is better than a thousand*

Before we come to receive that instruction which the words affoard us, it is
necessary for me to unfold the meaning of the words. And herein there is no
great difficulty, but only for me to show you, what is meant by the Courts of
God in this place. So then, by the Courts of God David does not mean the
outward fabric, or frame of Gods Courts, but he has special respect to the
duties of Gods worship and service, and the exercises of religion performed
there by Gods people. So that we may conceive David's meaning, as if he had
spoken more largely thus; O Lord of Hosts, I am now a banished man, debarred of
the liberty of thine House and ordinances, I cannot join with thy people, in
the duties of thy public worship, nor serve thee in the beauty of holiness.
O Lord I pray thee restore me again, for so highly do I prize all things
appertaining to thy public worship and service, that I think them only
happy, that have free liberty to frequent them; and therefore do envy the
very Sparrowes, which have more liberty in this, then I have: and that so much
the rather, because I value that time, which is spent in thy service, before
all other time a thousand fold. This is the sense. Let us now consider of the
Doctrine, viz. This; That time spent in Gods service, Doctrine 1. That time
spent in Gods service, is the best spent.
is absolutely, and incomparably the best spent time. Even a day spent in the
duties of Gods solemn worship and service, is better then a thousand days
spent otherwise.

Hereupon it is, 1. Proof. By the practice of Gods people.
that the Saints of God have spent so much time in the duties of Gods worship,
and service, and exercises of religion; as in holy meditations, preaching,
praying, hearing, etc. See it in examples. Let us begin with David. David's
piety.
Oh how great a part did he spend in Gods service! see, Psalm. 119. 97. O how I
love thy Law! it is my meditation continually. Hereupon it is that he
begins the day with prayer, Psalm. 5. 3. Early in the morning will I direct
my prayer unto thee, and will look up; yea, not only in the morning, but even
at noone, and night too, Psalm. 55. 17. Evening, and morning, and at noone will
I pray, and cry aloud: yea, and this not for a fit, or spurt only, but
constantly, even every day, Ps. 145. Every day will I praise thee, and bless
thy name for ever and ever: yea, as if this were too little, he would be at
this work seven times in a day upon occasion, according to that we read,
Psalm* 119. 164. Seven times a day do I praise thee, because of thy righteous
judgments; besides this, as if the day were too little, he would sometimes
borrow some part of the night for this purpose, O Lord, I cry in the day time,
Psalm. 22. 2.
but thou hear not; and in the night season also I am not silent. He would,
upon occasion, spend night and day in these holy courses, yea, and as if all
this was not yet enough, he would be at it again at midnight, Psalm. 119. 62.
At midnight will I arise, to give thanks unto thee, because of thy righteous
judgments. And why all this, but only to teach us thus much, that time spent
in Gods service is absolutely the best spent time, this appears (by his
practice) to be his opinion. Hereupon it is, Daniel.
that Daniel spent so much time in prayer, and thanksgiving; and that not only
in time of safety, but also in time of apparent hazard, Dan. 6. 10. When
Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went into his house, etc. and
kneeled upon his knees, three times a day, and prayed, and gave thanks before
his God, as he did before time.

Where we see, First, That this was Daniel's practice; sc. to pray, and give
thanks to God three times a day, upon his knees, in his chamber, with his
windows open toward Jerusalem: this was his usual, and constant practice
heretofore. And Secondly, that he did so still, as openly, and as solemnly, and
as frequently, as he did before, notwithstanding the danger of the Kings
Decree. And Thirdly, that he knew that the writing was signed, and sealed to
this purpose; all which surely he would never have done, if he had not been
fully persuaded of the truth of this Doctrine, which we have now in hand, sc.
That Time spent in Gods service, is absolutely the best spent time.

Thirdly, Mary Magdale^.
This appears by the practice of Mary Magdalen, or Sister of Martha, whereof
we may read, Luke 10. 39, 40, 41, 42. Where we see, that notwithstanding her
great love to our Savior, and the desire that she had to give Him the best
entertainment, she could; yet she lays all other businesses aside, and
Si^teth her down at our Saviors feet, to hear his words, says the Text,
ver. 39. In the time Martha was very busy, to prepare entertainment for our
Savior, and thought her sister in great fault, to leave her thus to serve
alone, and would not put to her helping hand; yea, she thought her case so
good, that she durst herein appeal to our blessed Savior, Ver. 40. Lord,
do thou not care, that my sister has left me to serve alone? bid her that
she help me, ( i. e.) Is it not an unreasonable thing, that I should do all,
and she sit here at thy feet, and do nothing? yea, and if she have no more
love* but t^ put me to all this, yet I wonder, that thou ha^t no more care, but
suffer her so idly to spend her time, when I have so great need of her help;
Lord, Bi^ her therefore that she help me: Sub ju^^ce lis est. Now see our
Saviors answer, and observe his sentence, ver. 41. 42. Martha, Martha, thou
^arest and art troubled about many things: But one thing is needful, Mary has
chosen ^he good part, which shall not be taken from her. Where we may see, 1.
That M^^y says nothing, our Savior himself apologizeth for her; 2. That he
blames Marth^, for too much care, even in so good a work, as that was, sc. to
give entertainment to our blessed Savior. 3. That he does directly ^ustifie
the godly practice of Mary, in taking that opportunity to hear his Word; as if
that was the only one thing needful. Which does plainly evince, sc. that
even ^n the judgment of our Savior: Time ^pent in Gods service, in hearing,
etc. is ^he best spent time, and to be preferred far before any other time
whatsoever.

In this regard (...) it was* ^^at holy Paul ^pent so much time, Paul's
diligence.
and ^^oke so much ^aines, in praying, and p^^^ching upon all ^ccasions.
Observe that speech of his to ^his purpose, Romans 15. 19. So that (...)
Ie^usalem, and round (...), I ^ave fully preached the G^^pe^l of Christ: yea,
he was content to spend his dearest life in this cause, Acts 20. 24. My life is
not dear unto me, that I may finish my course with joy, and fulfill the
Ministry, that I have received of the Lord Jesus; to testify the Gospel of
the grace of God: yea, and when he was preaching upon occasion, being to depart
on the morrow, He continued his speech until midnight, says the Text, Acts
20. 7. Hereupon also was that godly resolution of the Apostles, But we will
give our selves continually to prayer, and to the ministry of the Word, Acts
6. 4. (an excellent pattern for all faithful Ministers,) And why all this, but
only to testify the truth of this Doctrine, which we have in hand, namely,
that of all other, that is the best spent time, that is spent in Gods service.

Lastly, Lastly, our blessed Savior.
To this purpose observe the practice of our blessed Savior Christ Jesus: it
appears by his daily practice, that he was of this opinion. Hereupon it is
that he spent so much time in preaching, praying, and such like exercises of
religion; nay, his whole life was nothing else but a real and exact practice
of piety: after he had taken upon him his prophetical office, see with what
unwearied industry he proceeded this way; Jesus went about, teaching, and
preaching the Gospel of the kingdom, and healing every sickness, and every
disease among the people, says the Evangelist, Matthew. 9. 35. He went about
doing good continually this way: see what he could say of himself, I ever
taught in the Synagogues, Ioh. 18. 20. And again, I sat daily with you,
teaching in the Temple, Mat. 26. 55. Yea, to this purpose it is, that we
read, Luke 6. 12. That he continued all night in prayer to God: and afterward
upon occasion, we read that he spent three whole days together in prayer,
and preaching, according to that we find, Mar. 8. 2. I have compassion upon
the multitude, because they have now been with me three days, etc.

We may observe. 1. That the multitude had now been with our Savior 3 days
together, to hear him preach. 2. They must needs spend some time also in going
and coming to this end. 4. That he had compassion upon them, and would rather
work a miracle in feeding them, then suffer them to fainte by the way, etc. So
that by the practice of our Savior it appears evidently, that time spent in
Gods service, is absolutely the best spent time.

CHAP. II.
Containing the Reasons of the point.

NOw the reason of the point is especially three-folde. Reason.


1. In regard of God. 2. In respect of our selves. 3. In regard of others.
In regard of God, In respect of God.
Time spent in his service, ^ Ways.
1. Because it is spent with Him; 2. To Him, 3. For Him.

Time spent in Gods service is the best spent, (...) spent with God.
because it is spent with God. We account that time well spent, that is spent
with our dearest friends; that time is very pleasant and delightful to us: now
God is our best friend, and therefore time spent with him, must needs be the
best spent. Now that God is with his servants thus busied, observe it, Matthew.
18. 20. For where two, or three are gathered together, in my Name, there am I
in the midst of them. O happy company, where Christ himself is in the (...)!
Thus he encourages his Disciples, when he sends them out to preach the
Gospel; Matthew. 28. 20. Go, and teach all Nations, etc. teaching them to
observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo I am with you
always, even unto the end of the world. Time spent in the special presence of
Christ, must needs be the best spent time: but time spent in Gods service, is
spent in the special presence of Christ (so that a man may say with David,
while he is so employed, Nevertheless, I am continually with thee, Lord, Psalm.
7^. 23. and therefore time spent in Gods service, must needs be the best spent.

2. Because time spent in Gods service, is To Gods pleasure.
to his contentment, he is marvellously delighted with it; In these things I
delight, says God, Ier. 9. 24. And with such sacrifices God is well pleased:
it is an excellent place to this purpose, Heb. 13. 15, 16. By him let us offer
the sacrifices of praise to God continually: And to do good, and to
communicate, forget not: as if he had said; do not forget to spend your time
in duties of piety to God, and charity to men, for for with such sacrifices
God is well pleased, says the Apostle. It is time spent for Gods pleasure, etc.

3. Because, Time spent in Gods service For h^s glory.
that is, for his honor and glory, which is the supreme end of all, 1 Cor.
10. 31. Whether ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do (howsoever ye spend
your time) do all to the glory of God: This is the chief end of our creation,
Isa. 43. 7. For my glory have I created him, says the Lord, O come let us
worship, and fall down, and kneel before the Lordour Maker, says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 95. 6. O let us employ our time so, as may be most for Gods
glory: now time spent in holy duties (in well doing,) is spent to Gods glory,
Herein is my Father gl^rified, that ye bring forth much fruit, says our
Savior, the more fruitful we are in good duties, the more glory redounds to
God. This should make us abundant in the work of the Lord. Hence is that
speech of our Savior, 1 Cor. 15. ^ast.
Matthew. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works; (spend much time in Gods service, and become patterns for others) why
so? And glorify your Father which is in heaven; (i. e.) this does much
glorify your heavenly Father. So, Phil. 1. 11. The Apostle prays, that they
might be filled with the fruits of righteousness; and mark the reason, which
are by Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of God; so that time spent in Gods
service, is spent for his glory. Now lay all these three together, and they
will make a strong twine to confirm this truth, like Solomon's threefold cord,
which is not easily broken, Eccles.
That time which is spent with God, or in his presence: 2. and to his pleasure,
and delight: and thirdly, for his glory, must needs be the best spent time;
but so is all that time, that is spent sincerely in GODS service; and therefore
time spent in Gods service, must needs be the best spent time. Thus in regard
of God.

Secondly consider, it is the best in regard of our selves.

2. Time spent in Gods service, is the best spent time, 2. Reason. In respect
of our selves.
in respect of our selves;

1. It is most for our credit.

2. For our profit.

3. For our pleasure.

4. For our comfort, in life and death.

1. Time spent in Gods service, is most for ^ur credit. God will ever make good
his promise, Most for our credit.
1 Samuel 2. ^0. Them that honor me I will honor: and they that despise me,
shall be lightly esteemed. See what the Holy Ghost says, of those Bo^reans,
(that received the Word with all readiness of mind, and searched the
Scriptures daily) Acts 17. 11. These were more noble, then those in
Thessalonica, says the text, And why so? Wherein did their chief Nobility
appear? sc. in their outward quality, they had this spiritual excellency, to
regulate their hearing by the Word; In that they received the Word with all
readiness of mind, as appears in the words following, and searched the
Scriptures daily, whether those things were so. Every religious godly person,
that spends much time in Gods service, is a noble person, in Gods account. It
was one of Solomon's titles of honor, to be called, The Preacher, one that
spent much time in Gods service, and in teaching others, Eccles. 1. Yea, and
see how David glories in this, that he was Gods servant, one that spent much
time in Gods service, Psalm. 116. 16. O Lord, truly I am thy servant: I am thy
servant, and the son of thy handmaid. Lo, a man's greatest honor, sc. to be
Gods servant, to show, that time spent in ^ods service, is the most for a man's
credit, and therefore the best.

For our pleasure.
all other pleasures are but vain, and mad mirth, in comparison of this; This
will satisfy a man's soul, as with marrow and (...), as David speaks. See
what pleasure Gods servants have taken in this, I ^steemed ^he words of his
mouth more th^n my necessary fo^de, says Job, Job 23. 12. O what pleasure and
sweetness did Job find in the Word of Gods mouth! it was sweeter and more
pleasant in taste, then his appointed or necessary food: It did him more good,
then his meat and drink.

So likewise, Much sweet^nesse in Gods service.
see it in David, Oh how I love thy law, it is my meditation continually,
Psalm. 119. 97. How sweet are thy words unto my taste? sweeter then honey unto
my m^uth; Ver. 103. So likewise to Jeremiah, chap. 15. 16. Thy words were
found, and I did eat them: and how did they taste? They were unto me the very
joy, and rejoicing of my heart, says the Prophet. Yea, so it was to Paul, Romans
7. 24. I delight in the Law of God, according to the inner man. But above all,
observe that speech of our Savior, Joh. 4. 34. There you shall find, that our
Savior at that time was hungry and thirsty, and the Disciples were gone to
the City to buy meat; in the mean time, comes a woman to draw water, and
our Savior took that opportunity to instruct her, and convert her to God,
yea, and was so serious in it, and so much delighted with it, that when the
Disciples come with meat, they say unto him, M. eat, Ver. 33. See what he
answers, I have meat to eat, which ye know not of, and then explaineth the
meaning, Verse 34. My meat is to do the will of Him that sent me, and finish
his work. Lo, this was his very meat, it did him more good, He found more
sweetness in it, and so far preferred it before his meat and drink, so
that (if our mouth be not out of taste) time spent in Gods service has the
most pleasure in it, and therefore, in that regard, is the best spent time.

Thirdly, Time spent in Gods service is Most profitable.
both for body and soul, Godliness is profitable unto all things, says the
Apostle, (1 Timothy 4. 8.) having the promise of the life that now is, and also of
that to come. This is the good and the right way, as Samuel calls it, 1 Samuel
12. 24. It is that one thing needful, as our Savior himself calls it, Luke
10. 42. This is the only thing, the very boon that David would beg at Gods
hands, Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I will seek
after. But one thing David? surely it is some rare thing, some extraordinary
profitable matter. What is it? That I may dwell in the house of the Lord, all
the days of my life, and behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his
Temple. This is David's one thing, sc. that he might spend all the greatest
part of his life in Gods service; he knew the benefit, and the profit of it. He
might well say then, as, Psalm. 23. 6. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow
me all the days of my life. Time spent in Gods service, is the only way to
procure safety and profit, both for body and soul, 1. There is safety in this
course, even when their seems to be most danger, And safe for body.
He that loses his life for Christ's sake, shall be sure to find it, Mat.
16. Yea, see that excellent promise, v. 11. of this Psalm; The Lord will give
grace, and glory, and no good thing will he withhold, from them that walk
uprightly. Let no man think that Religion is the Highway to danger and
beggary; No, no, It is the only safe way, and the most profitable. An excellent
place to this purpose, is, that we have, Exo. 34. 24. Where the Lord enjoyneth
that all the Males should appear before him thrice in the year at Jerusalem,
(as if all the Males in England were to appear thrice in the year before God
at London) Now whereas a man would think that this was very dangerous, in
regard of invasion from their cruel neighbors, that might take the
opportunity to set upon their borders, in the absence of all the Males: Now
mark what the Lord promises in that case, No man shall desire thy land: such
an envious, covetous, malicious thought, shall not once enter into their heart,
as to think, Now we have a fit opportunity to invade Israel. So the equity of
this promise remains still: Time sincerely spent in Gods service, brings
safety with it; or, if any danger, or outward hurt come, in this case, God will
dispose it for our good. Rather then Daniel shall loose by his time spent in
Gods service, Safety in Gods service example of it.
the Lord will keep him in safety in the Lions den, and send his Angels to
shut the Lions mouths, that they may not hurt him, as we see, Dan. 6. Mark
that speech of the King to him, Verse 20. O Daniel, servant of the living God,
Is thy God (whom thou servest continually) able to deliver thee from the Lions?
Is there safety in the service of thy God? See how Daniel answers, according
to the event of it, Ver. 22. My God has sent his Angel, and shut the Lions
mouths, that they have not hurt me. Lo, what impregnable safety in Gods
service. So Daniel 3. What danger were the three noble Jews in? But see how
God made good that promise, ( Isa. 43. 2.) When thou passest through the
waters, I will be with thee, etc. when thou walk through the fire, thou
shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. Our God whom we
serve is able to deliver us, say they, Dan. 3. 17. and the event showed as
much. Ver. 25. says the King, I see four men walking in the midst, and they
have no hurt, and the form of the fourth, is like the Son of God, God is
able to keep the fire from hurting (if he please) even those that walk in the
midst of it. And mark what is said of these men, Verse 27. That they were such,
upon whose bodies the fire had no power, nor was an hair of their head singed,
neither were their coats changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on them, Oh
admirable fruit of faith! Oh strange effects of piety! who would not confess,
that time spent in Gods service, is the best spent time, when he sees and
considers that there is such admirable profit and safety in it? Nay, he that
does conscionably spend time in Gods service, may be sure he shall want nothing
that is good, Psalm 34. 10. So that such a man may boldly say with David, Psalm.
23. 1. The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want. The greatest Monarch under
heaven (without piety) cannot say so much; yea, Blessed is the man that fears
the Lord; (and spends much time in his service) for riches and plentiousnesse
shall be in his house, if God see it to be good for him, Psalm. 112. 1, 2. Thus
for the body.

Then for the soul. He that spends And Soul.
Shall never perish, but have everlasting life, Ioh. 3. 16. Yea, he that
spends time in Gods service, does follow the advice of our Savior, Ioh. 6.
27. sc. To labor for that meat that perishes not, but endures unto
everlasting life; and with Mary, chooses the better part, which shall never be
taken from him, Luke 10. 42. Yea, this is chiefly, and especially beneficial
for the soul. See an excellent promise to this purpose, Isa. 55. 3. Incline
your ear, and come unto me, hear, and your soul shall live. And, I will make
an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David, Ver. 4. This
is the maine thing to be regarded, in point of profit. For, What is a man
profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and loose his own soul? says
our Savior, Matthew. 16. 26. See an experiment of this, in that rich man, Luke
12. 19, 20. that had goods laid up for many years, but could not secure his
soul, no, not for a night, but God said unto him, thou fool, this night shall
they fetch away thy soul, and then whose shall these goods be, which thou
have provided? And this is the case of every man, that spends his time to get
riches, instead of Gods service, Ver. 21. So is every one that gathers riches
for himself, and is not rich toward God; For, What hope has the Hypocrite,
though he has gained, when God shall fetch away his soul? Job 27. 8. When
such are ready to call to the mountains to fall upon them, and the hills to
cover them, from the presence of the Lamb, Revel. 6. 16. Then shall the godly
lift up their heads with joy, because their redemption draws nigh. So that by
this it appears evidently, that time spent in Gods service has the most
profit in it every way, both for body, and soul. Oh the difference between
time spent in Gods service, and in the neglect of it! Give me leave to
conclude this branch of the Reason, with that excellent place, in Isa. 65. 13,
14. Thus says the Lord, Behold! my servant shall eat, and ye shall be
hungry; behold! my servant shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty; behold! my
servant shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed; Verse fourteen behold! my
servant shall sing for joy of heart, and ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and
shall howl for vexation of spirit, etc. A sweet cordial for GODS servants;
but terrible to the wicked, that neglect his service.

Most full of comfort in life and death, etc.
has the most comfort in it; the very time it self, so spent, is full of
comfort, the very joy and rejoicing of a man's heart. But especially this will
afford us comfort at our death, and at the day of judgment. 1. For our death
bed nothing will afford us so much comfort then, as this, if a man can say with
the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1. 12. Our rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our
conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom,
but by the grace of God we have had our conversation in the world; Time
sincerely spent in Gods service, will assure a man, that when he dies, he shall
go to heaven, 2 Cor. 5. 1. We know that if this earthly house of this
tabernacle shall be dissolved, we have a building of God, not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens. Three singular examples I will give you for this. 1.
That of Hezekiah, Isa. 38. 3. When the Prophet greeteth him with that heavy
tidings, saying, put thy house in order, for thou shall dye, and not live. What
was it that did afford him comfort, in that case? That you shall see, was the
consideration of his well spent time. Remember, Lord, I beseech thee, how I
have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that
which is good in thy sight. Lo, the chief ground of comfort in death, is the
conscience of a well led life. So that of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. For I am
now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand, says the
Apostle, v. 6. Now see* what it was that did afford him comfort in that case.
Surely, consideration of the right and religious spending of his time. I have
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith;
henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness. He that would
have the like comfort in his death, must have a care to spend much time in Gods
service in his life time. Oh, let me dye the death of the righteous, says
wicked Baalam, and let my last end be like his; he means in regard of
sweetness, and comfort, Number. 23. 10. This is the desire of many. Now the way
to obtain this, is to live the life of the Righteous. This appears lastly,
by the example of our blessed Savior, when he had finished his course, how
sweetly does he conclude? John 17. 4, 5. I have glorified thee on the earth,
I have finished the work which thou gave me to do; (i. e.) I have spent my
whole life in thy service, it has been my meat to do the will of thee my
heavenly Father: Yea, see the sweet fruit of this: And now, o Father, glorify
thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the
world was. See here the way to have hope, and comfort in death. He that would
have glory with God in heaven; must glorify God here on earth. He that would
be assured, that he shall spend his time with God in heaven, in eternal glory;
must first spend his time in Gods service here on earth. Grace on earth, is the
way to glory in heaven. And thus you see also, that time spent in Gods service,
is the best, not only in regard of God, but also in respect of our selves.

In regard of others, hereby we may do good to others.
and lastly, I told you, that time spent in Gods service, is best spent, in
regard of others: it redoundeth not only to Gods glory, and our own good, but
it also extends to the good of others, especially, those that are in any kind
of distress. Time spent in Gods service, is the best way, both to prevent
danger, and to remove it. Consider the danger and misery of GODS Church, both
at home and abroad: danger of famine, danger of sword, danger of pestilence:
Now what better remedy to prevent these dangers, then time spent in Gods
service, in prayer, and fasting, etc? See this in the practice of the
Ni^ivites, Io^^h 3. The danger was great, for, Yet forty days, and Niniveh
shall be destroyed, says the Lord, ver. 4. Well, see how they prevented this
fearful danger; How did they spend their time? That you may see, Ver 5. 6.
They believed God, and p^oclaimed (...) and put on sack^loth, from the greatest
(...) them, to the least of them; Yea, and word ^^me to the King himself, who
arose from his Throne, and laid his Robe from him, and sat in Ashes; and made
proclamation throughout the City, that neither man, nor beast should drink
water, nor taste any foo^e, but be covered with sack^loth, and cry mightily
unto God, etc. Who can tell whether God will turn, and repent, etc. that we
perish not? (i. e.) If any thing will prevent our destruction, this will do
it. Now see the event, Ver. 10. And God saw their works, etc. He saw how they
spent their time, and God repented of the evil that he had said, that he would
do unto them, and he did it not: so that time spent in Gods service, is the
best way to prevent danger. Yea, and secondly, It is the best way also to
remove it; oh the miseries of Gods people in Germany, and in this land also,
some by famine, some by pestilence; our wit, is too shallow; our strength too
weak, our purse too empty, to relieve them: if any thing we have can do them
good, it must be our prayers, and the right and religious spending of our time.
Alas! time spent in sinning, in swearing, in drunkenness, this provokes the
eyes of Gods glory, and incenseth his wrath against us: but time spent in Gods
service, is the way to help them, and our selves in this case. Threefold
proof of it.
And for the farther help of our unbeleeving hearts, in this high point,
consider, 1. Gods own direction: 2. The Churches practice; 3. Our own
experience.


1. 1. The Testimony of God himself.
We have the Testimony of God himself. See an excellent place to this purpose,
2 Chronicles. 7. 13, 14. Where the Lord himself puts a case of danger, and
prescribes the remedy. 1. If I shut up heaven, that there be no rain, (and
this you know was our very case lately) or, if I send pestilence among my
people, (and this is our case, even for the present, there have been (and
still are) sundry places in this kingdom infected with the pestilence) here is
the danger. Well; what is the best course that Gods people can take to remove
such a judgment? how should we do to help those that are in this woeful
estate? That the Lord himself shows plainly, v. 14. If the people that are
called by my Name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, etc.
that is, spend time in my service, then see the admirable fruit of this, then
will I hear from heaven, and forgive their sins, and heal their land. Time
spent in Gods service is the best way to remove a judgment from our selves, or
others. This is a course of Gods own prescribing.

2. 2. The Testimony of the Church, and State.
This is the judgment and opinion of the Church, and State wherein we live,
and our Religious Governors, and such as are in authority. Hereupon it was,
that in the last great Plague, there was a general Fast proclaimed, and
appointed to be celebrated throughout the whole kingdom, that we might seek
God by prayer and fasting, for the cessation of that sore judgment of the
Pestilence. And why this, but only to show, that even our gracious Sovereign,
and such as are in authority in our Church and State, are verily persuaded,
that time spent in Gods service, is very effectual and availeable to take away
the Pestilence.

3. It appears by experience, 3. Experience.
what admirable success we have had in this case, we have found by experience
often the worth of this course, either for preventing, or removing a judgment:
as in that year, 1625. and sundry other times both before, and since, the Lord
has made good unto us that precious promise, Isa. 65. 24. It shall come to
pass, that when ye call, I will answer; and while ye are yet speaking, I will
hear: for while we were yet praying, and fasting, the Lord was entreated of
us. So that even in this regard also, time spent in Gods service is absolutely
the best spent time. So that a godly religious man, that spends much time in
Gods service, shall prevail more, either for preventing, or removing a
judgment from the land, then an hundred others: he is the only man that must
deliver the Ileland, according to that in Job 22. 30. He shall deliver the
Island of the Innocent or (as is well noted in the Margent.) The Innocent shall
deliver the Island, and it is delivered by the pureness of thine hands. It is
the purity of hearts and hands, and time spent in Gods service, that must help
in this case: for otherwise, we know that God hears not sinners, but if any
man be a worshiper of God, and a doer of his will (if any delight to spend
time in GODS service) him he hears, says the blind man, Ioh. 9. 31.

CHAP. III.
Conta^ning the first Use of the point, viz. for Instruction.

1. IS it so, Use 1. For Instruction.
That time spent in Gods service, is absolutely the best spent time? The
knowledge of this truth does lead us on to the knowledge of other precious
truths to this purpose, for our instruction;

1. Hence then it follows, The worst spent time.
that time spent in sinning, or in the Devils service, must needs be the worst
spent time; time spent in swearing, lying, stealing, wantonness, drunkenness,
yea in covetous carking and caring, etc. is the worst spent time that can be:
it is quite opposite and contrary to that which is spent in Gods service; and
therefore, as that is the best, so on the contrary, this must needs be the
worst spent time that can be. It is the worst in every respect, 1. In respect
of God, 2. In regard of our selves. 3. In respect of others.

1. 1. In respe^t of God.
Time spent in sinful courses is the worst spent time, in respect of God
Himself, 1. 1. Without God.
Not with God, but without God in the world, and without Christ, according to
that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 12. That at that time, ye were without Christ,
being Aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants
of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world, where the Apostle
speaks of the time that they had spent in the state of nature, according to
the Prince of the air, after the lusts of the flesh, etc. Ver. 2. 3. Now see
how woefully and fearfully he concludes, as touching all that time, that is
so spent, namely, That it is time spent without Christ, without the Pale of the
Church, wirhout promise, without hope, and lastly, without God in the world: no
time better spent, then that time which is spent with God, and therefore no
worse time, then that which is spent without God. Thus Cain spent his time,
after he had slain his brother Abel, He went out from the presence of the
Lord, says the Text, Genesis 4. 16. and this is a chief branch of the eternal
punishment of the wicked in hell. They shall be punished with everlasting
perdition, from the presence of God, says the Apostle, 2 These. 1. 9. Hereupon
was that earnest and importunate suit of David, Psa. 51. 11. Cast me not, Lord,
out of thy presence, to intimate untous, what a woeful thing it is to be without
God, or to be cast out of his presence.

2. 2. To his dishonor.
Time spent in the devils service (in vicious courses) is it not spent for God,
but against him; not for his glory, but to his dishonor; Thou that boastest of
the Law, through breaking the Law, dishonourest thou God? says the Apostle,
Romans 2. 23. Time spent in the breach of Gods Law, is spent unto Gods dishonor,
robs God of his honor and glory, that is due unto him; and therefore the
worst spent time that can be.

Thirdly, 3. Not to his pleasure but to his grief.
Time spent in sinning is not spent to Gods pleasure, but the contrary, it does
even provoke the eyes of his glory, Isa. 3. 6. Their tongue; and their doings
are against the Lord, to provoke the eyes of his glory; yea the Lord is not
only offended at it, but even grieved and wearied with time so spent: How can a
child spend his time worse, then in grieving and breaking the hearts of his
loving Parents? This is the very case of all those that spend time in vicious
courses. Observe it, Isa. 7. 13. Is it a small thing for you to weary men, but
ye will weary my God also? O woeful thing, to weary and grieve God with our
sinful courses! Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, says
the Lord, Psalm. 95. 11. I am broken with their whorish heart, which is
departed from me, Ezec. 6. 9. Yea, his very heart is broken with the grief of
it, as the Prophet speaks, Ier. 23. 9. Yea, the Lord is oppressed with our
sins, as a cart is pressed with sheaves: it is the Holy Ghosts expression,
Amos 2. 13. Yea, the Lord is so far from being well pleased, or delighted
with it, that on the contrary, he hates and abhors it; yea, he smites his
hands together, in detestation of it, I have smitten my hands at thy dishonest
gain, says the Lord, Ezec. ^2. 1^. the Lord will not spare that man (which so
spends his time, but his wrath and jealousy shall smoke against him, to blot
his name out from under heaven, Deuteronomy. 29. 20.

1. 2. In regard of our selves.
It is the worst spent time that can be, in regard of ourselves, for there is
neither profit, nor credit, nor safety, nor pleasure, nor comfort in it; but
the contrary to all these, as is easy to manifest in sundry particulars.

1. 1. No profit but loss.
Time spent in the devils service, is the worst spent; because there is no
profit in it, a man is always on the loosing hand; now this is most evident,
that all sinful courses are unfruitful, and unprofitable courses, Have no
fellowship, with the unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians 5. 8. All
sinful works, are both works of darkness, and unfruitful works: hence
that of the Apostle, Romans 6. 21. What fruit had ye in those things, whereof
ye are now ashamed? Observe the confession and expression of every true
penitent, according to that we read, Job 33. 37. God looks upon men, and if
any say, I have sinned, and perverted that which is right, and it profited me
not. Every true convert is able to tell you, out of his experience, that all
sinful courses are unprofitable courses in conclusion, for they loose Gods
favor, they loose their interest in Christ, they loose the comfort of a good
conscience, they loo^e their souls, Matthew. 16. 26. and in a word, they loose
heaven: these are the fruits of time spent in sinning. Judge then if all such
be not damned loosers in the end, unless they repent speedily, 2. No
pleasure, nor credit, nor comfort.
and turn to God. Again, there is no true pleasure, but vanity and vexation
of spirit. Take the sin of uncleanness, which seems to have the most
pleasure in it, and you shall find at last there is no pleasure in it, but the
gall of bitterness, In the end it biteth like a Serpent, and ^urteth like a
Cochatrice. See a notable place for this purpose, Pro. 5. where the Wiseman,
dissuading from the sin of uncleanness, Ver. 8. Remove thy way far from
her, and come not nigh the door of her house, and then see what excellent
arguments He uses to this purpose, Verse 9. 10* 11. Lest thou give thy honor
to others, and thy years to the cruel: there is loss of credit, Lest
strangers be filled with thy wealth, etc. (there is loss of goods and outward
estate. Thus sin brings beggary) And thou mourn at last* when thy flesh
and thy body is consumed, (there is loss of pleasure and comfort) and say, How
have I? Oh how have I misspent my time, in the service of sin and Satan! Nor
safety.
Oh let us strive to see this in time, and labor to prevent it. Lastly, there
is no safety but death and danger in it, for the wages of sin is death, Romans
6. 2^. The like I might say in regard of others: but this is enough, to prove
that time spent in sinning, is absolutely the worst spent time, for body and
soul.

Secondly, 2. Instruct. For Humiliation, that we have spent so little time in
Gods service, and so much in the service of sin and Satan.
For Humiliation, Seeing time spent in Gods service is the best spent time,
This serves to teach us, what cause we have (even the best of us) to be
humbled, that we have spent so little time in the duties of Gods service; and
have been so lavish and prodigal of our precious time, in other things. For.
1. What a great deal of most precious time have we spent, before our
conversion, before we spent (in effect) any time at all in Gods service? All
the time of our unregeneration, has been utterly spent in the service of sin
and Satan; we were vassalls to the Prince that rules i^ the air, the spirit
that now works in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. Now consider,
what a lamentable thing it is, that a man, (that is made for Gods glory, and
chiefly for his worship and service) should spend twenty, thirty, forty,
and some fifty years in the service of sin and Satan, before he begin to
serve God at all, or so much as once think of the maine end for which he was
made, and sent into this world? Alas! by nature we are so far from any
desire to do God service, that, on the contrary, we hate him, and oppose, and
set our selves against him, and in effect do nothing daily, but even fight
against God: for indeed, there is a direct and an express enmity between God
and us, by nature; as appears by that speech of the Apostle, Romans 5. 10. For
if, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the death of his
Son, etc. We are children of wrath by nature, and we do even study enmity,
and rebellion against the Lord; yea, notwithstanding the vow and covenant, that
we have made in our Baptism, sc. that we would continue Christ's faithful
servants, and soldiers, unto our lives end; yet alas! notwithstanding we daily
dishonor God by our vicious lives, and live in the apparent breach of his
blessed and holy Commandments. Not only before our conversion.
In our natural estate we do not so much as once perceive the things of the
Spirit of God, for they are foolishnes unto us, neither can we know them,
because they are spiritually discerned, as the Apostle shows, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
No, no, alas! we are so far from spending time in Gods service, that we
spend it in working the will of the flesh, and in heathenish lusts. This the
Apostle intimates, 1 Peter 4. 3. For the time past of our lives may suffice
us, to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we walked in
lasciviousness, lusts, excess of Wine, revellings, banquetings, and
abominable Idolatries; Lo! here the Apostle shows, how we spend our time
usually before our conversion, not in working the will of God, but the will of
the Gentiles; not in the service of God, but in the service of the flesh, and
of the devil; for drunkenness, and idolatry are such. Thus vainly and
foolishly do we spend our time by nature, yea, this is not the estate of some
few odd ones, that are of an extraordinary evil nature; but it is the
condition of all, even of the best. The holy Apostle confesses thus much of
himself, and of all true believers (before their conversion) Titus 3. 3. For
we our selves were sometimes foolish, disobedient, serving diverse lusts, and
pleasures, living in malice, hateful, and hating one another, says the
Apostle. So that if we seriously consider this, we have reason every one, to
cry out of himself, in this respect, as the Psalmist did in another case;
Psalm. 73. 22. So foolish am I, O Lord, by nature, and ignorant, I was as a
beast before thee! Or else with the Apostle, Romans 7. 24. O wretched man that I
am! what a woeful wicked wretch have I been, that have spent so much time in
the service of sin and Satan, and so little in the service of the Lord, my
Maker, and Redeemer!

Secondly, 2. Consider. But also, even since our calling.
Besides this, we have much more cause to be humbled, and with Job, even to
Abhor our selves in dust and ashes, if we consider how much precious time we
have, and daily do mis-spend, even since our conversion. Alas! how little time
do we yet spend in ^ods service; The time past of our life might suffice, 1
Pet. 4. 3. It is enough (and too much) that all the time we have spent before
our conversion, is wholly misspent; but that we should bring more wrath upon
us daily, by mis-spending our time still, is much more grievous. It is now high
time to awake out of sleep, and with all diligence, instantly to serve God,
night and day. It is strange, that an heathen person should enter into so
divine and heavenly a consideration, Seneca Epist. 1. Nihil agendo, aliud
agendo, and male agendo*
about the mis-spending of precious time. Sometimes, doing nothing; sometimes,
matters of the By; and sometimes, evil. But alas! how little then do we
spend, Been agendo? Let us but consider how much time we spend, in eating, and
drinking; and then how much in sleeping, walking, talking, sporting, working;
but how little time have we then for reading, hearing, praying, etc. a
lamentable thing if rightly considered. Simile.
A loving Father sends his son to the University, to get learning, and he
when he comes there, spends his time in other By-matters, and
impertinencies, so much time spent at Tavern, so much in Recreation, so much
in walking abroad, and so much in complementing with, and entertaining of his
acquaintance; but little or no time in study, etc. What says the Father, at
his return after many years? He cries out, surely my son has utterly
misspent his time, and consumed my estate to no purpose. This is our very
case. The Lord sends us into this world, to bring glory to his Name, and to
get grace for our souls, and to prepare for glory: But alas! how do we
mis-spend our time in following worldly vanities; and for one serious thought
of heaven, we have (at least) an hundred earthly cogitations. And then again,
lastly, if we do now and then set our selves to serve God, yet how soon are
we tired, and ready to cry out, Behold what a weariness is it! Mal. 1. 13.
See therefore what great cause we have to be humbled in this regard.

CHAP. IIII.
Containing the second Use of the point, namely, for Reprehension.

SEcondly, Use 2. For Reprehension of diverse sorts.
This serves for the reprehension of diverse sorts of people, that are justly
to blame in this regard; besides what is already intimated in the former Use.

First, 1. Sort. 1. Such as can find time for every thing, but only for Gods
service.
Such as can find time for every thing, but matters of Religion; they can
find time for walking, talking, working, and playing; but none for hearing,
reading, praying; whereas we have heard, that time spent in Gods service, is
the best spent time: men can find many days to spend for themselves, none for
God. Thus the ambitious spend time to get honor, the malicious for revenge,
the covetous to get wealth; in the mean time, no time can be spared, to be
spent to get grace. Oh the folly of men, to begin at the wrong end: First seek
the kingdom of God, says our Savior, Mat. 6. 33. Now that is put off to the
last place (at least) if it be not altogether neglected. See the picture of
such fools, Luke 12. 19, 20. There was a man spent all his time to get wealth,
but could find no time to serve God, and to get grace; and therefore he has
no time to enjoy his wealth; but in the very night that he began to take
possession, and enjoy the benefit of all his pains, God greeteth him with this
heavy message; Thou fool, this night shall they fetch away thy soul, and
then whose shall those goods be, which thou have provided? So is every one
(says our Savior) that gets riches for himself, and is not rich toward
God. What greater folly, then to be all for the present, nothing for the
future? All for the Summer, nothing for the Winter? All for the body, nothing
for the soul? And yet alas! there are thousands that are thus besotted,
Martha-like, and worse, cumbred about many things, when the one thing needful,
the better part, is wholly neglected. Now for the remedy of this, give me
leave to commend unto your consideration, that golden place of our Savior,
Mat. 16. 26. What is a man profited, if he gain the whole world, and loose his
own soul? Take heed brethren, a man cannot look upward and downward both at
once; or upward with one eye, and down with the other: for we cannot set our
affections upon things above, if we set them too much upon things here below:
we cannot serve God and Mammon, Mat. 6. 24. We cannot love God, and the world:
If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him, says the
Apostle, 1 John 2. 15. We cannot be both earthly, and heavenly minded, as we
ought; we cannot be a friend of the world, and Gods friend too, but Whosoever
makes himself the friend of the world, is the enemy of God. It is an
excellent place of the Apostle, Jam. 4. 4. later end: Know ye not, that the
friendship of the world, is enmity against God? Whosoever therefore will be a
friend of the world, is the enemy of God. They are too blame, that spend more
time in the worlds service, then in the Lords.

Secondly, 2. Sort. Are such as spend more time in idle pleasures, and
recreation, then in Gods service.
This serves to reprove such as spend more time in sinful pleasures and
recreation, then in Gods service: These are lovers of pleasures, more then
lovers of God, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 3. 4. As if men were made only
for themselves, and their own pleasures, and not for GOD. How far are these
from the disposition of faithful Moses? Who refused to be called the son of
Pharoahs daughter, choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God,
then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, Heb. 11. 24, 25.

Now for the means to prevent, Remedies against this.
or reform this gross abuse, in thus mis-spending of our time; Let us
consider these two particulars.

First, That time spent in Gods service, 1. Remedy.
is absolutely the most full of pleasure; yea, there is no true solid pleasure
in the world without it; it is to a spiritual man, the very joy and rejoicing
of his heart.

Secondly, 2. Remedy.
The more pleasure we have in any thing, in the neglect of Gods worship and
service, the more torment and sorrow will follow afterward: The better the wine
is, the sharper and more sour will it be, when it is turned to vinegar. It is
most true of all such delights, which Abner said to Joab, They will be
bitterness in the later end. See the fruit of the rich man's carnal pleasures,
Luke 16. 25. In that speech of Father Abraham to the rich man in hell; Son,
remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, or thy
pleasures, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou
art tormented. O the everlasting bitter panges of hell, which follow the
pleasures of sin for a season! Who would dote upon such sweet meat, that is
attended with such bitter and sour sauce? So, mark what is said of Babylon,
that had glutted her self with pleasures, and made her self Drunk with the
blood of the Saints, Revel. 18. 7. How much she has glorified her self, and
lived deliciously; so much torment and sorrow give her. The more pleasures of
sin here on earth, the more torment in hell. If our carnal mirth-mungers
would consider this, it would be a means to persuade them to spend more time
in Gods service, and less in the pleasures of sin, which are but for a
season.

Thirdly, 3. Sort. Are such as stay long, before they begin to spend any time
at all that way.
This serves to reprove all such, as stay long before they spend any time at
all in Gods service. How ordinary a thing is it for men to mispend their best
strength, and flower of their youth, and reserve the decrepit old age for God?
Tell many of repentance, of Gods service, of the power of godliness; oh, say
they, it is too soon, I am too young; hereafter is better, when I am old. This
is the usual practice of the world. If time spent in Gods service be the best
spent; woe be to those, that stay long before they begin to serve God at all.
Simile.
Like a man that goes to London, about some business of great importance, and
when he comes there, spends all his time in saluting here, and
complementing there, and seeing this and that rare sight; and then has all his
(...) to dispatch, when he should go home. Here is the very case of many, that
come into the City of this world: they spend the greatest part of their time
in other things; and never so much as dream or think of Religion, which is
the maine end, for which they were sent into the world. What a woeful account
will these make, at the last day?

Now for prevention, or remedy hereof, Antidotes against this*
let us consider these four particulars.

First, The express command of God: Remember our Creator in the days of our
youth; Gods command*
before those days come, wherein we shall say, I have no pleasure in them. A
woeful thing, for a man even then to bethink himself how to live, when he is
ready to die, Eccles. 12. 1. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth.

Secondly, Consider the time which we Consider, that the time we have to
spend, is very uncertain.
a man resolves to serve God when he is old; yea, but what if he dye in the
mean time, while he is young, and never live until he be old? How many
Lambe-skinnes come to the Market, as well as the skins of elder sheep? How
many dye young, and drop away, even in the midst (as they thought) of their
best strength? No man knows the day of his death; and therefore Job (to make
sure work) would begin and prepare for it every day, Job* 14. 14. All the
days of my appointed time will I wait, until my change come. Death many
times comes suddenly, when it is the least thought on of all: When they shall
say, peace, peace; then shall sudden destruction fall upon them, says the
Apostle, 1 These. 5. 3. They spend their days in wealth, and in a moment go
down to hell, Job 21. 13. Therefore they say unto God, depart from us, for we
desire not the knowledge of thy ways, etc. A woeful estate.

The longer we are before we begin, the more difficulties we shall meet
withal.
The longer it is before we return to God, the more difficult we shall find
it, to turn at last. Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit. Continuance in
sin, breeds custom in sin; and how hard is it for men to overcome evil
customs? Ier. 13. 21. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his
spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil. So that it
is exceeding difficult, if not impossible. The further a man goes out of his
way, the longer journey he has to go at his return; and then it is possible
for him to stay too long.

Consider how just it is, for God to reject such as do turn at last.
But admit, that at last he desires to return to God, and spend time in his
service; Yet how just is it with God, to reject him in that case? What a base
thing, for a man to spend all the best of his time and strength in the service
of sin and Satan, and then to begin to serve God, when he is fit for
nothing, but to feed worms? What would you think of that servant, whom you
should hyre to serve you for a year; and yet he never would do you days
work, until the last month, or week, or hour, immediately before he
should receive his wages? Or what would you conceive of that Soldier, that
should spend all his youth and strength in the wars against his King, and
Sovereign; and then offers his old age to his Prince, when he is scarce able
to carry his weapon. Here is the very case of all those, that spend all the best
of their health and strength in the service of sin, and offer their poor,
despicable old age to God. What is this but to offer the Lame, and Torn, and
the Sick? Mal. 1. O how justly may God reject us in that case? Consider that
fearful place, Pro. 1. 28, 29. Then shall they call, but I will not answer:
they shall seek me early, but shall not find me, because they hated
knowledge, etc. They that despise Gods service in their youth, may justly
expect, that God should despise them in their age.

Fourthly, 4. Sort. Such as spend some time in Gods service, but not enough.
This serves to reprove such, as spend some time in Gods service, but not
enough: seem to make conscience of some duties, but not of others. If time
spent in Gods service be the best spent time, then they are to blame, that
deal niggardly with God in this regard; that do serve God by the halves; with
the lips, but not with the heart; have prayer in the morning, but not in the
evening; both these perhaps, but no reading, nor godly conference, nor
catechizing: some also come to Church sometimes, once a month, or in the
morning, but not in the evening. Well, consider that time spent in Gods service
is absolutely the best spent time. Therefore they are too blame, that are
sparing in this behalf. God is abundant in goodness to us, and therefore we
should be abundant in duty to him; Always abounding in the work of the Lord,
as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 15. 58. Oh, for shame let us not be niggardly
with him, that is so bountiful to us; He gives to all men liberally, says
the Apostle, Iam. 1. 6. O let us be liberal in our duty to God, seeing no
time is so well spent, as that which is spent in Gods service. O let us
therefore be cheerful and hearty in it.

Now for Remedies in this case, (...)
Let us consider these four particulars.

(...)
and the more pains we take in Gods service, the more glory redoundeth to
God. Herein is my father glorified, that ye bring forth much fruit, says our
Savior, Ioh. 15. 8.

(...)
The more pains we take, and the more time we spend in Gods service, the
greater reward is reserved for us; For God is not unrighteous, to forget your
patience, and labor of love, Heb. 6. 10. But will both surely and fully reward
it in the end. These small pains of ours, which are but for a moment, they
cause unto us, or work for us, a far more exceeding, and an eternal weight
of glory, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 4. 17. Abundance of time sincerely
spent in Gods service, will procure abundance of glory.

Thirdly, The more time we spend in The stronger our assurance of salvation.
the stronger will be our assurance, that when we die, we shall go to heaven,
Having your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life, says the
Apostle, Romans 6. 22. The more fruitful we are in holiness, the faster we lay
hold on eternal life. Hence is that excellent place of the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.
5. And besides this, giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue, and to
virtue knowledge, etc. and so one grace unto another; as if he should have
said, spend much time in Gods service, take much pains to abound in grace; Why
so? What is the Apostles Reason? That you shall see, verse. 11. For so an
entrance shall be made unto you, abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of
Jesus Christ. Lo here the excellent benefit of pains and diligence in Gods
service. This will fill a man full of joy and peace in believing.

Fourthly, and lastly, Hereby we shall We shall bring credit to our
profession.
and adorn and beautify our Religion, and do good to others. Mat. 5. 16. Let
your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, says our
Savior. A good conversation prevails, where the Word sometimes prevails
not; That if any obey not the Word, they may be won by the good conversation
of the wives, says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 3. 1.

Fifthly, 5. Sort. Such as spend more time in the Devils service, then in Gods.
This serves to reprove such, as spend more time in the Devils service, then
in Gods; yea, and the number of these is exceeding great, that spend more time
in swearing, in railing, in drunkenness, in wantonness, etc. then in hearing,
or praying, and such like exercises of piety and godliness. Nay, what shall we
think of such, as spend that very time in the devils service, that is
appointed for Gods service? Such as spend that very time in swearing, and
gaming, and drinking, drunk in the Alehouse, which should be spent in the
exercises of Religion, in Gods house? when men are so weary of Gods service,
that they are even tired out with an hour or two, spent therein; and yet can
without weariness spend twice as much in vicious courses, and not be weary?
Oh fearful height of impiety, that men should take more delight in the devils
service then in Gods! Yea, that are so earnestly bent upon it, that they do
even imagine mischief upon their beds, that when the morning light is, they
may practice it, Mich. 2. 1. Yea, some are so sharp set in this case, that it
does even break their sleep; according to that in Proverbs 4. 16. They sleep
not, except they do evil; and their sleep departs from them, except they
cause some to fall, Oh how foolishly and desperately do such spend their time,
even in cutting, and wounding, and stabbing their souls, and do daily
treasure up to themselves wrath, against the day of wrath, and the revelation
of the righteous judgment of God, Romans 2. 4, 5.

Now for the perfecting of this branch, give me leave to show you the remedies
of this dangerous mischief: and the helps which we must use to this purpose,
Preservatives.
are principally these four.

1. Consider, 1. Remedy. Whilst we live thus, we are children of wrath.
that all the while we spend our time thus, we are children of wrath, and in
the state of nature, as the Apostle shows, Ephesians. 2. 3. All the while we
live thus, we can look for nothing, but the wrath of God, to come upon us, as
it does upon the children of disobedience, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians 5.
6. The wrath of God is even revealed from heaven against such, Romans 1. 18.
See a notable place for this purpose, in Romans 2. 8, 9. But unto them that are
contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, (mark the
condition of all such) indignation, and wrath, tribulation, and anguish, upon
every soul of man that does evil, upon the Jew first, etc. See here the
estate of such as spend time in the devils service, instead of Gods.

Secondly, 2. Remedy. God will not hear their prayers, that do so.
Consider, that all such have cause to fear, that God will deny to help and
succor them, when they stand in the most need of it, and seek for it with
greatest earnestness. If I regard wickedness in my heart, God will not hear
my prayer, says David, Psalm 66. 18. Yea, we know that God hears not
sinners, says the blind man, John 9. 31. and therefore, if God do not hear
wicked men's prayers in their extremities, but lets them perish in their sins;
it is not for want of power, or mercy in God; but only for want of piety, and
repentance in them, according to that excellent place which we have to this
purpose, in Isa. 59. 1, 2. Behold, the Lords hand is not shortened, that he
cannot save; neither is his ear heavy, that he cannot hear, where is the
fault then? that you shall see in the next verse, verse 2. But your iniquities
have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face
from you, that he cannot hear; Oh the woeful estate of all such, as cry unto
God in their extremities, and are nothing at all regarded! Yea, God has told
them already, that he will not hear them: observe it, Proverbs 1. 28, 29.
Then shall they call, etc. that is, in their extremity, but I will not answer;
they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me; because they hated
knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord. Yea, the Lord has sent
them word before hand, that he will not help them, Job 8. 20. Behold, God will
not cast away a perfect man, neither will he help the evil doers, says the
Text there. O the woeful estate of all such, when sickness comm^n, or troubles
come, or death; then they are glad to cry out, Help Lord, or else I am damned
for ever: Not I, may the Lord say, I will help no evil doers, such as you
are, and therefore thou art now like to perish, and dye in thy sins, John 8.
20. Yea, the Lord is so far from regarding the prayers of such people, in
such cases, that he rather refuses them; see upon what warrant I speak it,
Proverbs 15. 8. The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination unto the Lord.
The sacrifice, what is that? Surely his prayers, as appears by the Antithesis
in that place: for so it follows, But the prayer of the upright is his
delight, God hates and abhors the prayers of all such as live in their
sins, and hate to be reformed: He that turneh away his ear from hearing the
Law, even that man's prayer shall be an abomination, says the Wiseman, Prove.
28. 9. O woeful estate! If men had but eyes to see it, and hearts to consider
it aright: the Lord takes no pleasure in the very best services which they can
do him.

And no marvel, 3. Remedy. All such are at utter enmity with God.
for in the third place; So long as men live in their sins, without
repentance, and spend time in the Devils service, instead of Gods, there is a
direct and an express enmity between God and them. If when we were enemies,
we were reconciled to God, by the death of his Son, says the Apostle, Romans
5. 10. Yea, especially those that live and go on in their sins, have just
cause to be assured of this, and that they shall smart for it accordingly; See
a place or two to this purpose, Psalm 37. 20. But the wicked shall perish, why
so? surely, because they are Gods enemies. And the enemies of the Lord shall be
as the fat of Lambs, (easily melted) into smoke shall they consume away. Where
we see; first, that the wicked are Gods enemies. Secondly, that they shall
consume away like smoke, and the fat of Lambs. So in that Psalm for the
Sabbath, Psalm 92. 9. For lo thine enemies, O Lord, lo thine enemies shall
perish; and who are they? that ye shall see in the same verse. All the workers
of iniquity shall be scattered: where we see both the description, and the
condition of wicked men. They are Gods enemies, there is their description;
dissipation, and perishing, there is their condition. But above all to this
purpose is that of Psalm 68. 21. God will surely wound the head of his
enemies, and the hairie scalpe of such a one, as goes on still in his
trespasses, O consider this, ye that forget God, and live in your sins, lest
God tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you, Psalm. 50. 22. What
estate can be more dangerous then an estate of enmity against God? The
adversaries of the Lord shall be broken in pieces, out of heaven shall be
thunder upon them, says Hannah Samuel's Mother, 1 Samuel 2. 10. Me thinks I
have said enough, if effectual, to afright men out of their service of sin
and Satan, especially if I shall add but one thing more, which shall be the
fourth and the last remedy, that I purpose to propound.

Fourthly, 4. Remedy. Consider, that the devil is the worst Master that we can
serve.
Therefore consider, that the devil is the worst master that any man can
serve, and gives the most woeful and accursed wages. What baser Master then
the devil? that great red Dragon, Revelations 12. 12. That roaring Lion, that
goes about continually seeking whom he may devour, A murderer from the very
beginning: John 8. 44. and the most damnable liar, that ever was, yea, the very
father thereof; What baser Master then the Devil? Yea, and see what base wages
he gives, Romans 6. 23. For the wages of sin is death, spiritual,
temporal, and eternal, both the first, and the second death. They that spend
time in the devils service, must go to hell, with the Devil for company,
Psalm 9. 17. The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all that forget God.
They are utterly deceived, that think to live like devils upon earth, and yet
for all that, become glorious Saints in heaven, when they dye: that think they
shall get into the new Jerusalem hereafter, without being New Creatures for the
present. No, no, God has revealed the contrary already, as is evident, Revel.
22. 14, 15. Blessed are they that do his Commandments (that spend time in
Gods service) for they shall enter in through the gates, into the City of the
new Jerusalem. But without shall be dogs, and Inchanters, and Whoremongers,
and such as love, and make lies. These must stand without, etc. go to hell
with the devil and his Angels, according to the prediction of Christ himself,
in Matthew 25. 41. Go ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. Consider this, all you that have spent more time in the
devils service, then in Gods; yea, all, or the greatest part of thy life in the
service of sin and Satan; and little, or no time at all in the service of
God Almighty: you that could find in your hearts to say unto God, Depart from
us, for we desire no acquaintance with thy ways, He will pay you home one
day, in your own coin, (unless ye repent) and send you packing to hell,
with a, depart from me, etc. I know ye not, ye workers of iniquity, Matthew 7.
23. Yea, when ye shall begin to claim acquaintance with God, and cry, Lord,
Lord, etc. Even then will He profess unto you, I never knew you, 6. Sort.
Such as will neither spend Time in Gods service themselves, nor suffer others
Depart from me, ye that work iniquity.

The sixth, and the last sort, are those, that will neither spend time in Gods
service themselves, nor suffer others; such as not only mispend their own
time, but also hinder and discourage others from the well spending of theirs;
such as cry out, what need so much preaching, such running after Sermons, etc.
like waggish and unhappy Scholars, that will neither apply their books
themselves, nor suffer their fellows, but hinder, and disturb them by all
means possible. Here is just the Dog in the manger. These are Satan's
Vicegerents, even his Standard-bearers, and Captains, chief factors for Hell.
These are they, that will neither enter into the kingdom of heaven themselves,
nor suffer others, but shut up the kingdom of God against them, Luke 11 52.
Matthew. 23. 13.

Consider now; Is time spent in Gods service absolutely the best spent time?
See the woeful estate of all such.
How grossly and grievously are they to blame, that not only despise the duties
of Gods service themselves, but also discourage others; For the perfecting of
this point, give me leave to show you the woeful and fearful estate of all
such.

1. They are guilty of the blood of their Guilty of the blood of souls.
by this means. Now what a woeful estate is this, that whereas a man is not
able to answer one of a thousand, in respect of his own sins, he should yet
be chargeable with the sins of others? when he shall hear those poor
souls curse him in hell, and say, O woe be to thee, for thou art the cause of
my damnation? I had spent my time in Gods service, had it not been for thee? O
how this will gall thee, and torment thee at that day; such and such might have
gone to heaven, but for thy discouragements: Ezec. 33. 6.
He verily dies in his iniquity, but his blood will the Lord require at thy
hands, thou have helped forward a soul to death, and so art guilty of the
blood of souls.

A sin of a large extent reaches up unto heaven.
it reaches up to the very heavens. Every such person, does even become a
fighter against God, and takes the devils part against Christ, this soul is
mine, says the LORD, and I will save it; nay, says the Devil, this soul is
mine, and I will damn it. Thus they strive and wrestle for the poor soul;
Christ, by the means of grace to save it, and Satan by his temptations to
damn it: now the profane person, he takes Satan's part, and helps him
against Christ; and therefore is a direct fighter against God. Excellent to
this purpose, is that speech of Gamaleel, Acts 5. 39. when they were consulting
how to suppress the Apostles preaching of the Gospel, Abstain from these
men, and let them alone; for if this counsel, or this work be of men, it
will come to naught; but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest happily
ye become even to fight against God; He that fights against Gods ordinances,
does even fight against God: yea, he that does but murmr against these
things, his murmurings are against the Lord, Exodus 16. 8. yea, and he that does
set himself to persecute Gods people for this, does even persecute Christ
himself, as appears by that speech of Christ to Paul, as he was going to
Damascus, with a Commission to persecute those Primitive Christians, Jesus
Christ strikes him down to the earth, and salutes him in these terms, Acts 9.
4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? I am Jesus of Nazareth whom thou
persecutest. Christ takes that as done to him, which is done to his members,
in this case: yea, he that does but touch them (in any kind, to hurt them)
touches the very Apple of GODS eye. Oh that men would seriously consider the
extent of their sin, and how far their rebellions do reach in this case!

And therefore in the third place, it must The wrath of God is ready to fall on
them to the uttermost.
that the wrath of God is ready to seize upon them to the uttermost; yea, the
wrath of God already abides on them, although they perceive it not. See a
fearful and terrible place of the Apostle, to this purpose, 1 These. 2. 14. Ye
have suffered like things of your own Countrymen, as they of the Jews, Why?
what had the Jews done? That the Apostle shows, verse 15. Who both killed
the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and have persecuted us, and they
please not God, and are contrary to all men, verse 16. forbidding us to speak
to the Gentiles, that they might be saved, (there is the very case that we have
in hand) they do hinder (as much as in them lies) the salvation of others.
Now what is the fruit of all this? that ye shall see, in the later end of that
verse. To fill up their sins always, for the wrath of God is come upon them to
the uttermost; Oh the woeful estate of such, the wrath of God is ready to seize
upon them to the uttermost. This is enough even to shake the hearts of all
such, as are guilty in this kind.

A fearful sign of reprobation.
it is the very brand of a reprobate, and he that goes on in this case,
without repentance, has great cause to fear this of himself, That God has
forsaken him, and given him up to his own hearts lusts, and into the hands of
Satan. Two singular places of Scripture I will give you for this, the one 2
Timothy 3. 8. As Iannes, and Iambres withstoode Moses; so do these men resist
the truth, (they will neither embrace it themselves, nor suffer others,) what
is the state of these men? (men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the
faith. The other place which I will commend to your consideration in this case,
is, that of the Apostle, Philippians 1. 28. And in nothing be terrifyed by your
adversaries, which is to them a token of perdition, but to you of salvation,
and that of God. Where we may plainly see, that as it is a token of
salvation, to be persecuted for righteousness sake; so it is a fearful token
of Reprobation, to be a persecuter in that case.

Fifthly, and lastly, It is a fearful A sign they belong to Satan.
that a man belongs to the Devil. This is a special work of the devil, to
hate, and malign, and persecute men for their piety. If a man therefore
resolve to go on in this case, it is a fearful sign that a man is even a
very child of the Devil. Thus our Savior disputes the case with the
Pharis^es, John 8. 1. They bosted that Abraham was their father, nay, says our
Savior, ye go about to kill me, a man that has told ye the truth, that did
not Abraham, says he, verse 40. why then, say they, we have one father, even
God, verse 41. No, says our Savior, verse 44. Ye are of your father the
Devil, and the works of your father ye will do, All that persecute Gods
people for their piety, are of their father the devil, in that case, see Acts
13. 8, 9, 10, etc.

CHAP. V.
Containing the third Use of the point, viz. for Exhortation.

THirdly, Use 3. sc. For Exhortation to sundry duties, especially three.
Is it so, that time spent in Gods service, is the best spent time? This
serves then to exhort us to sundry duties.

1. In regard of our selves.

2. In respect of others.

1. This Doctrine serves to exhort us to a threefold duty. For seeing time
spent in Gods service is the best spent time: let us then,

1. Begin betime to serve God.

2. Be constant.

3. Be abundant in it, and spend as much time in it, as we can possibly.

1. This serves to exhort every one of us, 1. Duty. That we begin betimes,
and set our selves ever speedily to serve the Lord, and without all delay.
that speedily and without delay we set our selves to the duties of Gods
worship and service. How can we spend our time better? All time is even wholly
misspent, that is spent in the neglect of this. Oh therefore old men, young men,
all men, let us speedily set our selves to the duties of Gods service: Now is
the accepted time, now is the day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6. 2. Seek the Lord
whilst he may be found; and call upon him while he is near, Isaiah 55. 6. Why
should we defer any longer; considering that one day nothing will vex and
grieve us more, then that we began no sooner? Art thou an old man? Then thou
had need to begin with all speed, lest thou be prevented by death? Art thou
young? Oh then begin speedily, to prevent mispending thy precious time in the
service of sin and Satan; I write unto you, young men, to exhort you to
begin to serve God betime, in the flower of your youth. How can you spend the
flower of your youth better, than in the service of your Maker? Give me leave
therefore, to persuade and press every one of you, in the words of the wisest
Solomon, Eccles. 12. 1. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, before
the evil day come: It is a young man's greatest honor to be religious
betimes. Oh what an honor to young Solomon, to be virtuously instructed, even
from his childhood, with, Know thou the God of thy fathers, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. So
an everlasting credit for young Samuel, to be trained up in the duties of Gods
service of a child, Samuel ministered before the Lord, being a child, says the
Text, 1 Samuel 2. 18. And again, The child Samuel ministered unto the Lord before
Ely 1 Samuel 3. 1. Yea, this was so famous and admirable a thing, that all Israel
took notice of it; for they all knew that Samuel was established to be a
Prophet of the Lord, says the Text, 1 Samuel 3. 20. verse. This set such a
Crown of glory upon his head, that it is not forgotten to this day. He that
sets himself to serve, and honor God in his youth, shall have the honor
and credit of it for ever. So for Josiah, What glorious things are spoken of
him to this day, even in this respect? See how the Spirit of God reports it,
in 2 Chronicles. 34. 3. In the eight year of his reign, while he was yet young, he
began to seek after the God of David his father; young indeed, for he was but
eight years old, when he began to reign, verse 1. So that he could be but
sixteen years of age, at the most, when this was reported of him. O what an
excellent pattern is here for young men: let them all learn of this young
Saint, to bestow the flower of their youth upon God; it will set an everlasting
crown of glory upon their head. To the same purpose is that of famous Timothy,
of whom it is said, That he knew the Scriptures of a child, which was able to
make him wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. Wherewithal shall a young man
cleanse his way, and become religious? Surely by imitating and following the
example of such rare young men, as these are.

Now the better to stir up young men hereunto, I have two general Motives to
propound unto them (besides the honor of it) viz.

1. The Utility. Motives 2.
2. The Necessity.
1. The Vtility. Hearken to this, 1. The utility, as appears in sundry
benefits, which flow from hence.
O ye young men, for it is for your profit; hear it, and do it for your
good. Behold! here I will show you the good and right way, sc. fear the Lord,
and serve him in your youth, First seek Gods kingdom, and the righteousness
of it, as our blessed Savior himself advises, Matthew 6. 33. Acquaint your
selves with God, even in your youth, and serve him, for hereby good shall come
unto you, as one of Jobs friends speaks excellently, Job 22. 21.

1. For. 1. The Lord will take it exceeding Benefit. The Lord takes it
exceeding kindly, if we set our selves to serve him in our youth.
we shall please him exceedingly; yea, the Lord will be so much affected with
it, that he will never forget it. To sacrifice our youth unto Gods service, is
(as it were) to sacrifice our Isaac to him: now see how kindly the Lord took
Abraham's purpose in that case, Genesis 22. 12. By my self have I sworn,
because thou have done this thing, that in blessing, I will bless thee. He
that dedicateth his youth unto Gods service, shall be remembered with a blessing
in his age. So when Israel was newly come out of Egypt, no marvel if they
were much affected with his admirable mercies toward them; they could not
choose (for the present) but love him entirely, and even set the dearest of
their affections upon him. Now see how kindly this was taken, and remembered a
long time after; (yea, notwithstanding their manifold infirmities, their
murmurings, their infidelity, etc.) yet see how lovingly the Lord makes
mention of it, a long time after, Jeremy 2. 2. Thus says the Lord, I remember
thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou
wentest after me in the wilderness, etc. The kindness of their youth, is
kindly remembered, With such sacrifices the Lord is well pleased. This is the
first benefit.

Secondly, 2. Benefit. It will prevent the Lusts of youth, which will else lie
heavy upon us in our age.
If we set our selves to serve God in our youth; it will be an excellent
means, to prevent the lusts of youth; which if they be not prevented, will be
bitter and terrible in the time of age. Fly the lusts of youth, says the
Apostle, 2 Timothy 2. 22. There are certain lusts, which men are most subject
unto in time of youth: yea, these lusts, are noisome and dangerous, and fight
directly against the soul; Abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against
the soul, says another Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 11. These (many times) lie heavy
upon the conscience (of the best,) in time of age. Hearken how holy David
cries out, Psalm. 25. 7. Remember not the sins of my youth, says that good
man: He knew what a woeful case he should be in, if God should call him to
account, for the sins of his youth: and yet doubtless, he was a godly man,
even from his youth: see what he says of himself, Psalm. 71. 5. Thou art my
hope, O Lord God, thou art my trust, even from my youth: yea, he was taught of
God from his youth, ver. 17. Yea, mark what the Lord himself says of him,
even in his youth, 1 Samuel 13. 14. The Lord has sought him a man after his own
heart. He was a man after Gods own heart, yet cries out of the sins of his
youth. So consider Job, by the Lords own testimony, an incomparable man; A man
that feared God, and eschewed evil: yet see how he cries out of the sins of
his youth, Job 13. 26. Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to
possess the sins of my youth: and yet he was religious and merciful, even
in his youth: see what he could speak of himself; Job 31. 18. (where speaking
of the widow and fatherless;) For from my youth, he (that is the fatherless)
was brought up with me, as with a Father; and I have guided her (that is the
widow) from my mothers womb. Now mark it, I pray you, are the sins of youth
thus bitter, to such as David, and Job, such godly persons? What will they then
be, to them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity; and sin as it were
with a cart-rope? They must needs feel and find (one day) that it is an evil
thing, and bitter, to forsake the Lord, and that his fear is not in them (in
their youth) as the Lord himself speaks, Ier. 2. 19. They that have taken
great pains, and toyled, and moyled in their youth, are apt to cry out of
Stitches and Aches in their age: this is the very case of such as take great
pains in the service of sin, and Satan, in their youth; they will cry out
of the bitterness of it in their age: As Abner said to Ioab, they will find it
bitterness in the later end. Thus wise Solomon disswadeth the young man from
whoredom; Pro. 5. 8. Come not nigh the door of her house; Why so? 1. Lest
thou give thine honor to others, and thy years to the cruel; thy credits
gone, ver. 9. yea, and thy profit too, Lest strangers be filled with thy
wealth, and thy labors be in the house of strangers; it will empty thy house
of wealth, etc.

But this is not all. Service of sin, bitterness in the end.
It will be bitterness in the end, ver. 11. Lest thou mourn at last, and say,
How have I hated instruction, etc ( i.e.) How have I misspent my precious
time, and neglected the service of God, in my youth? Now the way and chief
means to prevent this, is to set our selves to serve God, even in our youth;
for this will bring sweetness and comfort in time of age. Oh what an
happiness, when a man can say with Paul, Act. 23. 1. I have lived in all good
conscience unto this day. Or with the young man, Mark. 10. 20. All this have I
kept from my youth. See the respect that our Savior had to him for this; Then
Jesus beholding him, loved him: He even loved him, in some sort, for his
external obedience: how much more will he love them, that truly, and
sincerely love and serve him? Ich. 14. 21. 23. He that has my Commandments,
and keeps them, is he that loves me; and he that loves me, shall be beloved
of my Father, and I will manifest my self to him; yea, my Father will love
him, and we will come and make our abode with him. O happy Company! what
greater comfort? It is heaven upon earth: in stead of the bitter sins of
youth, we shall have fellowship with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ, says the Apostle, 1 Ioh. 1. 3.

Thirdly, 3. Benefit. Quo semel est imbuta, etc.
Time spent sincerely in Gods service in our youth, will make us constantly
religious in our age. I know indeed, that some that have seemed Saints in
youth, It will make us constant in Gods service in our age.
have proved devils in their age: As Ioash, etc. but they did but seem so,
they had only a form of godliness, but denied the power of it, 2 Timothy 3. 5.
But such as are truly and sincerely religious in youth, will be constant in
age; that is the right property of a tree of Righteousness, Psalm. 92. (that
Psalm for the Sabbath day) verse. 13. 14. They that be (truly) planted in the
house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of the house of our God. They
shall still bring forth fruit in their old age, they shall be fat and
flourishing. To the same purpose is that speech of Solomon, Pro. 22. 6. Train
up a child, (or Catechize) in the way he should go, and when he is old, he
will not depart from it. Lo, the benefit of a religious education in youth. He
that spends time in Gods service, in his youth, will hardly neglect it in his
age. He that is a Tymothy, in his youth, for the most part, proves a Mnaason,
an old Disciple in his age, Act. 21. 26. An heart seasoned with the true fear
of God in a man's youth, will make him, that he shall not depart from God when
he is old. Solomon indeed fell foulely, and dangerously in his age, but
returned to God by repentance at last, as is evident by his book of
Ecclesiastes; yea, see what warrant we have to think thus; Ier. 32. 40. And I
will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall never depart from me. He
that once truly fears God, departs not from him.

Fourthly, 4. Benefit. The more comfort for the present, and the more glory
hereafter.
The more time we spend, and the more pains we take in Gods service in our
youth, the more comfort shall we have for the present, and the more glory
hereafter: this adds still more weight, and massinesse to our crown of glory
in heaven. The small pains that we take in Gods service, (though in comparison
they be but as for a moment) yet work unto us, an eternal and exceeding
weight of glory, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 4. 17. O how this should
persuade us to begin betimes! The sooner we begin to spend time in Gods
service, the more time shall we spend in it, and reap the more glory
hereafter. This is evident by that Parable of the Talents. The more Talents we
have, and the better we employ them, the more glory in heaven. See what is
said to him that had five Talents, well improved, Luke 19. 17. Well done, thou
good and faithful servant, because thou have been faithful in a few things,
have thou authority over ten Cities. Yea, who must have the odd Talent, but
he that had ten before? Ver. 24. And he said unto them that stood by, Take the
Talent from him, and give it to him that has ten Talents. They said unto him,
(v. 25.) Lord, he has ten Talents, (i.e.) he has enough already; now observe
the answer, ver. 26. For unto every one that has, shall be given, etc. He that
has most grace to spend most time in Gods service on earth, shall have the
greatest reward, and the most glory in heaven. Oh therefore begin betime to
get grace, that thou may have the more glory in heaven.

Fifthly, 5. Benefit. Hereby we shall comfort our parents, and requite their
love.
The sooner we begin to spend time in Gods service, the sooner shall we
begin to requite our Parents love, and to afford them comfort. The childs
well-doing, is the Parents comfort. Yea, many Parents, that are not so
religious themselves, rejoice yet to see their children zealous, and forward
that way. A wise Son makes a glad Father, says Solomon, Prove. 10. 1. A wise
Son, that is, a religious child, one that sets himself to serve God in
his youth, he rejoices the heart of his Father: But a foolish Son (that is,
an ungodly Impe) is the grief of his Mother. Ungodly children, like a viperous
brood, do eat out the very hearts of their parents, and do stab their hearts
with sorrow, and heaviness. It is a strange speech of Solomon, 17. 21. He that
begets a fool (that is, an ungracious child, for that is Salomons fool)
does it to his sorrow; and the Father of a fool has no joy. I marvel not
more, that old Ely brake his neck with his fall at last, then that his sons
had not broken his heart long before, with their vicious courses. Oh let us
therefore serve God in our youth, that it may be a comfort to our Parents in
their age. Here is the fifth Benefit.

But besides the Utility, 2. Motive. 2 Necessity. Eccles. 12. 1.
let us (in the second place) consider the Necessity. For besides the express
charge that we have from God to this purpose, see the dangerous consequences,
and inconveniences that follow upon the neglect of it. Sundry mischiefs which
flow from the neglect of it.
So that we must needs do it, or we must do worse. Now the mischiefs that
do especially flow from the neglect of Gods service in our youth, are
principally five.

First, 1 Mischief We shall serve worse Masters,
If we do not serve God in our youth, we shall serve worse Masters, sc. the
Devil, the world, and the flesh. He that serves not God, must serve the
Devil; it is unavoydable; observe it, Ephesians. 2. 2. Wherein, in times past ye
walked, according to the course of this world, according to the Prince of the
power of the air, the Spirit that now works in the children of disobedience.
But how came this to pass? See, Ver. 12. At that time ye were without Christ,
etc. without God in the world: He that is without Christ, and without God, will
not, nor cannot be without his lusts. Until we become the servants of God, we
are all the vassals of Satan, and slaves to our own filthy lusts. Titus 3. 3.
For we our selves were sometimes foolish, serving diverse lusts, and
pleasures, etc. Lo, our woeful Masters, until we set our selves to serve
God; Living in malice, hateful, and hating one another, says the Apostle
there: Ye cannot serve God and Mammon, says our blessed Savior, Mat. 6. 24.
As if he had said, Ye cannot but serve one of them; He that commits sin,
is the servant of sin; a woeful Master. See what lamentable wages such
Masters usually give their servants in the end; The wages of sin is death,
says the Apostle, Romans 6. 23. See then how necessary it is to serve God, and
that speedily; for till then, we must of necessity serve woeful Masters, for
woeful wages. But O the happiness of such as spend time in Gods service; Ver.
22. But now being made free from sin, and become the servants of God, ye
have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. There is
excellent wages.

Secondly, 2 Mischief The more difficult.
The longer we stay, before we set our selves to serve God, the more difficult
and hard we shall find it, if we do return to God at last. He that posteth
the contrary way, Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit.
is still the farther from his journeys end, and will have the less mind to
return. Continuance in evil, breeds a custom in sin, which is not left,
without great difficulty; Ier. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin,
or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to
do evil. It is exceeding difficult. When a man has gotten a custom of
swearing, or drinking, or gameing, how hard is it for such to be reclaimed? A
twig is easily dealt with, which is immovable, if it grow till it become a
tree. How tractable was Joash in his youth? but in his age intolerable. He that
was guided by Jehojada in his youth, killed his son Zachariah afterward. Much
more, he that is bad in his youth, may be worse in his age.

Thirdly, 3. Mischief God has just cause, to reject such in their age.
How just is it with God to reject them in their age, which have rejected his
service in their youth. Men think any thing is good enough for God, the rotten
old age, the blind, and the lame, and the sick; but how much they are
deceived, the Prophet shows, Mal. 1. Offer it now to thy Prince, or thy
Governor, (says the Lord) would he accept it at thy hands? Suppose that a
Soldier should spend all his youth, in service against his Sovereign, and
then in his old age should offer his service to his Prince: How justly might
such a base offer be rejected? Why should we spend the flower of our youth in
vanity, and yet think that God should accept of us in our age? He that
runs from God, the greatest part of his life, God may hide himself from him
at his death: See their Histories.
witness Spira, and the Kentish Apothecarie; how woefully did God hide himself
from them in death, that had neglected his service in their life? When the
Father sees the child ready to play with every toy, or feather, and not to
mind his way, he steppeth behind a bush, and hides himself a good while
before the child can find him: so deals God with his children; Verily, thou
art a God that hydest thy self, O God of Israel the Savior, Isa. 45. 15.

If Gods children will walk so near hell mouth, the greatest part of their
life, Mr. Harris Abs. Funeral.
no marvel if at the time of death, the Lord take them by the heels, and make
them believe, he will throw them in. So I conceive the Lord dealt with Spira,
and the Apothecarie. I love them that love me, says Wisdom, and they that
seek me early, shall find me, Pro. 8. 17. To intimate unto us, that it is
possible for a man to come too late. There is a time, when God will not be
found; as is intimated, Isa. 55. 6. See an experiment of such as come too late;
and were rejected; Pro. 1. 28, 29. Then shall they call, but I will not answer:
they shall seek me early, but shall not find me: Why so? Because they hated
knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lerd. See what it is, to put off
the service of God to the last. Let Esau admonish every one of us, to beware of
coming too late; Heb. 12. 16, 17. Lest there be any fornicator, or profane
person, as Esau, who for one morsel of meat, sold his birthright: Why so?
For ye know, how that afterward (when he would have inherited the blessing) he
was rejected; for he found no place of repentance, though he sought it
carefully with tears. He that (profanely) prefers a mess of pottage,
before a birthright, is justly rejected, when he would inherit the blessing.
He that hates to be reformed in his youth, is very likely to be rejected in
his age: Because I called, and ye refused, says Wisdom, Pro. 1. 24. I will
therefore laugh at your destruction, and mock when your fear comes, ver.
26. He that laugheth Wisdom to scorn, when she reproves, is justly derided
of Wisdom, in his greatest extreamitie.

Fourthly, Mischief As none can be saved, except he repent^ so none can
repent, unless it be given him from above.
If a man were sure to escape this mischief, and that he should certainly be
accepted of God, at last, (if he do repent) yet a man is not sure that he
shall, or can repent: Repentance is the gift of God, as well as remission of
sins: so that, as none can be pardoned, unless he repent; so none can
repent, but those to whom it is given: If God peradventure will give them
repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth, says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2. 25.
He that is so often called to repentance in his youth, and neglects it, God
may justly deny to give him repentance in his age, Except ye repent, ye shall
perish, says our Savior, Luke 13. 5. and except God give it, you cannot
repent. Oh therefore, whilst God calls to repentance, and offers the
means, embrace it, lest yet be denied it afterward.

Men may dye three ways at last without repentance, which have rejected it,
Men may dye three ways. 1 Suddenly. 2 Sullenly. 3 Desperately.
which have rejected it, in time of their youth: First, They may dye
suddenly; 1 These. 5. 3. When they shall say, peace, peace, then shall
sudden destruction come upon them, etc. Or else, secondly, They may dye
desperately, at least in their own sense and feeling; as Cain and Judas. Or,
thirdly, They may dye sullenly, and sottishly, like Naball; Qualis vita, finis
ita; 1 Samuel 25. Brutish in life, and brutish in death; after God smote him,
his heart dyed within him, and he was even like a stone: he had a long time to
repent in, but he wanted an heart, his heart was dead within him, and he was
like a stone. If a man were sure to repent at last, and that his repentance
should surely be accepted, he might the far more safely defer and put off
his repentance, and serving of God, till age, or death: but a man can be sure
of neither of these: for as true repentance is never too late; so late
repentance is seldom true, says St. Augustine. And again; Qui dat
misericordium poenitentibus, non dat semper poenitentium petentibus.
He that always gives mercy to the penitent, does not always give repentance
to them that ask it: To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 95. 7. As if he had said, if ye reject, or
neglect to hear the voice of God to day, your hearts may be so hardened, Aug.
that ye cannot hear it to morrow. Vt vera poenitentia nunqu^m est sera; sic
sera poenitentia raro vera.
Say not to thy neighbor, go, and come again to morrow, says Solomon, Pro.
3. 28. How much less is it meet to be said unto a God, when he comes unto
thee, and wooeth thee to give him thy heart; Pro. 23. 26. My Son, give me thy
heart; put him not off till to morrow; thou know not what a day may bring
forth; therefore boast not of to morrow; thy heart may be farther of from God
to morrow, then it is to day. Oh therefore what thou resolvest to do, do it
speedily: the sooner, the better: Bis dat qui cito dat. Sen.
He gives twice, that gives quickly. He that will not serve God in his youth,
is in danger not to serve him at all: and look how thou do thy work, so
assure thy self God will pay thee thy wages: and the Proverb is often true,
Proverb.
An old naught, will never be ought.

Fifthly, 5. Mischief Brings Gods wrath upon children.
It is a dangerous thing to neglect the service of God in the time of our
youth, and to mis-spend it in the service of sin and Satan. Let no man say,
it is no matter for youth, no great matter for children, what they say, or do:
O yes (brethren) it is very material: he that sins in his youth, unless he
repent, is like to smart in his age. It does not extenuate our sins, but
aggravate them (rather) that they are the sins of our youth. See how
ironically the Wiseman speaks to the riotous young man, in Eccles. 11. 9.
Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, etc. But remember, that (for these things)
God will bring thee to judgment. This was one thing, that aggravated the sin
of Sodom, that young and old were guilty of it, they were generally beastly
and filthy, both young and old, Genesis 19. 4. Did at any whit excuse, or
extenuate the sin of Eli's sons, that they were young men? No; it did
aggravate it rather, 1 Samuel 2. 17. Wherefore the sin of the young men, was
very great before the Lord, says the Text. An odious thing for a young man to
be old in wickedness; for a young man to be an old drunkard, or an old
adulterer, etc. (that is, a man of a long standing in viciousness,) does
aggravate the sin very much. Yea, God cannot endure profaneness, no, not in
children: and therefore let no man say, it is no matter for children, how
profane they be, or how ungracious, no matter if they be mockers, and
swearers, etc. O yes (beloved) God is a God of such pure eyes, that he hates
profaneness, even in children. See an experiment of this, in those children
that mocked the old Prophet Elisha, 2 King. 2. 23, 24. As he was going up by
the way to Bethel, says the Text, there came forth little children out of the
City, and mocked him, saying, Go up, thou bald-head, Go up, thou bald-head:
now see the event of this; The old Prophet turned back, and looked on them,
and cursed them in the Name of the Lord, and there came forth two she Bears
out of the wood, and tare forty and two children of them. God will not suffer
the profaneness of children to go unpunished. O how much better had it been
for these children, that they had been employed in the worship and service of
God, that the Prophet might have blessed them in the Name of the Lord! Now the
estate of all that neglect the worship and service of God, is a most cursed
estate, whether they be young, or old, For cursed are all they that err from
Gods Commandments, as David speaks, Psalm. 119. 21. whether they be young, or
old. Not only the curse of the Prophet, but the curse of the great God, is
ready to seize upon them. O then let us set our selves to serve God in our
youth, and we may have the blessing of God upon us, both in our youth and age.
Thus you see also the necessity of it.

CHAP. VI.
Containing the second branch of the Use of Exhortation.

SEcondly, Use of Exhortation. 2. Branch. sc. To be constant in Gods service,
when we have once begun.
Seeing time spent in Gods service is the best spent time; This serves to
exhort us, that have once begun to serve God, that we should be constant in it.
It is to no purpose to begin to serve God, unless we resolve to hold on, and
persevere; left we be justly charged, with that of the Apostle, Galathians 5.
7. Ye did run well, who did hinder you, that ye shuold not obey the truth? i.
e. How comes it to pass that ye did not persevere? and for this they were
justly called, O foolish Galathians! Gala. 3. 1. Time spent in Gods service is
fitly resembled unto a race, Let us run with patience the race that is set
before us; says the Apostle, Hebrews 12. 1. It is a mere folly for any man
to begin a race, unless he resolve to persevere and be constant in it; and
therefore faith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9. 24. So run, that ye may obtain, that
is, begin speedily without delay, and hold on constantly without intermission.
This was holy David's pious resolution, Psalm 119. 33. Teach me, O Lord, the
way of thy statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end, There was constancy,
and perseverance. Now (for the perfecting of this point) I purpose to run
this course,

1. I will show you the Motives, that may persuade us to it.

2. The chief Means, that we must use to attain it.

1. The Motives, Motives, Which are threefold.
that may persuade us hereunto, are especially these three.

1. In regard of the equity of it. 2. The Vtilitite. 3. The Necessity of it.
The equity* God is our Master, and we his servants many ways.
sc. because the God of heaven is our chief Lord, and Master, and we are his
servants, in many respects; and therefore in all equity it is fit that we
shuold be constant in his service,

For. 1. We are the Lords professed servants.

2. His vowed, or sworn servants.

3. His made servants.

4. His bought servants.

And lastly, His obliged, or hired servants.

We are Gods servants by profession.
yea, we should take it ill from any that should speak or repute us otherwise.
We are all ready to say, with David, Psalm 116. 16. Behold, Lord, how that I
am thy servant, etc. We, we are Gods Livorie; it appears by our very
profession, that we would be esteemed to be Gods servants; hence we come to
Church, we depend upon his Ordinances, yea, no doubt, but if we should be
questioned, the most of us would be ready to say to God, as the Elders of
Israel said to Iehu, 2 Kings 10. When Iehu had slain his Master, he sends
this message to the Elders of Israel, Verse 2. Seeing your Masters sons are
with you, and there are with you Chariots, and Horses, a fenced City also, and
armor; Look even out the best, and meetest of your Masters sons, and set
him on his Fathers Throne, and fight for your Masters house: But they were
exceedingly afraid, says the Text, Verse 4. and said, Behold, two Kings stood
not before him, how then should we stand! But they sent unto Iehu, saying, we
are thy servants, and will do all that thou shall bid us; Lo they were Iehu's
servants by profession. And the most of us, (no doubt) are ready to profess no
less to God, Behold we are thy servants, and will do that which thou shall
bid us. O then let us be constant in Gods service, because we are his servants
by profession.

Secondly, We are his vowed, or his 2 His sworn servants.
as appears by the promise and solemn vow that we made to God in our
Baptism, which was, That we would not only become, but also continue, Gods
faithful servants, and soldiers, until our lives end. Yea, this vow we have
renewed since, so often as we have received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
How often have we publicly and solemnly dedicated our selves wholly to Gods
service? saying, Here Lord, we offer unto thee our selves, souls, and bodies,
etc. How can we then (for shame) flinch from his service, and be inconstant,
having so often solemnly protested, and sworn the contrary? This made David
constant in Gods service, because he had sworn to be constant in it, Psalm
119. 106. I have sworn, and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous
judgments. We have vowed, and sworn, as well as David, and therefore must
needs be perjured persons, if we be not constant in his service; Offer unto God
praise, or thankesgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most High, Psalm 50. 14.
We are the Lords sworn servants, and therefore it stands with equity that
we should be constant.

We are his made servants.
it is the very special end of our Creation: we were made on purpose to do
God service. And therefore the consideration of our creation, does strongly
bind us to be constant in Gods service, Psalm 100. 2, 3. Serve the Lord with
gladness, come before his presence with singing; and mark the reason of it,
verse 3. Know ^^e, that the Lord he is God, it is he that has ^ade us, and not
we our selves. How can we choose but chearefully and constantly ^oe service to
our Maker? And so again, Psalm 95. 6. O come let us worship, and ^all down,
and knele before the Lord our Maker, etc. And no marvel, for it is the very
end of our Creation, and coming into this world, sc. to do God service, and
thereby to advance his glory. He made all things for his own sake, yea, even
the wicked for the day of evil, says the Wiseman, Proverbs 16. 4. It is for
his own sake, and service, to advance his glory, and glory will he have of us,
one way, or other, one time, or other; if we do not honor him by doing his
pleasure here on earth, we shall perforce glorify his justice, in suffering
his pleasure for ever in hell: the Lord will attain his own end, in one kind
or other, For my glory have I created him, says God, I have formed him, yea, I
have made him. Another Motive, to be constant.

Fourthly, We are the Lords bought servants, His bought servants, or by way of
Redemption.
to this purpose only, to do God service. Suppose a man should meet a poor
man going to prison for debt, Simile.
(whence he was never like to come out) and should pay the sum, and set him
at liberty, upon condition, that he should be constant in his service as long
as he lived: Oh with all my heart, would the poor man say, how much better is
it t^ serve thee, then live in a prison, a dunge^^on all my days? he was
strongly engaged to that man's service. Here is our very case^ we are all
prisoners by nature, and Satan is ready every moment to carry us to the prison
of hell, where we should rot, and burn for ever; now the Lord redeemeth us,
and sets us at liberty from the service of sin and Satan, and the bondage
o^ corruption; Deliver him from going down to the pit, says the Lord, his
Ransom is paid, according to that in Job 33. 28. Oh then how strongly does
this bind us, to be constant in Gods service, that we should have a care never
to depart from him? Ye are not your own (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6. 19. 20.)
but ye are bought with a price, and therefore glorify God, in your bodies and
souls, for they are Gods: Ye are redeemed with a great price, not with
corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation; but with
the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without spot, says the Apostle, 1
Peter 1. 17, 18. Excellent to this purpose, is that in the song of Zachary,
Luke 1. 68. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited, and
redeemed his people; But to what end has he done this? That he shows
plainly, ver. 74. That we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies,
might serve him without fear, in holiness, and righteousness, be^^re him,
all the days of our life, So that the ^onsideration of our redemption should
^ake us constant in Gods service, because ^e were redeemed, and bought to that
end and purpose. Thus Moses expostulateth the ^se with those revolting
Israelites, Deuteronomy. ^^. 6. Do ye thus requite the Lord, O ye ^oolish people and
unwise? Is not he thy father, that has bought thee? Has he not ^ade thee, and
established thee? The sin of backsliding is fearfully aggravated, from (...)
consideration of the Lords singular goodness in our creation, and redemption;
Now the very end of God, in the great work of our redemption, is to purge us
to himself a peculiar people, that we might be ^ealous of good works.

Fifthly, We are his hired servants.
We are the Lords hired servants, in him it is, that we live, and move, and
have our being. After the Lord has made us, and sent us into the world, alas,
we all stand idle, and do him no service at all, until the Lord be pleased to
hire us, and set us a work, Matthew. 20. 7. Why stand ye here all the day idle,
(says the Lord of the Vineyard) go ye into the Vineyard, and work, etc. Lo,
we are the Lords hired servants, who is a most excellent paymaster, and very
bountiful, besides our wages, he is very kind unto us, in many special
gifts, and vailes, Isa. 65. 13, 14. Behold, my servants shall eat, and ye shall
be hungry; my servants shall drink and ye shall be thirsty; Yea, he is such a
Master as daily loadeth us with gifts and benefits, Psalm 68. 9. Blessed be
God, even the God of our salvation, who daily loadeth u^ with his benefits, and
all to this end and purpose, that we might be faithful and constant in his
service, that we might observe his statutes, Psalm. 105. last.
and keep his laws, that is even the very right use of all his mercies. When
Joshua had reckoned up Gods singular mercies toward the Jews, in Ioshuah 24.
See the use of all, verse 14. Now therefore fear the Lord, and serve him; And
now, Israel, what does the Lord require of thee, but only to love the Lord thy
God, and fear, and serve him? Deuteronomy. 10. 12. This was godly Samuels argument to
the revolting and offending Israelites, God forbid, that I should sin against
the Lord, in ceasing to pray for you, but I will show you the good, and the
right way, 2 Samuel 12. 24. etc. as if he had said, I will not only pray for
you, but I will also further teach, and instruct you in the right way; only
fear the Lord, and serve him, for consider what great things he has done for
you; else a man in this case is worse then the very Ox or Ass, as the Lord
himself speaks, Isa. 1. 2, 3. Hear o heavens, etc. the Ox knows his
owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib, but Israel has not known, my people
have not understood. And thus ye have seen the first Motive, that may
persuade us to be constant in Gods service, sc. In regard of the equity of it.

Secondly, The second Motive, 2. Motive. From the Utility, as appears by
sundry benefits.
that may persuade us to be constant in Gods service, is drawn from the
consideration of the Utility of it. It is commodious, and profitable, that we
should be constant, and persevere in Gods service. There be many that say, Who
will show us any good? Psalm. 4. meaning, profit. And it is the Question of
those profane ones, in Job 21. 15. What is the Almighty, that we should serve
him? Or what profit should we have, if we pray unto him? say they. Now to this,
I answer, That constancy and perseverance in Gods service, is exceeding
useful, and profitable, and that in many respects.

First, 1. Benefit. It will assure us, (...) when we dye, we shall go to
heaven.
Constancy in Gods service, will assure a man, that when he dies, he shall
go to heaven. What an admirable, and desirable thing it is, that a man should
be able to say with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 1. We know, that when the earthly
house of our tabernacle shall be dissolved, we have a building of God, an
house, not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. But how came the Apostle
by this assurance? Upon what ground did he thus confidently assure himself?
That we shall see, Ver. 9. Wherefore we labor, that whether present, or
absent, we may be accepted of him. This was the ground of his rejoicing, The
testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity; not
with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in
the world, 2 Cor. 1. 12. Upon this ground he expects a crown of
Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. Constancy and perseverance, is the very
condition required, and expressed in the Lords gracious promise; He that
endures to the end, shall be saved, says our Savior, Mat. 24. 13. Be thou
faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the crown of life, Rev. 2. 10.
In due time we shall reap, if we faint not, says the Apostle, Gal. 6. 9.
Yea, this diligence and constancy in Gods service, is that which will give a
man abundant assurance of entrance into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. Excellent
to this purpose is that of the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 1. 5. 11. Wherefore giving
all diligence, add to your faith virtue, and to your virtue knowledge, etc. (
i. e.) be abundant, and constant in Gods service: now mark the reason, Ver,
11. For so an entrance shall be ministered unto you, abundantly into the
everlasting kingdom of Jesus Christ. Oh what a precious thing is this!

Secondly, 2. Benefit. This will be our crown of glory in our age.
This will be a crown of glory to us, in our old age; sc. if we be constant.
See the testimony of Solomon for this, Pro. 16. 31, The hoarie head is a crown
of glory, when it is found in the way of Righteousness: That will not only
be a great honor and credit, for a man in that case, but also the Lord will
set a crown of glory upon the hoarie head, that is found in the way of
Righteousness, and is constant in Gods service. Here was Paul's crown of
glory, that though in his youth he was a persecuter, and injurious, (for they
that stoned Stephen, laid down their clothes at a young man's feet, whose
name was Saul, Act. 7. 58. and Chap. 8. 1. And Saul was consenting unto his
death, says the Text.) But after he was once truly converted, and was entered
into Gods service, see how constant he was in it, even until old age: yea,
death it self: as appears by his own speech to Philemon, Ver. 8, 9. Though
I might be much bold in Christ, to enjoyne thee that which is convenient; yet,
for love sake, I rather beseech thee, being such a one as Paul the aged, and
now a prisoner of Jesus Christ. Here was Paul's crown of glory, sc. that in
his old age, he was a prisoner, and a constant Martyr of Jesus Christ: here was
a right tree of righteousness, which brings forth fruit in their age, yea,
in their old age, and even then be fat and flourishing, Psalm. 92. 14. This was
Mnaasons crown of glory, that he was justly called an old Disciple; They
brought us to the house of one Mnaason, an old Disciple, with whom we should
lodge, says the Text, Act. 21. 16. Let this also persuade us to constancy and
perseverance.

Thirdly, 3. Benefit. This will also assure us, that we (...) Christ's Disciples.
Constancy in Gods service, is that which will assure us that we are the true
Disciples and followers of Jesus Christ. Oh what an admirable thing is this!
Who would not but labor to be assured that he is of the number of Christ's true
Disciples, and no hypocrite? Why now, constancy in Gods service will assure a
man of this. See an excellent place for this purpose, Joh. 8. 31, 32. If ye
continue in my Word (in yielding of constant obedience unto my Word) then are
ye my Disciples indeed, and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make
ye free, says our Savior. But on the other side, he that wavereth, and is
unconstant, has great cause to suspect himself, to be no better then an
hypocrite. See an excellent place for this purpose, Psalm. 106. 3. Blessed are
they that do judgment, and he that does righteousness at all times: they are
only happy, that are constant in Religion: but the hypocrite is fickle and
inconstant; Job 27. 8. What is the hope of the hypocrite, though he has
gained, when God takes away his soul? He is in a woeful estate at that time.
Why so? And who are these, that have cause to suspect themselves to be but
hypocrites? That ye shall see, Ver. 10. Will he delight himself in the
Almighty? Will he always call upon God? Will he be constant in Gods service?
No sure; in time of temptation they fall away, and so discover their
unsoundnesse and hypocrisy; for so argues the holy Apostle, 1 Ioh. 2. 19.
They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us,
they would no doubt have continued with us; but they went out, that they might
be made manifest that they were not all of us. Will ye also go away? says
our Savior to his Disciples, Joh. 6. 67. He that is a true Disciple of Christ,
will be constant in his service, and never depart from him: yea, he will be
ready to say, with Peter, (though without boasting of his own strength)
Though all men should forsake thee, will I never forsake thee: yea, though I
should dye with thee, yet will I not deny thee, Mat. 26. 35. No question Peter
spoke as he thought, when he said so, though his own strength failed him, when
it came to the point. But he that resolves the like, in the strength of the
Lord, and out of the sight and sense of his own weakness, (if he should be
left to himself) that man may comfortably assure himself, that he is a true
Disciple of Christ Jesus.

Fourthly, 4. Benefit. That God will hear our prayers.
Constancy in Gods service, will assure us of the Lords gracious readiness to
hear our prayers, the Lord will be constant in hearing the prayers of that man
which is constant in doing him service; 1 Ioh. 5. 14. This is the confidence
that we have in him, that if we ask any thing, according to his will, he
hears us. Oh what an happy thing, for a man to be assured in his soul, that
his prayers are heard, and find acceptance with the Lord? Now if a man be
constant in Gods service, he may be assured of his interest in those gracious
promises, Mat. 7. 7. Ask, and ye shall have; seek, and ye shall find;
knock, and it shall be opened unto you. Or that in Isa. 65. 24. It shall come
to pass, that when they call, I will answer; and while they are yet speaking,
I will hear. Now nothing will more certainly assure us of this, then
constancy in Gods service. See that excellent speech of our Savior, Joh. 15.
7. If ye abide in me, and my Word abide in you; ye shall ask what ye will,
and it shall be done unto you. Constancy in Gods service, assures us, that
God hears our prayers, and will grant our requests, so far as shall be
expedient. Hereupon is that admirable speech of the blind man, Ioh. 9. 31. We
know that God hears not sinners; but if any man be a worshipper of God, and a
doer of his will, him he hears. Lo another special benefit!

Fifthly, 5. Benefit. All such shall be taught of God, and directed in his
truth.
He that is constant in Gods service, shall be taught of God, and directed in
the truth, amongst all the multiplicitie of opinions that are in the world, he
shall know the Doctrine of Christ, and be able in some sort to distinguish it
from false Doctrines* and opinions, that are in the world; My sheep hear my
voice, and follow me, says our Savior, Joh. 10. 27. Yea, they know his voice,
and are able to distinguish it from the voice of strangers, ver. 4, 5. The
Sheep follow him, (that is, the good Shepherd) for they know his voice, and a
stranger will they not follow, but flee from him, for they know not the voice
of strangers, says the Text. Here is the happiness of a true Sheep of
Christ, one that is constant in Gods service. So, Psalm. 25. 12. 14. What man is
he that fears the Lord? him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose.
Yea, the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show them
his Covenant: They that fear and serve God constantly, shall be acquainted
with the secrets of Religion. O what an happiness is it for a man to be
assured in his soul, that he is of the true Religion, among all the religions
that are in the world. Hence is that speech of our Savior, Ioh. 7. 16, 17. My
Doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me: yea, but how should a man know
that? that our Savior shows, Ver. 17. If any man will do his will, he shall
know of the Doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self: A
most sweet and admirable benefit: a constant and conscionable care to yield
obedience to what we know, is the best means to perfect, and increase our
knowledge. This made David wiser then his enemies; yea, then the Ancient; yea,
then his teachers; because he was a constant practitioner of what he knew;
Psalm. 119. 98, 99. etc. He that would be assured of the truth of his Religion,
let him be constant in the duties of Gods worship and service; for this alone
will do it. Hereupon it was, that many poor silly men and women in Queen
Mary's days, sealed the truth with their blood; when many great Scholars fell
away.

Sixthly, 6. Benefit. This will afford us comfort in the greatest troubles that
can befall us, yea, even in death.
and lastly, Constancy in the duties of Gods worship, and service, will afford
a man comfort in time of trouble; yea, in the hour of death: this will make a
man able to lift up his head with joy, in that case, as if his redemption drew
nigh; Psalm. ^7. 37. Mark the upright man, and behold the just; that is, he
that is constantly just and upright; for the end of that man shall be peace,
says the Psalmist. See an experiment of this, in diverse examples. 1. The
example of Gods Church, in great affliction and persecution, Psalm. 44. see
their woeful misery, Ver. 13, 14. etc. Thou make us a reproach to our
neighbors, a byword, a shaking of the head amongst the people. My confusion
is continually before me, Ver. 15. All this is come upon us, Ver. 17. Well,
what was it now that did afford them comfort, in this their extremity? Surely
their constancy in Religion; Ver. 17, 18. Yet have we not forgotten thee, nor
have dealt falsely in thy Covenant; our heart is not turned back; neither have
our steps declined from thy way: Yea, though thou have ^ore broken us, in the
place of Dragons, and covered us with the shadow of death, Ver. 19. So, what
was it that affoorded Job such comfort, in his extremities, but his sincerity,
and constancy? Two excellent places we have for this; the one, in Job 27. 5.
God forbid, that I should justify you, says he to his friends. Why not? Were
they not honest and religious men? Yes surely, they were gracious men, and full
of wisdom; but yet Job would not justify them in that particular, wherein
they condemned him for an hypocrite: they charged him with inconstancy, and
hypocrisy, and that he would never yield unto, Till I dye, I will not remove
my integrity from me; my righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go,
my heart shall not reproach me, so long as I live. This was the only thing,
that did afford him comfort, in his great extremities, and calamities, and
unjust censures of his friends; he knew, that he had been sincere, and
constant in Gods service. The other place for this purpose, is, Job 23. when
God hid himself from him, that he could not see him, Ver. 8, 9. whether he
went forward, or backward, on the right hand, or on the left, yet he could not
find God; What was his comfort? Yet when he has tried me, I shall come out
like gold; I shall be the better for all this at last, Ver. 10. Well, how came
he to be assured of this? That ye shall see, Ver. 11, 12. My foot has held
his steps, his way have I kept, and not declined; neither have I gone back
from the Commandment of his lips; I have esteemed the words of his lips,
more then my necessary food: Here was his comfort, that he had been constant
in Gods service; it was grounded upon the consideration of his perseverance.
The second particular example, is that of David, Psalm. 18. when he was in many
waters, ready to be drowned, environed with strong enemies, Ver. 16, 17. Now
what was his comfort in these cases? That ye shall see, Ver. 21. For I have
kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed from my God. Lo
here, what will afford us comfort in our greatest miseries, and extremities,
sc. Constancy in cleaving to God; and a vigilant watchful care, not to depart
from him: All his judgments were before me, and I did not put away his
Statutes from me, Ver. 22. I have been constant in his service. So, that of
Psalm. 119. see what dangerous straites that good man was in; Ver. 107. I am
afflicted very much: How much David? My soul is continually in my hand; I do
even daily carry my life in my hand; there is but even a step, between me and
death: Well, how came that to pass? The wicked have laid a snare for me, says
he, Ver. 110. Well, what was his comfort in all this, his Staff to uphold him
in all these dangers? Surely his constancy in Gods service: I have sworn, and
will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments, V. 106. and Ver.
111, 112. Thy Testimonies have I claimed as my heritage for ever; for they are
the rejoicing of my heart; and I have inclined my heart to perform thy
Statutes always, even unto the end. Lo, this will afford us comfort in the
greatest troubles that can befall us. Yea, this will afford comfort, and
confidence, even in death; Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him, says
Job, upon this ground, Job 13. 15. See an example of this in that good King
Hezekiah; What was his comfort when the Prophet brought him the message of
death, from the Lord, Isa. 38. 3? Surely, his constancy, and sincerity in the
duties of Gods worship and service; Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I
have walked before thee, in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that
which has been good in thy sight, (i.e.) here is my chief comfort in this
case. So, this made Paul think on death with comfort, and rejoicing; 2 Cor. 1.
12. So, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. The time of my departure is at hand, and I am now
ready to be offered, sc. in sacrifice to God by death. Now see the grounds of
the Apostles comfort and confidence in that case; I have fought a good fight, I
have finished my course, I have kept the faith, (I have spent time in Gods
service constantly,) henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
Righteousness. And thus you see at large the Utility of the duty, which is
the second Motive, that may persuade us to be constant in the duties of Gods
worship and service.

Thirdly, The third and last Motive that may persuade us hereunto, 3. Motive.
The neces^itie of it.
is drawn from the consideration of the necessity of it; It is not only
equal, and profitable, but exceeding necessary, Constancy in Gods service is
necessary.
that we should be constant in the duties of Gods worship and service. This
appears, not only in regard of the express command of God, to that purpose,
but also, because it is the special condition required on our part, as ever we
expect the reward promised, (as we have heard before) but we shall find it
very necessary in many other respects; whereof I will only mention but one, or
two, which I conceive to be the chief.

First, Because, Arguments
without constancy and Else we loose all the pains we have taken in Gods
service heretofore.
we loose all the labor and pains, that we have already taken in Gods
service; we have labored in vain, and to no purpose, if we do not perseve^e;
if we faint, we are sure we shall never reap, as the Apostle seems to
intimate, Gal. 6. 9. All our righteousness shall not so much as be once
mentioned unto us, we shall be never a whit the better for it, Ezech. 18. 24.
The soul of the Lord shall have no pleasure in him: Heb. 10. 38. See an
experiment of this, in two famous examples to this purpose, sc. Demas and
Alexander. See what a good opinion the Apostle had of this Demas, he remembers
his love to the Church of Colosse, Col. 4. 14. Demas-greeteth you: yea, he was
one of Paul's fellow laborers, Philemon, ver. 24. And yet see how the Apostle
cries out of him afterward, 2 Timothy 4. 10. Demas has forsaken us, having loved
this present world: Demas has lost all his labor, and the credit of all his
former proceedings. So for Alexander; see how zealous, and forward he seemed to
be, in Act. 19. 33. he was very like to have suffered Martyrdom; and yet see
how the Apostle discovers him afterward, for his damnable Apostacy, 2 Timothy
4. 14. Alexander the Copper-smith has done me much evil, the Lord reward him
according to his work: for he has greatly withstood our words. So he lost the
benefit of all the good he had done formerly. But this is not all; Danger of
backsliding.
for

Secondly, The sin of backsliding and It is a thing most odious and hateful
to God.
is a thing that is most odious and hateful to God; the soul of the Lord
abhors it; the soul of the Lord will have no pleasure in such, that is, he
hates and abhors them: hereupon it is compared to the vomit of a Dog, and
the Sowes wallowing in the mire, 2 Pet. 2. 22. Yea, if any man draw back, it
is unto his perdition, unless he repent, Heb. 10. 39. And how hard a thing it
is for such to be brought unto Repentance: Heb. 6. 5. If they fall away, it is
impossible to renew them again unto repentance: How-ever, the back-slider in
heart, shall be filled with his own ways, Pro. 14. 14. And are quite lost in
their own sense, and feeling, which is even a little hell upon earth; as
appears by the example of Francis Spira, and William Rogers of Cranebrooke in
Kent, the Stories of both which are lately published. Yea, see the woeful
estate of Lot's wife; Let the judgment of God upon her, make us take heed of
looking back, which is the effect of that speech of our Savior, Luke 17. 32.
Remember Lots wife, who for looking back was turned into a pillar of salt,
Genesis 19. 46. Whosoever do thus, unless they repent and do their first
works, are in no case fit for the kingdom of heaven; for he that puts his
hand to the Plough, and looks back, is not fit for the kingdom of God,
says our Savior, Luke 9. 62.

Necessary to be constant, because the devil seeks continually to do us
mischief and bring us back to his kingdom.
in regard of the devils continual diligence, in watching all opportunities to
do us mischief, we had need continually to stand upon our guard, and ply our
work; for if we give over, we immediately become a prey to his malicious
cruelty. Whilst the little bird is in action, and flying from bush to bush,
and from place to place, she is in no danger of being shot to death; but when
she sits still, she becomes a prey to the cruel fowler, it is the Holy
Ghosts own similitude, Prove. 26. 2. As the bird by wandering, and the Swallow
by flying, so the curse causeless shall not come. When did David become a prey
to the Devil and lust, but when he lay idely at home, 2 Samuel 11. upon his
bed. The Devil seeks continually to do us hurt, and by doing nothing, we
learn to do evil. Therefore this is the Apostles argument, to persuade to
constancy and vigilance, 1 Peter 5. 8. For your adversary, the Devil, as a
roaring Lion, goes about, seeking continually whom he may devour. And thus ye
see also the necessity of constancy, and perseverance in the duties of Gods
worship, and service. It is equal, profitable, and necessary.

Now for the Means that we must use, Means.
that we may be constant, I will give you only one general, which will divide
it self into sundry particulars.

General A right disposition of the heart, showing it self.
get a right disposition of heart to this purpose, without this it is
impossible for any to be constant in Gods service: therefore says David,
Psalm 119. 112. I have inclined my heart, to perform thy Statutes always. It
is only a good, and an honest heart, that is able to make a man hold out in
Gods ways, as our Savior shows, Luke 8. 15. This made Iehu fall away at
last, notwithstanding all the fair shows he made of zeal for God, and his
truth, But Iehu took no heed, to walk in the Law of the Lord God of Israel,
with all his heart, says the Text, 2 Kings 10. 31. This made him cleave to
Ieroboam's calvish Idolatry. So this made Simon Magus fall off, notwithstanding
all his fine shows of Religion, his keeping company with the Apostles, his
being baptized, etc. he showed plainly what he was at last: And how came that?
I perceive that thy heart is not right, in the sight of God, says the Apostle
to him, Acts 8. 21. If we would persevere in Gods service, we must labor to
have our hearts set in a right frame.

Now (more particularly) if ye ask me, In sundry specialties.
what disposition or frame of heart is it, that we must labor for, 2. Special.
if we would be constant in Gods service?

1. I answer, 1 It must be a faithful or believing heart.
that if we would be constant in Gods service, we must labor for a believing
heart, an heart fraught with the precious grace of true saving faith. This is
that, which will make a man constant and victorious over all impediments, 1
John 5, 4, 5. For whosoever believes and is borne of God, overcommeth the
world: and this is the victory that overcommeth the world, even your faith.
True saving faith is of a lasting nature; he that has it, can never perish,
but have everlasting life, John 3. 16. Yea, this does always end in salvation,
1 Peter 1. 9. Receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your
souls, says the Apostle, if any man draw back, and fall off from Gods
service, it is either for want of faith, or at least for want of a true saving
faith. When the Apostle had showed the danger of backsliding; see the remedy
which the Apostle prescribes, or intimates (at least) in that case, If any
man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. We are not of them that
draw back^ unto perdition, (there is the danger) but of them that believe, or
follow faith to the saving of the soul, there is the remedy, Hebrews 10. 38,
39. If any thing make us hold out against Satan, in that dangerous conflict,
it must be the shield of faith, whereby we may quench all the fiery darts of
the wicked, Ephesians 6. 16. Above all, take unto you the shield of faith: if
any thing at all can do you good, this is it.

2. It must be such a faith, A loving heart.
as works by love, Galath. 5. 6. And therefore in the second place, we must
labor for a loving heart, if we would be constant: Let us serve God for love,
and that will make us persevere in it. Men will be constant in the works they
love, the Epicure is constant in pleasures, and recreations; the covetous, in
toyleing for the world; the Student is constant at his book; And why so?
Because they love these things. Charity will make a man hold out, it hops all
things, and endures all things, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. It never
fails, ver. 8. They that serve God for love, resemble the Sun, that shines
more and more, till the perfect day, or like Mount Sion, that stands fast for
ever, and cannot be removed, Psalm. 125. 1. See how constant is Jacob in
serving for Rachel, Genesis 29. 20. He served seven years for her, and they
seemed but a few days, in regard of the love that he had to her, says the
Text; Love set him a work, and that made him constant in it. Now what a shame
for us, if Jacob should love Rachel, better than we love God, If ye love me,
keep my Commandments, says our Savior, John 15. 14. As if he had said, If
ye love me, ye will do it. Labor of love, will be constant. He whose
bounty, and charity is grounded upon true love to God, will be constant in it.
It is an excellent place to this purpose, Hebr. 6. 10. God is not unrighteous,
to forget your work, and labor of love, which y^ have showed toward his
Name. But how did that appear? Surely by the constancy of it, In that ye have
ministered unto the Saints, and do minister, (i. e.) this is a true sign, that
your charity, and works of mercy proceed from love to the Name of GOD, because
ye are constant in them; this argues evidently that they are labors of love.

An heart fraught with the true fear of God.
if we would be constant in Gods service, we must labor to have our hearts
fraught with the true fear of God. This is one of the gifts of God, that are
without repentance, Romans 11. 29. The fear of the Lord is clean, and
endures for ever, Psalm 19. 8. Blessed is the man that fears always,
Proverbs 28. 14. He that truly fears God, will fear him always, this will
make him constant in Gods service, Ier. 32. 40. I will put my fear in their
hearts, that they shall never depart from me, says the Lord. The true fear of
God will make us constant, and therefore it is a chief point of wisdom, to
serve God with fear, as is intimated, in Psalm 2. 10, 11. Be wise now
therefore, O ye Kings, be instructed, ye Judges of the earth; Well, wherein
should they chiefly show their wisdom? Verse 11. Serve the Lord with fear,
and rejoice with trembling; Why so? Surely, because then they would be
constant, and keep in the right way, or else they would soon perish from it,
as is intimated in the next verse 12. Kiss the Son, lest be be angry, and
ye perish from the right way.

Fourthly, A sound and upright, or a good and an honest heart.
If we would be constant in Luke 8. 15. Behold, thou desire truth in the
inward affections, says David, Psalm 51. 6. Because the Lord knows such an
heart will be constant. A little before the Apostle ^hewing the danger of
backsliding, and inconstancy in GODS service, he prescribes this, as it were
a remedy, to prevent that danger, Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw nigh ^o God, with a
true heart, etc. Such an heart will make a man constant and firm ^ndeed:
therefore says David, Psa^. 119. ^0. Let my heart be sound in thy sta^utes,
that I be not ashamed. A true ridden horse will hold out to the end of the
journey, but a tainted jade will faint at last. This made the Israelites so
fickle and inconstant in Gods service; Psalm 78. 34. When he slew them, then
they sought him, and they returned, and enquired early afte^ God. Was not this
well? Yea, so far as man could judge it was excellent, that they should so
readily return to him that smote them; and so indeed it had been, if it had
come form the heart: but alas^ there they failed. Ver. 36. Nevertheless, they
did but flatter him with their mouth, and lied unto him with their tongue; for
their heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his covenant.
This was abominable. So that if we would be constant in GODS service, we
must see that our hearts be sound, and upright, else they will start aside
like a broken, or a deceitful bow, verse 57.

An heart yielding obedience in lesser matters.
If we would be constant in the maine duties of Gods worship, and service, we
must take heed, that we take not liberty wilfully to offend in lesser matters.
I know special respect must be had to the maine duties of Religion, and the
weighty things of the Law, Matthew. 23. 23 but yet we must take heed, of taking
liberty to offend in smaller matters, against knowledge and conscience: He that
breaks one of the least of Gods Commandments, and teaches men so, the same
sha^ be called and accounted least in the kingdom^ of heaven, says our
Savior, Matthew 5 19. How great a Scholar, or how strict soever he may seem
to be in other things, this will lessen them, in the hearts of Gods people.
Yea, and he that at first takes liberty, wilfully to offend in trifles, will
at last fall away in greater matters. First petty oaths, then greater, etc. It
is an excellent place to this purpose, and excellently urged by a late Divine
in this case, Gal. 1. 7. Dike Deceitf. of heart, page 191.
There be some that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ: No,
might they say, they retained the Gospel, only they would have brought in a
Jewish ri^e, or two, Circumcision; which was a thing of nothing: What says the
Apostle to these? Galathians 2. 5. To whom we gave place by subjection, no not
for an hour. Not for an hour? Why Paul? what hurt can there be in a
circumstance, a Ceremony, or a trifle? Yes, if it be urged as necessary to
salvation, it would soon overturne the truth, and substance of the Gospel;
and therefore he gives this for the reason (why he would not yield, no not
for an hour) That the truth of the Gospel might continue with you; as if he
had said, ye cannot retain long the truth of the Gospel, if ye admit this.

Sixthly, Lastly, an heart ^tored with courage and pa^^ence.
and lastly, He that would be that case: In your patience possess your
souls, says our Savior, Luke 21. 19. And, Let us run with patience the
race that is set before us, Heb. 12. 1. Yea, we have need of patience, says
the Apostle, Heb. 10. 36. Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit ye like men,
be strong, says the Apostle, 1 Cor 16. 13. He that will follow Christ
constantly, and not forsake him, must resolve before hand, to take up his
cross, and arm himself with patience, Luke 9. 23. If any come unto me, let
him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me; This made Paul so
constant in Gods service, after he had once begun to serve him, sc. because he
was armed with a patient, and courageous resolution, to endure what ever could
befall in that case, My life is not dear to me, that I may finish my course,
and fulfill the ministry that I have received, etc. Acts 20. 23. Yea, I am
ready, not only to be bound, but also to dye at Jerusalem, for the Name of the
Lord Jesus, Acts 21. 13. And thus have I finished the second duty, that we are
to be exhorted unto, inregard of our selves, sc. Constancy in Gods service, and
have showed both the Motives, why, and the means, how, to attain ability to
perform it.

CHAP. VII.
Wherein the last duty (in regard of our selves) is propounded, together with
the Motives to persuade us thereunto.

THirdly, 3. Duty. To spend as much time in Gods service as we can possibly.
Seeing time spent in Gods service, is absolutely the best spent time; This
serves to exhort every one of us, not only to begin to serve God. 1. Speedily
without delay. 2. And constantly without ceasing, but also plentifully, and
abundantly; let us spend as much time as we can possibly this way; we cannot
spend our time better, then in Gods Courts, his House and Ordinances, the
duties of his public worship, and service. Oh therefore let us deal
plentifully, and abundantly this way, Let us give all diligence, not some, but
all diligence is little enough this way, 2 Pet. 1. 5. Whatsoever thy hand
finds to do, do it with thy might, says Solomon, Eccles. 9. 10. Always
abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor shall not be in
vain in the Lord, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 58. The more pains we take in
Gods service, the more wages shall we be sure to receive. And therefore when we
come to the wholesome waters of Gods Sanctuary, let us drink freely and
abundantly; this is our Saviors own exhortation, when he comes into his
garden of the Church assemblies, Cant. 5. 1. Eat, O friends, drink, yea,
drink abundantly, O beloved. It is an excellent thing, when a man can say
truly, that which Iehu only pretended in another case, 2 King. 10. 18. Ahab
served Baala little, but Iehu shall serve him much: So, such and such serve God
a little, I will serve him much: Surely it must needs be well taken at Gods
hands, when we have a care to spend as much time in Gods service, as we can
possibly.

Now for the perfecting of this duty, (which is the maine point of all) I will
show you, 1. Some Motives to persuade us to it. 2. Some few Directions, how to
do it.


And first for the Motives.

The Motives that may persuade us, Motives.
to spend as much time as we can possibly, in the duties of GODS public
Ordinances, they are principally these four.

Time present, is the only time for this purpose.
I mean, the time of this present life, is the only time, that we have to
this purpose, either now, or never, must we serve God in these duties and
Ordinances: as for Purgatory, it is but a popish dream, a very fancy: the time
of this life is the only time for this purpose. Hereupon is that speech of our
Savior, John 9. 4. I must work the works of God, while it is day, the night
comes, when no man can work: by night, he means death, and the grave; there
is no work to be done then; this appears by the next verse, that this is
our Saviors meaning, (i. e.) While I live I must finish the work that I have
in hand, death comes, when no man can work: no, then we rest from our
labors, Revel. 14. 1^. whilst we have time, let us do good, says the
Apostle, Gal. 6. 10. There is a set time, appointed for well doing, which is
the time of this life, which is by no means to be let slip, or omitted? if
death once come, it presently puts an end to our labor: when night comes,
men shut up shop. Excellent therefore to this purpose, Eccles. 9. 10.
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might. Ply thy work hard.
Now mark the reason, which he gives to this purpose; For there is no work,
nor devise, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go; there
is no opportunity for doing any work there, no, that is the evening, a time
of reckoning, but not of working; that is a time of receiving wages, not of
labor. What says the Lord of the Vineyard, when the evening was come? Matthew.
20. 8. Call the laborers, and give them their hire: not set them a work, but
pay them their wages. If therefore we look for any wages at evening, let us
ply our work in the day time. This is the first Motive.

Secondly, 2. Motive. This time is short.
As the time of this life, is the only time for this purpose; so it is very
short, and very uncertain; the time of him that lives longest here, is but
short, Job 14. 1. Man that is borne of a woman, has but a short time, and is
full of misery. Remember, Lord, how short my time is: Our work is great, Ars
longa, vitabrevis
and our time short, and therefore we had need to be diligent: our journey is
long, and our time short, and therefore we had need to run speedily, as well
as constantly. Time passes away with a swift foot, My days pass away as the
most swift Ships, says Job 9. 26. Man is like to vanity, his days are as a
shadow, that passes away, Psalm 144. 4. Yea, we bring our years to an end,
as a tale that is told, Psalm. 90. 9. And our life is very like unto a vapor,
James 4. 14. Seeing then our time is so short and withal so uncertain; we
had need to run with speed (as well as patience) the race that is set before
us. If the time were short, yet if it were certain, there were less danger in
slacknesse: but it is not more short, then uncertain; like the thief, that
comes in the night, or a Masters return home, who has set no time, but
commands his servants to watch, Watch ye therefore, for ye know neither the
day, nor the hour, says our Savior, Mat. 25. 13. But blessed is that
servant, whom his Lord, when he comes shall find so doing; watching, and
working with all diligence, Luke 12. 43.

Thirdly, 3. Motive. We stay long before we begin.
After we once begin to serve God, we had need to use all diligence, and spend
as much time as we can that way; because we are long before we spend any
time at all to this purpose. Some stay twenty, thirty, forty, fifty years,
before they do God any service at all, to any purpose; all such had need to
work hard, when they have once begun. Yea, and such as begin betime, they stay
long, before they enter; our childhood, and youth are a great part spent,
before we enter into Gods Vineyard, Matthew. 20. 1. There were some that began
early in the morning, but it was the third hour, our nine of the clock,
before any more came, verse 3. and some stayed until the eleventh hour, five a
clock at night, an hour before Sun set; and therefore such had need to work
hard. Generally we spend time, for our selves, for the world, for Satan,
before we spend any time for God; for ye are all the children of wrath by
nature, Ephesians. 2. 3. serving diverse lusts and pleasures, Tit. 2. 3. So that,
for the most part, it is long before we serve God. Mark that speech of the
Apostle, to this purpose, Romans 13. 11. And that knowing the time, that it is
high time to awake out of sleep, It is high time to serve God, for the night
is far spent, that is, the time of this life is far spent; it is high time
to fall to work. Now lay these together, the time of this life is the only
time that we have to serve God, it is very short, and uncertain at best, and
withal it is very far spent before we begin, therefore we had need to ply
our work with all diligence. This is the Apostles chief Argument to persuade
us to spend much time in Gods service, or according to his will, 2 Peter 4. 2.
That he no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh, to the lusts
of men, but to the will of God: Why so? see verse 3. For the time past of our
life may suffice us, to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, (i. e.) it is
enough, and too much, alas, that we have misspent so much of our precious time
already; it is now high time to redeem time to spend in Gods service. He that
has but a small stock in all, and mispendeth some part of that too, had need
to be sparing and frugall with that which is left: here is our very case, our
time that we have to spend in Gods service, the whole time of our life, is but
short, we have misspent much already, we had need to spend all the rest (if it
were possible) wholly in Gods service.

Fourth Motive, 4. Motive. The excellency of our Master.
to persuade us to spend much time in Gods service, is drawn from the
consideration of the excellency of that Master whom we serve, Behold, Lord,
how that I am thy servant, says David, Psalm 116. 16. Ye call me Lord, and
Master (says our Savior) and ye say well, for so I am, John 13. 23. Yea,
Lord, so thou art, absolutely the best and most incomparable Master in heaven
and earth. This I will strive and endeavor to manifest, in sundry particulars;
which will be so many several Motives, to persuade us to spend as much time in
his service as we can possibly.

First, Almighty Master; able to defend his servants, and to provide for them.
Our heavenly Master is a most potent, Cor. 6. last. Thus God himself
encourages Abraham to do him service, Genesis 17. 1. I am God Almighty, or the
Strong God, walk before me, and be upright. He is able to bring to pass what
he pleases, in heaven or earth, Psalm. 115. 3. Is any thing too hard for the
Lord? says God himself, Genesis 18. 14. He is able to defend us from all dangers
that may befall us, and to supply us with all necessaries; so that we need
fear nothing, if we be careful to serve God: Genesis 15. 1. Fear not Abraham, I
am thy Shield, (therefore nothing can hurt thee) and I am thy exceeding great
reward, (therefore make no question of thy wages) let no man think, or say, it
is in vain to serve God; for we serve such a Master, as is both able to defend
us, and pay us our wages to the full, that we need never repent our work: For
he is able to do for us exceeding abundantly, above all that we can ask, or
think* says the Apostle, Ephesians. 3. 20. there is his power. This made the
three noble Jews stick to Gods service, they would by no means change their
Master, because they knew his power, and ability, both to defend, and reward
them, Dan. 3. 17. Our God, whom we serve, is able to deliver us, and he will
deliver us out of thine hands, O King. So that if we serve this Master, we
need fear nothing, in regard of his power.

He is ever present with them.
He is such a Master, as is always present with his servants to defend them.
If a Master be able, yet what are his servants better for him in his absence?
^ow our heavenly Master is ever present (...) us, to defend us; his eye is
continually (...), Psalm. 33. 9. Thus God encouraget^^ ^^uah, Chap. 1. 9. Have
not I commanded thee? Be strong, and of a good courage, be not afraid, etc. for
the Lord thy God is with thee whithersoever thou go. Now if God be with us,
we need not fear who are, or can be against us, Romans 8. 31. Especially, we
never set our selves to serve God in the duties of his public worship and
service, but he is present with us, in a special manner, Mat. 18. 20. Mat. 28.
20. Lo, I am with you always, unto the end of the world: This is an excellent
argument, to persuade us to spend much time in Gods service, how difficult, or
dangerous soever it may seem to be; because we may be sure of Gods presence
with us; Isa. 41. 10. Fear not, I am with thee; be not afraid, I am thy God, I
will help thee, etc. What if we pass through the fire, or water afflictions,
yet we need fear nothing, so long as we are sure the Lord is with us. Now see
what a promise we have for this; Isa. 43. 1, 2. Fear not, says the Lord, I
have redeemed thee, thou art mine, (i. e.) thou art my servant, by purchase, or
redemption. What then? Ver. 2. When thou passest through the waters, I will be
with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou
walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame
kindle upon thee: neither fire, nor water can hurt us, if God be with us. This
made Joseph prosper so exceedingly in all his dangers; He was first cast into a
pit, then sold into Egypt, then cast into prison, put in the Stocks, the iron
entered even into his soul, but in all these extremities, the Lord was with
him, Genesis 39. 21. Yea, and at last, made him Ruler of all Egypt. This made
Hezekiah prosper so exceedingly in all his enterprises: see how the Text
reports it, in 2 Kings 18. 5. He trusted in the Lord God of Israel, and clave
unto him, and served him, ver. 6. Then see the event, ver. 7. And the Lord was
with him, and prospered him whithersoever he went: and therefore see how he
could encourage his Soldiers against the invasion of the King of Assyria, in 2 Chronicles. 32. 7. Be not afraid of the King of Assyria, be strong and courageous,
for (notwithstanding all his multitude) there is more with us, then with him.
Now see how he proves it, ver. 8. both by way of confession, and by direct
affirmation; With him (indeed) is an arm of flesh; but with us is the Lord
our God to help us, and to fight our battles. Yea, thus the Lord encouraged
Paul, to an unwearied painfulnes in preaching the Gospel, Act. 18. 9, 10. Be
not afraid, but speak, and hold not thy peace; for I am with thee, and no man
shall set on thee to hurt thee. This will make a man courageous, even in the
strongest dangers, in the very jaws of death, Psalm. 23. 4. Though I walk
through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, says holy
David; for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me. Let us
therefore be courageous, and abundant in the duties of Gods service, for the
Lord is ever present with us, to defend us, and to provide for us. This is
David's reason, in the verse immediately following the words of this Text, ver.
11. of this Psalm; For the Lord is a Sun, and a Shield, he will give grace
and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly
in his service. So, Jer. 1. 19.

Very pitiful, and full of compassion.
He is a pitiful and tenderhearted Master, full of compassion, mavelous
ready to lay to heart the afflictions of his servants; In all their
afflictions, he is afflicted, Isa. 53. 9. Excellent to this purpose is that of
St. James 5. 11. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and ye know the end of
the Lord, that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy. As if he had
said, ye may clearly see in Gods dealings with Job, that in conclusion, he
approved himself to be very pitiful, and of tender mercy. A strange place to
this purpose is that we have, Judges 10. Though he seems to reject them, and
hold them at staves end for a time, yet upon their repentance, see how sweetly
he approves and manifests his compassion toward them, Ver. 16. They put
away their strange gods, and served the Lord, and his soul was grieved for the
miseries of Israel: though he may shut up his bowels for a time, yet at last
his compassions will find a vent, his very soul is grieved for our miseries:
So, Ier. 31. 18, 19, 20. Consider the estate of repenting Ephraim, the Lord
seems angry with him, and speaks against him, yea, and it may be smites
him too: but no sooner does Ephraim truly repent, and smite upon his thigh,
and fall out with his sins, but then, see how God is affected with him: when
he thinks worst of himself, then God thinks the best of him: see ver. 20.
Is Ephraim my dear child? It may be Ephraim thought himself scarce worthy
the name of a servant, and yet God even then calls him his child, yea, his
dear child. Well, how shall this appear? Surely by the Lords gracious pity
and compassion toward him: now he is sorry for his sins, God is sorry that
he did so much as speak against him; For since I spoke against him, I do
earnestly remember him still, therefore my bowels are troubled for him, I will
surely have mercy on him, says the lord. Oh who would not serve such a
Master, that is thus full of compassion, thus ready to lay to heart, and be
affected with his servants miseries! yea, his very bowels are troubled, his
soul is grieved for them. O let us be plentiful and abundant in the service
of such a Master.

Ready to pardon the wants and weaknesses of his servants.
The Lord is ready to manifest this tender mercy, and this gracious
disposition of his, in pardoning the wants and weaknesses of his servants, in
subduing their corruptions, and in keeping covenant with them. I must lap up
many things together, because I have not time to express them severally.
First, He is sinne-pardoning Master: yea, he alone can do it, no man has
power on earth to forgive sins, but God alone; Mat. 9. Bless the Lord, O my
soul, forget not all his benefits, who forgiveth thine iniquities, and heals
thy diseases, says David, Psalm. 103. 2, 3. Here is a sin-pardoning Master:
yea, he takes no notice many times of our infirmities, but graciously passes
by the weaknesses of his servants. Numb. 23. 21. He has not beheld iniquity
in Jacob; he has not seen perverseness in Israel: or, if he do see, he
freely forgiveth it, and spares his servants, as a man spares his own son
that serves him, Mal. 3. 17. And then he is a Covenant-keeping Master; All his
promises are yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. Daniel gives him this title, Dan. 9.
4. O God the great, and terrible, that keep Covenant with them that love
thee: he is always as good as his word, and often better: Faithful is he that
has called you: 1 These. 5. 24. namely to his service: he will keep Covenant
with you. Nay, see a place that has all these together in it, Mich. 7. 18, 19.
Who is a God like unto thee? The Lord is a most incomparable Master, there is
none like him in all the world. Why so? Surely for those three things, whereof
I have now spoken: first, He is a sinne-pardoning, secondly, a
corruption-killing, thirdly, a Covenant-keeping Master. See all these in this
Text, That pardonest iniquity, and passes by transgression, etc. there is a
sinne-pardoning Master: secondly, He will subdue our iniquities, (and heal our
backslidings, as Hosea 14 4.) there is a corruption-killing Master: Thou will
perform thy truth to Jacob, and mercy to Abraham, and therefore he is a
Covenant-keeping Master. If this be rightly considered, this will make us spend
much time in Gods service.

Fifthly, The Lord is a soule-saving Master; yea, he alone is able to do this,
A soule-saving Master.
no cannot save, or redeem their souls, he must let that alone for ever. Even
they that trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of their
riches, these seem to be very powerful Masters, yet mark what the holy Ghost
says of such, Psalm. 49. 6, 7, 8. None of them can by any means redeem his
brother, nor give to God a ransom for him; for the Redemption of the soul is
precious, and cease for ever. All the men in the world, with all the wealth
in the world, are not able to save one soul: And what is a man profited, if he
could win the whole world, if he loose his soul? says our Savior, Mat. 16.
26. But now this our heavenly Master is able to save a soul from death, and
cover a multitude of sins: Thou have delivered my soul from death, says
David, Psalm. 116. 8. Yea, he is the author of eternal salvation to them that
do obey him, Heb. 5. 9. Here is a Master worth serving, that is able to save
the souls of his servants with an everlasting salvation. Psalm. 3. 8. Salvation
belongs unto the Lord, (i. e.) it is his peculiar.

Accepts the will for the deed.
He is ready to accept, and take in good part, the poor endeavors of his
servants; yea, their desires (if sincere* and fervent) do find acceptance
with him. God does indeed set his servants hard taskes many times, such as they
are never able to perform of themselves: He commands us to love him with all
our hearts, and keep all his Commandments; but his meaning is (according to
the mitigation of the Gospel) only that we should earnestly desire, and do
our best endeavor to do so, and then it is sufficient in Gods account. A
loving Father, that would try the willingness of his child, bids him, go
sirrah, run, and fetch me such a great piece of wood (which, it may be, is as
much as five or six men could carry) but if he find him willing, and ready to
do his best endeavor, it contenteth the Father: so deals God with his
servants; He spares them, as a man spares his own son that serves him,
Mal. 3. 17. Yea, if there be but first of all a willing mind, it is accepted,
according to that we have, and not according to that we have not, says the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 8. 12. Yea, sincere desires are graciously accepted. See how
Nehemiah. propounds his case, Neh. 1. 11. O Lord, I beseech thee, let thine
ears be attentive to the prayer of thy servant, and to the prayers of thy
servants, that desire to fear thy Name: especially, if these be seconded and
accompanied with earnest and sincere endeavors. Thus Abraham's resolution to
offer his Son, ( Genesis 22. 12.) was accepted, as if he had actually done it:
and therefore by faith Abraham when he was tried, offered up Isaac, says the
Holy Ghost, Heb. 11. 17. and yet we see in the Story, that actually, and
really he did it not* no, the Lord himself withheld him, by a voice from
heaven; and yet in this place ye see it is said, that he did offer Isaac, when
he was tried, that is, he was ready to have done it, it was his purpose, if
God himself had not granted him a dispensation; and therefore in Gods account
it was done: Yea, says the Lord himself, Genesis 22. 13. Because thou have done
this, though indeed he did it not, yet because he was willing to have done it,
it was done in Gods account, and in his gracious acceptance. Oh who would not
be constant and abundant in the service of such a Master?

Helps his servants, in doing their duties to him.
This gracious disposition of our Master, does farther show it self, in that
he is ready to help and assist his servants, in doing that work which he
requires of them, he affoordeth them help and strength to do their work:
and therefore though Paul when he looks upon his own weakness, and
inabilitie, is ready to cry out, 2 Cor. 2. 26. Who is sufficient for these
things? yet when he considers the helping hand of God, then he can say; I am
able to do all things, through Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4. 13. And
indeed most true is that of our Savior, Joh. 15. 5. Without me ye can do
nothing; so by his assistance, we can do all things that he commands, so as
he is pleased to accept of them; for the Lord himself puts to his helping
hand, Psalm. 37. 24. Isa. 41. 10. Fear not Jacob, I am with thee, etc. I will
help thee: He will help us pray, his Spirit shall help our infirmities, Romans
8. 26. and help us preach, and hear, and in a word, is ready to work all
our works for us. As we deal with a young Scholar that begins to write,
his hand is guided: so does the Lord deal with us, Isa. 26. 12. Thou have
wrought all our works for us.

Eighthly, Let us be abundant, A good paymaster, and bountiful,
and spend Psalm. 84. 11. He will give grace and glory, and no good thing will
he withhold from them that walk uprightly. As he himself loves a bountiful
giver, so he is such a one himself, sc. bountiful and liberal; He gives to
all men liberally, and upbraideth not, says the Apostle, Iam. 1. 5. He does
even daily load his servants with benefits, Psalm. 68. 19. Blessed be God, even
the God of our salvation, who does daily load us with his benefits. Oh who
would not be diligent in the service of such a bountiful Master? Yea, he
rewards all his Servants with no less then a Kingdom, Luke 12. 32. Fear
not little flock, for it is your Fathers pleasure, to give you a Kingdom. So,
Mat. 25. 34. Come ye blessed children of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
provided for you, from the beginning of the world. Yea, such a kingdom, that
consists of an eternal and exceeding weight of glory, 2 Co. 4. 17 Even such
as eye has not seen, neither has ear heard, nor has ever entered into the
heart of man to conceive the worth of, 2 Co. 2. 9. O how can we think all our
time sufficient to spend in the service of such a Master, that is thus
beneficial unto his servants! Consider also his bounty, in giving rain from
heaven, Act. 14. 17 with Ier. 5. 24. Let us now fear the Lord etc. I omit to
show further, how slow he is to anger, and how ready to forgive, and to be
reconciled: He does even beseech us to be reconciled unto him, as the Apostle
speaks, 2 Co. 5. 20

Takes pleasure in their prosperity.
He is such a Master, that takes pleasure in the prosperity of his servants,
and is constant in his love toward them: earthly Masters are changeable, and
fickle, and do often envy the prosperity of their servants: but the Lord
has pleasure in the prosperity of his servants, and his love toward them is
constant and unchangeable. For the first, observe it, Psalm. 35. 27. Let them
say continually, let the Lord be magnified, which has pleasure in the
prosperity of his servants: He loves to have them merry at meat, and at
work, and sing for joy of heart, Isa. 65. 14. And withal, he is constant in
his love toward them: if he be angry, it is but for a moment, but his love and
mercy is everlasting toward them. See a singular place for this purpose, in
Isa. 54. 7, 8. For a small moment, have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies
will I gather thee: and ver. 8. In a little wrath, I hid my face from thee for
a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the
Lord thy Redeemer. If he be wroth, if he seem to forsake, or hide himself
from his servants, it is but for a moment; but his love and kindness is
everlasting, his mercy endures for ever; having loved his own which were in
the world, he loved them unto the end, says our Savior, Ioh. 13. 1. not for a
time, but for ever; his love, like himself, is constant, and unchangeable, it
is an everlasting love, Ier. 31. 3. With an everlasting love have I loved thee;
therefore with loving kindness have I drawn thee, says the Lord. Yea, his
love to his servants is so constant, that nothing shall be able to diprive them
of it, nothing can finally do it, and for ever, Romans 8. 37, 38. For I am
persuaded, says the Apostle, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
height, nor depth, nor things present, nor things to come, nor any other
creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord. Yea, sin it self (that is the most dangerous enemy of all,
for your iniquities have separated between you and your God, Isa. 59. 1.)
cannot do it, yea, rather then so, your sins shall be pardoned, and that for
his own sake, Isa. 43. 25. for I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions,
for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. Here is a gracious and a
constant loving Master.

Hears p^avers, and revengeth the wrongs, and injuries, that are offered to
them.
This heavenly Master of ours, is ready daily to manifest and express his
love toward his servants, in hearing their prayers, and revenging all such
wrongs, as are offered unto them. See the proof of this privilege in both the
branches of it. First, For his hearing prayers, it is one of his titles of
honor, to hear prayers, Psalm. 65. 2. Especially, the prayers of his servants,
and such as fear him, Joh. 9. 31. If any man be a worshipper of God, and a
doer of his Will, him he hears. Yea, he will fulfill the desires of them that
fear him, he will hear their cry, and save them, Psalm. 145. 18. And if any
man delight in Gods service, he shall have his hearts desire, Psalm. 37. 4.
Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thy heart.
What greater privilege? Yea, he is many times found of them, when they do not
seek Romans 10.
him, Isa. 65. 24. It shall come to pass, that when they call, I will answer;
and while they are yet speaking, I will hear. O how open is his ear unto
their complaints, when they are wronged by their adversaries! and how ready is
the Lord, even speedily to avenge their wrongs! Hear what the unjust Judge
says, says our Savior, Luke 18. 7. And shall not God avenge his own Elect,
which cry day and night unto him; I tell you, that he will avenge them
speedily. True it is, he will not allow his servants to be their own carvers,
and avenge themselves. But what need they, when he is ready to do it for them?
Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord, To. 12. 19. He that touches
Gods servants, (to hurt them) does touch the aple of his eye, Zach. 2. 8 He
takes all their wrongs: and injuries, as done to himself, and he will
certainly, and wisely avenge their wrongs 2 Kings 9. 7. Iehu shall smite Ahab
and Iezabel, but to what end? Iehu's end was to get the kingdom, but what was
the Lords end? that ye shall see in the place forenamed, That I may avenge the
blood of my servants, the Prophets, and the blood of all the servants of the
Lord, at the hands of Iezabell: they must pay dear, that shed the blood of
Gods servants; the Lord himself will be avenged of them. Another place to
this purpose, is that we have, Deuteronomy. 32. 41. If I whet my glistering sword, and
my hand takes hold on judgment, I will render vengeance to mine enemies, etc.
and I will make my arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall devour flesh,
etc. But whose blood and flesh shall thus go to wrack. That ye shall see,
verse 43. Surely they that have shed the blood of his servants: for he will
avenge the blood of his servants, says the Text. Who would not be abundant in
his service, that will not suffer his servants blood to be unavenged?

CHAP. VIII.
Containing the three first Directions or means how to spend much time in Gods
service.

FIrst, Means. And directions how to spend much time in Gods service. 1. An
heart rightly fitted, and prepared for this purpose
If we would spend much time in Gods service, we must labor to have our
hearts rightly fitted, and prepared for that purpose. There is a price in the
hand of many a fool to get wisdom, but he wants an heart to get wisdom,
says Solomon, Pro. 17. 16. How many blessed opportunities have we, of spending
time in Gods service, which are let slip, because we want hearts rightly
prepared for that purpose? Hereupon it is, that in the first place, God
requires our hearts, Proverbs 23. 26. My son, give me thy heart, and Ier. 14.
4. O Jerusalem, wash thy heart from wickedness, A profane heart can never
endure to spend much time in God service, but straight cries out, behold, what
a weariness is it, Mal. 1. 13. Hence it is, that the Lord cries out most of
all for want of a right and fit disposition of heart in the duties of his
service, Isaiah 29. 13. This people draws nigh unto me with their mouths,
and honor me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me. Here was the
defects of Ezechiels hearers, Ezech. 33. 31. ver. They come unto thee as my
people comes, and they also sit before thee as my people, and they hear my
words, but they will not do them, where was the chief fault? Surely in the
heart, for with their mouths they show much love, but their heart goes after
their covetousness. A covetous and a vicious heart will soon make a man weary
of time spent in Gods service: and therefore when any man sets himself to
do God any service, the Lord looks directly with what heart he does it. It
is an excellent speech of God to Samuel, (when he was to choose Israel a King)
1 Samuel 16. 7. the Lord said to Samuel, Look not on his countenance, nor on the
height of his stature, etc. For the Lord sees not as man sees; for man
looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart: For the
Lord knows full well that if the heart be not right set for God, he will
never walk uprightly before God, how great a semblance or show of piet^ soever
a man may make, therefore God in his wisdom looks on the heart, Deuteronomy. 32.
46. Set your hearts unto all these words, says Moses. It is not setting of the
ear to hear only, or the mouth to speak, no, nor the hands to work, nor
feet to walk, that will serve the turn, unless the heart, in the mean time
be right set for that purpose: therefore says David, Psalm 119. 11. I have
hid thy Word in my heart, that I might not sin against thee. Lo, the chief
antidote against sin is to hide, and ponder the Word of God within our hearts.

An excellent direction, to this purpose, is that of the Apostle Saint James 4.
8. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you (if we desire that God
should draw nigh to us in mercy, we must strive, to draw nigh to him in
service, and obedience.) But what is required, that we may be fit to draw
nigh to God? Wash your hands, or cleanse your hands, ye sinners, and purify
your hearts, ye double minded. It is only a clean and a true heart, that will
make a man fit to draw nigh to God, Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw nigh to God, with
a true heart, etc. Hereupon David prays so earnestly for such an heart,
Psalm 119. 80. O let my heart be upright in thy Statutes, that I be not
ashamed. For indeed, God loves truth of heart, or truth in the inward
affections, above all other things whatsoever: this is the maine thing that he
desires; Psalm 51. 6. He that ever means to be religious indeed, must of
necessity begin with the heart, that is the chief great wheel of the clock
that moves all the rest, Psalm 37. 30, 31. The mouth of the righteous will
speak wisdom, his tongue will be talking of judgment. How comes this to
pass? that ye shall see in the words following, The Law of God is in his
heart, and none of his steps shall slide. It is the heart that sets both the
tongue, and hands a work: for out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth
speaks, says our blessed Savior, in Matthew 12. 34. Oh therefore all that
would spend much time in Gods service (which, as we have heard, is absolutely,
and incomparably the best spent time) labor to have your hearts rightly fitted
and prepared for that purpose, even such an heart as I have formerly described
unto you, namely, a believing heart, a loving heart, a sincere and an upright
heart, full of truth and sincerity, and an heart also fraught with the true
fear of God: he that has such an heart, is right set for Gods service. It is
just such an heart as God would have us to have, sc. an heart fraught and
furnished with the true fear of GOD, Deuteronomy. 5. 29. They have well said, all
that they have spoken, says the Lord, ver. 28. Oh that there were such an
heart in them. Good words, without a good heart, are little worth. Well, what
kind of heart would God have them to have? That ye shall see in the words
following, O that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me,
and keep my Commandments always, that it might be well with them. An heart
fraught with the true fear of God, is that which GOD especially desires
should be in his children, and which he does exceedingly delight in, when he
finds in it them.

2. We must be constant and conscionable 2. Direction Sc. Constancy in the
private duties and exercises of Religion.
in the private exercises of Religion: this is the way to bring the heart to a
right frame for the public Ordinances? this is like the tuneing of the
instrument: so that he that cares not for spending any time at all in private
duties, cares not how little time he spends that way, in public. Oh that
we would lay this to heart, and be careful to spend time in private prayer,
and reading, and holy meditations. Even Princes are not exempted in this case:
See that Direction, in Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19. See the King of Isreal's duty, when he
sits on the Throne of his kingdom, He shall write him a Copy of Gods Law
in a book, out of that which is before the Priests and Levites, and it shall
be with him, and he shall read therein, all the days of his life, that he
may learn to fear the Lord his God, etc. where we see,

1. That it is the duty, even of Kings themselves, to fear GOD, as well as
others.

2. That to the end he may fear God, he must be acquainted with Gods Word;
for the fear of God must be learned out of the book of God.

3. He was to get him a copy of Gods Book, that which we now call a Bible;
Kings must get them Bibles, as well as Priests and Levites;

4. He must read in it all the days of his life; and if Kings, then much
more all subjects, and private persons, must spend some part of every day in
the duties of Gods service in private. Who need think himself too good for
private duties, when Kings themselves are not exempted? Yea, it is the duty of
all Gods people to search the Scriptures, John 5. 39. Search the Scriptures,
for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they that testify
of me, says our Savior, Yea, we should all study to be well acquainted with
the Scriptures, by private reading, that we may be the more delighted with the
public heareing; Colossians 3. 16. Let the Word of CHRIST dwell in you richly
in all wisdom, teaching, and admonishing one another, in Psalms, and Hymns,
and spiritiuall songs, etc. Lo, how Gods people should spend their time in
private. O how this would fit us for exercises of Religion in public! What
made those Noble Boereans, Acts 17. 11. willing to spend so much time in
hearing Paul preach in public? Surely this was one cause (amongst the rest)
sc. the care which they had to spend their time well, even in private; They
searched the Scriptures daily whether those things were so, and so finding how
sweetly Paul's Doctrine accorded with that which they found written in Gods
Book, they received the Word, with all readiness of mind, and took delight
to spend much time in the duties of Gods public worship and service, Deuteronomy. 6.
6, 7. These words which I command thee shall be in thy heart, and thou shall
teach them diligently to thy Children: and lo this would make us love to spend
much time in Gods service, publicly, etc.

Thirdly, 3. Direction 1. Begin each day with the private duties of Religion.
He that would have an heart rightly prepared, that he may be fit and willing
to spend much time in the duties of Gods solemn worship and service, must have
a care to begin the day with religious exercises, and holy meditations: godly
cogitations let into the heart in the morning, will season the heart of a man
exceedingly, and keep it in a better frame all the day after* o what an
excellent thing, to consecrate even our first awaking unto God; this is the way
to shut out the three capital adversaries of our salvations, the Devil, the
World, and the Flesh, that are ready to dispose us to evil, so soon as we
awake in the morning; The way to keep out this wretched company all the day,
isto let God into our hearts (so soon as we awake) by holy meditations. See an
experiment of this in David. What made him to make so great account of Gods
public Ordinances? Surely, his care to begin the day well, was a very great
help unto him. Even he that says in our Text, A day in thy Courts, is better
than a thousand: could say other where, Early in the morning will I direct my
prayers unto thee, and will look up, Psalm 5. 3. He was an excellent husband
in a morning. And therefore, as the drunkard rises early to follow strong
drink, Isaiah 5. So Gods people must rise early in the morning, to do God
service: yea, this was an ordinary thing with David, Psalm 119. 147. I
prevented the dawneing of the morning, and cried: he was at his holy exercises
before the dawneing of the day: So Psalm 130. ver. 6. My soul waits for the
Lord, more than they that watch for the morning; I say, more than they that
watch for the morning. He was like a man full of pain, that could not rest,
nor sleep all the night, but watches for the morning light; or a man, that
has some special business to do, that breaks his sleep, with the
thoughts of it, and lies, and watches for the morning, that he may speedily
start up and set about it: so a gracious heart, does even consecrate his first
awakings unto God; and lies and watches for an opportunity to do God
service. Oh that we would hearken to this direction, sc. to begin the day well,
even with holy meditations. Oh what a shame is it, that we should not be as
diligent to save our souls, as the wicked are to loose theirs; and be at
least as zealous in Gods service, as they are in the devils. Now mark the
practice of the wicked, Mich. 2. 2. They imagine mischief upon theirbe ds,
when the morning light comes, they practice it. So on the contrary, let us,
as soon as we awake, imagine piety upon our beds, that when the morning light
comes, we may practice the same, to GODS glory, and our eternal salvation.

It is the practice of some wise people, that live in infected places, that
before (...) go abroad in the morning, they take a ^rau^ht of some wholesome
liquor, to fill their veins; which is an excellent mean^s to prevent the
infection of the pestilence, or any such like catching, or infectio^^ disease:
so a good draught of prayer, or holy meditation, the reading of a Chapter next
our heart, such spiritual receipts would be excellent means to prevent the
world, or devils infecting of our souls: whereas if we venture abroad without
all, or any of these (fasting, as it were) we are in great danger to be
infected. To this purpose we have the example, and practice of our blessed
Savior, who by private prayer, and meditation, made himself the fitter for
the discharge of the duties of his public Ministry, Yea, and arose early in
the morning, to that purpose: Observe it, Mar. 1. There we shall find, that
our Savior was earnestly ben^ upon the discharge of his Prophetical office,
and to this end (by his Spirit) stirs up an earnest desire in the peoples
hearts to hear him; and therefore says the Text, Simon, and they that were
were with him, said unto him, All men seek for thee, verse 36. 37. and then
see his resolution to that purpose, verse 38. 39. Let us go into the next
towns, that I may preach there also, for therefore came I forth, and so he
preached in their Synagogues throughout all Galilee. But what means did he
use, to fit himself for this purpose: that ye may see, ver. 35. And in the
morning rising up a great while before day, he went out, and departed into a
solitary place, and there prayed: wherein he is an excellent pattern for our
imitation, and by his blessed example does plainly teach us, that for a man to
arise early in the morning, to perform the duties of Gods private worship and
service, is an excellent means to prepare and fit him for the duties of Gods
public worship, and service. Hereupon it is also, that He gives direction for
private prayer, even prayer in the Closet, as well as public, Matthew. 6. 6. But
thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, and shut the door, and pray
unto thy Father in secret; and thy Father, that sees in secret, will reward
thee openly, Which he does (not only because such prayers, for the most part
are done in sincerity, but also) because he well knew, that the more men made
conscience of prayer in secret, the fitter and the more willing they would be
to spend time in the public duties of Gods service: besides, the promise of
acceptance is made to such as seek wisdom early, Pro. 8. 17. I love them
that love me, and they that seek me early, shall find me, says Wisdom
there.

CHAP. IX
Containing the fourth Direction, how to spend much time in Gods service.

FOurthly, 4 Direction We must labor to have our hearts fraught with the love
of Gods house and Ordinances.
if we would spend much time, in the duties (...) Gods public worship and
service, we must labor to (...) our hearts fraught with the love of Gods
House, and Ordinances; we must love public prayer, and the Word preached, and
the Sacraments, etc. Men will never care for spending much time, in things
which they love not, they are soon weary of such kind of employments: but on
the other side, men care not how much time they spend, in those things which
they love, and wherein they delight. Some spend their time in working, and
toil and moyle to get wealth, they will arise early, and sit up late, and eat
the bread of sorrows, etc. And why so? Surely, because they love profit. Some
spend their time in hunting, and hawking, and such like recreations, because
they love their pleasures. Some spend their time in study, because they love
learning. In a word, Trahit sua quemque voluptas; every man usually spends
most time, in that which he loves best. And therefore he only is fit to spend
much time in Gods service, that is greatly in love with the duties of Religion.
What a great deal of time did Jacob spend in Laban's service, for the love of
Rachel? twice seven years he served him, night and day with all his power, and
they seemed but a few days, in regard of the love, which he had to her, says
the Text, Genesis 29. 20. Twice seven years, seem but a few days, if they be
considered and looked upon with the eyes of love. Now is it not a great shame
for us that are Christians, if it shall appear, that a man shall love a fair
Virgin, better than we love God? Now if we loved Gods Ordinances as we should,
all the time that we spend in his service, would seem but a few days, even
nothing in comparison, if we could once come to serve God, out of love to
himself and his Ordinances. Now surely, this must needs follow upon the three
former directions: for, if we, 1, get an heart right set for God and be
constant in the private duties of religion, and especially, be careful to
season our hearts with religious cogitations early each morning, then we cannot
choose, but love the duties of Gods public worship and service: and where this
true love to Gods Ordinances is, there will be a care to spend much time in
Gods worship and service, both public and private. See the description of
David's blessed man, Psalm. 1. 1, 2. where he is described, first, Negatively,
by what he does not; and secondly, Affirmatively, by that which he does, v. 2.
But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in that Law does he meditate
day and right. See the connection of these two: If ye ask, Why he spends so
much time in Gods service, even day and night? It is answered, because his
delight is in the Law of the Lord, ergo, he spends much time in it. Yea, see
this in David himself. Why did he spend so much time in the duties of Gods
worship and service; but in regard of his singular love and affection toward
them? as that one speech of his does plainly and fully intimate, Psalm. 119. 97.
Oh how I love thy Law, it is my meditation continually. A man will never
continually think and meditate on that which he loves not. David could never
have said truly out of his experience, A day in thy Courts, is better then a
thousand, if he could not have truly said first, My soul longs, yea, even
faints for the Courts of the Lord, Psalm. 84. 2. No, it was his extraordinary
love to Gods house and Ordinances, that made him value time spent there, at so
high a rate. The Book of Psalms gives plentiful and abundant testimony to
this purpose; Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, the place where
thine honor dwells, Psalm. 26. 8. And again often in Psalm. 119. Oh how I
love thy Law! How much, David? Surely, more then thousands of gold and silver:
Ver. 72. Yea, more then great spoils, ver. 102. yea, it was sweeter then
honey, and the honey-combe, Psalm. 119. 103. No marvel if such a man as he
spent much time in the duties of Gods service, that loved Gods house and
Ordinances so exceedingly. Yea, such was his love to the duties of Religion,
that by his good will, he would spend all his days in that holy employment:
yea, and he makes it his grand request, the very only Boon, that he would
beg at Gods hands, that he might do so. An excellent place to this purpose, is
that which we have, Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I
will seek after. But one thing David? Surely, that is some great matter
indeed: it may be some great Kingdom, bigger then that of Jerusalem: No;
David's aim was at another kind of matter: see how he does express it, That I
may dwell in the house of the Lord, all the days of my life. This is David's
one thing, that he would beg at Gods hand; yea, the meanest office, or
employment in Gods house, would give him more content, then the highest place
in the tents of the ungodly, as is sweetly expressed in this very Verse, Psalm.
84. 10. in the words immediately following the words of our Text; I had rather
be a doore-keeper in the house of God, then to dwell in the Tents of
wickedness. Yea, this is not David's case only, but all that are regenerate
indeed, and truly godly and religious, they are all of the same mind, as well
as David. The little child loves nothing so well as the mothers breast, that
is the only still-babe, that gives content for the most part, when all other
devices fail, if this do not quiet the child, scarce any thing will do it:
so it is with all the newborn babes of Christ; if they once be regenerate and
borne again; they love nothing so well, as to suck the milk of Religion, out
of the breasts of Gods Ordinances. It is the comparison that the holy Ghost
himself uses, 1 Pet. 2. 2. As newborn Babes, desire the sincere milk of
the Word, that ye may grow thereby. See the affection of Gods Saints this way,
Jeremiah, and Ezechiel, and Job, and Paul. First, for Jeremiah, Chap. 15. 16.
Thy Words were found, and I did eat them. And how did they taste, Jeremiah?
Thy Word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of my heart. Lo what sweetness the
Babes of Christ find in Gods Ordinances. The like we find of Ezech. 3. 3.
Son of man, cause thy belly to eat, and fill thy bowels with this roll.
Here was Gods charge to the Prophet: now see what sweetness he found in it,
Then did I eat the roll, and it was in my mouth as honey for sweetness. Then
for holy Job, the sweetness that he found in Gods Ordinances, was that which
affoorded him a great deal of comfort in his greatest afflictions, Job 23. 12.
His way, that is, the Lords way, have I kept, and not declined, neither have I
gone back from the Commandment of his lips; I have esteemed the words of his
lips, more then my necessary food: that made him so religious, and spend so
much time in Gods service, because he was so far in love with Gods
Ordinances. Then consider the example of Paul, Romans 7. 22. What made him spend
so much time in Gods service, in prayer, and preaching to all the world, but
because he loved the Word exceedingly? I delight in the Law of God, according
to the inner man: so far as he was regenerate, he took great delight in Gods
Ordinances. But above all, consider the example of our blessed Savior; none
comparable to him, for his unwearied painfulnesse in Gods service: He went
about, doing good continually, Act. 10. 38. Yea, observe it, Mat. 9. 35. Jesus
went about all the Cities, and Villages, teaching in their Synagogues, and
preaching the Gospel of the kingdom, and healing every sickness, and every
disease amongst the people. And why so? Surely, because his love to Gods
Ordinances, and his Fathers will, was extraordinary. This is the reason, that
he himself gives in this very case. It is an excellent Story that we find,
Ioh. 4. the effect and substance whereof is this; That our Savior coming to
Sychar, to Jacobs Well, and being hungry and thirsty, He sends his Disciples
into the City to buy meat, says the Text, ver. 8. In the mean time, comes
a woman of Samaria to draw water, and our Savior takes that opportunity, in
their absence, to convert the heart of this poor Samaritan, wherein the
Disciples find him so busy at their return, that he had forgotten both his
hunger and thirst, in so much, that they were enforced to urge him, saying,
Master, eat, ver. 31. Now mark the sweet answer of our blessed Savior; I
have meat to eat, that ye know not of, ver. 32. And see how he does farther
express his full meaning, Ver. 34. Jesus said unto them, my meat is to do
the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. Oh admirable pattern!
Oh heavenly example! such was his delight in doing Gods will, that he
prefers it before his meat and drink, in the time of his greatest hunger
and thirst.

Now for the perfecting of this point, to quicken our affections, and to set
the better edge upon our appetites, let us consider these three particulars.

First, Motives.
That we may love Gods Ordinances the better, To persuade us to the love of
Gods house and Ordinances.
and delight to spend more Jesus Christ. This is the Apostles Argument, Romans 1.
16. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God unto
salvation. Yea, it is the very Word of Gods grace, Act. 20. 32. And now,
brethren, I commend you to God, and to the Word of his grace, which is able to
build you up farther, and to give you an inheritance amongst them that are
sanctified. Yea, the Word preached, is a special fruit of his favor, peculiar
to those that are Gods people: so that wheresoever he sends it, he has a
purpose to save some there. See how this is mentioned, as a special privilege
to the Jews, which were then the only people of God under heaven, Psalm. 147.
19, 20. He shows his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and Ordinances unto
Israel: He has not dealt so with any Nation. Oh how we should value the Lords
goodness herein to us, if this were rightly and thoroughly considered? This was
the Jews chief privilege, that they had the Lords Word in special for their
direction, when all Nations besides were left in darkness, Deuteronomy. 4. 8. For
what Nation is there so great, that has Statutes and Judgments so righteous,
as all this Law which I have set before you this day? So mark how the Apostle
sets out the Jews privilege, above all other Nations, which (he shows)
consisted in this, that they had the Lords lively Oracles for their Direction;
Romans 3. 1, 2. What advantage then has the Jew, and what profit is there of
Circumcision? Much every way; chiefly, because unto them were committed the
Oracles of God: They were the Lords Oracles, and therefore the more to be
esteemed; and their privilege was so much the greater, that did enjoy them. So
again, setting out the Jewish privileges, see how the Apostle reports the
matter, Romans 9. 4. To whom pertains the adoption, and the glory, and the
Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises?
The Lords Covenants, the Lords Law, the service of God, and his promises; this
should make us esteem them. Yea, it is the Lord that sends Prophets, and
Apostles, and Pastors to teach and instruct his people in this Word that he
has given us; Ier. 3. 15. I will give you Pastors, according to mine own
heart, that shall feed you with knowledge and understanding. It was the Lord
Jesus Christ himself, that sent the Apostles to preach the Gospel, Mat. 28.
20. Go, and teach all Nations, etc. teaching them to observe all things that I
command you; and lo, I am with you always, unto the end of the world. Yea,
and this sending of Ministers to preach the Word unto us, is a fruit of Gods
singular love toward us, it argues the Lords fatherly pity and compassion
toward us; according to that we read in 2 Chronicles. 36. 15. And the Lord God of
their fathers, sent unto them by his Messengers, rising early, and sending,
because he had compassion on his people, and on his dwelling place. Now lay up
all these together. If the Word preached be an Ordinance of Gods appointing; if
he send the Ministers to preach it; if their com^^^ to do this, be a fruit of
his love, yea, (...) compassion toward us; then surely, if this (...) rightly
considered, we cannot choose ^ut love it; it is the Lords doings, and
therefore it is mavelous in our eyes. The like may be said of prayer, and the
Sacraments, they are also of Gods ordaining.

Secondly, 2. Motive. The worth and excellency of Gods Ordinances.
Consider the worth and excellency of these Ordinances in themselves. The Word
of God faithfully preached, is an excellent Ordinance of God, and so is prayer,
and so are the Sacraments, matters of special and exceeding worth: now ye
know, men love and delight in things that are most excellent. This is one
reason that David gives, why he delights in the society of Gods Saints, sc.
because they were excellent persons, Psalm. 16. 2. My goodness extends not
unto thee, (says he to God) v. 3. but to the Saints that are in the earth, and
to the excellent, in whom is all my delight. Do thou delight in those things
that are excellent? O then delight thy self in Gods Ordinances, which are most
excellent. The Word of God faithfully preached is a most sweet and excellent
Ordinance of GOD. See how highly David, that man of GOD, commends and extolleth
it, Psalm. 19. 7. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul; the
Testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple; and ver. 10. More to be
desired are they then gold, yea, then much fine gold, sweeter also then honey
and the honey-combe. Oh the transcendent excellency of the Word of God
faithfully preached! Had I the tongue of men and Angels, I could not express
it to the full. Take notice of a Testimony or two to this purpose, in the new
Testament, 2 Cor. 10. 4. For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but
mighty, through God, to the pulling down of strong holds: yea, it is able to
make Satan fall down from heaven like lightening. This is the Lords great
Ordinance, to batter the strong holds of sin and Satan; they are excellent
things, for the demolition of Satan's Ammunition: this casts out the strong
man armed, and takes away his armor, wherein he trusted; here is the
excellency of the Word preached. So observe another testimony to this purpose,
which shows the excellency of this Ordinance; Heb. 4. 12. For the Word of God
is quick, and powerful, and sharper then any two edged sword, piercing, even
to the dividing asunder of the soul and spirit. This sword of the Spirit is a
most excellent Ordinance of God, it is a special Shield, to defend us against
the fury of all our spiritual enemies. See the Apostles testimony for this,
Ephesians. 6. 16. Take the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit, which
is the Word of God. See how our blessed Savior (with this) put Satan to
flight, Mat. 4. Scriptum est; this was his weapon: and see the conclusion, ver.
11. Then the Devil left him. This sword will pierce the very ^^ead of that
great Leviathan. Oh how we should love it, if this was rightly considered.

Thirdly and lastly, 3. Motive. The singular use and benefit of them.
Consider the singular use and benefit of Gods Ordinances, in regard of us.
Give me leave to instance in one of Gods Ordinances, sc. the Word preached.
Certainly, the utilitie of it is extraordinary, if it be well considered:
observe it, I beseech you, and see in some particulars.

First, 1. Benefit. Of the Word preached, it is the Word of God.
The Word preached, is the Word of life, the means to quicken a dead soul; It
is the means both to beget, and to preserve spiritual life in the soul of a
Christian; Psalm. 119. 50. This is my comfort in mine affliction, for thy Word
has quickened me. We are by nature all dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.
1. Now the Word faithfully preached, is the means to revive and raise us up
unto newness of life, Ioh. 5. 25. Verily, I say unto you, says our Savior,
the hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the
Son of God, and they that hear it, shall live. See here the means to revive
and quicken our dead souls. Oh therefore let us love the Word, even as we love
our life; Pro. 8. 35. He that finds me, finds life, and shall obtain
favor of the Lord: Oh the worth of life! Life is sweet, especially spiritual;
yea, natural life is very dear unto us; Skin for skin, and all that a man
has, will he give for his life, says the Text, Job 2. 4. Now the Word of God
faithfully preached, is our very life, Pro. 4. 13. Take fast hold of
Instruction, let her not go, keep her, for she is thy life, says the
Wiseman. How can we choose but love the Word, if we consider this?

Secondly, 2. Benefit. The Word of Health.
Because life it self, without health, is but a burden, rather then any
benefit. A sick man is even weary of his life: so was Job in his extremity;
My soul is weary of my life, Job 10. 1. sc. for want of health. Therefore in
the second place, the Word of God is health, as well as life, to them that
truly embrace it. My Son, attend to my words, says Solomon, Pro. 4. 20. Why
so? See the worth of them, sc. Ver. 22. For they are life unto those that find
them, and health unto all their flesh. Life is a sweet thing, if it be
accompanied with health: so, Pro. 3. 8. It shall be health to thy navell, and
marrow to thy bones. Health is a most precious Jewel, and therefore the Word,
which is the means to beget and preserve it, must needs be precious.

Thirdly, 3. Benefit. The Word of Comfort.
But what is life and health without comfort? And therefore in the third place,
the Word preached is the chief means of comfort that we do enjoy. This is
our chief support and consolation, next under God himself; Psalm. 119. 92.
Unless thy Law had been my delight, I should have perished in my affliction.
The Word preached is the Word of comfort, proceeding from the God of all
comfort (1 Cor. 1. 3.) which is able to comfort us in all our tribulations,
that we may be able to comfort others with the same comfort, wherewith we our
selves are comforted of God. Yea, the holy Word of God is both written and
preached to this end and purpose. 1. It is written to this end, Romans 15. 4.
Whatsoever is written aforetime is written for our learning, that we through
patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. Yea, secondly, This is
one end of preaching, Isa. 40. 1. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says your
God: speak comfortably to Jerusalem. Hence also is that of the Apostle, 1 Cor.
14. 3. when showing the excellency of preaching; he gives this for one of the
chief reasons of his Encomium; But he that prophesies, speaks to men, unto
edification, and exhortation, and comfort. He that preaches aright, preaches
to the comfort of Gods people. Indeed, as for the wicked of the world, here is
no comfort for them, they must go to the world for comfort, for the Word has
none for them; it is the terror of the Lord, to torment them before the time;
but to the godly, and such as are religious, it is to them a Word of strong
consolation, yea, the very joy, and rejoicing of their heart, says Ier. 15.
16. This was David's comfort, Psalm. 119. 50. This is my comfort in my
affliction, for thy Word has quickened me. And indeed, what greater comfort,
then for a condemned man to hear of a pardon? Men in a desperate condition to
hear of a Savior? Joh. 5. 39. Search the Scriptures, for they are they that
testify of me, says our Savior himself. What greater comfort? The
Scriptures tell us of the gracious readiness of God to be reconciled to poor
sinners; 2 Cor. 5. 20. We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech
you by us, and we pray you, in Christ's stead, to be reconciled to God. The Word
assures us, that upon our repentance, our sins are forgiven us, Ezech. 18.
21. which is one of the chief grounds of comfort that can be propounded. Thus
Christ comforted the poor Palsieman, Mat. 9. 2. Son, be of good cheer, thy
sins are forgiven thee. Men may seem, but can never be truly cheerful in
the want of this favor. Thus also would our Savior comfort the poor weeping
penitent, Luke 7. 48. Thy sins are forgiven thee. He knew she could receive
no better ground of comfort. So when God would have his people comforted, Isa.
40. 1. see what direction he gives to that purpose; Comfort ye my people,
Comfort ye Jerusalem; How? Tell her; that her iniquities are pardoned, etc. As
if he had said, If any thing will afford her comfort, that will do it.
Blessed is the man whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered,
Psalm. 32. 1, 2. He that is assured of happiness, may well be comforted. Yea,
the Word preached, is the glad tidings of Salvation; it does assure us of our
interest in Christ, and that He is made of God unto us, Wisdom, and
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. As also that
Christ, with all his merits, do properly belong unto us, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23.
All is yours, whether it be Paul, or Apollos, etc. all is yours, and ye are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Now what greater comfort? So that ye see, that the
Word faithfully preached, is the Word of comfort; and therefore we have reason
to love it in that regard.

Fourthly, 4. Benefit. The Word of spiritual consolation.
Because carnal or worldly comfort is little worth; therefore, in the fourth
place, the Word preached is the best means of spiritual comfort, gracious,
and heavenly consolation. Hereupon it is called the Grace of God, Titus 2. 11.
And the Word of (...) Grace, Act. ^0. 32. And the ministration of the Spirit, 2
Cor. 3. 8. It is the Instrument that the Spirit of God uses to work grace in
the hearts of Gods people. It is the ministry of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. 18.
Yea, the Word of regeneration, Iam. 1. 18. Of his own will begat he us, with
the Word of Truth, says the Apostle. It is the immortal s^ede of our new
birth, 1 Pet. 1. 23. yea, the chief means of our Conversion, Psalm. 19. 7. The
Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul. Yea, it is the chief means
of our Sanctification, Psalm. 119. 9. Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his
way, etc? Ioh 15. 3. Now are ye clean, through the Word that I have spoken
unto you, says our Savior: and Ioh. 17. 17. Sanctify them with thy Truth,
thy Word is Truth. Lo, the chief Instrument of our Sanctification! Yea, as
God himself, is the God of all grace; so is his Word, the Word of all grace:
for what grace of the Spirit is it, that is not usually begotten in us by the
Word, whether knowledge, or faith, or repentance, or the fear of God? etc. 1.
Out of question, it is the chief means of knowledge, and wisdom, and
understanding in the things of God. See it in David's example, Psalm. 119. 98.
Thou, through thy Commandments, have made me wiser then mine enemies, for they
are ever with me. Ver. 99. I have more understanding then all my teachers; for
thy Testimonies are my meditation. Ver. 100. I understand more then the
Ancient, because I keep thy precepts. Then for faith, the Word is the means
to beget and preserve that; for it is the Word of faith, Romans 10. 8. And the
Apostles conclusion is, Ver. 17. So Then faith comes by hearing, and hearing
of the Word of God. And then for the fear of God, another excellent grace of
the Spirit, the Word of God is the chief means to beget that; Deuteronomy. 17. 19.
Where it is said of the King, that he shall write him a copy of the book of
the Law, and read in it all the days of his life; Why so? That he may learn
to fear the Lord his God, and to keep all the words of this Law: Yea, this is
the end of our public meeting to hear the Word faithfully preached, all both
old and young must come to hear it. Deuteronomy. 31. 12. Gather the people together,
men, and women, and children, and the stranger that is within thy gates: All
sorts must constantly frequent the Church assemblies, and depend upon the
ministry of the Word: Why so? That they may hear, and that they may learn,
and fear the Lord your God, and observe to do all the words of this Law. The
true fear of GOD must be learned out of the Book of GOD; and hearing the Word
preached, is the means to attain thereunto. The like might easily be showed of
sundry other graces. But this is not all: the Word preached, is not only the
means to beget the graces of Gods Spirit in us, but to increase them also.
Observe it, 1 Pet. 2. 2. As newborn Babes, desire ye the sincere milk of
the Word, that ye may grow thereby, says the Apostle. So that the ministry
of the Word, is not only the seed of our new birth, but also the chief means
of our increase and growth in Grace: yea, it will still build us up farther,
until we come to perfection, Act. 20. 32. And now, brethren, I commend you to
God, and to the Word of his grace, which is able to build you up farther, and
to give you an inheritance among all them that are sanctified. Oh precious
Word, and well worthy of all high esteem, that is able to build us up in
grace, farther and farther, until we come to perfection! How can we choose
but love the Word exceedingly, and delight to spend much time in it, if we
seriously consider how useful it is unto us also in this respect.

Fifthly, 5. Benefit. The word of eternal life and salvation.
and lastly, The Word preached, is not only the chief means of spiritual
life, and comfort, but of our eternal happiness and salvation. It is not
only the Word of grace, but of glory too, and of salvation, Romans 1. 16. I am
not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, says the Apostle, Why so? Because (how
simple, or despicable so ever it may seem in it self, yet) it is the power of
God, through faith, unto salvation, a foolish thing indeed it is, in the eye of
flesh and blood, and of carnal Reason, but yet it pleases God, even by the
foolishness of preaching to save them which do believe, 1 Cor. 1. 21. Yea, it
is the Word of salvation, so that he is far from salvation, that rejects it,
Psalm. 119. 155. Yea, it is the Word of eternal life, and therefore he that
thrusts it from him, does judge himself unworthy of eternal life. See two
direct Testimonies for this: the one is the speech of Peter to our Savior,
John 6. 68. Will ye also go away, says our Savior to his Disciples? The
Apostle Peter makes answer, Whither should we go? (where shall we think to
mend our selves?) thou have the words of eternal life, And therefore, he that
rejects it, and cares not to spend time in the hearing, and reading, and
serious perusal of it, does even judge himself unworthy of everlasting life,
Acts 13. 46. says the Apostle, addressing his speech to the Jews, It was
necessary that the Word of God should be first preached unto you, (the
preaching of Gods Word is of necessary use in the Church of God) but since that
ye thrust it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life, etc.
behold we turn to the Gentiles. Oh how readily, and with what great affection
would we receive the Word, if this was rightly considered.

CHAP. X.
Containing part of the fifth Direction, etc.

FIfthly, 5. Direction Redeem the Time.
All that desire to spend much time in Gods service, must follow that golden
rule of the Apostle, sc. of redeeming the time, Redeeming the time, because the
days are evil, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 16. Which rule he repeateth
again to the Colossians, Colos. 4. 5. Now if you ask me, From what we must
redeem the time? I answer, from all such lets and impediments that will hinder
this way. There are diverse great consumers of precious time, from which he
must carefully redeem it, that would spend much time in Gods service. I shall
need to say the less in this case, in regard of that which I have already
said, as also in respect of a Treatise written to this purpose, Whately.
Redemption of Time.
called The Redemption of time. Yet (because I would not leave the point
imperfect) I will briefly insist upon some few particulars.

1. Therefore all men, All mispenders of time must be suppressed.
must very carefully and watchfully subdue and suppress all those great
mispenders of time, which like so many graceless spend-thrifts, do wast and
consume many precious hours, and much golden time, that was far better spent
in Gods worship and service: which are especially six.

1. Sinning.

2. Sleeping.

3. Carking and caring.

4. Sporting, or recreations, with immoderate feasting.

5. Foolish thinking.

6. And lastly, idle speaking, which is usually a fruit of the former, because,
Out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks: whereof some of these
must be mortified, and put to death, and others again restrained and
regulated, or bound, as it were, to the good behavior.

1. The first, Let. 1. 1. Sinnc.
and the worst, and chief mispender of precious time, is Sinning; when we
spend time in doing that which is directly naught, as lying, swearing,
drunkenness, wantonness, and such like works of the flesh, and of the Devil:
this is the worst spent time of all, as being directly contrary to that which
is spent in Gods service; as I have already showed in the first use of the
point.

Now this thief is utterly to be mortified, and put to death; imprisoning, or
binding to the good behavior, will not serve the turn; for indeed this is a
desperate ruffian, or swaggerer, that is not capable of any good behavior, and
therefore must needs be put to death, and wholly suppressed. We must endeavor,
as much as in us lies, that we spend no time in sinning, but carefully
mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit; this is the Apostles rule,
Colossians 3. 1, 2, 5. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things
which are above, be heavenly minded, set your affections upon things above, Let
your conversation be in heaven, Phil. ^. 30. But what course must we take to
this end? That the Apostle shows, verse 5. Mortify therefore your members,
which are upon the earth. Where we see this truth most clearly manifested,
that all that would spend much time in Gods service, and holy performances,
must carefully mortify their members here on earth, and put sinful lusts to
death: For this horrible thief, and great mispender of precious time, is like
some mischievous person, or desperate ruffian, that flies in a man's face, and
will either kill, or be killed; and therefore must needs be killed, that he
does not kill us, for the wages of sin is death, Romans 6. 23. So that we
must either kill our corruptions, or they will bring our sonles to death, Romans
8. 13. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye: but if ye through the
Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. Where you see, that
our precious souls cannot live; but by the death of our corruptions: the life
of the one, is the death of the other: as Ahab lost his own life, for
preserving Benhadads, Thy life shall go for the life of him, in 1 Kings 20.
42.) so our souls must eternally perish, if we suffer our corruptions to
survive.

But how should we so mortify our lusts, Quest.
that we may spend little or no time time in vicious courses, and so
consequently more time in Gods service?

An. 1. Let us diligently search, Resp. 1. Remedy. Sin must be discovered,
and found out.
that we may plainly discover and find out that special sin, wherewith we
have been formerly most pestered, It is impossible to execute a malefactor,
until he be found out, and apprehended: diligent search is first made, and Hue
and cry sent after him to find him out: so we must deal with those lusts,
wherein formerly we have spent too much time; Lamentations 3. 40. Let us
search, and try our ways, and turn to the Lord our God. This was David's
practice, Psalm 119. 59. I examined, or considered, or thought on mine own
ways, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies: yea, because he knew his heart
was deceitful, and fraudulent, Ier. 17. 9. He does beseech God to assist him
in it, and to do it for him, Psalm 26. 2. Examine me, O Lord, and prove me;
try my reins, and my heart. Like a man that hears proclamation, for the
apprehension of such and such a Traitor, he not only searches his own house
himself, but he sets open the door, and entreats the officer to enter,
and make what diligent search he can, that if there be any traitor lurking
there, he may be found out, and executed: so David, search me, o Lord,
examine my heart, and house, and see if there be any sinful lust there, and
let them be all mortified. To the same purpose is that we have, Psalm. 139. 23,
24. Search me, O God, and know my heart; try me, and know my thoughts, and see
if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. Lo, here
was sincerity, and this was the best way to find out our most secret lusts,
and hidden corruptions. O therefore let us not be strangers at home, but
examine our own hearts, as the Psalmi^^ speaks, Psalm 4. 4. A sweet place
for this purpose, is that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves,
whither ye be in the faith, or no; prove your own selves; know you not your
own selves? ( i. e.) what an absurd thing is it, for you to be skillful in
others affairs, and neglect your own? to know other men, and not your own
selves? what greater hypocrisy? The Hypocrite is sharp sighted abroad, but
blind at home; He can see a mote in the eye of another, but does not discern
the beam that is in his own, it is our Saviors character of an hypocrite,
Matthew 7. 5. But on the contrary, the advice of the Apostle is excellent,
Galathians 6. 4. But let every own prove his own work, (seek to find out
his own lusts) then shall he have rejoicing in himself, and not in another.

Secondly, 2. Remedy. Smite it with the two edged sword of the Spirit.
When we have found out this waster, and apprehended this Traitor, then let us
directly smite it with the two edged sword of the Spirit upon the head, which
is the Word of God, a special part of a Christians armor, and so much the
more excellent in this case, because it is a weapon both defensive, and
offensive, Ephesians 6. 16. And take the Helmet of salvation, and the Sword of
the Spirit, which is the Wo^d of God. See what admirable work our Savior made
with this spiritual weapon, in the single combat, that he had with Satan,
hand to hand, Matthew 4. Scriptum est, (...) verse 4. And again, (...) verse
6. And see the event of this combat, v. 11. (...) Then the Devil left him,
etc. This put him utterly to flight: And no marvel, Heb. 4. 12. (...)
for the Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper then any two edged
sword, says the Apostle, Hebr. 4. 12. Super ^mnem gladinm ancipitem.
Above any sword with two mouths, that is, having two edges, as the word
signifies. This will cut and wound, yea, break the head of any lust
whatsoever, if it be as hard as any stone. See an excellent place for this
purpose Ier. 23. 29. Is not my Word like as a fire, says the Lord? and like an
hammer, that breaks the Rock in pieces? If a man be hardened in any sinful
way, behold here is a fire to melt the heart of any lust whatsoever; it will
fire it out of the soul: or if it be as hard as a rock, lo, here is an
hammer to break it all in pieces. Oh therefore when thou have found out what
special lust, or corruption it is, that hinders thee from spending time in
Gods service, smite it with this two edged sword, lay upon the head of it with
this hammer, and terrify thy conscience with the threats of the Word, and say,
How can I, or how dare I live in this sin, that will poison my soul? Or how
can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? How dare I live in the
sin of swearing, when I see, and consider how expressly the Lord has said,
that He will not hold him guiltless, that takes his Name in vain; but will
surely cut him off with the flying role of his curse, Zach. 5. 3. consider the
place, This is the curse that goes over the face of the whole earth; for every
one that steals, shall be cut off, as on this side, and according to it; and
every one that swears, shall be cut off, as on that side, according to it.
Would not this make men leave stealing and swearing, if it was rightly
considered? So, durst men live in the sin of lying, if they believed that
speech of the Wiseman: Prove. 12. 22. Lying lips are an abomination unto the
Lord? Yea, or that of, Revel. 21. 8. sc. That all liars shall have their part
in the lake that burns with fire, and brimst^n^, which is the second death?
In a word, durst men live in drunkenness, whoredom, covetousness,
profaneness, etc. if they were persuaded that such should never inherit the
kingdom of God, 1. Cor. 6. 10. and that for such things comes the wrath of
God upon the children of disobedience, Ephesians 5. 6? This was David's chief
Antidote aagainst every sin, Psalm 119. 11. I have hid thy Word in my heart,
that I might not sin against thee. Smite thy lusts with this weapon, and thou
shall see thy desire upon such enemies.

Thirdly, 3. Remedy. Fl^e unto Heaven for a^de b^ ^ervent praye^.
When we have found out that, or those special corruptions, which have
hindered us from spending time in Gods service, if we cannot vanquish and
overcome them of our selves, by the power of Gods Word, let us then fly to
heaven for help, and cry out unto God Almighty for his assistance. What better
remedy, (when a man has met with too potent an enemy) then to fly to the Lord
Chief Justice of Heaven and Earth, and earnestly, and fervently to crave his
aid? This was Saint Paul's refuge in this case, Romans 7. 24. O wretched man
that I am, Who shall deliver me from this body of dea^^? But thanks be to God
through Jesus Christ, v. 25. there is the issue. So again, when the same holy
Apostle was cumbred, and pestered with the prick in the flesh, the messenger
of Satan, 2 Cor. 12. 7. see what course he took: here was his refuge, even the
bosom of the Lord was his only shelter and defense, v. 8. For this I besought
the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me. Now see the issue; What a
gracious answer? v. 9. And he said unto me, my grace is sufficient for thee,
etc. Hearty confessions, and strong petitions and cries to God, are very
availeable in this case; the prayer of the righteous is very effectual in such
a condition, if it be fervent, Iam. 5. 16. as the Apostle there speaks in
another case. When a man is in that case, and in so great a strait, that he
knows not what to do, it is his best course in that case to look up to God,
by earnest, and fervent prayer, according to the practice of that gracious King
Iehosophat, 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. Will thou not judge them? Oh Lord? Will thou not
judge them? for we have no might against this great multitude, neither know we
what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. He looked at God in this case with
many eyes; with an eye of faith and confidence, with an eye of patient
expectation, with an eye of diligent observation, and with an eye of prayer;
according to that of David, Psalm 5. 3. Early in the morning, will I direct my
prayer unto thee, and will look up: where the former words are a direct
explication of the later, ( i. e.) I will look up unto thee, o Lord, with an
eye of prayer. If a man can even fall out with himself, and loath himself in
his own sight for his iniquities, and for his abominations, as the Prophet
speaks, Ezech. 36. 31. and earnestly, and unfainedly complain to God against
his corruptions; certainly, in Gods good time he shall be able to prevail
against his corruptions: for God is not only a sinne-pardoning, but also a
corruption-killing God, one that will subdue our iniquities, Micah 7. 18. See
what a promise we have for this, Romans 6. 14. Sin shall not have dominion
over you; for ye are not under the Law, but under Grace, says the Apostle. And
Ier. 3. 22. with Hosea 14. 2. Return, ye backsliding children, and I will
heal your backslidings, says the Lord there, so that here is great hopes (if
we take this course) that we shall prevail against our corruptions. Besides,
though for the present our corruptions may seem stronger, and more ^uis^ant
then before, yet we shall be sure to ^revaile at last, and in the mean time
these ^ailings of ours shall be forgiven, and our ^^iquities, and infirmities,
whereinto we all through the violence of corruption, ^^all not be imputed unto
us, if we do ear^estly, and fervently cry out for help and ^^rength against
them. This seems to be directly prefigured in the ancient Law of the Jews,
Deuteronomy. 22. 23. That if a man find a betrothed Damsel in the City, and lie
with her, etc. then, in that case, they shall both be stoned, because she
might have prevented the same by crying out: but verse 25. But if a man find a
betrothed Damsel in the field, and the man force her, and lie with her, then
the man only that lay with her shall dye, verse 26. But to the Damsel thou
shall do nothing, there is in the Damsel no sin worthy of death: for as
when a man rises against his neighbor and slays him, even so is this
matter; Because it is supposed, that the Damsel cried in this case, but could
not be heard in the field, Verse 27. For he found her in the field, and the
betrothed Damsel cried, and there was none to save her. So in this case, when
the Devil finds us at some advantage, and does force us to some sin, yet
if we struggle and cry out against him, though he do prevail with us for the
act, yet in the Lords great mercy, it is not imputed. Let this encourage us to
confess our sins to God, and cry out against our corruptions, and judg^ our
selves for them. Excellent to this purpose is that direction of one:
Whateley's. Husbandry: page 8
A man (says he) must ever and anon be saying thus with himself, Ah vile
sinful wretch, and hate worthy creature that I am, have I not sin^ned against
God and mine own soul, i^ such a passionatenesse, in such wantonness in such
injustice, and the like? Oh that I could even detest my self for this; Who,
but a very beast, or a fool, would have been so often, and so grossly
overtaken? It is not possible to imagine, unless one do take experience of
his own practice, how much the renewing of this holy anger against a man's
self, for his sins past, will strengthen him against the same, and abate the
power of his corruptions. Ibid. p. 8^.
And therefore, says he, put thy self often in mind of thy former sins,
being out of love and conceit with thy self, saying, Ah vile creature! How
could I find in my heart to do such things? would any man have thought it
possible, for any creature, from whom all reason, and piety both were not,
^anished, to run out into such words? such deeds? etc. Thus he, piously, and
sweetly. And surely, if we would thus judge and condemn our selves, we should
not be judged of the Lord, says the Apo^tle, 1 Cor. 11. ^2. An excellent
direction, and a most sure and speedy may to prevail against our strongest
lusts, and most preva^ent corruptions, if we can thus pray and ^ry out against
them. As the Lo^^^^^sisteth ^he p^ou^: so He givet^ grace to the humble. The
more we see, and discern our want of grace, the more fit are we to receive
it. Excellent to this purpose is that of another. Gods grace is free, he
looks not at any thing in us in the bestowing of it: What? Do thou think
that thou art incapable of grace, because thou art unworthy of it? This is a
mere fallacy. Do not cast away thy confidence, because thou see not in
thee, that goodness which thou desire. It is some goodness in thee to be bad
enough in thine own esteem: be but vile enough, base enough, bad enough, and
then thou art good enough to partake of grace: thine emptiness will make some
way to fullness, Thus he sweetly. For this will make a man cry out for Gods
gracious aid and assistance, Help Lord, for these lusts of mine, like the
sons of Zerviah, are too hard for me. This is the way to break the heart of
our lusts, and to mortify our earthly members, that we shall never spend so
much time in vicious courses as we have done. Thus David cried out against
covetousness, Psalm 119. 35. Incline my heart to thy Testimonies, and not to
covetousness; He beggeth the Lord Chief Justice his warrant to apprehend it,
M. Bernard. Isle of man page 165. 4. Remedy.
as one does wittily observe in that case. And this is the third Remedy.

Fourthly, and lastly, If we would prevail against sin, that we may not
spend any time at all, at least, much less time in the service of it, we ^ust
daily possess, and furnish our soulas with holy meditations.

1. Consider the odious, 1. Medit.
loathsome, and filthy nature of sin, which in the book of God is not only
called filthy, and that excrementally; but it is even filthiness it self, 2
Cor. 7. 1. Having therefore these promises, let us cleanse our selves from the
filthiness of the flesh and Spirit. Yea, James 1. 21. Let us lay aside all
filthiness, and superfluity of maliciousness, Iam. 1. 21. (...).
and receive with meekness the ingrafted Word, which is able to save your
souls, the word signifies properly the filth that is under a man's nail. Yea,
to show the filthy nature of it, it is compared to the Sowes wallowing in the
mire, and the vomit of a Dog; it is even the metaphor of the Holy Ghost, 2
Peter 2. 22. How could we find in our hearts to live in sin, and spend our
time this way, if we consider this?

2. Not only filthy, 2. Medit.
but dangerous in many respects. It brings body, and soul, and name, and
estate, and all to ruin; It is the loss of our very souls, if we continue in
it without repentance, Luke 12. 19. Thou foo^e, this night shall they fetch
away thy soul; and then see what our Savior infers from heaven, Matthew
16. 26. For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and
loose his own soul?

Thirdly, 3. Medit.
Consider how odious to God, his very soul abhors it, as the greatest evil
in the world. It is the breach of his Law, most contrary to his holy and purest
nature. It was the death of the Lord Jesus, for he was delivered up for our
sins, Romans 4. 25. It killed the Prince of life, and pierced the heart, and shed
the blood of Gods only Son; and therefore must needs be mortified, and put
to death. Yea, nothing will sooner do it, then these, and such like
meditations. Now if we thus subdue and mortify, yea, crucify this notorious
thief, that thus robs God of his glory, and man of Gods favor, we shall be
able to spend much time in Gods service. This is the first mispender of
precious time, that must of necessity be mortified, and put to death.

Secondly, 2. Let. Excessive sleeping, or sluggishnes.
Another great let or impediment, that must be removed; another great waster of
time, that must be speedily suppressed, is immoderate, or excessive sleeping,
and sluggishnesse, This also is a most dangerous mispender of precious time,
although not so bad as the former. Thus the Prophet Jonah misspent his time, as
he was in a Ship sailing to Tarshish, when he should have gone to Ninev^h; He
was fast asleep in a very dangerous storm, when he stood in more need to have
been wrestleing with God by humble, earnest, and hearty prayer, Jonah 1. 6.
See how pathetically the Heathen Mariners awake him, and rouse him up, The
Ship-master came to him, says the Text; and said unto him, What meanest thou,
o sleeper? Arise, and call upon thy God, if so be that God will think upon
us, that we perish not, (i.e.) Is this a fit time to sleep, when we are all
ready to perish, and be ready even every moment to be swallowed up of the
waves? Oh therefore arise, and bestirre thy self, and call upon thy God, and
for shame learn to spend the time better then in sleeping, especially, in
such, and so great and apparent danger, their being (as it were) but even a
step between us and death. Thus Solomon awaketh his fluggard, Proverbs, 6. 9,
10. How long will thou sleep, o sluggard? When will thou arise out of thy
sleep? Mark now the sluggards drousie, slumbring, senseless answer, Yet a
little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep; Thus
still he keeps his bed, and there he delights to spend his time, and there
the Wiseman lets him alone, and bestows no more pains to call him up, but
even passes sentence upon, as he lies in his bed, So thy poverty comes as
an armed man. This will bring both temporal poverty, and spiritual misery
upon a man; such a man shall surely come to poverty, Proverbs 20. 13. for this
steals away not only much time, that was better spent in Gods service; but it
robs us of two special seasons, and opportunities of doing GOD service, and
getting good to our souls, sc. the morning season, and the Sermon time, or the
time for the exercises of religion, which is the very harvest of our souls, Is
not he likely to be a poor man, that will keep his bed in harvest time, and
like to reap shame and penury? Prove. 10. 5. Well, What shall we do with
this unruly person? Put him to death? O no, What? Not sleep at all? Rather
bind him to the good behavior, send him to the house of correction: for
sleep, in it self, is a refreshing mercy of God, which he conferreth upon
those whom he loves, Psalm 127. 4. For so he gives his beloved sleep. What
then? Deal thus with this companion; cut shorter this prodigal; allow him
less liberty. He that mispendeth his means, it is pity but he should want;
let some of his means be taken from him, he does but wast and mispend it. And
therefore the best way is to observe these two rules, which I will prescribe on
purpose (in this case) for our Direction.

1. Let us habituate, 1. Rule or Remedy. To habituate or accustom our selves
to timely rising.
or accustom our selves to early or timely rising. Let us even forcably break
off our sleep, for religious and godly meditations; and that which at first
will seem even impossible, will by a little use and custom prove, not only be
possible, but also most facile and easy, even as the Cock clappeth his wings
early in the morning, thereby to shake off drowsiness, and to stir up
himself to crow: so let us shake off our sluggish humor by degrees, and even
stir up our selves to holy duties in the morning. Thus David stirs
himself, and endeavors to shake off his drousie temper, Psalm 103. 1, 2.
Bless the Lord, o my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy Name.
Bless the Lord, o my soul, forget not all his benefits. Yea, this he would
do early, or betimes in the morning, Psalm 5. 3. Early in the morning will I
direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up. Yea, this was not all, but
sometimes he would break his sleep, even at midnight, to do God service,
Psalm 119. 62. At midnight will I arise to give thanks unto thee, because of
thy righteous judgments; Thus by degrees in time we should prevail
exceedingly against that sluggish humor, that will else keep us from
embracing many blessed opportunities of doing God service.

Thirdly, 2. Rule or Remedy. Take heed of immoderate use of the Creatures.
We must beware of excessive eating and drinking. The immoderate use of the
good creatures of God, does very much dispose to sleep, but indispose us to
any holy and religious employment. When the belly is full, etc. says the
homely Proverb, a man, in that case, is fitter to serve the Devil in sinning,
or the flesh by sleeping, then God in any religious duty whatsoever. Put a
knife to thy threat, if thou be a man given to appetite. Wisely do thou
refrain from the immoderate use of that, which will altogether indispose thee
to Gods service, and make thee a very prey to lust, and unto the Devil. He
that in this case makes his belly his god, is then ready for sleep almost at
any time, but will scarce be fit to serve GOD at any time. Consider the place
of the Apostle, Romans 13. 13. Not in ryotting, or gluttony, and drunkenness,
and what follows? Nor in chambering and wantonness: where we see, that riot
and excess in the use of Gods good creatures, disposes strongly to lust and
filthiness. When I fed them to the full, then they committed adultery against
me, and assembled themselves by troops in the Harlots houses, says God,
Jeremy 5. 7. It was Sodoms fullness, that made them so filthy. But of this
hereafter, when I come to speak of feasting, and recreations, which is another
great mispender of precious time, and a great impediment to keep us from
spending time in Gods service. And so much therefore as touching this second
great mispender of precious time, and that is, excessive sleeping.

CHAP. XI.
Wherein other chief Lets are removed, containing the other part of the fifth
Direction.

THirdly, 3. Let. Immoderate carking and caring for the things of this life.
All that would spend much time in GODS service, must very carefully take
heed, and beware of another great mis-spender of precious time, and that is,
immoderate carking and caring for earthly things: all inordinate and covetous
thought taking for outward things, must needs be carefully shunned and avoyed.
How many precious hours do men usually spend in taking thought, saying, What
shall we eat? and what shall we drink? What shall I do when I am old, and
past my work? Or how shall I do in a dear year, etc? and such like terrible
dreams. Thus many an hour is misspent, in such worldly distrustful
cogitations, that were far better spent in Gods service: Not, but that an
honest moderate care is lawful and necessary; but all distracting distrustful
care is forbidden, as a great usurper of precious time. It is the Apostles
direction, Phil. 4. 6. In nothing be careful, but in every thing let your
requests be made known to God: (...), where the Apostle prohibiteth only a
distrustful, distracting, or heart-dividing carfulness, as the word
signifies and shows, That time spent in covetous carking and caring, and
religious prayer and invocation, cannot well stand together; according to that
of our Savior, Mat. 6. 24. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon; no more then a man
can look upwards and downwards both at once. The great hurt that this thief
will do us.
Let us (a little) consider of the great hurt that this usurper will do us in
this case. This covetous carking, will either keep us from, or distract us in
profiting by the performance of holy duties; and therefore is a great enemy in
this case, and must needs be mortified. 1. It many times keeps us from the
performance It keeps us from the performance of holy duties.
Where covetous carking reigns, there is no room for piety, godliness is
quite put down; there is no leisure for private prayer in the Closet and
family, nor many times, there is no time for the public duties of Religion.
See how the world kept men from the great Supper, whereof our Savior speaks
in the Gospel; Luke 14. 16. A certain man made a great Supper, and bad many,
and sent his servant at Supper time, to say to them that were bidden, come, for
all things are now ready. How could they find in their hearts to slight or
reject such a loving invitation? See then what follows, ver. 18. And they all
with one consent began to make excuse. The first said unto him, I have bought
a piece of ground, and I must needs go and see it, I pray thee have me
excused: Ver. 19. And, another said, I have bought five yoke of Oxen, and I
must needs go and prove them, etc. Ver. 20. And another said, I have married a
wife, and therefore I cannot come. Thus ye see what worldly excuses they had.
And our Savior doubtless would hereby teach us, that inordinate love of the
world, keeps men from the duties of Gods service.

Secondly, Or else if it do not altogether Or di^^racteth us in them.
yet they are great means to distract us in them: so that if we do set our
selves to serve God, yet we cannot do it with all the heart, as we should.
This covetous carking will steal away the heart, that we cannot so seriously
hearken to the Word preached, we cannot set our hearts to all the good Word of
God, as we ought to do, Deuteronomy. 32. 46. These words that I command thee, shall
be in thy heart, says God, Deuteronomy. 6. 6. This cannot be, in this case; for
covetous carking will keep out the Word, and distract us in hearing of it. See
an experiment of this in Ezechiels hearers, Ezec. 33. 31. By their outward
garb and fashion they seemed to be very religious, they were constant hearers,
They come unto thee as the people comes, and they sit before thee as my
people, and they hear my words, but they will not do them, for with their
mouth they show much love; but their heart goes after their covetousness. It
was but an heartlesse piece of service that they performed to God,
covetousness, even in the very instant of hearing, had stolen away their
hearts. They were just like unto a Chapman, Simile.
that while he is busy in cheapning a commodity, and beating it to a price, a
nimble subtle cutpurse, in the mean time, has stolen his purse; so that when
he should come to pay for his commodity, his money is gone. Let us beware and
take heed of this subtle jugler, that will either keep us from, or distract us
in the duties of Gods worship and service.

Or else keeps us from pro^iting by them.
This will keep us from profiting by, or practicing of that which we seem to
hear with great attention: so that we shall become but hearers only, but not
doers of the Word; and so build the houses of our souls upon the sand. This
our Savior shows, in his Parable of the Sower, Mat. 13. 22. Some seed
falls among the Thorns, and the Thorns grow up with it, and choke it; that
is, as our Savior himself there expounds it, He also that received seed
among the thorns, is he that hears the Word, and the care of this world, and
the deceitfulness of riches, choke the Word, and he becomes unfruitful. Thus
ye see the great hurt we receive by this unjust usurper of our precious time,
which prevails so much the more, because he seems to be the right Lord, and
the true owner of the greatest part of our time. What must we do in this case?
Surely so far as this care is inordinate, it must needs be mortified. It
masketh under the name of thrift, and frugalitie, and good husbandry, etc. But
indeed, where this prevails, there the one thing needful must needs be
wanting: As appears by that speech of our Savior, Luke 10. 42. Martha,
Martha, thou carest, and art cumbred about many things, but one thing is
needful; Mary has chosen the better part, which shall never be taken from
her. And therefore this is a special corruption that must needs be mortified.
This is one of our earthly members that must be put to death, Col. 3. 5.
Mortify therefore your members which are on the earth, fornication,
uncleanness, etc. and covetousness which is Idolatry.

But how shall we suppress and mortify this unruely companion? Quest. Means
and Remedies.


I answer, Ans.
Upon a three fold meditation or consideration. First, Consider, How
Consider how needless;

First, Needless these excessive cares are.
Consider how needless, because we Pet. 5. 7. Casting all your care upon him,
for he cares for you, says the Apostle. We may learn of little children, to
depend upon the care and providence of our heavenly Father; They never take
care where to get meat and drink, nor how to procure new clothes, but leave
the care of these things unto their parents; how much more should we commit the
care of these things to God, who has assured us, that we shall not want any
thing that is good, Psalm. 34. 10? How chearefully and comfortably may we depend
upon the promise of our heavenly Father, that he will never fail us, nor
forsake us. Consider Mat. 6. 33. But secke ye first the kingdom of God, and
the righteousness thereof, and these things shall be added unto you. This is
one of our Saviors chief arguments, to dissuade from inordinate care, Mat. 6.
31, 32. Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? Or what shall we
drink? Or wherewithal shall we be clothed? Ver. 32. For your heavenly Father
knows that ye have need of these things, (i.e.) therefore it is a needless
thing for you to cumber, or trouble your selves with any such unnecessary
cogitations.

How vain, and fruitless.
This inordinate care and thought-taking for outward things, is not only
needless and superfluous, but also exceeding vain and fruitless: it cannot
avail any thing at all, it can do no good. Men's aim and end in this case, is
to get wealth, and to be rich: but it is not inordinate care, but the blessing
of God that makes rich, says the wisest Solomon, Pro. 10. When we have
carked, and cared, and cast beyond the Moon, yet this will not serve the turn,
when we have done what we can. This is another of our Saviors excellent
arguments, that he produces in this case, Mat. 6. 27. Which of you by taking
thought, can add one cubite unto his stature? No: with all our care, we cannot
so much as make one hair white or black: and therefore all our care and
thought-taking in this case is vain and fruitless; Psalm. 127. 1, 2. Except
the Lord build the house: except he keep the City, the builders and watchmen
do both spend their strength in vain, they wholly loose their labor: and ver.
2. It is in vain for you to rise up early, and sit up late, and to eat the
bread of sorrows: for so he gives his beloved sleep. Thou shall remember,
that it is the Lord thy God that gives thee power to get wealth, says the
Lord, Deuteronomy. 8. 17, 18. Thou shall not say, my power, and the might of mine hand
has gotten me this wealth; but thou shall remember the Lord thy God: for it is
he that gives thee power to get wealth. It is not our care, or providence, but
the blessing of God that brings wealth; and therefore our excessive care is
fruitless.

Thirdly, Dangerous, and hurtful.
This inordinate thought-taking

First, 1. Mischief They l^^ us open to Satan's foul temptations.
This inordinate desire of having, makes a man a prey unto Satan, and lays
him open unto Satan's dangerous temptations: it does cast a man inevitably into
the snare of Satan, 1 Timothy 6. 9. But they that will be rich, fall into
temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which
drown men in destruction and perdition. This will make a man lie, and steal,
and cheat, yea, forswear, and swagger, etc. The devil has every covetous man
always at advantage, as it were, upon the hippe, he is even carried captive by
him at his will. This is one woeful mischief, that it makes a man even
apparently the devils vassal.

Secondly, 2 Mischief They will eat out the true love of God, out of our
hearts.
This inordinate love of the world, in process of time, will even eat out the
true love of God out of our hearts. For even as adulterous love in a woman,
does even eat the love of her husband out of her heart, so that the more she
loves a stranger, the less she regards her husband: so does the inordinate
love of the world. If we dote upon that painted Strumpet, she will so bewitch
us, that in time we shall not care for the Lord at all. This is the Apostles
argument, 1 Ioh. 2. 15. Love not the world, nor the things of the world; for if
any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. It is not
possible for a man to over-love the world, and yet in the mean time, to love
God as he ought, no more then it is possible for a man to look even upward and
downward both at once. Set your affections upon things above, and not on the
things that are here below, Col. 3. 1. Intimating, that it is at least
improbable, if not impossible, to do both.

Thirdly, 3. Mischief Depriveth us of Gods love to us.
The too-much bent of the affections to outward things, does utterly deprive us
of Gods love to us. As the love of the Father is not in him; so the love of the
Father is not toward him, in that case. But on the contrary, the Lord even
hates and abhors him; which is a most woeful estate and condition: Psalm.
10. 3. Speaking good of the covetous, whom God abhors. Where we see
evidently, that every covetous person is hated and abhorred of GOD. And no
marvel, for it is no less then Idolatry in Gods account, Col. 3. 5. Yea, and
there is a very direct and express enmity between God and every such person,
Iam. 4. 4. Know ye not, that the amity of the world, is enmity against God:
so that whosoever makes himself a friend of the world, the same is Gods
enemy. Now mark the woeful estate of Gods enemies; Psalm. 68. 21. God will
surely wound the head of his enemies, and the hairie scalpe of such a one as
walks on still in his trespasses. This is another fearful and intolerable
mischief.

Fourthly, 4. Mischief Keeps many from entering upon the pro(...) Religion
This inordinate thought-taking for outward things, does often keep many from
entering upon the profession of Religion, and embracing of Christianity. Many
could be content to embrace Christ, if it were not for the world. This
hinders many from becoming the Disciples of Christ, because they cannot
find in their hearts to forsake all for his sake. See an experiment of this in
that young man in the Gospel, Mat. 19. 16. He had a months mind to become one
of our Saviors Disciples: see how sweetly and lovingly he speaks to our
Savior, Good Master, what good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal
life? If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments: as if he had said,
come on thy ways, I will set thee a task: but when he had told him the upshot
of all, Ver. 22. If thou will be perfect, Go, and sell all that thou have, and
give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come follow me:
Ver. 22. When he heard this saying, he went away sorrowful, for he was endued
with great possessions. Yea, and (it seems) he did not so much possess, as
he was possessed of them: he loved the treasures of the earth too well, to
forsake them for the treasures of heaven. Now mark what our Savior infers
hereupon to his Disciples, Ver. 23. Verily, I say unto you, that a rich man
shall hardly enter into the kingdom of God. Inordinate love of riches does
keep men from the profession, much more from the practice of Religion. This is
another mischief.

Fifthly, 5. Mischief Makes men fickle, and inconstant in Religion.
We would never spend time in inordinate thought-taking how to get wealth, if
we did consider another special inconvenience that ever comes with it, and
that is, that it makes men fickle and inconstant in their Religion. This will
make a man plainly disert, and utterly forsake Christ, and his cause, and leave
him in the open fields. A covetous person will never stand to his colors: our
Savior himself foretells, that some should forsake him, Ioh. 16. 32.
Behold, the hour comes, etc. when ye shall be scattered every man to his
own, and shall leave me alone: and yet I am not alone; for the Father is with
me. Yea, this you shall find most certain, that nothing will make a man
sooner do this, then the inordinate love of this present world. This made
Demas forsake his colors, and turn Apostata. The Apostle once kindly salutes
the Church in his Name; but after cries out against him for Apostacy, 1 Timothy
4. 10. Demas also has forsaken us, having loved this present world. So that if
we would be constant in the service of Christ, we must take heed of the world.

Sixthly and lastly, 6. Mischief Brings the wrath of God upon a man's
posterity.
This will bring the wrath of God upon a man's posterity. Many a man goes to
the devil himself, to make his son a rich man; and yet in spite of his
heart, God makes him a beggar, He begets a son, and there is nothing in
his hand, Eccles. 5. 14. So that he coveteth an evil covetousness to his
house, Heb. 2. 9, 10. He thinks his children shall fare better, and they
speed the worse for his evil gotten goods: as appears by the examples of
Achan, and Ahab; whose covetous ill gotten wealth was the ruin of them, and of
their posterity, Josu. 7. 24. 1 King. 21. 29. This will help us against this
sin, if this be rightly considered.

Fourthly, 4. Let. sc. Carnal feasting.
Another great Let or impediment in this case, is excessive feasting, or
belly-cheare. True it is, that we are allowed the liberal, and comfortable use
of Gods creatures, not only for necessity, but for delight; but yet we must
even in this case beware of excess. The Prophet cries out against
unreasonable, and unseasonable feastmungers, Amos 6. 4. That they stretched
themselves upon their couches, and did eat the Lambs out of the flock, and the
Calves out of the stall. Ver. 6. That drink wine in Bowls, etc. but are not
grieved for the afflictions of Joseph. Isa. 5. 11. ver. 12. Woe to them that
rise up early to follow strong drink, etc. And the Tabret and the Pipe are in
their feasts; but they regard not the work of the Lord, nor the operation of
his hands. Where we see, that time spent in inordinate and excessive feasting,
and time spent in Gods service, cannot well stand together; it is a great Let
and impediment in this case. This was one thing that made the rich man, that he
could find no time for Gods service, nor for the good of his soul, Luke 16.
19. Because, as he was clothed with purple and fine linen, so he fared
deliciously every day, says the Text. Every day was a day of feasting, and
therefore there was no time left for the exercises of Religion: they feed the
body, but starve and pine the soul. Therefore we must have a care to spend
less time in feasting, Remedies. To consider the great hurt that comes by it.
that we may spend more in the duties of Gods worship and service. And to this
end let us consider these five Remedies.

First, 1. Mischief Abuse of Gods creatures.
Immoderate feasting, is seldom, or never without the abuse of Gods good
creatures, and so we fight against God, and strike him with those blessings,
which he has graciously given us for our delight: yea, hereby we commit
Idolatry, in making our belly our God, Phil. 3. 19.

Secondly, 2. Mischief A breeder of quarrels and unquietness.
Seldom without brabbles and quarrels, many times between persons of near
relation one to another. See the fruit of that great feast made by Ahashuerus,
that lasted so long; What was the event of it, but a woeful breach between
him and his wife? Hest. 1. 19.

Thirdly, 3. (...)
A man in that case is most apt to deny God. This made Agur pray against wealth
and riches; Give me not poverty, nor riches, says the Text, Pro. 30. 8. And
the^ see the reason that he gives for it, Ver. 9. Lest I be full, and deny
thee, and say, Who is the Lord? Thus full-fed Pharaoh cried out, Exodus 5. 3.
Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice, to let Israel go? I know not
the Lord, neither will I let Israel go. Excessive fulness will make a man even
to kick against God; Jesurun is waxed fat, and kicked, says the Text, Deuteronomy 32.
15. Thou are covered with fatness; Then he forsook God that made him, and
lightly esteemed the rock of his Salvation. Lo, the fruit of excessive
fullness. Yea, this was one of the sins of Sodom, Idleness, and fullness of
bread made them so intolerably filthy, that they fell to that uncleanenesse
which was unnatural, as the Prophet shows, Ezeck. 16. 49.

4. Mischief And also to forget God.
This excessive use, or rather abuse of Gods creatures, are great means to
make us forget God. True it is, that even then we have most cause to remember
him with all love and thankfulness: but such is the corruption of our nature,
that even then above all other times, we are most apt to forget him; according
to the admonition of the Lord himself by Moses, Deuteronomy. 8. 11, 12. When thou
have eaten and art full, then thou shall bless the Lord thy God, for the good
Land that he has given thee. There is the right use of fullness and plenty.
But what follows? Ver. 12. Beware, that thou forget not the Lord thy God: and
Ver. 13, 14. Lest when thou have eaten and art full, etc. then they heart be
lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God, etc. Here is a dangerous mischief
indeed: Psalm. 9. 17. The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all that forget
God. O consider this ye that forget God, and feast your selves without fear,
least he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you. When I fed them
to the full, they then committed adultery against me; and assembled themselves
by troops in the harlots houses, Iere. 5. 7.

Fifthly, 5. Mischief Increase our torments in hell, if we repent not.
The more that we have misspent our time in feasting and carnal pleasures,
the more torment we are like to have hereafter. All such immoderate carnal
pleasures end in torments, without repentance. What became of him that was
clothed in purple and fine Linen, and fared deliciously every day? Luke 16.
19. What is the next news we hear of this Belly-god; this mirth-munger? The
rich man dyed, and was buried; and in hell he lifted up his eyes, being in
torments, and sees Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom, ver. 23.
yea, and see there, what Abraham especially objecteth against him, Ver. 25.
Son, Remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, etc.
therefore he is comforted, and thou art tormented. See a direct testimony,
concerning the woeful estate of such, Phil. 3. 18, 19. For many walk, of whom
I told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of
the Cross of Christ; whose end is destruction: Well, What are their courses?
Whose God is their belly, whose glory is their shame, who mind earthly
things. See here the end of excessive feasting. And thus you see the fourth
Impediment, and the Remedies against it.

Fifth let or impediment, 5. Let. sc. Carnal pleasures, how hurtful and
dangerous.
that keeps men from spending time in Gods service, is the inordinate
pursuit, and excessive use of carnal pleasures and delights, vain mirth and
merriment. This does follow to be handled after the former, as being, for the
most part, an inseparable companion of it; Exodus 32. 6. The people sat down
to eat, and to drink, and they rose up to play. So in Isaiahs time, this was
an adjunct of their feasting, Isaiah 5. 12. The Harp, and the Violl, the
Tabret, and Pipe are in their feasts, (therefore they had no time to serve God)
therefore it follows, But they regard not the work of the Lord, etc.
certainly these vain pleasures, if eagerly followed, will do us a great
deal of hurt, in usurping a great part of precious time, which was better
spent in Gods service. Recreations, if moderately used, are very useful and
refreshing, but if inordinate, they spoil all. As it is fitly said of fire and
water, that they are very good servants, but evil Masters: fire on the hearth
is useful; but in the thatch of the house fatal and dangerous: so pleasures
and recreations are very convenient, if used moderately, but very hurtful, if
they be abused by excess. Yea, even the most innocent and harmless pleasures
that can be, are very hurtful, if followed immoderately; as the best wine
makes the sharpest and the quickest Vinegar, To be lovers of pleasures, more
then of God, 2. Tim. 3. 4. or to spend that time in pleasures, which we should
spend in Gods service, will poison the most innocent and harmless pleasures
in the world.

Now the Remedies that we must use against Remedies.
this great usurper of precious time, are principally these.

1. Let us be sure that the matters of our See that the matter of our pleasures
be lawful.
be just and lawful. To take pleasure in sinning against God, It is a sport
for a fool to do wickedly, says Solomon Prove. 10. 23. To take pleasure in
swearing, in excessive drinking, or making others drunk, or pernicious and
uncivil jestings, this mirth is wholly earthly, sensual, and devilish; this
is like him, of whom Solomon in Prove. 26. 19, 20. that casts firebrands,
arrows, and death, and says, Am I not in sport? Here is woeful sport. Be
sure thy delights be lawful and honest.

Secondly, Remedy.
Seasonable. If never so lawful, Seasonable.
they are deadly and dangerous. Bowleing, shooting, leaping, these are lawful
in themselves; but these may be made unlawful, if used unseasonably, that is,
in time of divine Service, or Sermon on the Lords day; Here is Wine turned into
Vinegar: or in time of any public calamity, when Gods Church is in misery.
This was their fault in Amos his days, They drank wine in bowls, etc. but
did not regard the affliction of Joseph, Amos 6. 6. So Isaiah 22. 12. In that
day did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping and mourning, etc. and behold,
joy, and gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing Sheep, eating flesh, and
drinking wine. These were things lawful in themselves, but unseasonable now,
because at this time God called for the contrary. This is the second rule or
Remedy.

Thirdly, Remedy. 3. Moderate, and not excessive.
Moderate and sober, and not excessive, when we are even too much bent upon
pleasures, and set our hearts upon them continually. Here was the Rich man's
fault, that he fared deliciously every day, Luke 16. 19. when we love
pleasures more than God; when we spend more time in carnal delights, then in
the duties of Gods service; nay, can find no time to give over. Some spend day
by day in pleasures, like their resolution, in Isa. 56. 12. Come ye (say they)
I will fetch wine, and we will fill our selves with strong drink, and to
morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant. This was excessive.

Fourthly, 4. Rule or Remedy. Meditat.
And therefore the fourth and last Remedy consists in holy meditation,
concerning the vanity, and danger of carnal delights, if followed
immoderately. To withdraw our affections from them, consider,

To consider the vanity of carnal pleasures.
and vacuity of these delights, and pleasures; especially, if we seem to
place our happiness, and felicity, in the enjoyment of them; they cannot
satisfy the mind of man, but the more he doteth upon them, the less he
finds in them. See what Solomon pronounces of them all, when he had sifted
them to the bottom, All is vanity, and vexation of spirit. That which he says
of silver, is as true of pleasures, He that loves them (especially too well)
shall not be satisfied with them Eccles. 5. 10. See what the Holy Ghost
pronounces of all worldly things, and consequently of carnal and worldly
pleasures, Isa. 55. Wherefore do ye spend your money, for that which is not
bread, and your labor for that which satisfies not? These cannot satisfy,
nor bring any true content with them. But as in case of a burning fever, the
poor thirsty creature, cries out for a cup of cold water, but the cup is
scarce gone from his mouth, when he cries out for more, as being more
enflamed, and far more thirsty then before: so it is with these carnal
pleasures, they do bewitch us so, that the more we enjoy them, the more we
dote upon them, Let us stay and moderate our selves this way, with this
consideration, He that thinks to satisfy himself with carnal delights, may
as well take in hand to fill a sive with water, which would be an endless
labor.

Secondly, Medit. 2. Fickle and uncertain.
If they could satisfy, (which they cannot do) yet dote not upon them,
because they are so fickle, uncertain, and momentany. Alas! they are but for a
season, they betake them to their wings (like riches) and fly away as an Eagle
toward Heaven: they are of a fading nature, and a perishing condition: they
endure but for a season; That made wise Moses care little for them, and so
lightly to esteem them, preferring the afflictions of Gods people before them,
Heb. 11. 25. Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then
to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.

Thirdly, Meditat. 3. Hurtful and dangerous.
Consider how hurtefull, and dangerous. Carnal mirth does ever end in
heaviness, and bitterness. Woe unto you that laugh now, says our Savior,
for ye shall wayle and weep, Luke 6. 25. ( i. e.) Hearken to this ye merry
blades, that spend all your days in mirth, and jollity, you will have one day
the heaviest hearts of any people under heaven; in the mean time it steals
away the heart. Like as continual whetting spends time, and spoyleth the
sith: so excessive sporting spoyleth the mind, indisposeth to good, and
makes a man even a prey to his lusts and to Satan; yea, and we may assure our
selves, that it will be bitterness in the later end, for it is sure to end in
heaviness, either of godly sorrow, (if we do repent) or of desperate griese
and sorrow in hell, lest thou mourn at last, says Solomon, Prove. 5. 11. when
thy flesh and body are consumed, etc. So Job 21. 13. They spend their days in
wealth, or in mirth, says the margent, And in a moment go down to hell, A
fearful end, a woeful conclusion.

Sixth chief Let or impediment is vain Vain speeches.
which the Apostle fitly calls tatling, 6. Let.
and speaks of it, as a fault somewhat worse than idleness, and a thing most
incident unto Women, 1 Timothy 5. 13. And not only idle, but tatlers also, and
busy bodies; which is the babbling out of vain, and frothie speeches, the
prosecuting of an idle tale, which has neither head, nor foot. This is a very
great consumer of much precious time, and a great impediment.

The Remedies whereof consist, Remedies.
partly in Meditation. Practice.


1. Consider that God Almighty is a Meditat. 1.
most curious observer, That God does curiously observeour-speeches.
and an exact earewitnesse David, for this purpose, Psalm 139. 3, 4. Thou art
acquainted with all my ways; for there is not a word in my tongue, but lo, o
Lord, thou know it altogether. Had we not need to take heed what we speak,
as well as what we do, for the Lord hearkeneth, and lends a listening ear to
all our speeches, whether they be right or wrong, Ier. 8. 6. I hearkened, and
heard, Metitat. 2.
but they spoke not aright, no man repented himself of his own wickedness,
God will call us to a strict account for them.
saying,

That as God hears, so he will call us to a strict account for our very
speeches: for God will not only bring every work, but also every idle word
into judgment; Mat. 12. 36. But I say unto you, that every idle word that men
shall speak, they shall give an account thereof at the day of judgment. For
by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned.

Secondly, 2. Remedy. Consisting in practice. Keep thy mouth and tongue with
all diligence.
Keep not only thy heart, but also thy mouth and tongue with all diligence.
This was David's practice, Psalm. 29. 1. I said I will take heed unto my ways,
that I sin not with my tongue. I will keep my mouth with a bridle. And
especially look well to the heart, and keep that clean and sure, because out
of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks, says our blessed Savior,
Matthew. 12. 34.

Seventhly, 7. Let. Is vain thoughts.
and lastly, Vain thoughts and cogitations, which keep holy meditations out
of the heart, and dispose to vanity. I hate vain thoughts, says David,
Psalm 119. 118. There is both the disease, and the remedy. This the Lord
cries out against, in Ierem. 14. 4. Wash thy heart from wickedness, O
Jerusalem: How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? The Remedy
against this last impediment, Remedies.
Consisting in meditation. 1. God searches the heart, and sees our thoughts.
and examine them daily, and that upon a twofold consideration.

1. Because God is a searcher, and discerner of the very thoughts, and intents
of the heart: He searches the heart, and reins, Psalm. 7. 9. Yea, he
understands the thoughts a far off, or long before, Psalm 139. 2. The Lord
knew what thoughts the Israelites would think in the land of Canaan, before
ever they came there, Deuteronomy. 31. 21.

2. Because the Lord will bring not only God will bring our very thoughts into
judgment
but every secret thing (our very thoughts) into judgment, Eccles. 12. 14) So
that we had need to pray, that even the thoughts of our hearts may be forgiven
us, Acts 8. 22. and thus you see now the fifth means, or direction, how to
spend much time in Gods service, sc. by thus redeeming the time as you have
heard.

CHAP. XII.
Containing the third and last Duty, which we are to perform sc. in regard of
others, etc.

THirdly and lastly, 3. Duty. Not only to spend much time in Gods service our
selves, but also to do our best, to prevail with others to do so.
Seeing time spent in GODS service is absolutely and incomporably the best
spent time, This serves to exhort us, not only to preach, but also to do our
best to persuade, and prevail with others, and to press them earnestly to
spend much time in Gods service. It is the disposition of a religious heart,
that such an one is not content to serve God himself, but earnestly desires,
and carefully endeavors, to draw others thereunto. This has ever been the
disposition and the practice of Gods people, Psalm. 122. 1. I was glad, when
they said unto me, let us go to the house of the Lord. Where we see, that in
those days, such as were truly religious, were not content to serve God
themselves, but were ready to exhort and persuade others thereunto. 2. That
David was marveilous glad, and very ready to accept of the motion. This was
foretold to be the disposition of godly persons under the time of the Gospel,
Isa. 2. 2, 3. Mich. 4. 1, 2. It shall come to pass in the last days, that the
mountain of the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountains, etc.
and all Nations shall flow unto it. Well, What is, or shall be, the disposition
of godly persons in those times? And many people shall go up, and say, come
ye, let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of
Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths, etc.
The like was foretold, Zach. 8. 21. The inhabitants of one City, shall go to
another, saying, let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the
Lord of Hosts; I will go also. Where we see,

1. That godly people are not content to It has bin the practice of Gods
people to do so.
serve God themselves, but are careful to exhort and persuade others thereunto.

2. That they were ready to do this speedily.

3. That he that made the motion, was himself ready to go before them, by his
own good example, I will go also: an excellent pattern for our imitation;
that we should exhort others to make all possible speed to serve God. And 2.
That such as make such religious motions, must be fearful to go before them,
by their own good examples. Now as it was foretold that it should be so in the
later days; so give me leave to show by examples, that it was so. Now for
examples I might produce many, I will instance but only in two: one man, and
one woman: that I may persuade both men and women, to imitate and follow such
rare, and holy examples. Holy Barnabas, see what the Spirit of God says of
him: Acts 11. 23, 24. (when he came to Antioch) sc. That when he had seen the
grace of God among them, he was glad, and exhorted them all, that with purpose
of heart they would cleave unto the Lord: for he was a good man, and full of
the Holy Ghost, etc. Wherein we may see; 1. That he that is truly religious, is
not content to serve God himself, but rejoices greatly in the religious
forwardness of others, and is ready to exhort, and encourage others to
constancy, and perseverance therein. 2. That he is a good man, and full of the
Holy Ghost that is of that holy disposition.

2. The other example is that of the Woman of Samaria, John 4. 28. who having
met with our blessed Savior, and being by him effectually wrought upon, and
truly converted unto God, she runs into the City to tell her neighbors,
saying, Come, see a Man that has told me all that ever I did; Is not he the
Christ? where we see, that she was not content to enjoy this special favor
her self, but she earnestly desires, and carefully endeavors to be an
instrument and means to prevail with others, and to bring them to God. Let no
man say, What need I trouble my self with others? Is it not enough for me to
be religious, and serve God daily, and truly my self, unless I be forward to
exhort others? For he that has true grace, cannot but be ready to do all
good offices to hasten, and to help forward the salvation of others. Goodness
is even a spreader of it self. True grace makes a man to resolve, like those
Lepers, whereof we read 2 Kings 7. 9, 10. When they had filled, and satisfied
their hungry stomachs, and carried silver, and gold, and hidden it for their
use, se^ then what they say with themselves. The^ they said one to another, We
do not well, th^^ day is a day of good tidings, and we hold ou^ peace. Now
therefore come, and let us te^^ the Kings household. Where we see, tha^ though
their charity began at home, yet (...) did not end there, but expressed it
self for the relief and the benefit of others. H^ that has once tasted of
the sweetness (...) Gods gracious favor, cannot but earnestly invite others.
See an experiment of this in one that had the least leisure to show it, that is
the thief on the Cross, Luke 23. 40. Fear thou not God, seeing thou art in
the same condemnation? 41. And we indeed justly, etc. but this man has done
nothing amiss. See how many signs of true grace he has manifested!

1. He confessed his own guiltiness, and the justice of God.

2. Vindicated the innocence of Christ.

3. Was affected with the judgment, and brought to fear God.

4. Earnestly desired to work upon his fellow servant, Do thou not fear
God, etc. ( i.e.) o fear God, consider what a woeful estate thou art plunged
into.

Reasons, Reasons or Motives.
or Motives io persuade us hereunto, are four.

1. In regard of God.

2. In regard of our selves.

3. In regard of others.

4. In regard of the excellency of Gods Ordinances.

1. In regard of God, In regard of God: because hereby we shall show our zeal
to his glory, which is hereby advanced.
because the Lord Whether ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to
the glory of God, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Now surely the more people,
and the greater the company is, that join together in the duties of Gods
service, the more glory must needs hereby redound to God: for the enlarging of
Christ's kingdom, is a chief means of advancing Gods glory. This our Savior
teaches, in the very mould, and course of the Lords Prayer: it appears in
the very order of the petitions. 1. Hallowed be thy Name: to show, that in all
things, in the first place, Gods glory must be respected; 2. Thy kingdom come:
there is the chief means, to show that the coming of Gods kingdom is one
chief means for the hallowing of his Name; and the enlarging of Christ's
kingdom is a chief means for the advancing of Gods glory, Matthew. 6. 10, 11.
certainly much glory must needs hereby redound to God, when we are not content
only to serve God our selves, but also exhort, and excite, and stir up others
hereunto.

Secondly, 2. Motive In regard of our selves, because. 1. This is a good
Testimony that we our selves are religious.
There is another Motive to persuade us, which is drawn from our selves:
Hereby we shall manifest the work of grace wrought in our own hearts. This is a
good testimony that we are truly religious indeed, when we are not content to
serve God our selves, but are ready to provoke, and stir up others hereunto:
for goodness is a spreader of it self, it is ready to disperse and
communicate it self for the good of others. Ye heard what the Holy Ghost said
of Barnabas, Acts, 11. 23. That he exhorted them all, that with purpose of
heart they would cleave to the Lord, ver. 24. for he was a good man, and full
of the Holy Ghost. A good man, and one that is full of the Holy Ghost, is, and
will be ready to excite, and stir up others unto that which is good: When
thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren, said our Savior, Luke 22. 32. He
that is truly converted himself, will be ready to be a means to convert, and
turn others to God. See it in David, Psalm 51. 13. Then shall I teach thy
ways to the wicked, and sinners shall be converted unto thee. Where there is
abundance of grace in the heart, it will manifest it self in our gracious
speeches, and holy communication, Psalm. 37. 30, 31. The mouth of the righteous
speaks wisdom, his tongue will be talking of judgment, the Law of his God
is in his heart, etc. for out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth
speaks, says our Savior, Matthew. 12. 34. I have hid thy Word in my heart,
says David, Psalm 119. 11. See the fruit of this Psalm. 95. 6. O come let us
worship, and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our maker, etc. True grace
makes a man ready to do good offices for others, especially, to persuade them
to serve God, and be religious.

Thirdly, 3. Motive. In regard of others* hereby we shall manifest our love,
and discharge our duty to others.
In regard of others; For hereby we shall best manifest our love and respect to
others; yea, we do not know, how much good we may do them this way; for by
this, we may come to save a soul from death, and cover a multitude of sins,
Iam. 5. 20. Hereby we may come to be acquainted with the ways of God, This
has been the practice of Gods people.
our selves and others whom we persuade, may be hereby converted to walk in
his paths; for Psalm. 19. 7. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the
soul, etc. See how confidently David assures himself of the conversion of
others, upon his best endeavor to teach them Gods ways, Psalm. 51. 13. Then
shall I teach thy ways to the wicked, and sinners shall be converted unto
thee. How much more, if we come to the house and Ordinances of God, and bring
others with us? This argument Gods people have used, to persuade others to go
with them to Gods house. Come, let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, for
he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths, Isa. 2. 2, 3.
This is the way to bring others to the true fear of GOD, as well as our
selves, if we can persuade them to accompany us, in the constant and frequent
use of Gods Ordinances. Observe an excellent place to this purpose, Deuteronomy. 31.
11, 12. When all Israel is come to appear before the Lord, in the place that
he shall choose, thou shall read this Law before all Israel in their hearing.
Gather the people together, men, women, and children, and the stranger that is
within thy gates. Why so? What good will they get this? That they may hear,
and that they may learn, and fear the Lord your God, to do all the words of
this Law. Where we see, that the house, or place of Gods worship and service
must be constantly frequented; and that it is not enough for us to come thither
our selves, but we must also bring our whole families, men, women, and
children; yea, the very stranger that does but occasionally come unto us; we
must bring all to Gods Ordinances. And lastly, that hereby we are likely to be
instruments of working the fear of God in the hearts of those whom we bring;
and so to bring them to obedience. Let no man say, What need we trouble our
selves with others? Is it not enough, for every man to look to himself, and
to have a care that he spend time himself in Gods service, though he do not
meddle with others? For though Christian charity begin at home, yet it does
not end there; but he that is truly careful to serve God himself, will be
ready to exhort and admonish others, especially those of his family, and such
as are committed to his charge. And if any think much at this, yet let him
know that it is no more then his duty; Heb. 3. 13. But exhort one another
daily, while it is called to day. Nay, no man can have any good assurance, that
he draws nigh to God with a true heart himself, if he do not do his best
endeavor, to excite and stir up others to do so too. See an excellent
passage to this purpose, Heb. 10. 22. 24. etc. Let us draw near with a true
heart, in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience, and our bodies washed with clean water, etc. But how shall we come
to be assured that we do so? That you shall see, Ver. 24. Let us consider one
another, to provoke unto love, and unto good works, etc. Yea, but what good
work are we principally to bring others unto? Surely, to frequent the Church
assemblies, v. 25. Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the
manner of some is, So that you see, we have great warrant for this. Yea, we
must needs do it, necessity is laid upon us, and woe be unto us if we do it
not. It is the voice of a Cain, Am I my Brothers keeper? Genesis 4. Art thou not
bound to love thy neighbor as thy self? But I will tell thee, that thou do
not love, but hate him in thy heart, if thou suffer him to go on in any
sinful way, and do not do thy best endeavor to convert him. See an evident
place for this purpose, in Levit. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in
thy heart. Yea, it is the second maine duty of the Law, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self? But it may be thou art ready to say, Else we hate o^r
brother in our heart.
Alas! I do not hate him, but wish him well, and love him as my self; I do
not trouble him, nor make nor meddle with him, etc. Nay, but this is not
enough, thou may hate him in thy heart, notwithstanding all this, if thou
go no farther, and therefore see what follows; Thou shall in any wise rebuke
thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him; else thou do but hate him in
thy heart. So that if we see our brother neglect the Church assembles, or hear
him swear, and blaspheme the Name of God, or live in any other sin, and do
not plainly rebuke him, thou do not love thy brother, but hate him in thy
heart, and art a murderer in Gods account. Hereby we testify the truth of our
love toward them; especially, thy family, and those that are committed to thy
charge; thou do not love them truly, but hate them in thy heart, if thou
neglect the good of their souls. See the concurrent practice of such as have
been once truly converted themselves, that their families have been soon
wrought on, even immediately after. Act. 16. 34. It is said of the converted
Iayler, The Iayler. Acts 16.
that he believed in God, with all his house. And the like is said of others.
Abraham.
This was Abraham's care, to instruct and reform his family, Genesis 18. 19. I
know Abraham, that he will command his children and servants to keep the way
of the Lord, to do judgment and justice; (i.e.) I know Abraham will not be
content to serve God himself alone, but he will have a special care to see
that his household do so, as well as he. Yea, this was the resolution, and
godly piety of holy Joshua, Chap. 24. 14, 15. Joshua.
Having reckoned up the singular variety of Gods mercies toward them, he
endeavors hereupon to persuade all the people of God unto a religious
obedience, saying, Ver. 14. Now therefore, fear the Lord, and serve him in
uprightness and truth. But then see, ver. 15. if he could not prevail with
all the rest, yet he would be sure to prevail with his own family; he durst
undertake for them; As for me, I, and my house will serve the Lord. No man can
have assurance that he is truly converted to God himself, None but such can
be truly assured of their own conversion.
if he do not put away iniquity from his Tabernacle: See, Job 22. 23. If thou
return to the Almighty, thou shall be built up; thou shall put away iniquity
from thy tabernacles. Oh how this would quicken our desire and endeavor to
reform our family; if this was laid to heart, and rightly considered; this
would make a man resolve with David, not to keep such servants in his family,
as are profane, and irreligious; Psalm. 101. 4. A froward heart shall depart
from me, I will not know a wicked person: Ver. 7. He that works deceit shall
not dwell in my house; and he that tells li^s, shall not tarry in my sight. O
therefore let us have a care, not only to serve God our selves, but let us do
our best to persuade others; especially, let us have a care to reform our
families, and put away iniquity from our Tabernacle; This is the way to bring
Gods blessing upon our families.
this is the way to bring the blessing of God both upon our selves, and upon
our families. The power of Religion, where it once comes, does ever leave a
blessing behind it. As the Ark of God brought a blessing with it to the house
of O bed Edom, 2 Samuel 6. 11. Yea, if there be but one person in a family that
truly fears God, the whole family and household shall fare the better for
their sakes. Thus God blessed Labans house for Jacobs sake, as Laban himself
confessed, and therefore was loathe to part with him, Genesis 30. 27. I pray thee
tarry, says he, for I have learned by experience, that the Lord has blessed
me for thy sake. And so the Lord blessed Putiphar's house for Ioseph's sake:
that idolatrous family sped a great deal the better for such a servant; The
Lord blessed the Egyptians house for Ioseph's sake, says the Text, Genesis 39.
5. But how much more, would it be a special means to bring Gods blessing upon
our houses, and families, if all the whole family would delight to spend time
in GODS service, and be religious? Doubtless, the Lord would make good that
gracious promise, Psalm. 84. 11. That he will be Sun and Shield unto them;
that he would give grace and glory, and no good thing would h^ withhold from
such a family, etc. Thus you see strong Motives and Arguments, to persuade us,
not only to serve God our selves, but also to exhort and persuade our families
to do the like. Here are the three first Motives.

CHAP. XIII.
Wherein the fourth Motive to the third and last Duty is propounded, and
prosecuted.

FOurthly, 4. Motive. To perswa^^ us to endeavor to prevail with others to
spend time in Gods service; sc. The worth and excellency of the duties of Gods
public worship and service.
The last Motive to persuade us, not only to serve GOD our selves, but also to
persuade others thereunto, is drawn from the consideration of the worth and
excellency of the exercises of Religion; especially, the duties of his public
and solemn worship. How can any of us spend our time better, then in such holy
and excellent performances? It is even a little heaven upon earth to be so
employed; there have we the Word faithfully read and preached, both the Old and
New Testament; yea, there we have the Ordinance of Catechizing, wherein we have
milk for babes, as well as meat for strong men. But as touching the worth and
excellency of this Ordinance, I have already spoken, Chap. 9. But besides the
Ministry of the Word, we have, 1. the public and solemn prayers, and
Lyturgie of our Church, wherein all Gods people join together, as one man, in
that solemn duty and service. 2. We have the holy and blessed Sacraments,
rightly, and duly administered, both Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord,
which were both of them clearly instituted by Christ himself, and are of
profitable and excellent use for Gods people, that have occasion to join
together in the celebration and participation of them.

First, 1. Public pra^ers lawful and excellent.
For public prayer in the Congregation, see how expressly the Apostle requires
it, 1 Timothy 2. 1. I exhort, that first of all, prayer, and supplication, and
intercession, and giving of thanks, be made for all men, for Kings, and such
as are in authority. Let no man despise the public Lyturgie of our Church,
and the prayers that are used there, as if God regarded not such prayers as are
read upon a book; for certainly, the most godly, M. Sam. Hieron. Preface
before Help to Devotion.
learned, and wisest men, that I have heard, or read of, have approved of set
form of prayers: yea, one of the wisest and ablest (even of those that have
disliked the Ceremonies of our Church) has yet highly esteemed of the prayers,
which are appointeh to be read in our public Lyturgie; yea, and does profess
publicly, that in his opinion, no wise man will dislike such kind of prayers,
either because they are read upon a book, M. Hildersham. on Psalm 51. page 810.
811. Idem on Psalm. 51. page 68.
or for their length, or the multitude of them: yea, ye shows plainly, that
it has been the practice and custom of the best Churches, to have books of
public prayers, and approves of, and justifies the practice of Gods Church
in that regard; yea, Hildersham Fast. page 37.
see how highly that pious man has approved of the Book of prayers, appointed
by Authority for the keeping of public Fasts: concerning which this reverend
Divine says thus, concerning the said Book of prayers, That they are as
ample, holy, effectual, and fit for the present occasion, as ever were in any
Lyturgie that he had seen. Having therefore cleared this in the first place,
give me leave to show you the worth and excellency of public prayers in the
Congregation, in some respect above any prayers that are made in secret in our
Closets, or in private amongst our people in our families. See it in four
particulars.

Illustration. In regard of the
In regard of the excellency of the company that is present there in a special
manner: which I will manifest unto you in these three particulars.

Company that is present there,
The Church and people of GOD are present there, in a most special manner, and
ready to join with us in these public The presence of Gods people.
Now it must needs be an excellent thing, and very beneficial unto us in this
regard. This made David delight in the duties of Gods public worship and
service; yea, and carry his whole hous-hold (a multitude) with him to the House
of God, because he was sure to meet with the Saints of God there, in whom, next
under God himself, was all his delight; Psalm. 42. 4. Psalm. 16. 3. My
goodness, O Lord, extends not to thee, but to the Saints which are on the
earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all my delight. This made him so glad
when he was exhorted by any to go to the house of God, sc. in regard of the
good company that he was sure to find there. Psalm. 122. 1. 4. I was glad when
they said unto me, let us go up to the house of the Lord. Why so? That ye
shall see, ver. 4. Thither the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the Lord, etc. to
give thanks to the Name of the Lord: and, ver. 8. For my brebren and
companions sake, I will now say, peace be within thee. Lo, this is one strong
Motive that should persuade us, not only duly to frequent the house of God
our selves, but to exhort and stir up others to join with us therein, sc.
because of the people of GOD, that are there present in a special manner.

Secondly, The Angels are present there.
Not only Gods people are there they are at all times fent forth for the good
of them that shall be heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1. 14. so especially then, when
we are the most seriously employed in the duties of Gods public worship and
service; they then pitch their tents about us, to defend us, Psalm. 34. 7. and
keep us in all our ways; much more when we walk in the ways of God, they
are then present with us in a most special manner. This the Apostle
intimates, in that direction which he gives to women, ^ Cor. 11. 10. For this
cause ought the woman to have power on her head, Chrysostom and Pareus in
locum. Hildersha. on John 4. page 117.
(that is, to have her head covered, in token of sujection) because of the
Angels, (i.e.) The Angels are in a most special manner present in our Church
assemblies, and will dislike such disorders. Yea, this was also figured to Gods
people in Salomons time, and hence it was, that the walls of Salomons Temple
were full of Cherubims round about, 1 King. 6. 29. to intimate unto Gods
people, that the holy Angels of God were in a special manner present in the
Church assemblies. This should persuade us to make great account of the public
prayers in the Congregation.

Not only the Saints and Angels, but also the Lord himself is there present.
Not only the Saints and Angels, but also the Lord himself is in a most
special manner present, at our public prayers in the Congregation: Lo, I am
with you always, to the end of the world, says our Savior, Mat. 18. 20.
Especially, at public prayers; for of such kind of assemblies our blessed
Savior speaks, Mat. 18. 20. Where two or three are gathered together in my
name, there am I in the midst of them. Oh how this should persuade us, not
only to spend time in Gods service our selves, but also exhort others to do
so too, in regard of the excellent company that we are there sure to meet
withal, the holy Saints, and the Angels of God; yea, and the Lord himself.

Secondly, 2. Illustrat. Such prayers are usually most powerful and prevalent.
Because public prayers, that are presented to God in the Congregation, are
usually most prevalent, and powerful, and likely to prevail with God, either
for the obtaining of some special blessing that we want, or preventing, or
removing some heavy judgment, either felt, or feared; for the Lord loves the
gates of Zion, more then all the dwellings of Jacob, Psalm. 87. 2. Such prayers
do usually find special acceptance with him. See what a promise our Savior
has made to such prayers, Mat. 18. 19. Again, I say unto you, if two of you
(much more, if two hundred) shall agree on earth, as touching any thing that
they shall ask, it shall be done for them, of my Father which is in heaven.
For there the Lord commands his blessing, and life for evermore, says the
Text, Psalm. 133. 3. Yea, the Lord himself directs to these public and
solemn prayers, as those that of all others are the most effectual to
prevail with God; as appears in Joell 2. when he foretells a judgment
future; see what the Lord prescribes, as the means to prevent it, V. 15. Blow
the Trumpet in Zion, sanctify a Fast, call a solemn assembly; V. 16. Gather
the people, sanctify the Congregation, assemble the Elders, yea, gather the
children, yea, the bride and bridegroom, the Priests and Ministers of the
Lord, all must bestirre themselves, with fasting, and weeping, and praying; and
then see the event promised, V. 18. Then will the Lord be jealous for his Land,
and pity his people, Ver. 19. The like promise we have, 2 Chronicles. 7. 13, 14. If
the people that are called by my Name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and
seek my face, etc. So that in the opinion of God himself, such prayers are
excellent, because most effectual and prevalent with God in time of danger.
Yea, this was the opinion of our blessed Savior, and therefore it was that he
frequented the Jewish Synagogues, the places appointed for public prayer,
though he was the most excellently furnished with the spirit of prayer, of any
that ever were; yea, and those Synagogues had great corruptions in them: which
shows how highly he esteemed of public prayers, which were solemnly made to
God in the Congregation. This also appears by experience. See what wonderful
success the Ninivites had, in proclaiming public fasting and prayer; Jonah 8.
10. When God saw their works (how publicly and solemnly they went to work)
he repented of the evil that he intended to do unto them, and he did it not.
So see the success that Iohosophat had by this means, even at a dead lift, 2 Chronicles. 20. 3. 13. Concerning which the Story sets out three things in that
case, as the most remarkable. 1. The danger they were in, their enemies being
many in number, were ready even suddenly to set upon them, ver. 1, 2. 2. The
course that they took, to prevent the danger, v. 3. He proclaimed a fast, and
set himself to seek the Lord: yea, see how solemnly they went to work; Ver.
4. Judah gathered themselves together to ask help of the Lord, even out of
all the Cities of Judah they came to seek the Lord: and ver. 13. And all Judah
stood before the Lord, with their little ones, their wives, and their children,
there was none left out. Then thirdly, See the strange and admirable success
that followed hereupon, ver. 22, 23, 24. etc. They had the victory, without so
much as striking of a stroke, the enemies destroyed one another, and the Jews
had nothing to do, but only to divide the spoil, and return due praise and
thankesgiving to God, for so miraculous a deliverance. See here the power of
joint prayers, like a great flood, they beat down all before them. And
indeed, in all reason the prayers that are made by the public vote of Gods
people, must needs be the most effectual; for if the effectual fervent prayer
of one righteous man avail much, Iam. 5. 17. much more of many: Mat. 7. 7.
Ask, and you shall have; seek, and ye shall find; and knock, and it shall
be opened. If a whole Town or Parish do all join together, to ask a boon
at some great man's hand, they are most likely to prevail, rather then one man
alone. 2. If many eyes do join in seeking a thing that is lost, there is the
more probability to find it; and if many join together, with joint forces,
to knock at heaven gates; are they not the more likely to beat them open? O
then the blockish folly of such as regard not these public prayers, that are
made to God in the Church assemblies, but do often absent themselves, upon
every light and trivial occasion! Yea, and see the folly of those that
prefer their own private prayers, before the public prayers of the whole
Church of God in the Congregation: but above all, the folly of those is most
palpable, that do bestow that time in private reading upon a book, which they
should employ in joining with Gods people in public and solemn prayers: if
this be not to offer unto God the sacrifice of fools, I must needs confess, I
do not know what is.

Thirdly, 3. Illustrat. Such prayers redound most to Gods glory.
The third thing wherein the worth of such kind of prayers appears, is in
regard of the glory that hereby redoundeth to God. I know the Lord receives
glory by the performance of holy duties in secret, and in our families, as well
as in the Congregation: but as 1 Cor. 15. There are degrees of glory, there is
one glory of the Sun another of the Moon, and another of the stars: so in
this case; 1. Secret duties in our Closets, that may be compared to the glory
of the Stars. 2. Private duties in our families, that may be compared to the
Moone-light. 3. Public duties in the Congregation, that may be compared to the
glorious light of the Sun: So that the most glory does hereby redound to God.
Hence it is, that David had such a special respect to the duties of Gods
public worship and service; as Psalm. 111. 1. I will praise thee, O Lord, with
my whole heart, in the assembly of the upright, and in the Congregation. So,
Psalm. 116. 18. I will pay my vows now in the presence of all his people. Why
so? Surely, because he knew that much glory did hereby redound to God. Psalm.
29. 1, 2. Give unto the Lord glory and strength; give unto the Lord the glory
due unto his Name: But how? It follows; Worship the Lord in the beauty of
Holiness. By this means we give unto God the glory due unto his name. Fourthly,
4. Illustrat. Most sweet and comfortable.
In regard of the sweetness and comfort that hereby redou^deth to Gods people:
this is afeast of fat things; yea, hereby we taste that the Lord is gracious, 1
Pet. 2. 3. And it is unto Gods people the very joy and rejoicing of the heart;
they are like unto them that keep holy day, as David expresses it, Ps. 42. 4.
v.

CHAP. XIV.
Containing a Description of the excellency of the Sacraments, of Baptism, and
of the Lords Supper.

SEcondly, As the excellency of the public prayers should persuade us, not
only to frequent the public exercises of Religion our selves, but also move
us, to exhort and persuade others: The excellency of the Sacraments.
so the excellency of the Sacraments, which are rightly and duly administered
in our Church assemblies, should also persuade us hereunto. O the excellency of
these seals of Righteousness, as the Apostle calls them, Romans 4. 11. See it
in both the Sacraments of the new Testament. And First, 1. Baptism, the
excellency of it.
For Baptism, Consider the excellency of this Sacrament in it self, and the
usefulness and benefit of it, in regard of our selves. It was the Lord Jesus
himself that instituted and appointed this Sacrament. It was he that said unto
his Disciples, Mat. 28. 19. Go, and teach all Nations, It was instituted by
Christ himself.
and baptize them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, etc. and
therefore in no case to be slighted or disregarded. Let no man therefore despise
this Sacrament, or scornfully turn their backs upon it, when it is administered
in the Congregation, (as many do, who either depart thence, or else employ
that time in private reading, as if this Ordinance did nothing at all concern
them) for it was Christ himself that instituted it, and therefore any contempt
or indignity offered herein, must needs reach Christ himself, The
administration of it, is 2 Beneficial to us.
as the abuse of the Kings broad seal extends to his Majesty.

Secondly, There is none of us but may receive much good by this Sacrament of
Baptism (whenever it is administered) if the fault be not in our selves; 1.
Benefit.
for hereby we shall not only testify our due respect to Gods Ordinance, and
consequently to his own Majesty: 1. Hereby we are put in mind of our own
Baptism, and the benefits which we then received.
but besides, hereby we shall be put in mind of our own Baptism, and our
participation in this blessed Sacrament, and of those admirable benefits, which
we then received, as, sc. the remission of our sins, our spiritual new birth
and regneration, being borne of water and of the Holy Ghost, Ioh. 3. 5. Yea,
hereby we become the members of Christ, the children of God, and inheritours of
the kingdom of heaven, as we have it in our Catechism. And how can we be put
in mind of these benefits, without being in some measure stirred up unto
praise and thankfulness for the same, when we have such a lively commemoration
of our being ingrafted into the body of Christ, and of our original sins being
washed away in the blood of Christ? Now if any wonder, or think it strange,
how any such benefits should hereby be conveyed unto us; let him consider, that
Gods ordaining of any thing, does make it effectual to the end for which it is
appointed, although in it self it seem never so improbable, or wholly
impossible: See 2 Kings 5. Naaman the Syrian coming to the Prophet to be cured
of his leprosy, he sends him to wash seven times in Jordan, and he should be
cleansed, this seemed a very incredible thing in the eyes of this great man,
go wash in Jordan; here a likely course to cure a man of his leprosy: if
washing in a river would have served the turn, I need never to have come
hither, for, says he, Are no Abanah, and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus better
then all the waters of Israel? etc. and so he began to go his way in a rage,
says the Text, verse 12. yea, and if some of his servants had not better
considered of the matter, he had gone back again as unclean as he came;
for, say they, My father, if the Prophet had bidden thee do some great matter,
would thou not have done it? How much more, when he says unto thee: Wash,
and be clean? What hurt can it do thee, if thou wash in Jordan? Besides, it
may happily prevail beyond all expectation. And see the sequel, ver. 14. He
went down, and dipped himself seven times in Jordan, according to the saying
of the Man of God, and his flesh came again, like unto the flesh of a little
child, and he was clean. So let no man say, What likelihood, or probability
is there, that the washing or besprinkling the face of an Infant with baptism,
should be the instrument of regeneration? Or that a bit of bread, and a small
sup of wine, should be of such admirable efficacy, as to make us partakers of
Christ, with all his merits? For certainly, the Ordinances of GOD make a thing
admirably effectual, above and beyond all imagination. What an admirable
passage to this purpose is that which we have, Numbers 21. 9. Where being stung
with fiery Serpents in the Wilderness, God commands them, as a remedy, that
they should make a Serpent of brass, and set it upon a Pole. Now in the eye of
carnal reason, this was an unlikely thing to do any good at all; and yet the
Text shows how admirably effectual it was; so that he that could look
toward the brazen Serpent, was healed immediately: and so whosoever can look at
Christ, with an eye of faith in his Ordinances, shall surely be healed. So that
here is the first benefit that we may receive, and the ground of it.

Secondly, 2. Benefit. This may put us in mind of the vow we made then to God.
So often as we see this Ordinance of Baptism administered, so often we may be
put in mind of our duty, and the solemn vow and promise that we made to God
in that Sacrament, sc. that we would forsake the Devil, and all his works,
etc. and that we would believe in God, and keep his Commandments, and so
approve our selves to be Christ's faithful servants and Soldiers unto our lives
end. And is it not of singular use, to be put in mind of our duty? And how
can we choose but remember it, when we see and hear the like, nay the same vow
and promise made to God, in the behalf of another? This is another special
benefit.

Thirdly, 3. Benefit. Hereby witnesses in Baptism may be put in mind, of
that which they undertook in the behalf of others.
Hereby we may be put in mind of that which we undertake, as solemn Witnesses
in the behalf of our God-children, or our children in God; that so we may put
them in mind of what we promised for them, and see that they be virtuously
brought up, and to this end call upon them to hear Sermons, etc. all which,
all promise, but few perform. This will mind us of this duty.

Fourthly, 4. Benefit.
and lastly, Hereby we have a fit opportunity of performing a good office, An
opportunity of performing a good office, in the behalf of the Infant baptized.
in respect of the present infant baptized, sc. to pray unto God for it, that
it may be made a lively member of Christ, a true child of God, and hereafter an
inheritour of the kingdom of heaven. In which respect, it would be a good
point of wisdom in Parents, if they would provide (as much as may be) that
their children may be baptized on the Sunday, or holy day, for solemn assembly
of Gods people; that by this means their children may have the benefit of the
joint prayers of the whole Congregation.

Lords Supper. The excellency of it.
The excellency of the other Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and the benefits
which we receive thereby, is another strong motive to persuade us, not only to
delight in the exercises of Gods public worship and service our selves, but
also to exhort and stir up others hereunto. For this blessed Sacrament does
fitly succeed and follow after the former: for first we live, and then we are
nourished. So that as the Sacrament of Baptism, is a Sacrament of initation,
or implantation into Christ: So the other, is a Sacrament of our continuance,
and growth in Christ. By the first, the life of grace is begun; and by the
second, continued, or preserved in us. This also is an Ordinance of Christ's
own instituting: for the Apostle tells us expressly, An Ordinance of Christ.
that he received it of the Lord Jesus, who, the same night that he was
betrayed took bread, etc. So that this blessed Sacrament is no less excellent
then the former, Beneficall to us.
let us (as in the former) consider what benefits we may receive, so often as
this Sacrament is celebrated among us, and received of us.

1. Hereby the Lord Jesus Christ, Benefits.
with all his precious and soule-saving merits, Hereby we do receive Christ,
with his merits.
are Christ, which are verily and indeed taken, and received of the faithful
in the Lords Supper. And for the proof of this, we have the express words of
our Savior, Take, eat, this is my Body. So that herein Christ Jesus, with all
the merits of his Body and Blood are offered unto us, and bestowed really and
effectually on all worthy receivers.

2. By receiving of this Sacrament, we jointly profess our common interest in
Christ, and our communion with him, and one with another: and hereupon this
Sacrament is fitly called the communion, 1 Cor. 10. 16.

3. Hereby the promises of God, and the merits of Christ are sealed up unto us:
So that hereby we come to have both Gods Hand Seal, to assure us of the pardon
of our sins, and of eternal happiness: in which respect the Sacraments are
called the Seals of righteousness, Romans 4. 11.

Fourthly, Hereby our corruptions are Our corruptions are mortified, and the
graces of Gods spirit increased.
and the graces of Gods Spirit greatly augmented and confirmed in us. These
Ordinances, through the special blessing of God, do nourish and feed our
souls unto life eternal. So that most true we shall find that speech of our
Savior, Ioh. 6. 55. For my Flesh is meat indeed, and my Blood is drink
indeed. Yea, ver. 51. I am the living Bread which came down from heaven; if
any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever, and the bread which I will
give, is my Flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. Only remember,
that all this must be understood of spiritual eating, as our Savior
Himself, in the same place, gives us expressly to understand: for when his
gross hearers made that carnal question, saying, How can this Man give us his
flesh to eat? verse 52. Our Savior does earnestly confirm it still, ver. 53.
Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, you have no
life in you, etc. Yea, when many of the Disciples were offended, and murmured
at it, see how he gives them satisfaction, ver. 63. It is the Spirit that
quickneth, the flesh profits nothing; the words which I speak unto you, they
are Spirit, and they are life; to show, that all this must be spiritually
understood; for the food is spiritual, and so of necessity the eating and
drinking must needs be. So that this is enough to persuade us to value, and
highly to esteem this Ordinance, because therein Christ Jesus is verily, and
indeed taken and received, to the eternal benefit and comfort of all worthy
receivers: an argument sufficient, not only to persuade us to take all
opportunities of receiving this Sacrament our selves, but also to persuade
others hereunto, in regard of the great benefits that are here offered and
exhibited, to the souls of all worthy receivers.

Fifthly, 5. Benefit. The commemoratton of the death of Christ, most lively
represented unto us.
Hereby we have the commemoration of Christ's death most lively and effectually
represented unto us. So that we may in this case use the benefit of our eyes,
to see the Bread broken, and the Wine powered out, to signify the death of
Christ, and the shedding of his Blood; so that our hands do as it were handle
the Word of life, Christ, as 1 John 1. 1. The Word foundeth in our ear; but in
the Sacrament, the same is most lively represented unto our eyes, sc. the death
of Christ: So that as often as we eat that bread, and drink that cup, we
show the Lords death, till he come, faith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 26. Yea, and
this is a special end, for which this Sacrament was ordained at the first, Do
this, in remembrance of me, says our Savior, Matthew. 26. Yea, the Sacraments
are most lively representations of the sufferings of Christ, as if therein
Christ was really again crucified before our eyes, according to that speech of
the Apostle to the Galathians, chap. 3. 1. O foolish Galatians, Who has
bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus
Christ was evidently set forth, even crucified amongst you! How was he
crucified among them, but only in the Word and Sacraments? So that where the
Word is faithfully preached, and the Sacraments duly celebrated, there is Jesus
Christ so evidently set forth, as if he was even crucified among that people.
Oh how this also should persuade us, not only to serve God our selves, but also
to do our best, to persuade others to spend time in Gods service; especially,
if we remember the Doctrine, which is the ground of this whole discourse,
namely this, that time spent in the duties of Gods service, is absolutely and
incomparably the best spent time: then certainly we would easily be persuaded,
not only to spend much time in Gods service our selves, but also earnestly to
do our best endeavor* to cause others to do the like, especially (...)
^amilies, and those which are more especially committed unto our charge; that
so we may not only save our selves, but also them that belong unto us, 1 Timothy
4. 16.

FINIS.

