Pierces Supererogation OR A NEW PRAISE OF THE OLD ASS.

A Preparatiue to certain larger Discourses, entitled NASHES S. FAME.

Gabriell Haruey.



LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf.

1593.

TO MY VERY GENTLE, AND Liberal friends. M. Barnabe Barnes, M. John Thorius,
M. Antony Chewt, and every favorable Reader.
Loving M. Barnabe, M. John, and M. Antony, (for the rest of my partial
Co^menders must pardonme, till the Print be better acquainted with their names)
I have lately received your thrice. courteous Letters, with the Overplus of your
thrise-sweet Sonets annexed: the liberallestgiftes, Ibeleeue, that ever you
bestowed upon so slight occasion, and the very prodigallest fruits of your
floorishing wits. Whose only default is, not your, but my default, that the
matter is nothing correspondent to the manner; and miselfe must either grosely
forget miselfe, or franckly acknowledge misimple self an unworthy subject of
so worthy commendations. Which I cannot read without blufhing, repeat without
shame, or remember without grief, that I come so exceeding-short in so
excessive great accountes; the sums of your rich largess, not of my poor
desert; and percase devised to advertise me what I should be, or to signify
what you wish to be; not to declare what I am, or to insinuate what I may be.
Eloquence, and Courtesy were ever bountiful in the amplifying vein: and it
has been reputed a friendly Policy, to encourage their loving acquaintance to
labor the attainement of those perfections, which they blason in them, as
already atcheiued. Either some such intention you have, by way of Stratageme to
awaken my negligence, or enkindle my confidence; or you are disposed by way of
Ciuility, to make me unreasonably beholding unto you for your extreme
affection. Which I must either leave unrequited; or recompense affection with
affection, and recommende me unto you with your own Stratageme, fitter to
animate fresher spirits, or to whet finer edges. Little othervse can I, or the
world reap of those great-great commendations, wherewith you, and diverse other
Orient wits have newly surcharged me, by tendering so many kind Apologies in
my behalf, and presenting so many sharp Inuectiues against my adversaries:
unless also you purposed to make me notably ashamed of my confessed
insufficie^cy, guilty of so manifold imperfectio^s, in respect of the least
semblance of those imputed singularities. Whatsoever your intendiment in an
ouerflowing affection was, I am none of those, that greedily surfeit
Ofselfe-conceit, or sottishly hug their own babyes. Narcissus was a fair
boy, but a boy: Suffenus a noble braggard, but a braggard^ Nestor a
sweet-tongued old man, but an Old Man: and Tully (whom I honor in his virtues,
and excuse in his ouersightes) an eloquent Selfe-loouer, but a Selfe-loouer. He
that thought to make himself famous with his ouerweening and brauing I Will,
I Will, I Will, might perhaps nourrish an aspiring imagination to imitate his Ego,
Ego, Ego, so gloriously reiterated in his gallant Orations. Some smirking
minions are fine fellows in their own heads, and some cranke Princockes
jolly men in their own humors: as desperate in resolution, as the dowtiest
rank of Errant knights; and as coye in fantasy, as the nicest sort of
simpring dam^sels, that in their own glasses fi^d ^o creature so bewtifull, or
amiable, as their deli^ous selves. I have beheld, and who has not seen some
lofty conceits, towering very high, and coying themselves sweetly on their own
amounting wings, young feathers of old Icarus. The gay Peacocke is woondrously
inamored upon the glittering fan of his own gorgious tail, and weeneth
himself worthy to be crowned the Prince of birds, and to be enthronished in
the chair of supreme excellency. Would Christ, the green Popiniay, with his
newfangled iestes, as new, as Newgate, were not as much to say, as his own
Idol. Queint wits must have a Privilege to prank-vp their dainty limbs,
and to fawn upon their own tricksie devises. But they that impartially know
themselves; severely examine their own abilities; uprightly counterpoise
defectes with sufficiencies; frankly confess, the greatest part of their
knowledge, to be the least part of their ignorance; advisedly weigh the
difficulties of the painful and toyle-someway, the hard maintenance of credit
easily gotten, the impossible satisfaction of vnsatisfiable expectation, the
uncertain fickleness of private Fantasy, and the certain brittlenesse of
public Fame; are not lightly bewitched with a fond doting upon their own
plumes. And they that deeply consider upon the weakness of inward frailty,
the casualtie of outward fortune, the detraction of Envy, the virulency of
Malice, the counter-pollicy of Ambition, and a hundred-hundred empeachments of
growing reputation: that as well divinely, as philosophically have learned to
love the gentleness of Humanity, to embrace the mildness of Modesty, to
kiss the meekness of Humility, to loath the odiousness of Pride, to
assuage the egrenesse of Spite, to prevent the vengeance of Harred, to reap
the sweet fruits of Temperance, to tread the smooth Path of Security, to take
the firm course of Assurance, and to enjoy the felicity of Contentment: that
iudiciously have framed themselves to carry Minds, like their Bodies, and
Fortunes, as apperteineth unto them, that would be loath to ouerreach in
presumptuous conceit: they I say, and all they that would rather underly the
reproach of obscurity, then ouercharge their mediocritie with an illusiue
opinion of extraordinary furniture, and I wott not what imaginary
complementes; are readier, and a thousand times readier to return the greatest
Praises, where they are debt, then to accept the meanest, where they are alms.
And I could nominate some, that in effect make the same reckoning of Letters,
Sonets, Orations, or other writings commendatory, that they do of meat
without nourishment, of herbs without virtue, of plants without fruit; of a
lamp without oil, a link without light, or a fire without heat. Only some
of us are not so deuoide of good manner, but we conceive what belongs to
civil duty, and will ever be pressed to interteine Courtesy with courtesy, and
to requite any friendship with friendship: unfeignedly desirous, rather to
recompense in deeds; then to gloss, or paint in words. You may easily
persuade me to publish, that was long sithence finished in writing, and is now
almost dispatched in Print: (the amends must be addressed in some other more
material Treatise, or more formal Discourse: and happily Nashes S. Fame may
supply some defectes of Pierces Supererogation): but to suffer your
thrise-affectionate Letters, and Sonets, or rather your thrise-lauish
beneuolences to be published, which so far surmount not only the mediocrity
of my present endeavor, but even the possibility of any my future emproouement;
I could not be persuaded by any eloquence, or importunacy in the world, were I
not as monstrously reviled by some other without reason, as I am excessiuely
extolled by you without cause. In which case he may seem to a discreet enemy
excusable, to an indifferent friend justifiable, that is not transported with
his own passion, but relyeth on the judgment of the learnedest, and refers
himself to the Practice of the wisest. In the one, esteeming Plutarch, or
Homer, as an hundred Autors: in the other Valuing Cato, or Scipio, as a
thousand Examples. I never read, or heard of any respective, or considerate
person, under the degree of those, that might revenge at pleasure, contemn
with authority, assecure themselves from common obloquy, or command public
reputation, (mighty men may find it a Policy, to take a singular, or
extraordinary course), so careless of his own credit; so recklesse of the
present time, so senseless of the posterity, so negligent in occurrents of
consequence, so dissolute in his proceedings, so prodigal of his name, so
deuoide of all regard, so bereft of common sense, so vilely base, or so hugely
hawtie of mind; that in case of infamous imputation, or unworthy reproach,
notoriously scattered-abroad, thought it not requisite, or rather necessary, to
stand upon his own defense according to Equity, and even to labor his own
commendation according to the presented occasion. Discourses yield plenty of
Reasons: and Histories affourde store of Examples. It is no vainglory to permit
with consideration, that abused Modesty has affected with discretion. It is
vanity to controwle, that true honor has practiced: and folly to condemn,
that right wisdom has allowed. If any dislike Immodesty indeed, despise
vanity indeed, reprove Arrogance indeed, or loath Vainglory indeed; I am as
forward with Tongue, and Heart, as the foremost of the forwardest: and were my
pen aunswereable, perhaps at occasion it should not greatly lagge behind. To
accomplish, or advance any virtuous purpose, (since it is now enforced to be
sturring) it might easily be entreated, even to the uttermost extent of that
little-little Possibility, wherewith it has pleased the Greatest to endowe it.
Howbeit Courtesy is as ready to ouerloade with praise; as Malice eger to
overthrow with reproach. Both ouershoote, as the manner is; but malice is the
Devil. For my poor part, I hope the One shall do me as little harm, as fair
weather in my journey: I am suer, the other has done me more good, then was
intended, and shall never puddle or annoy the course of the clear running
water. Albeit I have studied much, and learned little: yet I have learned to
gleane some ha^dfulls of corn out-of the rankest cockle: to make choice of the
most fragrant flowers of Humanity, the most virtuous herbs of Philosophy,
the most sovereign fruits of Government, and the most heavenly manna of
Divinity: to be acquainted with the fairest, provided for the fowlest,
delighted with the temperatest, pleased with the meanest, and contented with
all weather. Greater men may profess, and can atchieue greater matters; I
thank God, I know the length, that is, the shortness of mine own foot. If it
be any man's pleasure to extenuate my sufficie^cy in other knowledge, or
practice, to empeach my ability in words, or deeds, to debase my fortune, to
abridge my commendations, or to annihilate my fame, he shall find a cold
adversary of him, that has laid hot passions awatering, and might easily be
induced to be the Inuectiue of his own Non-proficiency. Only he craves leave
to estimate his credit, and to value his honesty, as behooves every man, that
regards any good: and ifwithall it be his unfeigned request, that Order should
repeal disorder; moderation restrain licentiousness; discretion abandon
vanity; mildness assuage choler; meekness alay arrogance; consideration
reclaim rashness; indifferency attemper passion; Courtesy mitigate, Charity
appease, and Unity atone debate: pardon him. Or in case nothing will prevail
with fury but fury, and nothing can win desired amity, but pretended
hostility, that must driue-out one nail with another, and beat-away one wedge
with another according to the Latin Proverb; Pardon him also, that in the
resolution of a good mind, will command, what he cannot entreat; and extort,
what he cannot persuade. That little may be done with no great adoo: and seeing
it may as surely, as easily be done, I am humbly to beseech established
Wisdom, to wink at one experiment of aduenturous Folly; never before
embarked in any such actio^, and ever to eschew the like with a chary regard,
where any other mediation may purchase redress. I will not urge, what
conniuence has been noted in as disfauorable cases: it is sufficient for me to
plead mine own acquitall. Other praise he affects not, that in a deep
insight into his innermost parts, finds not the highest pitch of his Hope,
equivalent to the lowest pit of your commendation. And if by a gentle
construction, or a fauorous encouragement, he seems any thing in others
opinion, that is nothing in his own Censure; the lesser his merit, the
greater their mercy; and the barrainer his desert, the frutefuller your
liberality. Whose unmeasurable praises I am to interpret, not as they may seem
in some bounteous conceit, but as they are in mine own knowledge; good words,
but unfitly applied; friendly beneuolences, but wastfully bestowed; gallant
amplifications, but slenderly

(...) TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, his especial dear friend, M. Gabriell Haruey,
Doctor of Law.
SWeet M. Doctor Haruey, (for I cannot intitule youwith an Epithet of less
value, then that, which the Grecian, and Roman Orators ascribed to
Theophrastus, in respect of so many your excellent labors, garnished with the
garland of matchless Oratory): if at any time either the most earnest
persuasion of a dear friend, and vnusually most dear, and constant, adjured
thereunto by the singular virtue of your most prayse-worthy, and unmatchable
wit: or the wonderful admiration of your peerlesse conceit, embraued with so
many gorgeous ornaments of divine Rhetorique: or the doubtless successiue
benefit thereof, devoted to the glory of our English Eloquence, and our vulgar
Tuscanisme (if I may so term it); may work any plausible, or respective
motions with you, to bewtifie, and enrich our age, with those most
praise-moouing works, full of gallantest discourse, and reason, which I
understand by some assured intelligence be now glowing upon the anuile, ready
to receive the right artificial form of diuinist workema^ship: the^ let I
beseech you, nay by all our mutual frendships I conjure you, (love, and
admiration of them, arming me with the placarde of farther confidence) those,
and other your incomparable writings, speedily, or rather presently show
themselves in the shining light of the Sun. That by this Publication of so
rare, and rich Discourses, our English Ravens, the spiteful enemies to all
birds of more bewtifull wing, and more harmonious note, then themselves, may
shrowde themselves in their nests of basest obscurity, and keep hospitality
with battes, and owls, fit consorts for such vile carions. Good Sir, arise,
and confound those Viperous Cryticall monsters, and those profane (...) of our
Commonwealth; which endeavor with their mutinous, and Serpentine hissing, like
geese, not to arm the Senators, and Orators of Rome, but to daunt, astonish,
and if it were possible, to overthrow them. And sithence the very
thunder-lightning of your admirable Eloquence, is sufficiently auailable to
strike them with a lame Palsy of tongue, (if they be not already smitten with
a senseless Apoplexy in head, which may easily ensewe such contagious
Catharres, and Reumes, as I am privy some of them have been grievously
disseased withal) miss not, but hitt them suerly home, as they deserve with
Supererogation. You have been reputed evermore, since first I heard of you in
Oxford, and elsewhere, to have been as much given to favor, commend, and
frequent such, as were approved, or toward in learning, wit, kind behavior,
or any good quality, as may be required in any man of your demerit: an
undoubted sign, how much you loath Inuectiues, or any need^les conte^tions. I
would, (as many your affectionate friends would) it had been your fortune to
have encountered some other Paranymphes, then such, as you are now to
discipline: most unwillingly, I perceive, but most necessarily, and not without
especial consideration, being so manifestly urged, and grosely provoked to
defend yourselfe. But you have ere now been acquainted with patience perforce:
and I hope the most desperate swasher of them will one day learn to show
himself honester, or wiser. And thus recommending your sweet endeavors, with
your grauer studies, to the highest treasury of heavenly Muses; I right heartily
take my leave with a Sonet of that Muse, that honoreth the Vrany of du Bartas,
and yourselfe: of du Bartas elsewhere; here of him, whose excellent Pages of
the French King, the Scottish King, the brave Monsieur de la Noe, the aforesaid
Lord du Bartas, Sir Philip Sidney, and sundry other worthy personages, deserve
immortal commendation. I thank him very heartily, that imparted unto me those
few sheets: and if all be like them, truly all is passing notable, and right
singular.

Sonet.
THose learned Orators, Rooms ancient sages,
Persuasions Pith, directours of affection,
The minds chief counsel, rhetoriques perfection,
The pleasant baulmes of peace, wars fierce outrages:
Sweet Grecian Prophets, whose smooth Muse assuages
The Furies powerful wrath, poisons infection:
Philosophers (by Causes due connection,
Matched with The Effects of Nature) future ages
Embrauing with rich documents of Art:
The wisest Statesmen of calm Commonweales:
The learned General Councels, which impart
Diuinest Laws, whose wholesome Physique heales
Both Church, and Layety: All in One behold
Ennobled Arts, as Precious stones in gold.
From my lodging in Holborne: this of June. 1593.

Your most affectionate,

Barnabe Barnes.

Having perused my former Sonet, if it may please you Sir, to do as much for
your dear friends, Parthenophil, and Parthenophe, they shall have the desired
fruit of their short exercise, and will rest beholding to your courteous
acceptance: which they would be glad to reacquite in the loouingest manner they
may. And so most affectionatly recommend themselves unto your good self: whose
unblemished fame they will evermore maintain with the best blood of their
hearts, tongues, and Pens. We will not fay, how much we long to see the whole
Praises of your two notorious enemies, the Ass, and the Fox.

Sonet.
Nash, or the Confuting Gentleman.
The Muses scorn; the Courtiers laughing stock;
The Countries Coxecombe; Pr^nters proper new;
The Cities Leprosy; the Pandars stew;
Virtues disdain; honesties adverse rock;
(...) vile champion; slanders stumbling block.
Graund Orator of Cunny-catchers crew;
Base hroaching tapster of reports untrue;
Our modern Viper, and our Countries mock;
True Valors Cancer-worme, sweet Learnings rust.
Where shall I find meet colors, and fit words,
For such a counterfaict, and worthless matter?
Him, whom thou raylest on at thine own lust,
Since Bodine, and sweet Sidney did not flatter,
His Inuectiue thee toomuch grace affordes.
Parthenophil.

Sonet.
Haruey, or the sweet Doctor.
Sidney, sweet Cignet, pride of Thamesis;
Apollos laurel; Mars-his proud prowess:
Bodine, register of Realms happiness,
Which Italyes, and Fraunce's wonder is:
Hatcher, with silence whom I may not miss:
Nor Lewen, Rhetoriques richest noblesse:
Nor Wilson, whose discretion did redress
Our English Barbarism: adioyne to this
Diuinest moral Spencer: let these speak
By their sweet Letters, which do best unfold
Harueys deserved praise: since my Muse weak
Cannot relate so much as has been told
By these Forenam'd: then vain it were to bring
New feather to his Fames swift-feathered wing.
Parthenophe.

THE PRINTERS ADVERTISSEment to the Gentleman Reader.
CVrteous Gentlemen, it seemed good to M. Doctor Haruey, for breuity-sake, and
because he liked not ouer-long Preambles, or Postambles to short Discourses, to
omit the commendatorie Letters, and Sonnets of M.Thorius, M.Chewt, and diverse
other his affectionate friends of London, and both the Universities. Which
nevertheless are reserved to be prefixed, inserted, or annexed, either in his
defensive Letters, enlarged with certain new Epistles of more special note;
or in his Discourses ofNashes S. Fame, already finished, and presently to be
published, as these shall like their interteinem^t: of whose favorable and
plausible Welcome, diverse learned and fine wits have presumed the best.
Howbeit finally it was thought not amiss, upon conference with some his
advised acquaintance, to make choice of some two, or three of the reasonablest,
and temperatest Sonnets (but for variety, and to avoid tediousness in the
entrance, rather to be annexed in the end, then prefixed in the beginning of
the present Discourses): one of the foresaid M. Thorius, an other of M. Chewt,
and the third of a learned French Gentleman, Monsieur Fregeuill Gautius, who
has published some weighty Treatises, as well Politic, as Religious, both in
Latin, and French; and has acquainted M. Doctor Haruey with certain most
profitable Mathematical devises of his own invention. The residue is not
added by me, but annexed by the Author himself: whom I humbly recommende to
your courteous Censure, and so rest from ouertroubling you with my unpolished
lines.

Pierces Supererogation OR A NEW PRAISE OF THE OLD ASS.
A Preparatiue to certain larger Discourses, entitled NASHES S. FAME.
I Was ever unwilling to undertake any enterprise, that was unmeet for me; or
to play any part, either in earnest, or in jest, that might ill-beseeme me: and
never more unwilling then at this instant, when I must needs do it, or put
something in hazard, that I would be loath to commit to the courtesy of
adventure. Not because my Confuters swords, or my enemies daggers carry any
credit with the wise; or because my Letters fear any discredit with the
honest; or because I cannot abide to be confuted, that daily confute my self,
and condemn every mine own default with rigor: but because Silence may seem
suspicious to many; Patience contemptible to some; A good mind, A bad heart to
those, that value all by courage; A known forbearer of Libellers, A continual
bearer of coals; and there is no end of abuses upon abuses, of injuries upon
injuries, of contempt upon contempt, where presumptuous Impudency, and odious
Slander, the two errantest vagabonds in the world, may safeconduct themselves,
and franckely pass uncontrolled. Yet were that, either all, or the worst of
all, I could still vow Silence in brawles, and would still profess Patience in
wrongs: (I hate brawles with my heart: and can turne-ouer A volume of wrongs
with a wett finger:) but some cunning men, that carry hoony in their mouths,
and gall in their hearts, not so sweet in the Premises, as bitter in the
Conclusion, can smoothly, and finely descant upon the least advantage,
howsoever injurious: and certain pretty Experiences, by way of sensible
instruction, have taught some, that Malice was never such an hypocrite, as now;
and the world never such a Scoggin, as now; and the Devil never such a knave,
as now: and what a desperate dissoluteness were it in him, that regards his
good name, to abandon himself, or to relinquish the dearest thing in this
life, (I know no deerer thing, then honest credit) to the favor of Envy, or
to the discretion of Fortune? Gentlemen, he is hardly bestead for a Patron,
that relyeth on the tuition of Envy, or reposeth his affiance in the protection
of Fortune: and he must not take it unkindly, to be forsaken of other by the
way, that forsakes himself in the way. Even he that loves not to be his own
defender, much less his own prayser, (do him no wrong, my Masters, though ye
do him no right) yet hates to be his own traitor: and has reason to
experimente some round conclusions, before he offer his throat to the blade
of villainy, or his forhead to the brand of diffamation. And although he be the
subject of his own contempt, and the argument of his own Satyrs: (surely no
man less doteth upon himself, or more severely censureth his own
imperfections:) yet he in some respects disdayneth to be reviled by the abiects
of the world. Whose dispraise in some age were a commendation, and whose praise
an inuectiue: but this is a queint world, and needs no April showers, to
furnish May-games. I protest, I have these many years, not in pride, but in
judgment, scorned, to appear in the rank of this scribbling generation: and
could not have been hired with a great fee, to publish any Pamflet of
whatsoever nature, in mine own name, had I not been intollerably provoked,
first by one rakehell, and now by an other, the two impudentest mates, that
ever haunted the press: (some have called them knaves in gross: I have found
them fools in retayle:) but when it came to this desperate point, that I must
needs either be a base writer, or a vile Ass in printe, the less of the two
evils was to be chosen: and I compelled rather to alter my resolution for a
time, then to prejudice my self for ever. They that list may feed at the
manger with the sons of the Mule: it is an other Table-Philosophy, that I
fancy. Howbeit amongst all the misfortunes, that ever happened unto me, I
account it my greatest affliction, that I am constrained to busy my pen,
without ground, or substance of discourse, meet for an active and industrious
world. Every man has his crosses in one accident, or other: but I know not a
greeuousser persecution, then a base employment of precious time, necessarily
enforced. Other crosses may someway edify: this is a plague without remedy; a
torment without end; a hell without redemption. As in the course of my study,
it was always my reckoning; He loses nothing, whatsoever he loses, that
gains Time: so in the task of my writing, or other exercise, it is my
account; He gayneth nothing, whatsoever he gayneth, that loses Time. A good
matter, delivered in good manner, wins some estimation with good minds: but
no manner sufficient to countenance a contemptible Theme: and a rascal
subject abaseth any form: or what has drowned the memory of the trimmest, and
daintiest trifles, that fine conceit has devised? Were it mine own election,
I might worthily incur many reproves, and justly impute them to my simple
choice: but Necessity has as little free will, as Law; and compels like a
Tyrant, where it cannot persuade, like an Orator, or advise like a
Counselor. Any Virtue, an honorable Commonplace, and a flourishing branch
of an heavenly tree: Politic, and militar affairs, the worthiest matters of
consultation, and the two Herculean pillars of noble states: the private lives
of excellent personages in sundry courses, and the public actions of puissant
nations in sundry gouernementes, shining mirrours of notable use for the
present time, and future ages. Were it at my appointment, to dispose freely of
mine own hours: O how willingly, and cheerfully could I spend the freshest
and dearest part of my life, in such arguments of valor? Learning is a
goodly and gallant Creature in many parts: and diverse members of that
beautiful body vpbraide the most-exquisite pen, and mostcurious pencill of
insufficiency: no diligence too-much, where no labor enough: the fruitefullest
sciences require painefullest industry, and some lively principles would be
touched to the quick: whatsoever booke-case, or scholepoint is found by
experience to be essential, and practicable in the world, deserves to be
discussed with sharp invention, and sound judgment. I could yet take
pleasure, and proffite, in canuassing some Problems of natural Philosophy, of
the Mathematiques, of Geography, and Hydrography, of other commodious
experimentes, fit to advance many valorous actions: and I would upon mine
own charges, travail into any part of Europe, to hear some pregnant
Paradoxes, and certain singular questions in the highest professions of
Learning, in Physic, in Law, in Divinity, effectually and thoroughly disputed
pro, and contra: and would think my travail as aduauntageously bestowed to
some purposes of importance, as they that have aduenturously discovered
newfound Lands, or bravely surprised Indies. What conferences, or
disputations, what Parliaments, or Councels, like those, that deliberate upon
the best government of Commonwealthes, and the best discipline of Churches;
the dubble anchor of the mighty shipp, and the two great Luminaries of the
world? Other extrauagant discourses, not material, or quarrelous contentions,
not available, are but wastinge of wind, or blotting of paper. What should
Exercise, or studdy, burn the Sun, or the candle in vain? or what should I
do against my self, in speakinge for my self, if outward respects did not
inwardly gripe, and a present exigence lay violent hands upon me? Though
extremity be powerable, yet an unwilling will is excusable. Philosophers, and
Lawyers can best argue the case of inuoluntary acts: but what so forcible, as
compulsion: or so pardonable, as a passive action? Blame him not, or blame him
gently, that would be a little loath, to be dieted at the rack of the old Ass,
or to be bitten of the young dog. He is no party in the cause, that pleads
thus against Aristogiton. Sweet Gentlemen, imagine it to be a speech, addressed
unto your selves. Peradventure the viper did never bite any of you; and the
Gods forbid, it should ever bite you: but when you epsy any such pernicious
creature, you presently dispatch it: in like manner when you behold a
Sycophant, and a man of a viperous nature, look not till he has bitten some
of you, but so soon as he starteth-vp, pull him down. And again in an other
place of the same sententious, and politic Oration: He that mainetayneth a
Sycophant, is by nature and kind an ennemy of the good: unless somebody
imagine, that the seed and root of a naughty Sycophant ought to remain in
the City, as it were for store, or good husbandry. Demosthenes was as deeply
wise, as highly eloquent: and has many such notable sentences, as it were
Caueats, or Prouisoes, against the dangerous ennemies of that flourishing
City, and especially against Calumniatours, whose viperous sting he could by
no means avoid: albeit otherwise such an Orator, as could allure hearts
with persuasion, or conjure minds with astonishment. I would no other City
loved figs: or must an other City of necessity love figs, because it is
grown an other Athens, a mother of eloquence, a nurse of learning, a grandame
of valor, a seat of honor, and as Aristotle termed Athens, a garden of
Alcinous, wherein one fruit ripeneth upon an other, one pear upon an other,
one grape upon an other, and one fig upon an other. The Sycophant be his
own interpreter: and if he may be licensed, or permitted to be his own
caruer too, much good may it do him, and sweet digestion give him joy of his
dainety figg. I must have a little care of one, that cannot easily brucke
unreasonable sauciness: and would be loath to see the garden of Alcinous made
the garden of Green, or Motley. It was wont to be said by way of a Proverb;
He that will be made a sheep, shall find wolves enough: but forsooth this
exceeding-wise world, is a great Asse-maker: and he that will suffer himself
to be proclaimed an Ass in printe, shall be sure never to want load and
load enough. Who so ready to call her neighbor, a skold, as the rankest skold
of the parish: or who so forward to accuse, to debase, to revile, to
crow-treade an other, as the arrantest fellow in a country? Let his own mouth
be his pasport, or his own pen his warrant: and who so leawd as his greatest
adversary, modesty: or so honest, as his dearest friend, villainy: or so learned,
as his learnedest counsel, vanity: or so wise, as his profoundest Author, young
Apuleius. What familiar spirit of the Air, or fire, like the glibb, and
nimble wit of young Apuleius? or where is the Eloquence, that should describe
the particular perfections of young Apuleius? Prudence, may borrow, discretion;
Logique, arguments; Rhetorique, colors; Phantasy, conceits; Steel, an edge;
and Gold, a luster, of young Apuleius. O the rare, and queint Invention, o the
gallant, and gorgeous Elocution: o the brave, and admirable amplifications: o
the artificial, and fine extenuations: o the lively pourtraitures of egregious
praises, and disprayses: o the cunning, and strange minglemangles: o the pithy
iestes, and marvelous girdes of young Apuleius: the very prodigality of Art, and
Nature. What greater impossibility, then to decipher the high, and mighty style
of young Apuleius, without a liberal portion of the same eleuate spirit?
Happy the old father, that begat; and thrice happy the sweet Muses, that
suckled, and fostered young Apuleius. Till Admiration has found-out a
smoother, and tricksier quill for the purpose: Desire must be content to leave
the supple and tidy constitution of his omni-sufficient Wit, vndisplayed.
Only it becomes gentle minds to yield themselves thanckefull; and to tender
their bounden duty to that inestimable pearl of Eloquence, for this precious
glimze of his incomprehensible valor; one short Maxim, but more worth, then
all the Axioms of Aristotle; or the Idees of Plato; or the Aphorisms of
Hippocrates; or the Paragraphes of luftinian. He knows not to manage his
pen, that was not born with an Affe in his mouth; a fool in his throat; and
a knave in his whole body. Simple men may write against other, or plead for
themselves: but they cannot confute cuttingly, like a hackster of Queen-Hith,
or bellow lustely, like the foreman of the Heard. I go not about to discover
an Ass in an Oxes hide: he needs no other to pull him by the famous ears,
that is so hasty to descry, and so busy to bestirre his wisest parts. but what
a notable Ass indeed was I, that sought the wings of a mounting Pegasus, or
a stying Phoenix, where I found the head, and feet of a braying creature? Some
promises, are desperate debtes: and many threatninges, empty clouds; or rather
armies fighting in the air, terrible visions. Simplicity cannot dubble: and
plain dealing will not dissemble. I looked either for a fine-witted man, as
quick as quicksilver, that with a nimble dexterity of lively conceit, and
exquisite secretaryship, would out-runne me many hundred miles in the course
of his dainty devises; a delicate minion: or some terrible bombarder of
terms, as wild as wildfire, that at the first flash of his fury, would leave
me thunder-stricken upon the ground, or at the last volley of his outrage,
would batter me to dust, and ashes. A redoubted adversary. But the trimine
silke-worme, I looked-for, (as it were in a proper contempt of common
finenesse) proves but a silly glow-woorme: and the dreadful enginer of
phrases, in steed of thunderboltes, shoots nothing but dogboltes, and
catboltes, and the homeliest boltes of rude folly. Such arrant confuting
stuff, as never print saw compiled together, till ma^ster Villainy became an
Author; and Sir Nash a gentleman. Printers, take heed how ye play the Heralds:
some lusty gentlemen of the maker, can no sooner bare a Goose-quill, or a
Woodcockes seather in their shield, but they are like the renowned Lobbelinus,
when he had gotten a new coat: and take upon them, without pity, or mercy,
like the only Lords of the field. If ever Esquier raued with conceit of his
new Arms, it is Danters gentleman: that mightily despises, whatsoever he
beholds from the high turret of his creast, and cranckly spitteth upon the
heads of some, that were not greatly acquaynted with such familiar
enterteinement. His best friend, be his Judge: and I appeal to my worst
ennemy, whether he ever read a more pestilent example of prostituted Impudency?
Were he not a kinseman of the foresaid viper, a Dog in malice, a Calfe in
wit, an Ox in learning, and an Ass in discretion: (time shall cronicle him,
as he is:) was it possible, that any man should have bestowed some broad, and
loud terms, as he has done? Who could abide it, without actual revenge, but
he, that enterteineth spite with a smile, makes a pastime of Strange News;
turns choler into sanguine, vinegar into wine, vexation into sport; and has
a salve for a greater sore?

Come young Sophisters, you that affecte raylinge in your disputations, and
with a clamorous howte would set the Philosophy schools non plus: come old
cutters, you that use to make dowty frayes in the streets, and would hack-it
terribly: come hee-and shee-scoldes, you that love to pleade-it-out inuincibly
at the bar of the dunghill, and will rather loose your lives, then the last
word: come busy commotioners, you that carry a world of quarrelous wits, and
mutinous tounges in your heads: come most-redowted Momus, you that will
sternely keep heaven, and earth in awe: come running heads, and giddy pens
of all humors, you that dance attendance upon oddest fashions; and learn a
perfect method, to pass other, and to excel your selves: such a new-deuised
model, as never saw Sun before, and may make the gayest mold of antiquity to
blush. Old Archilochus, and Theon, were but botchers in their railing faculty:
Stesichorus, but a gross bungler: Aristarchus but a curious, and nice fool:
Aristophanes and Lucian, but merry iesters: Ibis against Ovid; Meuius against
Horace; Carbilius Pictor against Virgill; Lauinius against Terence; Crateua
against Euripides; Zoilus against Homer, but rank fowters. Salust did but
dally with Tully: Demades but toy with Demosthenes: Pericles but sport with
Thucy dides, and so forth. For examples are infinite; and no exercise more
ancient, then Iambiques amongst Poets; Inuectiues amongst Orators;
Confutations amongst Philosophers; Satyrs amongst Carpers; Libels amongst
factioners; Pasquils amongst Malcontentes; and quarrels amongst all. But the
Old Age was an Infant in Wit, and a Grammar Scholar in Art: Lucians
Rhetor, never so bravely furnished, will be heard with an Echo: Julian will
rattle Christendom: Arrius will shake the Church: Macchiauell will yerke the
Commonwealth: Vnico Aretino will scourge Princes: and here is a lusty ladd of
the Castle, that will bind Bears, and ride golden Asses to death. Were the
pith of courage lost, it might be found in his pen: or were the marrow of
conceit to seek, where should wit look for wit, but in his Inckebottle?
Art was a Dunse, till He was a writer: and the quickest Confuter, a drowsy
dreamer, till he put a life into the dead quill, and a fly into the wooden
box of forlome Pandora. A point for the Satyrist, whose conceit is not a
Ruffian in folio: and a figg for the Confuter, that is not a Swashbucler with
his pen. Old whimwhams have plodded-on, long enough: fresh invention from the
tapp, must have his friskes, and careers an other while: and what comparable to
this spowte of yarking eloquence? Give me the fellow, that is as Peerless, as
Pennylesse; and can oppose all the Libraries in Poules Churchyard, with one
wonderful work of Supererogation; such an vnmatcheable piece of Learning, as
no books can counteruaile, but his own; the only records of the
singularities of this age. Did I speak at a venture, I might deceive, and be
deceived: but where Experience is a witness, and judgment the Judge, I hope
the error will not be unreasonably great.

There was a time, when I floted in a sea of encountering waves; and devoured
many famous confutations, with an eager, and insatiable appetite: especially
Aristotle against Plato, and the old Philosophers: diverse excellent
Platonistes, endued with rare, and divine wits, (of whom elsewhere at
large,) Justinius Martyr, Philoponus, Valla, Viues, Ramus, against Aristotle: oh
but the great master of the schools, and high Chancellor of Universities,
could not want pregnant defense: Perionius, Gallandius, Carpentarius, Sceggius,
Lieblerus against Ramus: what? has the royal Professor of Eloquence, and
Philosophy, no favorites? Talaeus, Ossatus, Freigius, Minos, Rodingus,
Scribonius, for Ramus against them; and so forth, in that hott contradictory
course of Logique, and Philosophy. But alas silly men, simple Aristotle, more
simple Ramus, most simple the rest, either ye never knew, what a sharpeedged,
and cutting Consutation meant: or the date of your stale oppositions is
expired; and a newfound land of confuting commodities discovered, by this
brave Columbus of terms, and this only merchant venturer of quarrels; that
detecteth new Indies of Invention, and has the winds of Aeolus at
commandment. Happy, you flourishinge youths, that follow his incomparable
learned steps: and unhappy we old Dunses, that wanted such a worthy President
of all nimble and lively dexterities. What should I appeal infinite other to
their perpetual shame: or summon such, and such to their foul disgrace?
Erasmus in Latin, and Sir Thomas More in English, were supposed fine, and
pleasant Confuters in their time, and were accordingly embraced of the
forwardest and trimmest wits: but alack how unlike this dainty minion?
Agrippa was reputed a giant in confutation; a demi-god in omnisufficiency of
knowledge; a devil in the practice of horrible Arts: oh, but Agrippa was an
vrcheon, Copernicus a shrimpe, Cardan a puppy, Scaliger a baby, Paracelsus a
scab, Erastus a patch, Sigonius a toy, Cuiacius a babble to this Termagant; that
fights not with simple words, but with dubble swords: not with the
trickling water of Helicon, but with piercing Aqua fortis: not with the sorry
powder of Experience, but with terrible gunpowder: not with the small shot of
contention, but with the maine ordinance of fury. For breuity I ouerskip many
notable men, and valorous Confuters in their several veins: had not affection
otherwhiles swinged their reason, where reason should have swayed their
affection. But Partiality, was ever the busiest Actour; and Passion, the
whottest Confuter: whatsoever plausible cause otherwise pretended: and he is
rather to be esteemed an Angel, then a man, or a man of Heaven, not of Earth,
that tendereth integrity in his heart; equity in his tongue; and reason in his
pen. Flesh, and blood are frail Creatures, and partial discoursers: but he
approaches nearest unto God, and yields sweetest fruit of a divine
disposition, that is not transported with wrath, or any blind passion, but
guided with clear, and pure Reason, the sovereign principle of sound
proceeding. It is not the Affirmative, or Negative of the writer, but the
truth of the matter written, that carries meat in the mouth, and victory in
the hand. There is nothing so exceeding foolish, but has been defended by
some wise man: nor any thing so passinge wise, but has been confuted by some
fool. Man's will, no safe rule, as Aristotle says: good Homer sometime
sleeps: S. Augustine was not ashamed of his retractations: S. Barnard saw not
all things: and the best chart may eftsoons overthrow. He that takes a
Confutation in hand, must bring the standard of Judgment with him; and make
Wisdom the moderatour of Wit. But I might as well have ouerpassed the censure,
as the persons: and I have to do with a party, that valueth both alike, and can
phansy no Author, but his own phansy. It is neither reason, nor rhyme, nor wit,
nor art, nor any imitation, that he regards: he has builded towers of
Superarrogation in his own head, and they must stand, whosoever fall. Howbeit
I cannot ouerslipp some without manifest injury, that deserve to have their
names enrolled in the first rank of valiant Confuters: worthy men, but
subject to imperfections, to error, to mutual reproof; some more, some
less, as the manner is. Harding, and Jewel, were our Eschines, and
Demosthenes: and scarsely any language in the Christian world, has affoorded a
pair of adversaries, equivalent to Harding, and Jewel; two thundering and
lightning Orators in divinity: but now at last infinitely ouermatched by this
hideous thunderbolt in humanity, that has the only right terms inuectiue,
and triumphs over all the spirits of Contradiction. You that have read
Luther against the Pope: Sadolet, Longolius, Omphalius, Osorius, against
Luther: Calvin against Sadolet: Melanchthon against Longolius: Sturmius against
Omphalius: Haddon against Osorius: Baldwin against Calvin: Beza against
Baldwin: Erastus against Beza: Trauers against Erastus: Sutcliff against
Trauers: and so forth: (for there is no end of endless controversies: nor
Bellarmine shall ever satisfye the Protestants: nor Whittaker content the
Papists: nor Bancroft appease the Precisians: nor any reason pacify affection:
nor any authority resolve obstinacy:) you that have most diligently read these,
and these, and sundry other, reputed excellent in their kinds, cast them all
away, and read him alone: that can school them all in their terms inuectiue,
and teaches a newfound Art of confuting, his all-onely Art. Martin himself
but a meacocke: and Papp-hatchet himself but a milkesop to him: that inditeth
with a pen of fury, and the incke of vengeance; and has cart-loades of
papershot, and chainshot at commandment. Tush, no man can blason his Arms,
but himself. Behold the mighty Champion, the dubble sword bearer, the
redowtable fighter with both hands, that has robbed William Conqueror of his
surname, and in the very first page of his Strange News, choppeth-off the
head of four Letters at a blow. He it is, that has it rightly in him
indeed; and can roundly do the feate, with a witness. Why, man, he is worth
a thousand of these pidlinge and driblinge Confuters, that sit all day buzzing
upon a blunt point, or two: and with much ado drisle-out as many sentences in
a week, as he will powredowne in an hour. It is not long, since the goodlyest
graces of the most-noble Commonwealthes upon Earth, Eloquence in speech, and
Ciuility in manners, arrived in these remote parts of the world: it was a happy
revolution of the heavens, and worthy to be chronicled in an English Liuy, when
Tiberis flowed into the Thames; Athens removed to London; pure Italy, and fine
Greece planted themselves in rich England; Apollo with his delicate troop of
Muses, forsook his old mountains, and rivers; and frequented a new Parnassus,
and an other Helicon, nothing inferior to the old, when they were
most-solemnely haunted of divine wits, that taught Rhetorique to speak with
applause, and Poetry to sing with admiration. But even since that flourishing
transplantation of the daintiest, and sweetest lerning, that humanity ever
tasted; Art did but spring in such, as Sir John Cheek, and M. Ascham: and
wit budd in such, as Sir Phillip Sidney, and M. Spencer; which were but the
violetes of March, or the Primeroses of May: till the one begane to sprowte in
M. Robart Green, as in a sweating Impe of the euer-greene Laurel; the other
to blossom in M. Pierce Pennilesse, as in the rich garden of pore Adonis:
both to grow to perfection, in M. Thomas Nashe; whose prime is a harvest,
whose Art a mystery, whose wit a miracle, whose style the only life of the
press, and the very hart-blood of the Grape. There was a kind of smooth, and
clenly, and neat, and fine elegancy before: (proper men, handsome gifts:) but
alack, nothing lively, and mighty, like the brave vino de monte, till his
frisking pen began to play the Sprite of the buttry, and to teach his
mother tongue such lusty gambolds, as may make the gallantest French, Italian,
or Spanish gagliards to blushe, for extreme shame of their idiot simplicity.
The difference of wits is exceeding straung, and almost incredible. Good
lord, how may one man pass a thousand, and a thousand not compare with one?
Art may give out precepts, and directoryes in communi forma: but it is
superexcellent wit, that is the mother pearl of precious Invention; and the
goulden mine of gorgeous Elocution. Na, it is a certain pregnant, and lively
thing without name, but a queint mystery of mounting conceit, as it were a
knacke of dexterity, or the nippitaty of the nappiest grape, that infinitely
surpasses all the Invention, and Elocution in the world; and will bunge
Demosthenes own mouth with newfangled figures of the right stamp, maugre all
the thundering, and lightninge Periodes of his eloquentest orations, forlorn
creatures. I have had some pretty trial of the finest Tuscanisme in grain;
and have curiously observed the cunningest experiments, and brauest complements
of aspiring emulation: but must geeue the bell of singularity, to the humorous
wit; and the garland of victory, to the dominiering Eloquence. I come not yet
to the Praise of the old Ass: it is young Apuleius, that feeds upon this
glory: and having enclosed these rank commons, to the proper use of himself,
and the capricious flock; adopteth whom he lists, without exception: as
Alexander the great, had a huge intention, to have all men his subjects, and
all his subjects called Alexanders. It was strange news for some, to be so
assesied: and a work of Supererogation for him, so bountifully to voutchsafe
his golden name: the appropriate cognizance of his noble style. God-night poor
Rhetorique of sorry books: adieu good old Humanity: gentle Arts, and Liberal
Sciences content your selves: Farewell my dear moothers, sometime floorishing
Universities: some that have long continued your sons in Nature; your
apprentises in Art; your servants in Exercise; your lovers in affection; and
your vassalles in duty: must either take their leaves of their sweetest
friends; or become the slaves of that dominiering eloquence, that knows no
Art but the cutting Art; nor acknowledges any school, but the Curtisan
school. The rest is pure natural, or wondrous supernatural. Would it were
not an infectious bane, or an incroching pocke. Let me not be mistaken by
sinister construction, that wreasteth and wrigleth every syllable to the worst.
I have no reference to my self; but to my superiors by incomparable degrees.
To be a Ciceronian, is a flowting stock: poor Homer, a woeful wight, may put
his finger in a hole, or in his blind eye: the excellentest histories, and
woorthiest Chronicles, (inestimable monumentes of wisdom, and valor,) what
but stale Antickes? the flowers, and fruits of delicate humanity, that were
wont to be dainetily and tenderly conserved, now preserved with dust, as it
were with sugar, and with hoare, as it were with hoony. That frisking wine, and
that lively knacke in the right capricious vein, the only book, that
holdeth-out with a countenance; and will be heard, when woorme-toungued
Orators, dust-footed Poets, and weatherwise historians shall not be allowed a
word to cast at a dog. There is a fatal Period of whatsoever we term
flourishinge: the world runs on wheels: and there must be a vent for all
things. The Ciceronian may sleep, til the Scogginist has played his part: One
sure Conny-catcher, worth twenty Philosophers: A fantastical rimester, more
vendible, then the notablest Mathematician: no profession, to the faculty of
railing: all harsh, or obscure, that tickleth not idle fantasies with wanton
dalliance, or ruffianly iestes: Robin Good Fellow the meetest Author for Robin
Hoodes Library: the less of Cambridge, or Oxforde, the fitter to compile
works of Supererogation: and we that were simply trained after the Athenian,
and Roman guise, must be content to make room for roisters, that know their
place, and will take it. Titles, and terms are but words of course: the
right fellow, that bears a brain, can knock twenty titles on the head, at a
stroke; and with a iugling shift of that same invincible knacke, defend
himself manfully at the Paper-barre. Though I be not greatly employed, yet my
leisure will scarsely serve, to moralize Fables of Bears, Apes, and Foxes:
(some men can give a shrewd guess at a courtly allegory:) but where Lords in
express terms are magnifically contemned, Doctors in the same style may be
courageously confuted. Liberty of Tongue, and Pen, is no Bondsman: nippitaty
will not be tied to a post: there is a cap of mainetenaunce, called Impudency:
and what say to him, that in a superabundaunce of that same odd capricious
humor, finds no such want in England, as of an Aretine, that might stripp
these golden Asses out-of their gay trappinges, and after he had ridden them to
death with railing, leave them on the dunghill for carrion? A frolic mind,
and a brave spirit to be employed with his stripping instrument, in supply of
that only want of a divine Aretine, the great rider of golden Asses. Were his
pen as supererogatory a woorkeman, as his heart; or his lines such
transcendentes, as his thoughts: Lord, what an egregious Aretine should we
shortly have: how excessiuely exceeding Aretine himself; that bestowed the
surmountingest amplifications at his pleasure, and was a mere Hyperbole
incarnate? Time may work an accomplishment of woonders: and his graund
intentions seem to prognosticate no less, then the uttermost possibilities of
capacity, or fury extended: would God, or could the Devil, give him that
unmeasurable allowance of wit, and Art, that he extremely affects, and
infinitely wants, there were no encounter, but of admiration, and honor. But
it may very-well beseem me to conceal defectes: and I were best to let him
run out his jolly race, and to attend his pleasure at all assayes, for fear
he degrade me, or call me a Letter-monger. Oh, would that were the worst.
Gallant Gentlemen, did you ever see the blades of two brandished swords in the
hands of a Fury? See them now: and Lo how the victorious Duellist
stretcheth-out the arms of his Prowess, to run upon those poor Letters
with a maine carreere. Aut nunc, aut n^nquam: now the deadly stroke must be
stricken: now, now he will surely lay about him, like a lusty throssher, and
beat all to powder, that comes in the mighty swinge of his dubble flayle.
But I know not what astonishing terror may bedimm my sight: and peradventure
the one of those unlawful weapons is no sword, but a shaken firebrand in the
hand of Alecto. All the worse: and he twice wo-begon poor soul, that is at
once assaulted with Fire, and Iron, the two unmerciful instruments of Mars
enraged. God shield quiet men from the hands of such cruel Confuters: whose
arguments are swoordes; whose sentences, murdering bullets; whose phrases,
crosbarres; whose terms no less, then serpentine powder; whose very breath,
the fire of the match: all exceedingly fearful, save his footinge, which may
happily give him the slipp. He that stands upon a wheel, let him beware he
fall not. I have heard of some feate Stratagems, as sly, as the slyest in
Frontine, or Polyen: and could tell you a pretty Tale of a slippery ground,
that would make some bodies ears glow: but he that reuealeth the secret of
his own advantage, may have scope enough to beshrew himself. The Egyptian
Mercury would provide to plant his foot upon a square; and his Image in Athens
was quadrangular, whatsoever was the figure of his hatt: and although he were
sometime a Ball of Fortune, (who can assure himself of Fortune?) yet was he
never a wheel of folly, or an ecle of Ely. The glibbest tunge must consult
with his wit; and the roundest head with his feet: or peradventure he will
not greatly thank his tickle devise. The Wheelewright may be as honest a man,
as the Cutler: the Drawer, as the Cutter: the Deviser, as the Printer: the
worst of the six, as the Author: but some tools are false Prophets; and some
shoppes fuller of sophistry, then Aristotle's Elenches: and if never any witty
deviser did suttelly undermine himself, good enough. I can tell you, the
Wheel was an ancient Hieroglyphique of the most-conning Egyptians; and
figured none of their highest mysteries of triumph, or glory. But when again I
lift-vp mine eyes, and behold the glorious picture of that mostthreatning
Slassher: is it possible, so courageous a Confuter, should be less terrible,
then the Basiliske of Orus Apollo, that with his only hissing, killed the
poor snakes, his neighbors? can any Letters live, that he will slay? Were
not Patience, or Submission, or any course better, then farther discourse? what
fonder business, then to troble the Printe with Pamphlets, that cannot
possibly live, whiles the Basiliske hisseth death? Was I wont to jest at
Eldertons ballatinge; Gascoignes sonnettinge; Greenes pamphletting; Martins
libelling; Hollinsheads engrosing; some-bodies abridging; and whatchicaltes
translating: and shall I now become a scribbling Creature with fragmentes of
shame, that might long sithence have been a fresh writer with discourses of
applause? The very whole matter, what but a thing of nothing? the Method,
what but a hotchpott for a gallymafry? by the one, or other, what hope of
public use, or private credit? Socrates mind could as lightly digest poison,
as Mithridates boddy: and how easily have the greatest stomachs of all ages,
or rather the valiantest courages of the world, concocted the harshest, and
rankest injuries? Politic Philip victorious Alexander, invincible Scipio,
triumphant Caesar, happy Augustus, magnificent Titus, and the flower of the
noblest minds, that Immortality honors, with a sweet facility gave many
bitter reprehensions the slip, and finely ridd their hands of roughest
obloquies. Philosophy professes more: and the Philosopher of Emperors, or
rather the Emperor of Philosophers, Marcus Antoninus, when he deserved best,
could with a felicity hear the woorst. Cherrish an inward contentment in thy
self, my mind: and outward occurrences, whom they will not make, shall not
mar. It is as great a praise, to be discommended of the dishonest, as to be
commended of the virtuous: say, affirm, confirm, approve, justify what you
can, the Captaine-scolde has vowed the last word: none so bold to adventure
any thing, as he that has no good thing to loose: let him forge, or coin,
who will belce^e him? Lay-open his vanity, or foolery, who knows it not? yet
who so eager to defend, or offend, with tooth, or nail, by hook or crook?
The Art of figs, hadd ever a dapper wit, a deft conceit, a slicke forhead,
a smugg countenance; a stinginge tongue; a nippinge hand; a bytinge pen;
and a bottomless pit of Invention, stoared with neuer-fayling shifts of
counterfeite cranckes: and my betters by many degrees, have been feign to be
the Godsonnes of young Apuleius. Diverse excellent men have praised the old
Ass: give the young Ass leave to praise himself, and to practice his minion
Rhetorique upon other. There is no dealinge, where there is no healinge. To
strive with dirt, is filthy: to play with edged tools, dangerous: to try
masteries with a desperate adversary, hazardous: to encounter Demosthenes
Viper, or Apolloes Basiliske, deadly. To intend your own intentions with an
inviolable constancy, and to level continually at your own determined scope,
without respect of extrauagant ends, or cumbersome interruptions: the best
course of proceeding, and only firm, cheerful, gallant, and happy
resolution. Every by-way, that strayeth or gaddeth from that direct Path, a
wandering error: and a perilous, or threatninge by-way, a forest of wild
beasts. Hand, touch not the ranckeling byle, and throw-away the launcing
instrument.

I could conceive no less, then thus, and thus, when I began first to
surview that brauing Emprese: and ever me thought, Aut nunc, aut nunquam,
seemed to prognosticate great tempests at hand, and even such valorous
works of Supererogation, as would make an employed man of Florence, or
Venice, to break day with any other important business of state, or
traffic. I went on, and on, still, and still loking for those presaged
woondermentes: and thought it Platoes great year, till I hadd runne-thorough
the armed pikes, and felt the whole dinte of the two vengeable unlawful
weapons. But I believe, never poor man found his Imagination so hugely mocked,
as this co^futing Iugler coosened my expectation without measure: as if his
whole drift had been nothing else, but a pleasurable Comedy, or a mad
Stratagem, (like those of Bacchus, and Pan) queintlye devised to defeat the
opinion of his ^edulous reader, and to surprise simple minds with a most
unlikely event. A fine piece of conu^lance in some pageantes: and a brave
deseigne in fi^t place. Art knows the pageants: and policy the place. In
ernest, I expected nether an Orator of the stews: nor a Poet of Bedlam: nor a
knight of the alehowse: nor a qu^an of the Cuckingstole: nor a broker of
baggage stuff: nor a peddler of strange news: nor any base trumperye, or
mean matters, when Pierce should rack his wit, and Penniles stretch-out his
courage, to the uttermost extent of his possibility. But with out more
circumlocution, pride has a fall: and as of A Catt, so of Pierce himself,
howsoever inspired, or enraged, you can have but his skin, puffed up with
wind, and bumbasted with vanitye. Even when he stryueth for life, to show
himself brauest in the flaunt-aflaunt of his courage; and when a man would
verily believe he should now behold the stately personage of heroical
Eloquence face to face; or see such an unseen Frame of the miracles of Art,
as might amaze the heavenly eye of Astronomy: holla sir, the sweet Spheres are
not too-prodigall of their sovereign influences. Pardon me S. Fame. What the
first pang of his divine Fury, but notable Vanity: what the second fit,
but worthy vanitye: what the third career, but egregious vanity? what the
glory of his ruffian Rhetorique, and curtisan Philosophy, but excellent
villainy? That, that is Pierces Supererogation: and were Penniles a person of
any reckoning, as he is a man of notorious fame, that, that perhaps, in regard
of the outrageous singularity, might be supposed a Tragical, or Heroical
villainy, if ever any villainy were so entitled. The present consideration of
which singularity, occasioneth me to bethink me of One, that this other day
very soberlie commended some extraordinary gifts in Nashe: and when he had
grauesie maintained, that in the resolution of his conscience, he was such a
fellow, as some ways had few fellows; at last concluded somewhat more
roundly.

Well, my masters, you may talk your pleasures of Tom Nash; who yet sleeps
secure, not without prejudice to some, that might be more ielous of their name:
but assure your selves, if M. Pen^iles had not been deeply plunged in a
profound exstasic of kna^ery, M. Pierce had never written that famous work of
Super^rogation, that now stayneth all the books in Paules-churchyard, and
sets both the universities to school. Till I see your finest humanity
bestow such a liber all exhibition of conceit, and courage, upon your neatest
wits; pardon me though I prefer one smart Pamster of knavery, before ten
blundring volumes of the nine Muses. Dreaming, and smoke amount alike: Life is
a gaming, aiugling, a scoulding, a lawing, a skirmishing, a war; a Comedy, a
Tragedy: the sturring wit, a quintessence of quicksiluer; and there is noe
dead flesh in affection, or courage. You may discourse of Hermes ascending
spirit; of Orpheus encha^ting harp; of Homers divine fury; of Tyrtaeus
enraging trumpet; of Pericles bounsinge thunderclaps; of Platos enthusiasticall
rauishment; and I wott not what marvelous eggs in mooneshine: but a fly for
all your flying Speculations, when one good fellow with his oddiestes, or one
madd knave with his awke hibber-gibber, is able to putt down twentye of your
smuggest artificial men, that simper it so nicely, and coylie in their curious
points. Try, when you mean to be disgraced: and never give me credit, if
Sanguine wit putt not Melancholy Art to bed. I had almost said, all the
figures of Rhetorique must abate me an ace of Pierces Supererogation,: and
Penniles has a certain nimble and climbinge reach of Invention, as good as a
long pole, and a hook, that never fails at a pinch. It were unnatural, as
the sweet Emperor, Marcus Antoninus said, that the fig tree should ever want
juice. You that purpose with great sum^es of ^uddy, and candles to purchase the
worshipful names of Dunses, and Dodipoles, may closely sit, or sokingly ly at
your books: but you that intend to be fine companionable gentlemen, smirkinge
wits, and whipsters in the world, betake ye timely to the lively practis of
the minion profession, and enure your Mercuriall fingers to frame semblable
works of Supererogation. Certes other rules are fopperies: and they that will
seek out the Archmistery of the busiest Modernistes, shall find it nether
more, nor less, then a certain pragmaticall secret, called Villainy, the very
science of sciences, and the Familiar Spirit of Pierces Supererogation. Coosen
not your selves with the gay-nothings of children, and scholars: no priuiti^
of learning, or inspiration of wit, or revelation of misteryes, or Art
Notory, counteruayleable with Pierces Supererogation: which having none of
them, has them all, and can make them all Asses at his pleasure. The
Book-woorme was never but a pickgoose: it is the Multiplying spirit, not of the
Alchimist, but of the villanist, that knocks the nail one the head, and
spurreth cut farther in a day, then the quickest Artist in a week. Whiles
other are reading, writing, conferring, arguing, discoursing, experime^ting,
platforminge, musing, buzzing, or I know not what: that is the spirrit, that
with a woondrous dexterity shapeth exquisite works, and atchicueth puissant
exploites of Supererogation. O my good friends, as ye love the sweet world, or
tender your dear selves, be not unmindful what is good for the a^auncemente
of your commendable parts. All is nothing without advancement. Though my
experience be a Cipher in these causes, yet having studiously perused the new
Arte-notory, that is the foresaid Supererogation; and having shaken so many
learned asses by the ears; as it were by the hands; I could say no less, and
might think more.

Something else was uttered the same time by the same Gentleman, as well
concerning the present state of France, which he termed the most unchristian
kingdom of the most christian king; as touching certain other news of I
wott not what dependence: but my mind was running on my halfpeny, and my head
so full of the foresaid round discourse, that my hand was never quiet, until I
had altered the title of this Pamphlet, and newly christened it Pierces
Supererogation: as well in remembrance of the said discourse, as in honor of
the appropriate virtues of Pierce himself; who above all the writers that ever
I knew, shall go for my money, where the currantest forgery, impudency,
arrogance, phantasticalitie, vanity; and great store of little dicretion may go
for payment; and the filthiest corruption of abominable villainy pass
vnlaunced. His other miraculous perfections are still in abeyance: and his
monstrous excellencyes in the predicament of Chimera. The bird of Arabia is
long in hatchinge: and mighty works of Supererogation are not plotted, and
accomplished attonce. It is pity so hyperbolicall a conceit, ouerhawty for
the surmounting rage of Tasso in his furious angoy, should be humbled with so
diminitiue a wit; base enough for Elderton, and the riffe-raffe of the
scribbling rascality. I have heard of many disparagementes in fellowship: but
never saw so great Impudency married to so little wit; or so huge presumption
allied to so petty performance. I must not paint, though he dawbe. Pontan
decipher thy vauntinge Alopantius Ausimarchides a new: and Terence display thy
boastinge Thraso a new: and Plautus address thy vainglorious Pyrgopolinices
anew: here is a bratt of Arrogance, a gosling of the Printinghouse, that can
teach your braggardes to play their parts in the Printe of wonder, and to
exploit redowtable works of Supererogation; such as never were achieved in
Latin, or Greek. Which deferue to be looked for with such a longing
expectation, as the Jews look for their kingly Messiah: or as I look for
Agrippas dreadful Pyromachy: for Cardans multiplied matter, that shall delude
the force of the Canon: for Acontius perfect Art of fortifieng little towns
against the greatest Battery: for the Iliades of all Courtly Stratagems, that
Antony Riccobonus magnifically promises: for his universal Repertory of all
Histories, containing the memorable acts of all ages, all places, and all
persons: for the new Calepine of all learned, and vulgar languages, written, or
spoken, whereof a loud rumor was lately published at Basil: for a general
Pandectes of the Laws, and statutes of all nations, and commonwealthes in the
world, largely promised by Doctor Peter Gregorius, but compendiously
performed in his Syntagma Iuris vniuersi: for sundry such famous volumes of
hugy miracles in the clouds. Do not such Arch-woondermentes of supernatural
furniture, deserve arch-expectation? What should the Sons of Art, dream of
the Philosophers Stone, that like Midas, turns into gold, whatsoever it
touches: or of the sovereign, and divine Quintessence, that like Esculapius
restores health to sickness; like Medea, youth to Olde-age; like Apollor^us,
life to Death? No Philosophers Stone, or souraine Quintessence, howsoever
preciously precious, equivalent to such divine works of supererogation. O
highminded Pierce, hadd the train of your words, and sentences been
aunswearable to the retinue of your bragges, and threats, or the robes of your
apparaunce in person, suitable to the weeds of your ostentation in terms: I
would surely have been the first, that should have proclaimed you, the
most-singuler Secretary of this language, and the heauenliest creature under
the Spheres. Sweet M. Ascham, that was a flowing spring of humanity, and
worthy Sir Phillip Sidney, that was a flourishing spring of nobi lity, must have
pardoned me: I would directly have discharged my conscience. But you must give
plain men leave to utter their opinion without courtinge: I honor high heads,
that stand upon low feet; and have no great affection to the gay fellows, that
build up with their cla^bring hearts, and pull down with their untoward hands.
Give me the man that is meek in spirit, lofty in zeal: simple in presumption,
gallant in endeavor: poor in profession, rich in performance. Some such I
know; and all such I value highly. They glory not of the golden Stone, or the,
youthful Quintessence: but Industry is their goulden Stone; Action their
youthful Quintessence; and Valor their divine work of Supererogation. Every
one may think as he lists; and speak as he finds occasion: but in my
fancy, they are simply the simplest fellows of al other, that boast they will
exploite miracles, and come short in ordinary reckonings. Great matters are no
woonders, when they are menaced, or promised with big oaths: and small things
are maruels, when they are not expected, or suspected. I wondered to hear, that
Kelly had gotten the Golden Fliece, and by virtue thereof was suddenly advanced
into so honorable reputation with the Emperors majesty; but would have
woondred more, to have seen a work of Supererogation from Nashe: whose wit
must not enter the listes of comparison with Kellyes Alchimy: howsoever he
would seem to have the Green Lion, and the Flying Eagle in a box. But Kelly
will bidd him look to the swollen Toade, and the daunsing Fool. Kelly knows
his L^tum Sapientiae, and uses his terms of Art. Silence is a great
misterye: and loud words but a Coweherds horn. He that breeds mountains
of hope, and with much ado begets a molehill (shall I tell him a new tale
in old Inglishe?) begins like a mighty Ox, and ends like a sorry Ass.
To atchieue it without ostentation, is a notable praise: but to vaunt it
without atcheuement, or to threaten it without effect; is but a dubble proof
of a simple wit. Execution shows the hability of the man: presumption
bewraieth the vanity of the mind. The Sun says not; I will thus, and thus
displaye my glorious beams, but shines indeed: the spring braggeth not of
gallant flowers, but florisheth indeed: the Harvest boasts not of plentiful
fruit, but fructifieth in deed. Aesops fellows being asked, what they could
do, answered they could do any thing; but Aesope making a small show, could
do much indeed: the Greek Sophisters knowing nothing in comparison,
(knowledge is a dry water) professed a skill in all things; but Socrates
knowing in a manner all things, (Socrates was a springing rock) professed a
skill in nothing: Lullius, and his sectaryes, have the signet of Hermes, and
the admirable Art of disputinge infinitely de omni scibili; but Agrippa, one of
the vniuersallest scholars, that Europe has yielded, and such a one, as some
learned men of Germany, France, and Italy, entitled The Omniscious Doctor,
Socraticallie declameth against the vanitye of sciences, and for my comfort
penneth the Apology of the Ass. Never any of these prating vagabundes had the
virtuous Elixir, or other important secret: (yet who such monarchs for
Phisique, Surgery, Spagirique, Astrology, Palmastry, natural and
supernatural Magique, Necromancy, Familiar-spiritshipp, and all profound
cunninge, as some of these arrant Impostours?) he is a Pythagorean, and a
close fellow of his tongue, and pen, that has the right magisterium indeed;
and can dispatch with the finger of Art, that they promis with the mouth of
cosenage. They that vaunt, do it not: and they that pretend least, accomplish
most. High-spirited Pierce do it indeed, that thou crakest in vain; and I
will honor thy work, that scorn thy word. When there was no need, thy
breath was the mouth of Aetna; and like a Cyclops, thou did forge thunder in
Mongibello: now the warringe Planet was expected in person, and the Fiery
Trigon seemed to give the Alarm; thou talkeste of Cattes meat and Dogs
meat enough: and wilt try it out by the teeth at the sign of the Dogs-head in
the pot. Oh, what a chatering Monky is here: and oh what a dog-fly, is the
dogstarr proved? Elderton would have answered this geere out-of-cry: or had I
the wit of Scoggin, I could say some thing to it: but I looked for Cattes
meat in aqua fortis, and Dogs meat in Gunpowder; and can no skill of these
terms, steeped in thy mothers gutter, and thy fathers kennel. Na, if you will
needs strike it as dead as a door nail; and run upon me with the blade of
Cattes meat, and the fierbrond of Dogges-meate: I have done. Or in case your
meaning be, as you stoutely protest, to trounce me after twenty in the hundred,
and to have about with me, with two staves, and a pyke, like a tall fellow of
Cracouia: there is no dealing for short weapons. Young Martin was an old
hackster: and had you played your masters pryzes in his time, he peradventure
durst have looked those two staves in the face, and would have desired that
pike of some more acquaintance: but Truce keep me out of his hands, that
fights furiously with two staves of Cattes meat and a pyke of Dogs meat:
and is resolutely bente, the best blood of the brothers shall pledge him in
vinegar. Happy, it is noe worse, then vinegar; a good sauce for Cattes meat,
and Dogs meat. Gentlemen, you that think prommisse a bond, and use to
perform more, then you threaten; never believe Braggadocio again for his
sake. When he has done his best, and his worst: trust me, or credit your own
eyes, his best Best is but Cattes meat, and his worst Worst but Doggs-meate
enough. What should I go circuiting about the bushe? He takes the shortest
cut to the wood, and dispatcheth all controversies in a few significant
terms: not those of Gunpowder, which would ask some charging, and
discharging: but these of dogges-meat, which are up with a vomit. He that is
not so little, as the third Cato from heaven, or the eight wiseman upon earth,
may speak with authority; and christen me a Dunse, a fool, an idiot, a dolt,
a goose-capp, an ass, and I wot not what, asifilthy, as filthy may be. Dogged
Impude^cy has his proper Idiotisme; and very clarkly scholeth the ears of
Modesty, to spell, Fa-fe-fi-fo-fu. Simple wits would be dealt plainly
withal: I stand not upon coye or nice points; but am one of those, that would
gladly learn their own imperfections, errors, and follies, in
specialissimaspecie: Be it known unto all men by these presents, that Thomas
Nashe, from the topp of his wit looking down upon simple creatures, calls
Gabriell Haruey a Dunse, a fool, an idiot, a dolt, a goose-capp, an ass, and
so fourth: (for some of the residue, is not to be spoken but with his own
manerly mouth): but the wise man in printe, should have done well in his
learned Confutation, to have showed particulerlie, which words in my Letters,
were the words of a Dunse: which Sentences, the sentences of a fool: which
Arguments, the arguments of an Idiot: which Opinions, the opinions of a dolt:
which Judgments, the judgments of a goose-cap: which Conclusions, the
conclusions of an Ass. Either this would be dun, (for I suppose, he would be
loath to prove some Asses, that in favor have written otherwise, and in reason
are to verify their own testimonies): or he must be feign himself, to eat
his own Cattes-meate, and Dogges-meat: and swallow-downe a Dunse, a fool, an
idiot, a dolt, a goose-cap, an ass in his own throat; the proper case of his
filthiest excrements, and the sink of the famous rascal; that had rather be a
Poulcatt with a stinkinge stur, then a musk-cat with gracious favor. Pardon me
gentle Ciuilit^e: if I did not tender you, and disclame impudency, I could do
him some piece of right; and show him his well favored face in a Cristall, as
true as Gascoignes steele-glas. But trust him not for a dodkin (it is his own
request) if I ever did my Doctors Acts: which a thousand heard in Oxforde; and
some knew to be done with as little premeditation, as ever such acts were
done: (for I answered upon the questions, that were given me by Doctor
Cathedrae, but two days before; and read my Cursory Lecture with a days
warning:) or if I be not A F awne-guest Messenger between M. Christopher Bird,
in whose company, I never dined, or supped these six years, and M. Emmanuell
Demetrius, with whom I never drank to this day. Other matters, touching her
Highness affability toward Scholars, (so her Majesty's favor toward me
must be interpreted:) the Privy watchword of honorable men in their Letters
Commendatory, even in the highest degree of praising, (so our high
Chauncellours commendation must be quallified:) Nashes grave Censure of
Public Inuectiues, and Satyrs, (so Harueyes slight opinion of contentious,
and seditious Libels must be crosbitten:) his testimony of Ciceroes consolation
ad Dolabellam, (which he will needs father upon me in reproach, though his
betters will never pen such a peec of Latin, whosoever were the Stepp-Tully:) his
derision of the most profitable, and valorous Mathematical Arts, (whose
industry has atcheeued woonders of mightier puissance, then the labors of
Hercules:) his contempt of the worthiest persons in every faculty, (which he
always censureth as his punyes, and underlings:) his palpable Atheism, and
drinkinge a cupp of Lammeswool to the Lamb of God: his gibinge at Heaven, (the
haven, where my deceased brother is arrived,) with a deep cut out-of his
Gramer rules; Astra petit disertus: the very stars, are scarres, where he
lists: and a hundred such, and such Particularities; that requier sum larger
Discourse; show him to be a youngman of the greenest spring, as beardles in
judgment, as in face; and as Penniles in wit, as in purse. It is the least of
his famous adventures, that he undertakes to be Greenes advocate: as divine
Plato assayed to defend Socrates at the Bar: and I know not whether it be the
least of his dowtye exploites, that he salueth his friends credit, as that
excellent disciple saved his masters life. He may declare his dear affection
to his Paramour; or his pure honestye to the world; or his constant zeal to
play the Devils Orator: but noe Apology of Green, like Greenes Grotes-worth
of wit: and when Nash will indeed accomplish a work of Supererogation, let
him publish, Nashes Penniworth of Discretion. If he be learneder, or wiser then
other, in so large an assise, as should appear by the report of his own
mouth; it is the better for him: but it were not amiss, he should sumtime
looke-backe to the budget of Ignorance, and Folly, that hangs behind him; as
otherwhiles he condescendeth to glaunce at the satchell of his grammar books.
Calumny, and her coosen-german Impudency will not always houldout rubbers: and
they need not greatly brag of their harvest, that make Fantasy the root,
vanity the stalk, Follye the ear, Penurye the cropp, and Shame the whole
substance of their studdies. To be ouer-bould with one, or two, is something:
to be saucy with many, is much: to spare few, or none, is odious: to be
impudent with all, is intolerable. There were fair play enough, though foul
play were debarred but Boys, fools, and knaves, take all in snuff, when the
variance might be debated in the language of Courtesy: and nothing but
horseplay will serve, where the colt is disposed to play the jade. Did I list
to persecute him in his own vain, or were I not restrained with respective
terms of divine, and civil moderation: o Aretin, how pleasurably might I
canuas the bawling cur, in a tossing sheet of paper: or o Gryson, who could
more easily discover a new Art of riding a headstrong beast? But that which
Nashe accounts the bravery of his wit, and the dubble creast of his style, I
am in discretion to cut-of: and in modesty yield it his only glory, to have
the fowlest mouth, that I ever saw, and the strongest breath, that I ever
fealt. When witty girding fails, as it pitifully fails in every page of
that Superarrogatory work: Lord, what odious baggage, what rascal stuff, what
villainous trumpery filleth-vpp the leaf: and how egregiously would he play
the vengeable Sycophant, if the conueiance of his Art, or wit, were in any
measure of proportion, correspondent to his pestilent stomach? But in the
fellest fit of his Furye, even when he runs upon me with openest mouth, and
his Spite like a poisonous toade, swells in the full: as if some huge timpany
of wit would presentlye possess his brain; or some horrible Fiery Spright
would fly in my face, and blast me to nothing: then good Dick Tarleton is
dead, and nothing alive but Cattes-meat, and Dogges-meat enough. Na, were it
not, that he hadd dealt politiquely, in prouidinge himself an autenticall
suerty, or rather a mighty protector at a pinch, such a devoted friend, and
inseparable companion, as Aeneas was to Achates, Pylades to Orestes, Diomedes
to Ulysses, Achilles to Patroclus, and Hercules to Theseus: doubtless he had
been utterly undone. Compare old, and new histories, of far, and near
countries: and you shall find the late manner of Sworn Brothers, to be no new
fashion, but an ancient guise, and heroical order; devised for necessity,
continued for security, and mainetayned for proffite, and pleasure. In brauest
actions, in weightiest negotiations, in hardest distresses, in how many cases,
One man, no-boddy; and a daily friend, as necessary, as our daily bread. No
treasure, more precious: no bond, more indefesible: no castle, more
impregnable: no force, more invincible: no truth, more infallible: no element,
more needful; then an entire, and assured associate; ever pressed, as well in
calamity to comfort, or in adversity to relieve, as in prosperity to
congratulate, or in aduancemente to honor. Life is sweet, but not without
sweet society: and an inward affectionate friend, (as it were another The Same,
or a second Self,) the very life of life, and the sweet-harte of the heart.
Nashe is learned, and knows his Leripup. Where was Euryalus, there was Nisus:
where Damon, there Pythias: where Scipio, there Laelius: where Apollonius,
there Damides: where Proclus, there Archiadas: where Pyrocles, there Musidorus:
where Nashe, there his Nisus, his Pythias, his Laelius, his Damides, his
Archiadas, his Musidorus; his indivisible companion, with whose puissant help
he conquereth, wheresoever he raungeth. Na, Homer nor such an author for
Alexander: nor Xenophon for Scipio: nor Virgil for Augustus: nor Justin for
Marcus Aurelius: nor Liuy for Theodosius Magnus: nor Caesar for Selymus: nor
Philip de Comines for Charles the fifth: nor Macchiauell for some late princes:
nor Aretin for some late Curtesans; as his Author for him; the sole author of
renowned victory. Marvel not, that Erasmus has penned the Encomium of Folly;
or that so many singular learned men have labored the commendation of the
Ass: he it is, that is the godfather of writers, the superintendent of the
press, the muster-maister of innumerable bands, the General of the great
feilde: he, and Nashe will confute the world. And where is the Aegles quill,
that can sufficiently advance the first spoils of their new conquestes? Whist
sorry pen, and be advised how thou presume above the highest pitch of thy
possibility. He that has christened so many notable authors; censured so
many eloquent pens; enrowled so many worthy garrisones; and encamped so many
noble, and reverend Lords; may be bold with me. If I be an Ass, I have
company enough: and if I be no Ass, I have favor to be enstalled in such
company. The name will shortly grow in request, as it sometime flourished in
glorious Room: and who then will not sue, to be free of that honorable
Company? Whiles they are ridden, I desire not to be spared: when the hott-spurr
is aweary with tyring them, he will scarsly troble himself with a skin. Or if he
do, I may chance acquaint him with a secret indistillation; He that drinks
Oil of pricks, shall have much adooe to void syrup of roses; and he that
eats nettles for prouander, has a priuiledg to piss upon Lillyes for
litter. Poules wharfe honor the memory of oulde John Hester, that would not
stick with his friend for twentye such experimentes; and would often tell me
of A Magistral unguent for all sores. Who knows not that Magistrall unguent,
knows nothing: and who has that magistral unguent, fears no gunshott. The
Confuter meant to be famous, like Poggius, that altobe-assed Valla,
Trapezuntius, and their defendantes, many learned Italians: or might have given
a guess at some possible afterclaps, as good as a prognostication of an
after-winter. Though Pierce Penniles, for a spurt were a rank rider, and like
an arrant knight ouerran nations with a carreer; yet Thomas Nashe might have
been advised, and in policy have spared them, that in compassion favored
him; and were unfeignedly sorry, to find his miserable estate, as well in his
style, as in his purse, and in his wit, as in his fortune. Some complexions
have much adooe to alter their nature: and Nashe will carry a tache of Pierce
to his grave, (we have worse proverbs in english:) yet who seeith not, what
apparent good, my Letters have done him, that before ouercrowed all comers,
and goers with like discretion, but now forsooth has learned some few
handsome terms of respect, and very manerly beclaweth a few, that he might
the more licentiously besmeere one. S. Fame give him joy of his black cole,
and his white chalk.

Who is not limed with some default; or who reddier to confess his own
imperfections, then miselfe? but when in professed hatred, like a mortal
feudist, he has uttered his very uttermost spite, and wholly disgorged his
ra^corous stomach: yet can he not, so much as devise any particularaction of
trespass, or object any certain vice against me, but only one grievous crime,
called Pumps, and Pa^tofles, (which indeed I have worn, ever since I knew
Cambridge,) and his own dearest hart-root, Pride: which I protest before God,
and man, my soul in judgment as much detesteth, as my body in nature lotheth
poison; or any thing abhors his deadlye enemy, even amongst those creatures,
which are found fatally contrary by natural Antipathy. It is not excess, but
defecte of pride, that has broken the head of some men's preferment. Aspiring
minds can soar aloft: and Self-conceit, with the countenance of Audacity,
the tongue of Impudency, and the hand of Dexterity, preaseth bouldly into the
forwardest throng of the shouldring rank: whiles Discretion has leisure to
discourse, whether somedeale of Modesty were meeter for many, that presume
above their condition; and some deal of Selfe-liking fitter for some, that
have fealt no greater want, then want of Pride. It may seem a rude
disposition, that sorteth not with the quality of the age: and Policy deemeth
that virtue a vice, that modesty, simplicity, that resolutenes, dissolutenes,
that conformeth not it self, with a supple and deft correspo^dence to the
present time: but no such ox in my mind, as Tarquinius Superbus: no such
calfe, as Spurius Maelius: no such colt, as Publius Clodius: no such Ape, as
Lucians Rhetorician, or the Devils Orator. Blind ambition, a noble bayarde:
proud arrogance, a goulden Ass: vain conceit, a gaudy Peacocke: all bravery,
that is not effectual, a gay nothing. He vpbraideth me with his own good
nature: but where such an insolent braggard, or such a pussing thing, as
himself: that in magnifying his own babble, and debasing me, reuileth them,
whose books, or pantofles he is not worthy to bear. If I be an Ass, what
asses were those courteous friends, those excellent learned men, those
worshipful, and honorable personages, whose Letters of undeserved, but
singular commendation may be shown? What an ass was thiselfe, when thou did
publish my praise amongst the notablest writers of this realm? or what an Ass
art thiself, that in the spitefullest outrage of thy maddest Confutatio^, do
otherwhiles enterlace some remembrances of more account, then I can acknowledge
without vanity, or desire without ambition? The truth is, I stand as little
upon others commendations, or mine own titles, as any man in England
whosoever; if there be nothing else to solicit my cause: but being so
shamefully and intollerably provoked in the most villainous terms of reproach, I
were indeed a notorious insensate ass, in case I should either sottishly
neglect the reputation of so worthy favorers, or utterly abando^ mine own
credit. Sweet Gentlemen, renowned knights, and honorable Lords, be not
ashamed of your Letters, imprinted, or written: if I live, seeing I must either
live in tenebris with obloquy, or in luce with proof; by the leave of God, I
will prove miselfe no Ass. I speak not only to M. Bird, M. Spencer, or
Monsieur Bodin, whom he nothing regards: (yet I would his own learning, or
iudgmente were any way matchable with the worst of the three:) but amongst a
number of sundry other learned, and gallant Gentlemen, to M. Thomas Watson, a
notable Poet; to M. Thomas Hatcher, a rare Antiquary; to M. Daniel Rogers of
the Court; to Doctor Griffin Floyd, the Queens professor oflawe at Oxforde;
to Doctor Peter Baro a professor of divinity in Cambridg; to Doctor Bartholmew
Clark, late Deane of the Arches; to Doctor William Lewen, Judge of the
prerogative Court; to Doctor John Thomas Freigius, a famous writer of Germany:
to Sir Philip Sidney; to M. Secretary Wilson; to Sir Thomas Smith; to Sir
Walter Mildmay; to milord the bishop of Rochester; to milord Treasurer; to
milord the Earl of Leicester: Unto whose worshipful and honorable favors I
have been exceedingly beholding for letters of extraordinary commendation;
such, as some of good experience have doubted, whether they ever voutsafed the
like unto any of either university. I beseech God, I may deserve the least
part of their good opinion, either in effectual proof, or in dutiful
thankefullnesse: but how little soever I presume of mine own sufficiency, (he
that knows himself, has small cause to conceive any high hope of low
means:) as in reason I was not to flatter miselfe with their bountiful
commendation; so in judgment I am not to agreeue miselfe with the odious
detraction of this pestilent libeller, or any like despiteous slanderer: but in
patience am to digest the one with moderation, as in temperance I qualified the
other with modesty. Some would say, what is the peeuishe grudge of one beggarly
rakehell, to so honorable liking of so many excellent, and some singular me^?
But god in heaven, teach me to take good by my adversaries inuectiue; and no
harm by my favorers approbation. It is neither the one, nor the other, that
deserves evil, or well; but the thing it self, that edifieth; without which,
praise is smoke; and with which, dispraise is fire. Let me enjoy that essential
point: and hawk, or hunt, or fish after praise, you that list. Many
contumelious, and more glorious reports have passed from Enemies, and Friends,
without cause, or upon small occasion: that is the only infamy, that cannot
acquit it self from guiltiness; and that the only honor, that is grounded
upon desert. Other winds of diffamation, want matter to uphold it: and other
shadows of glory, lack a body to support it. In unhappiness they are happy,
of whose bad amounts good; and in happiness they unhappy, whose good
proves bad: as glory eftsoons follows them, that fly from it, and flies
from them, that follow it. There is a Term Probatory, that will not ly: and
commendations are never autenticall, until they be signed with the seal of
approved Desert, the only infallible Testimonial. Desert, (maugre Envy, the
companion of Virtue) Socrates high way to Honor; and the total sum of
Osorius De Gloria. I will not enter into Macchiauels discourses, Iouius
Elogyes, Carda^s natiuities, Cosmopolites Dialogues, or later Histories in
diverse languages: but some worthelye continue honorable, whom they make
dishonorable, and contrariwise. Reason has an even hand, and dispenses to
every one his right: Art amplifieth, or extenuateth at occasion: the residue,
is the liberality of the pen, or the poison of the ink: in Logique,
Sophistry; in law, injury; in history, a fable; in divinity, a lie. Horace, a
sharp, and sententious Poet, after his pithy manner, comprizeth much in few
words: Falsus honor iuuat, and mendax infamia terret,


Quem nisi mendacem, and mendosum? For mine own part, I am reasonably resolute
both ways, and stand affraide of fantastical discredit, as I esteem
imaginatiue credit, or a contemplative banquett. It fitteth not with the
profession of a Philosopher, or the constancy of a man, to carrye the mind of
a child, or an youth, or a woman, or a slave, or a tyrant, or a beast. That
rests not in my power, to reform, or alter, I were very unwise if I should
not endure with patience, mittigate with reason, and contemn with pleasure.
Only I can be content in certain behoouefull respects, to yield a piece of a
satisfaction unto some, that requier it in affectionate terms: and what honest
mind, in case of mortality, has not a care, how the posterity may be
informed of him? Other reasons I have elsewhere assigned: and am here to present
a vow to Humility, in detestatio^ of that, which my disposition abhors.

As for his lewd supposals, and imputations of counterfeit praises, without
any probability of circumstance, or the least suspicion, but in his own
vengeable malicious head, the common forge of pestilent surmyzes, and arrant
slanders; they are like my imprisonment in the Fleet of his strong Fantasy,
and do but intimate his own skill in falsifying of evidence, and suborning of
witnesses to his purpose: he museth, as he uses; and the goodwife his mother
would never have sought her daughter in the Oouen, if herself had not been
well acquainted with such shifts of cunninge conueiance. He was never a non
proficient in good matters,; and has not studied his fellows Art of
Cunnycatching for nothing. Examine the Printers gentle Preamble before the
Supplication to the Devil: and tell me in good sooth, by the verdicte of the
Tuchstone, whether Pierce Penniles commend Pierce Penniles, or no; and whether
that sorry praise of the Author Thomas Nashe, be not loathsome from the mouth
of the Printer Thomas Nashe. In coniectural causes I am not to avouch any
thing; and I mentioned not any such supposition before: but the tenor of the
style, and as it were the identitye of the phrase, together with this new
descant of his profound insight in forgery, may after a sort tell tales out of
the title De Secretis non reuelandis; and yield a certain strong savor of a
vehement presumption. There is pregnant evidence enough, though I leave
probable co^rectures, and violent presumptions, where I found them. His Life
daily (...) his Style; and his Style notoriously bewraieth his Life. But what
is that to me, or the world, how Nashe lives; or how the poor fellow his
father has put him to his foisting, and scribbling shifts; his only gloria
patri, when all is done. Rule thy desperate infamous pen; and be the son
of a mule, or the printers Gentleman, or what thou will for me. If thou will
needs derive thy pettigree from the noble blood of the Kilprickes, and
Childeberds, kings of France: what commission have I to sit upon Genealogies,
or to call nobility in question? If thou beist disposed to speak as thou
live, and to live like Tonosconcoleros, the famous Babilonian king: in
curtesy, or in policy forbear one, that is not ouer-hasty to troble himself
with trobling other. What I have heard credibly reported, I can yet be content
to smother in silence: and nether threaten thee with Tiburne, nor Newgate, nor
Ouldgate, nor Counter, nor Fleet, nor any public penance; but wish thy
amendment: and dare not be too saucy with your good qualities, les you confute
my Maistership of Art, as you have done my Doctorship of Law. Never poor
Doctorship was so confuted. The best is, I dote not upon it; and would rather
be actually degraded, then any way disparage the degree, or derogate from them,
that are worthier ofit. Rest you quiet; and I will not only not struggle with
you for a title; but offer here to renounce the whole advantage of a late
inquisition, upon a clamorous denunciation of S. Fame herself: who presumed
she might be as bold to play the blab with you, as you were to play the slouen
with her. Or if your pen be so rank, that it cannot stand upon any ground,
but the soil of Calumny, in the muck-yard of Impudency: or your tongue so
laxatiue, that it must utterly utter a great horrible deal more then all;
whuist a while: and for your instruction, til some pregnanter lessons come
abroad, I will breefely tell you in your care, A certain familiar history; of
more then one or two breakefastes, wherein some eight or nine eggs, and a pound
of butter for your pore part, with Gods plenty of other victuals, and wine
enough, powred-in by quartes, and pottels, was a scant pittance for an
invincible stomach, two hours before his ordinary. I have readd of Apicius,
and Epicures Philosophy: but I perceive you mean not to be accounted a
Pythagorean, or a Stoique. What? gorge upon gorge, eggs upon eggs, and sack
upon sack at these years? Berlady, Sir Kilpricke, you must provide for a hott
kitchen against you grow old; if you purpose to live Doctor Pernes, or
Doctor Kenols years. Such egging and whitling may happen bring you acquainted
with the triumphant chariot of rotten eggs; if you take not the better order
in time, with one, or two of the seven deadly sins. I will not offend your
stomach with the nice and queint regiment of the dainty Platonistes, or pure
Pythagoreans: fine Theurgy, too-gant and meager a doctrine for the Devils
Orator: if the Art Notory, cannot be gotten without fasting, and praying,
muchgoditch-them that have it: let fantastical, or superstitious Abstinence,
dance in the aier, like Aristophanes clouds, or Apuleius witches: your own
method of those deadly sins, be your Castle of Health. No remedy, you must
be dieted; and lett-blood in the Cephalica vein of Asses, fools, doltes,
idiots, Dunses, dodipoules, and so forth infinitely: and never trust me, if you
be not as tame-tonged, and barren-witted, as other honest men of Lumbardy, and
the Low-Cuntries. Tushe man, I see deeper into thee, then thou seeist into thy
self: thou have a superficial tange of some little something, as good as
nothing; and a running wit, as fisking as any fisgig, but as shallow as
Trumpington foorde, and as slight as the new workmanship of guegawes to
please children, or of toys to mock apes, or of trinketts to conquer savages.
Only in that singular vein of asses, thou art incomparable; and such an
egregious arrant foole-munger, as lives not again. She knew what she said,
that entitled Pierce, the hoggeshed of wit: Penniles, the tospot of
eloquence: and Nashe, the very inuentor of Asses. She it is, that must broach
the barrel of thy frisking conceit, and canonise the Patriarch of new
writers.

I will not here decipher thy unprinted packet of bawdye, and filthy Rymes, in
the nastiest kind: there is a fitter place for that discovery of thy foulest
shame, and the whole ruffianisme of thy brothell Muse, if she still prostitute
her obscene ballatts, and will needs be a young Curtisan of old knavery. Yet
better a Confuter of Letters, then a confounder of manners: and better the
dogges-meate of Agrippa, or Cattes-meate of Poggius, then the swines-meate of
Martial, or goates-meate of Arretine. Cannot an Itahan ribald, vomit-out the
infectious poison of the world, but an Inglishe horrel-lorrel must lick it up
for a restoratiue; and attempt to putrify gentle minds, with the vilest
impostumes of lewd corruption? Phy on impure Ganimeds, Hermaphrodits,
Neronists, Messalinists, Dodecomechanists, Capricians, Inuentours of new, or
reuiuers of old leacheries, and the whole brood of venereous Libertines, that
know no reason, but appetite, no Law but Lust, no humanity, but villanye,
noe divinity but Atheism. Such riotous, and incestuous humors would be
launced, not feasted: the Devil is eloquent enough, to play his own Orator:
his Damme an old bawd, wants not the broccage of a young Poet: Wanton
sprites were always busy, and Duke Allocer on his lustye Cocke-horse, is a
whot Familiar: the sons of Adam, and the daughters of Eve, have noe need of
the Serpents carowse to set them agogg: Sodom still burns; and although
fire from heaven spare Gomorra, yet Gomorra still consumes itself. Even
amorous Sonnets, in the gallantest and sweetest civil vein, are but daintyes
of a pleasurable wit, or iunkets of a wanton liver, or buddes of an idle head:
whatsoever sprowteth farther, would be lopped. Petrarckes Invention, is pure
Love it self; and Petrarckes Elocution, pure Bewty it self: his Laura was the
Daphne of Apollo, not the T hisbe of Pyramus; a delitious Sappho, not a
lascivious Lais; a saving Hester, not a destroying Helena; a nymph of Diana,
not a Curtisan of Venus. Aretines muse was an egregious bawd, and a haggishe
witch of Thessalia: but Petrarcks verse, a fine loouer, that learneth of
Mercury, to exercise his fairest gifts in a fair subject; and teaches Wit to
be inamored upon Beautye: as Quicksiluer embraseth gold; or as virtue affects
honor; or as Astronomy gazeth upon heaven; to make Art more excellent by
contemplation of excellentest Nature. Petrarck was a delicate man, and with an
elegant judgment graciously confined Love within the limits of Honor; Wit
within the bounds of Discretion; Eloquence within the terms of Ciuility: as
not many years sithence, an Inglishe Petrarck did, a singular Gentleman, and a
sweet Poet; whose verse sings, as valor might speak; and whose ditty, is
an Image of the Sun, voutsafing to represent his glorious face in a cloud. All
posterity honor Petrarck, that was the harmony of heaven; the life of Poetry;
the grace of Art; a precious tablet of rare conceits, and a curious frame of
exquisite workmanship; nothing but neat Wit, and refined Eloquence. Were the
amorous muse of my enemy, such aliuely Spring of sweetest flowers, and such a
living Harvest of ripest fruits: I would abandon other loves, to dote upon that
mostlouely muse; and would debase the Dyamant in comparison of that most
Dyamant muse. But out-vpon rank, and loathsome ribaldry, that putrifieth, where
it should purify, and presumes to deflowre the most florishinge wits, with
whom it consorteth, either in familiarity, or by favor. One Ovid was too-much
for Room; and one Green too-much for London: but one Nashe more intolerable
then both: not because his wit is any thing comparable, but because his will
is more outrageous. Ferraria could scarcely brook Manardus, a poisonous
Physician: Mantua hardly bear Pomponatius, a poisonous Philosopher: Florence
more hardly tolerate Macchiauel, a poisonous politician: Venice most hardly
endure Arretine, a poisonous ribald: had they lived in absolute Monarchies,
they would have seemed utterly insupportable. Germany, Denmark, Sweden,
Polony, Boemia, Hungary, Moscouy, are noe soiles of any such wits: but
neither France, nor Spain, nor Turkey, nor any puissant kingdom, in one, or
other Monarchy of the old, or new world, could ever abide any such pernicious
writers, deprauers of common discipline. Ingland, since it was England, never
bred more honorable minds, more aduenturous hearts, more valoroushandes, or
more excellent wits, then of-late: it is enough for Filly-folly to intoxicate
it self, though it be not suffered to defyle the land, which the water
enuironeth, the Earth enritcheth, the aier ensweeteneth, and the Heaven
blesses. The bounteous graces of God are sown thick, but come up thin:
corruption had little need to be fostred: wantonness will be a nurse, a bawd, a
Poet, a Legend to itself: virtue has much-a do to holdout inuiolably her
purposed course: Resolution is a forward fellow, and Valor a brave man; but
affections are infections, and appetite must sometime have his swinge. Were
Appetite a loyal subject to Reason, and Will an affectionate servant to
Wisdom; as Labor is a dutiful vassal to Commodity, and Trauail a flying post
to Honor; o heavens, what exploites of worth, or rather what miracles of
excellency, might be atcheeued in an age of Policy, and a world of Industry.
The date of idle vanities is expired: away with these scribbling paltryes:
there is an other Sparta in hand, that indeed requires Spartan Temperance,
Spartan Frugality, Spartan exercise, Spartan valiancye, Spartan perseverance,
Spartan inuincibility: and has no wanton leisure for the Comedyes of Athens;
nor any bawdy hours for the songs of Priapus, or the rymes of Nashe. Had he
begun to Aretinize, when Elderton began to ballat, Gascoine to sonnet,
Turberuile to madrigal, Drant to versify, or Tarleton to extemporise; some
part of his fantastical bibble-bables, and capricious panges, might have
been tolerated in a green, and wild youth: but the wind is changed, and
there is a busier pageant upon the stage. M.Aschams Toxophilus long fithence
shot at a fairer mark: and M. Gascoigne himself, after some riper experience,
was glad to try other conclusions in the Low Countries; and bestowed an
honorable commendation upon Sir Humfrye Gilbertes gallant discourse, of a
discovery for a new passage to the East Indyes. But read the report of the
worthy Western discoueries, by the said Sir Humfry Gilbert: the report of the
brave West-Indian voyage by the conduction of Sir Frauncis Drake: the report of
the horrible Septentrionall discoueryes by the trauail of Sir Martin Forbisher:
the report of the politic discovery of Virginia, by the Colony of Sir Walter
Raleigh: the report of sundry other famous discoueryes, and adventures,
published by M. Rychard Hackluit in one volume, a work of importance: the
report of the hoatt wellcom of the terrible Spanishe Armada to the coast of
Inglande, that came in glory, and went in dishonor: the report of the
redoubted voyage into Spain, and Portugal, whence the brave Earl of Essex,
and the two valorous Generals, Sir John Norris, and Sir Frauncis Drake
returned with honor: the report of the resolute encounter about the Isles
Azores, bewixt the Revenge of Ingland, and an Armada of Spain; in which
encounter brave Sir Richard Grinuile most vigorously and impetuously attempted
the extremest possibilities of valor and fury: for breuity I ouerskipp many
excellent Traicts the same, or the like nature: but read these, and M. William
Borrowghes notable discourse of the variation of the compass, or magneticall
needle; annexed to the new Attractiue of Robert Norman Hydrographer: unto which
two, Ingland in some respects is as much beholding, as Spain unto Martin
Cortes, and Peter de Medina, for the Art of Navigations: and when you have
observed the course of Industry; examined the antecedents, and consequents of
Trauail; compared Inglish, and Spanish valor; measured the Forces of both
parties; weighed every circumstance of Advantage; considered the Means of our
assurance and finally found proffit to be our pleasure, provision our security,
labor our honor, warfare our welfare: who of reckoning, can spare any lewd,
or vain time for corrupt pamphlets; or who of judgment, will not cry? away
with these paultringe fidlefaddles. When Alexander in his conquerous
expeditions visited the ruins of Troy, and reuolued in his mind the valiant
acts of the Heroical Woorthies there achieved; One offered to bring his
Majesty, the Harp of Paris: Let it alone, quoth he, it is the Harp of
Achilles, that must serve my turn. Paris upon his harp, sang voluptuous, and
lascivious Carols: Achilles harp was an instrument of glory, and a quier of
divine Hymns, consecrated to the honor of valorous Captains, and mighty
Conquerours. He regarded not the dainety Lydian, Ionian, or Aeolian Melody: but
the brave Dorian, and impetuous Phrygian Music: and waged Zenophantus to
inflame and enrage his courage with the furious notes of Battle. One Alexander
was a thousand Examples of Prowess: but Pyrrhus, the redoubted king of the
Epirots, was an other Alexander in tempestuous execution: and in a most-noble
resolution contemned the Vanities of unnoble Pastimes: in so much that, when
one of his Barons asked his Majesty, whether of the two Musicians, Charisius,
or Python, pleased his Highness better: Whether of the two, quoth Pyrrhus;
marry Polysperces shall go for my money. He was a brave Captain for the eye,
and a fit Musician for the ear of Pyrrhus. Happy Polysperces, that served
such a master: and happy Pyrrhus that commanded such a servant. Were some
demanded, whether Greenes, or Nashes Pamflets, were better penned: I believe
they would aunsweare; Sir Roger Williams Discourse of War, for Militare
Doctrine in Esse; and M. Thomas Digges Stratioticos, for Militare Discipline in
Esse. And whiles I remember the Princely care of Gelo, a famous Tyrant of
Sicill, (many tyrants of Sicill were very politic) that commanded his great
horse to be brought into the banqueting house, where other Lords called for
the Harp, other Knights for the Waits: I cannot forget the gallant discourse
of Horsemanship, penned by a rare gentleman, M. John Asteley of the Court:
whom I dare entitle our Inglish Xenophon; and marvel not, that Pietro
Bizzaro, a learned Italian, proposes him for a perfect Pattern of Castilios
Courtier. And thinking upon worthy M. Asteley, I cannot ouerpasse the like
labor of good M. Thomas Blundeuil, without due commendation: whose painful,
and skillfull books of Horsemanship, deserve also to be registered in the
Catalogue of Xenophontian works. What should I speak of the two brave
Knights, Musidorus, and Pyrocles, combined in one excellent knight, Sir Philip
Sidney; at the remembrance of whose worthy, and sweet Virtues, my heart
melts? Will you needs have a written Palace of Pleasure, or rather a
printed Court of Honor? Read the Countess of Pembrookes Arcadia, a gallant
Legendary, full of pleasurable accidents, and proffitable discourses; for three
things especially, very notable; for amorous Courting, (he was young in
years;) for sage counselling, (he was ripe in judgment;) and for valorous
fighting, (his sovereign profession was Arms:) and delightful pastime by way
of Pastoral exercises, may pass for the fourth. He that will Love, let him
learn to love of him, that will teach him to Live; and furnish him with many
pithy, and effectual instructions, delectably interlaced by way of proper
descriptions of excellent Personages, and common narrations of other notable
occurrences; in the vein of Salust, Liuy, Cornelius Tacitus, Iustine,
Eutropius, Philip de Comines, Guicciardine, and the most sententious
Historians, that have powdered their style with the salt of discretion, and
seasoned their judgment with the leaven of experience. There want not some
subtle Stratagems of importance, and some politic Secrets of priuitie: and
he that would skillfully, and bravely manage his weapon with a cunning Fury,
may find lively Precepts in the gallant Examples of his valiantest Duellists;
especially of Palladius, and Daiphantus; Zelmane, and Amphialus; Phalantus, and
Amphialus: but chiefly of Argalus, and Amphialus; Pyrocles, and Anaxius;
Musidorus, and Amphialus; whose lusty combats, may seem Heroical Monomachies.
And that the valor of such redoubted men, may appear the more conspicuous, and
admirable, by comparison, and interview of their contraries; smile at the
ridiculous encounters of Dametas, and Dorus; of Dametas, and Clinias: and ever
when you think upon Dametas, remember the Confuting Champion, more surquidrous
then Anaxius, and more absurd then Dametas: and if I should always hereafter
call him Dametas, I should fit him with a name, as naturally proper unto him,
as his own. Gallant Gentlemen, you that honor Virtue, and would enkindle a
noble courage in your minds to every excellent purpose; if Homer be not at
hand, (whom I have often termed the Prince of Poets, and the Poet of Princes)
you may read his furious Iliads, and cunning Odysses in the brave adventures of
Pyrocles, and Musidorus: where Pyrocles plays the dowty fighter, like Hector,
or Achilles; Musidorus, the valiant Captain, like Pandarus, or Diomedes; both,
the famous errant Knights, like AEneas, or Ulysses. Lord, what would himself
have proved in fine, that was the gentleman of Curtesy, the Esquier of
Industry, and the Knight of Valor at those years? Live ever sweet Book; the
silver Image of his gentle wit, and the golden Pillar of his noble courage:
and ever notify unto the world, that thy Writer, was the Secretary of
Eloquence; the breath of the Muses; the hoony-bee of the dayntiest flowers of
Wit, and Art; the Pith of moral, and intellectual Virtues; the arm of
Bellona in the field; the tongue of Suada in the chamber; the spirit of
Practice in esse; and the Paragon of Excellency in Print. And now whiles I
consider, what a Trompet of Honor, Homer has been to sturre-vp many worthy
Princes; I cannot forget the worthy Prince, that is a Homer to himself, a
Golden spur to Nobility, a Scepter to Virtue, a Verdure to the Spring, a
Sun to the day; and has not only translated the two divine Poems of
Salustius du Bartas, his heavenly Vrany, and his hellish Furies: but has readd
a most valorous Martial Lecture unto himself in his own victorious Lepanto, a
short, but heroical work, in meeter, but royal meeter, fit for a David's
harp. Lepanto, first the glory of Christendom against the Turk; and now the
garland of a sovereign crown. When young Kings have such a care of their
flourishing Prime; and like Cato, are ready to render an account of their
vacant hours; as if April were their July, and May their August: how should
gentlemen of years, employ the golden talent of their Industry, and travail:
with what feruency; with what vigor; with what zeal, with what incessant, and
indefatigable endeour: Phy upon fooleries: there be honorable woerkers to do;
and notable works to read. The aforementioned Bar^as, (whom elsewhere I have
styled the Treasurer of Humanity, and the Ieweller of Divinity) for the
highness of his subject, and the majesty of his verse, nothing inferior unto
Dante, (whom some Italians prefer before Virgil, or Homer,) a right
inspited, and enrauished Poet; full of chosen, grave, profound, venerable, and
stately matter; even in the next Degree to the sacred, and reverend style of
heavenly Divinity it self. In a manner the only Poet, whom Vrany has
voutsafed to Laureate with her own heavenly hand: and worthy to be alleged
of Divines, and Counselors, as Homer is quoted of Philosophers, and Orators.
Many of his solemn verses, are oracles: and one Bartas, that is, one French
Salomo^, more weighty in stern, and mighty counsel, then the Seven Sages of
Greece. Never more beauty in vulgar Languages: but his style adds favor, and
grace to beauty; and in a goodly Boddy represents a puissant Soul. How few
verses carry such a personage of state? or how few arguments, such a spirit
of majesty? Or where is the divine instincte, that can sufficiently commend
such a volume of celestial inspiration? What a judgment has the noble youth,
the harvest of the Spring, the sapp of Apollos tree, the diadem of the Muses,
that leaves the enticingest flowers of delight, to reap the maturest fruits
of wisdom? Happy plants, that speedily shew-foorth their generous nature: and
a sovereign good possesses those worthy minds, that suffer not their
affections to be inueigled, or entangled with any unworthy thought. Great
Excercises become great personages: as the Magnes approoueth his Nobility in
commanding Iron, and taming the Sea: baser, or meaner pastimes belong unto
meaner Persons; as Iett discovers his gentry, in drawing chafe, hairs, and
such trifles. A meet quality for Iett, or a pretty feate for Amber, to iuggle
chafe, festues, or the like weighty burdens: but excellent minds are
employed, like the noble Magnes, and ever conversant either in effecting, or in
perusing, or in penning excellent works. It were an impossible attempt, to do
right unto the great Captain, Monsieur de la Noe, and the brave soldiour, the
French King himself, two terrible thunderboltes of war, and two impetuous
whirlewinds of the Field: whose writings are like their actions, resolute,
effectual, valiant, politic, vigorous, full of aerie, and fiery spirit,
honorable, renowned wheresoever Valor has a mouth, or Virtue a pen. Could
the Warlie Horse speak, as he can run, and fight, he would tell them, they
are hot Knights: and could the bluddy Sword write, as it can sheare, it would
dedicate a volume of Fury unto the one, and a monument of Victory unto the
other. Albeit men should be malicious, or forgetful, (Spite is malicious, and
Ingratitude forgetful) yet Prowess has a Cloven Tongue; and teaches
Admiration in a fiery language to plead the glorious honor of emproued
valiancy.

Some accuse their destiny: but blessed Key, that opens such locks: and
lucky, most lucky fortune, that yields such ve^tue. Brave Chiualry, a
continual witness of their valor and terribility in war: and gallant
Industry, the daily bread of their life, in peace, or truce. Report shining
Sun, the days work of the King: and burning Candle, relat^ his
Nightes-studdy: and both ridd me of an (...) For who ever praised the wonders
of Heaven?

And what an infinite course were it, to runne-thorough the particular
commendations of the famous redoubted (...) or then (...) pregnant writers of
this age, even in the most-puissant Heroieall, and Argonauticall kind?

Nimble Entelechy has been a stranger in some Countries: albeit a renowned
Citisen of Greece; and a free Denisen of Italy, Spain, Fra^nce, and Germany:
but welcome the most-naturall inhabitant of the (...), the fail of the ship,
the flight of the bow, the shot of the gunne, the wing of the Eagle, the
quintessence of the mind, the course of the sun, the motion of the heavens,
the influence of the stars, the heat of the fire, the lightness of the
Air, the swiftness of the wind, the stream of the water, the frutefulnesse
of the Earth, the singularity of this age: and thank thy most-vigorous felfe
for so many precious works of divine fury, and powerable consequence;
respectively comparable with the richest Treasuries, and brauest armories of
Antiquity. Thvise happy, or rather a thousand times-happie Creature, that
with most advantage of all honorable opportunities, and with the extremest
possibility of his whole powers, inward, or outward; emploieth the
most-excellent excellency of humane, or divine Nature. Other Secrets of
Nature, and Art, deserve an high reputation in their several degrees, and may
challenge a souerain interteinement in their special kinds: but Entelechy is
the mystery of mysteries under heaven, and the head-spring of the powerfullest
Virtues, that divinity infuseth, humanity imbraceth, Philosophy admireth,
wisdom practices, Industry emproueth, valor extends; or he conceived,
that conceiving the wonderful faculties of the mind, and astonished with the
incredible force of a ravished, and enthusiasticall spirit; in a profound
contemplation of that eleuate, and transcendent capacity, (as it were in a
deep ecstasie, or Seraphicall vision,) most-pathetically cryed-out; o magnum
miraculum Homo. No marvel, o great miracle, and o most powerful Entelechy,
though thou seemist A Pilgrim to Dametas, that art the Familiar Spirit of
Musidorus: and what wonder, though he empeach thy estimation, that despises
the graces of God, flowteth the constellations of heaven, frumpeth the
operations of nature, mocketh the effectuallest and auayllablest Arts,
disdayneth the name of Industry, or Honesty, scometh whatsoever may appear
Virtuous, fawneth only upon his own conceits, claweth only his own fauorits,
and quippeth, bourdeth, girdeth, asseth the excelle^test writers of whatsoever
note, that tickle not his wa^ton sense. Nothing memorable, or remarkable with
hm, that feasteth not the riotous appetite of the ribald, or the humorous
conceit of the pha^tast. It is his S. Fame, to be the infamy of learning: his
reformation, to be the corruption of his reader: his felicity, to be the
misery of youth: his health, to be the scurfe of the City, the scabbe of the
University, the bile of the Realm: his salvation, to be the damnation of
whatsoever is termed good, or accounted honest. Sweet Gentlemen, and flourishing
youths, ever aim at the right line of Art, and Virtue, of the one for
knowledge, of the other for valor: and let the crooked rectify itself.
Resolution wandreth not, like an ignorant Traveler, but in every enterprise,
in every affair, in every studdie, in every cogitation leuelleth at some
certainty; and always has an eye to Use, an ear to good report; a regard to
worth, a respect to assurance, and a reference to the end. He that erreth,
erreth against Truth, and himself: and he that sins, sins against God,
and himself: he is none of my charge: it suffiseth me to be the Curate of mine
own actions, the master of mine own passions, the friend of my friends, the
pittyer of my enemies, the loouer of good wits, and honest minds, the
affectionate servant of Arts, and Virtues, the humble Orator of noble Valor,
the Commender of the foresaid honorable writings, or any commendable works.
Reason is no man's tyrant: and Duty every man's vassal, that deserves well.
Would this pen were worthy to be the slave of the worthiest actours, or the
bondsman of the aboue-mentioned, and the-like important Autours. Such
Mercuriall, and Martial Discourses, in the active, and chiualrous vein;
plead their own eternal honor: and write everlasting shame in the forhead
of a thousand frivolous, and ten thousand fantastical Pamflets. I would to
Christ, some of them were but idle toys, or vain trifles: but impuritie never
presumed so much of impunitie: and licentious folly by privilege, lewd
ribaldrie by permission, and rank villainy by conniuence, are become famous
Autours: not in a popular state, or a petty-principalitie, but in a souerain
Monarchy, that tendereth politic government, and is to fortify itself
against foreign hostility. If Wisdom say not, Phie for shame; and Authority
take not other order in convenient time: who can tell, what general plague may
ensue of a special infection? or when the kinges-euill is past cure, who can
say, we will now heal it? The baddest weed, grows fastest: and no Gangrene
so pregnantly dispreddeth itself, as riott. And what riott so pestiferous, as
that, which in sugared baits presents most poisonous hooks? Sir Skeleton, and
Master Scoggin, were but Innocents to Signior Capricio, and Monsieur Madness:
whose pestilent canker (...) all the Medicine of Earth, or heaven.

My writing, is but a private note for the public aduertiseme^t of some few:
whose youth asks instruction, and whose frailty needs admonition. In the
cure of a canker, it is a general rule with Surgeo^s: It never perfectly
heals, unless the roots and all be utterly extirped; and the flesh
regenerate. But the soundest Principle is: Principijs obsta: and it goes best
with them, that never knew, what a canker, or leper meant.

I still hoped for some graffes of better fruit: but this grand Confuter of my
Letters, and all honesty, still proceeds from worse to worse, from the
wilding-tree to the withie, from the dog to the goat, from the catt to the
swine, from Primerose hill to Colman hedge: and is so rooted in deep Vanity,
that there is no end of his profound folly. Which deserves a more famous
Encomiasticall Oration, then Erasmus renowned Folly: and more gloriously
disdaineth any cure, then the Gout. I may answer his hot rauing in cold
terms: and convince him of what notorious falsehood, or villainy I can: but
see the fra^ke spirit of a full stomach: and who ever was so parlously
matched? Were not my simplicity, or his omnisuficiencie exceeding great; I had
never been thus terriblie ouerchalle^ged. Gabriel, if there be any wit, or
industry in thee, now I will dare it to the uttermost: write of what thou will, in what language thou will, and I will confute it, and answer it. Take
Truths part, and I will pro^ue truth to be no truth, marching out of thy
doung-voiding mouth: and so forth in the brauing tenor of the same redoutable
style. Good Gentlemen, you see the sweet disposition of the man; and need no
other window into the closet of his conscience, but his own Gloss upon his
own Text. Whatsoever poor I say, in any matter, or in any language, albeit
Truth auerr and justify the same, he will flatly deny, and confute, even
because I say it; and only because in a frolic and dowtie iollitie, he will
have the last word of me. His Grammar, is his Catechism; Si ais, nego: his
stomach, his Dictionarie in any language: and his quarrel, his Logique in any
argument: Lucian, Julian, Aretin, I protest were you ought else but abominable
Atheists, that I would obstinatly defend you, only because Laureate Gabriel
articles against you. Were there not otherwise a marvelous odds, and
incomprehensible difference betwixt our habilities, he would never dare me,
like a bold Pandare, with such stout challenges, and glorious protestations:
but singular wits have a great advantage of simple men: and ^unning Falsehood
is a mighty confuter of plain Truth.

No such champion, as he that fights obstinatly with the target of
Confidence, and the long-sword of Impudence. If any thing extraordinarily
emprooueth valor, it is Confidence: and if any thing miraculously
singularizeth wit, it is Impudence. Distrust, is a natural fool: and
Modesty, an artificial fool: he that will exploit wo^dermentes, and karrie
all before him, like a sweepe-stake, must have a heart of Iron, a forhead of
Brass, and a tongue of Adamant. Pelting circumstances, mar brave executions:
look into the proceedinges of the greatest doers; and what have they more then
other men, but Audacitie, and Fortune?

Audendum est aliquid, Vinclis, and carcere dignum,
Si vis esse aliquid. Simplicity may have a guess at the Principles of the
world: and Nashe affects to seem a compound of such Elements; as bold, as
aeger, and as aeger, as a mad dog. He will confute me, because he will: and
he can conquer me, because he can. If I come upon him with a gentle reply, he
will welcome me with a fierce reioynder: for any my brief Triplication, he
will provide a Quadruplication at-large: and so forth in infinitu^, with an
vndauntable courage: for he swears, he will never leave me as long as he is
hable to lift a pen. Twenty such famous depositions proclaim his dowtie
resolution, and indefatigable hand at a pight field. Were I to begin again,
or cold I handsomely devise to give him the cleanly slipp, I would never deal
with a sprite of Coleman hedge, or a May-Lord of Primerose hill; that has all
humors in his liuerie, and can put conscience in a Vices coat. Na, he will
atchieue impossibilities; and in contempt of my simplicity, prove Truth a
counterfaict, and himself a true witness of falsest lies. But Lord, that so
invincible a Gentleman should make so solemn account, of confuting, and
reconfuting a person of so little worth in his valuation? Sweet man, what should
you think of troubling your-selfe with so tedious a course, when you might so
blithly have taken a quicker order, and may yet proceed more compendiously? It
had been a worthy exploit, and beseeming a wit of supererogation, to have
dipped a sopp in a goblet of re^ish wine; and naming it Gabriel, (for you are
now grown into great familiarity with that name) to have devoured him up at
one bit: or taking a pickle herring by the throat, and christening it Richard,
(for you ca^ christen him at your pleasure) to have swallowed him down with a
stomach. Did you never hear of detestable Jews, that made a picture of
Christ; and then buffetted, cuggelled, scourged, crucified, stabbed, pierced,
and mangled the-same most unmercifully? Now you have a pattern, I doubt not
but you can with a dexterity, choppof the head of a dead hoony-bee, and boast
you have stricken John, as dead as a doore-nayle. Other spoil, or victory (by
the leave of the foresaid redoubted daring) will prove a busy piece of work
for the son of a mule, a raw Grammarian, a brabling Sophister, a
counterfaict cranke, a stale rakehell, a piperly rymer, a stump-worne railer, a
dodkin author: whose two swords, are like the horns of an hodmandod; whose
courage, like the fury of a gad-bee; and whose surmounting bravery, like the
wings of a butterfly. I take no pleasure to call thee an Ass: but thou
proouest thi-selfe a Haddock: and although I say not, Thou art a fool, yet
thou will needs bewray thy diet, and disgorge thy stomach of the Lobster, and
coddeshed, wherewith thou did englutt thiselfe, since thy notorious surfett
of pikle herring, and dogfish. Thou art neither Dorbell, nor Duns, nor Thomas
of Aquine: they were three sharpedged, and quicksented schoolmen, full of
nimble wit, and intricate quiddities in their arguing kind, especially Duns,
and Thomas: but by some of thy cauilling Ergos, thou should seem to be the
spawne of Iauell, or Tartaret: and as very a crabfish at an Ergo, as ever
crawled-ouer Carters Logique, or the Posteriorums of Johannes de Lapide. When I
look upon thy first page (as I daily behold that terrible Emprese for a
recreation) still methinkes there should come flushing-out the great Atlas of
Logique, and Astronomy, that supported the orbs of the heavens by Art: or the
mighty Hercules of Rhetorique and Poetry, that with certain marvelous fine,
and delicate chains, drew after him the vassals of the world by the ears.
But examine his suttelliest Ergos, and taste his nappiest Invention, or daintiest
Elocution, (he that has nothing else to do, may hold himself occupied): and
Art will soon find the huge Behemoth of Conceit, to be the sprat of a pickle
herring and the hideous Leuiathan of Vainglorie, to be a (...) in Wit, a
periwinkle in Art, a dandiprat in Industry, a dodkin in Valu; and such a toy
of toys, as every right Scholar hisseth at in judgment, and every fine
Gentleman makes the Object of his scorn. He can rail: (what mad Bedlam
cannot rail?) but the savor of his railing, is grosely fell, and smells
noysomly of the pumpe, or a nastier thing. His gayest floorishes, are but
Gascoignes weeds, or Tarletons trickts or Greenes crankes, or Marlowes
brauados: his jests but the dregs of common fcurrilitie, or the shreds of the
theater, or the of-scouring of new Pamflets: his freshest nippitatie, but the
froth of stale inuentio^s, long-since loathsome to quick tastes: his shrouing
ware, but lenten stuff, like the old pickle herring: his lustiest verdure, but
rank ordure, not to be named in Civility, or Rhetorique: his only Art, and
the vengeable drift of his whole cunning, to mangle my sentences, hack my
arguments, chopp and change my phrases, wrinch my words, and hale every
fillable most extremely; even to the disioynting, and maiming of my whole
meaning. O times: o pastimes: o monstrous knauerie. The residue whatsoever,
has nothing more in it, then is usually in every ruffianly Copesmate, that
has been a Gra^mar scholar, reads riotous books, hanteth roisterly
company, delights in rude scoffing, and karrieth a desperate mind. Let him
be thoroughly perused by any indifferent reader whomsoever, that can iudiciously
discern, what is what; and will uprightly censure him according to his skill,
without partiality pro, or contra: and I dare undertake, he will affirm no
less, upon the credit of his judgment; but will definitiuely pronounce him,
the very Baggage of new writers. I could nominate the person, that under his
handwriting has styled him, The cockish challenger, the lewd scribler, the
offal of corruptest mouths, the draff of filthiest pens, the bagpudding of
fools, and the very pudding-pittes of the wise, or honest. He might have read
of four notable things, which many a iollie man weeneth he has at will, when
he has nothing less: much knowledge; sound wisdom; great power; and many
friends. And he might have heard of other four special things, that work the
destruction, or confusion of the forwardest practitioners: a headlong desire to
know much hastily a greedy thirst to have much suddenly; an ouerweening
conceit of themselves; and a surly contempt of other. I could peradventure
arread him his fortune in a fatal book, as verifiable, as peremptory: but I
love not to insult upon misery: and Destiny is a Judge, whose sentence
needs no other execution, but itself. No prevention, but deep repentance;
an impossible remedy, where deep bstinacie is grounded, and high Presumption
aspireth above the Moon. Hawtie minds may stie aloft, and hasten their own
overthrow: but it is not the wainscott forhead of a Rudhuddibras, that can
arreare such an huge opinion, as himself in a strong conceit of a mighty
conception, seems to trauaill withal: as it were with a flying Bladude,
attempting wonderments in the Air, or a Simon Magus, experimenting
impossibilities from the top of the Capitol. He must either accomplish some
greater work of Supererogation, with actual atchieuement, (that is now a
principal point): or immortalize himself the prowdest Vain sott, that ever
abused the world with foppish ostentation; not in one, or two pages, but in the
first, the last, and every leaf of his Strange News. For the end is like the
beginning; the midst like both; and every part like the whole. Railing,
railing, railing: bragging, bragging, bragging: and nothing else, but foul
railing upon railing, and vain bragging upon bragging; as rudely, grosely,
odiously, filthily, beastly, as ever shamed Print. Unless he meant to sett-vpp
a Railing School, and to read a public Lecture of bragging, as the only
regal professor of that, and that faculty, now other shifts begin to fail;
I wonder, his own mouth ca^ abide it without many a phah. You have heard some
worthy Premises: behold a brave conclusion: Awaite the world, the Tragedy of
Wrath:
What next I paint, shall tread no common Path:
with an other doubble Aut, for a gallant Emblem, or a glorious Farewell; Aut
nunquam tents, aut perfice. Subscribed with his own hand; Thomas Nash. Not
expect, or attend, but a wait: not somefew, some few, or the City, or the
University, or this Land, or Europe, but the World: not a Comedy, or a
Declamation, or an Inuectiue, or a Satire, or any like Elencticall discourse:
but a Tragedy, and the very Tragedy of Wrath; that shall dash the direfullest
Tragedies of Seneca, Euripides, or Sophocles, out of Conceit. The next piece,
not of his Rhetorique, or Poetry, but of his Painture, shall not tread the way
to Poules, or Westminster, or the Royal Exchange; but at least shall perfect
the Venus face of Apelles, or set the world an everlasting Sample of
inimitable artificiality. Other men's writing in prose, or verse, may plodd-on,
as before: but his Pamting will now tread Arare Path; and by the way bestow A
new Lesson upon Rhetorique, how to continue a metaphor, or uphold an Allegory
with advantage. The treading of that rare Path, by that exquisite Painting,
(his works are miracles; and his Painting, can tread, like his dancing, or
frisking, no common, but a proper Path) who expects not with an attentive, a
serviceable, a coouetous, a longing expectation? A wait world: and Apelles
tender thy most affectionate devotion, to learn a wonderful piece of curious
workmanship, when it shall please his next Painting to tread the path of his
most singular singularity. Meanewhile it has pleased soome sweet wits of my
acquaintance, (whom Heaven has baptized the Spirits of harmony, and the
Muses have enterteyned for their Paramours) to reacquite Sonnets with Sonnets,
and to snibb the Thrason^call rimester with Angelical meeter, that may happily
appear in fit place: and finely discover young Apuleius in his ramping roabe;
the fourth Fury in his Tragical Pageant; the new Sprite in his proper haunt,
or buttry; and the confuting Devil in the horologe. One She, and two He Is have
vowed, they will pumpe his Railing Inkhorne as dry, as ever was Holborne
Conduit: and squise his Craking Quill to as empty a sponge, as any in Hosier
Lane. Which of you, galla^t Gentlemen, has not stripped his stale Iestes into
their thredbare rags; or so seldom as an hundred times pitied his
creast-falne style, and his socket-worne invention? Who would have thought, or
could have imagined, to have found the wit of Pierce, so starued and clunged:
the conceit of an adversary, so weatherbeaten, and tired: the learning of a
scholar, so pore-blind, and lame: the elocutio^ of the Devils Orator, so
lanke, so wan, so meager, so blunt, so dull, so fordead, so ghastly, where the
masculine Fury meant to play his grisliest, and horriblest part? Welfare a
good visage in a bad cause: or farewell Hope, the kindest coosener of forlorn
hearts. The desperate mind, that assayeth impossibilities in nature, or
undertakes incredibilities in Art, must be content to speed thereafter. When
every attempt fails in performance, and every extremity foileth the
enterpriser, at-last even Impudency itself must be feign to giue-ouer in the
plain field: and never yield credit to the word of that most credible
Gentlewoman, if the very brazen buckler prove not finally a notorious
Dash-Nash. He summed all in a brief, but material Sum; that called the old
Ass, the great A, and the est Amen of the new Supererogation. And were I here
compelled to dispatch abruptly, (as I am presently called to a more commodious
exercise) should I not sufficiently have discharged my task; and plentifully
have commended that famous creature, whose praise the Title of this Pamflet
professes? He that would honor Alexander, may crown him the great A. of
puissance: but Pyrrhus, Hanniball, Scipio, Pompey, Caesar, diverse other mighty
Conquerours, and cue^ some modern Worthies would disdain, to have him sceptred
the est-Amen of Valor. What a brave, and incomparable Alexander, is that great
A. that is also the est-Amen of Supererogatio^; a more miraculous and
impossible piece of work, the^ the dowtiest puissance, or worthiest valor in
the old, or new world? Shall I say, blessed, or peerless young Apuleius, that
from the swathing bands of his infancy in Print, was suckled of the
sweetestnurses, lulled of the dearest grooms, cockered of the finest minio^s,
cowled of the daintiest paramours, hugged of the enticingest darlinges, and
more then tenderly tendered of the most delitious Muses, the most-amiable
Graces, and the most-powerfull Venues of the said unmatchable great A. the
graund founder of Supererogatio^, and sole Patron of such meritorious clients.
As for other remarkable Particulars in the Strange News; Ink is so like Ink,
spite so like spite, impudency so like impudency, brocage so like brocage,
and Tom-Penniles now, so like Papphatchet, when the time was; that I need but
ouerrun an old censure of the One, by way of a new application to the Other.
The notes of Martinisme appertain unto those, whom they concern. Pierce would
laugh, to be charged with Martinisme, or any Religion: though Martin himself
for a challenging, rufling, and railing: style, not such a Martin. Two
contraries; but two such contraries, as can teach Extremities to play the
contraries, and to confound themselves.

Papp-hatchet, desirous for his benefit, to currie favor with a noble Earl;
and in defect of other means of Commendatio^, laboring to insinuate himself
by smooth glosing, and cou^terfait suggestio^s, (it is a Courtlyfeate, to
snatch the least occasioner of advantage, with a nimble dexterity); some
years since provoked me, to make the best of it, inconsideratly; to speak
like a friend, unfriendly; to say, as it was, intolerably; without private cause,
or any reason in the world: (for in truth I looued him, in hope praised him;
many ways favored him, and never any way offended him): and notwithstanding
that spiteful prouocatio^, and even that odious threatening of ten years
provision, he had ever passed untouched with any syllable of revenge in Print,
had not Green, and this dog-fish, abhominably misused the verb passive; as
should appear, by his procurement, or encouragement, assuredly most
undeserved, and most injurious. For what other quarrel, could Green, or this
dogge-fish ever pick with me: whom I never so much as twitched by the sleeue,
before I found miselfe, and my dearest friends, vnsufferably quipped in most
contumelious, and opprobrious terms. But now there is no remedy, have
amongst you, blind Harpers of the Printing house: for I fear not six hundred
Crowders, were all your wits assembled in one capp of Vanity, or all your
galls united in one bladder of choler. I have lost more labor, then the
transcripting of this Censure: which I dedicate neither to Lord, nor Lady, but
to Truth, and Aequitie; on whose souerain Patronage Irelye.

An Advertisement for Pap-hatchet, and Martin Mar-prelate.
PAp-hatchet (for the name of thy good nature is pitifully grown out-of
request) thy old acquaintance in the Sauoy, when young Euphues hatched the
eggs, that his elder friends laid, (surely Euphues was someway a pretty
fellow: would God, Lilly had always been Euphues, and never Pap-hatchet;) that
old acquaintance, now somewhat straungely saluted with a new remembrance, is
neither lullabied with thy sweet Papp, nor scarre-crowed with thy sower
hatchet. And although in self-conceit thou know not thy self, yet in
experience, thou might have known him, that can Vnbutton thy vanity, and
Vnlase thy folly: but in pity spares thy childish simplicity, that in
judgment scorneth thy roisterly bravery; and never thought so basely of thee,
as since thou began'st to disguise thy wit, and disgrace thy art with
ruffianly foolery. He wins not most abroad, that weeneth most at-home: and
in my poor fancy, it were not greatly amiss, even for the pertest, and gayest
companions, (notwithstanding whatsoener courtly holly-water, or plausible hopes
of preferment) to deigne their old familiars the continuance of their former
courtesies, without contempt of the banainest gifts or empeachment of the
meanest persons. The (...) man in a parish, is a shrewd fool; and Humanity an
Image of Divinity; that pulleth-downe the hawty, and setteth-vp the meek.
Euphues, it is good to be merry: and Lilly, it is good to be wise: and
Papp-hatchet, it is better to loose a new jest, then an old friend; that can
cramme the capon with his own Papp, and hewe-downe the woodcocke with his own
hatchet. Bold men, and merchant Venturers have sometime good luck: but
happ-hazard has oftentimes good leave to beshrow his own pate; and to imbarke
the hardy fool in the famous Shipp of wisemen. I cannot stand nosing of
Candlestickes, or euphuing of Similes, alla Sauoica: it might happly be done
with a trice: but every man has not the gift of Albertus Magnus: rare birds
are dainty; and they are queint creatures, that are privileged to create new
creatures. When I have a mint of precious stones; and strange Fowls, beasts,
and fishes of mine own coining, (I could name the party, that in comparison of
his own natural Inventions, termed Pliny a barraine woombe;) I may
peradventure bless you with your own crosses, and pay you with the usury of
your own coin. In the mean while bear with a plain man, as plain as old
Accursius, or Barthol de Saxoferrato; that will make his Censure good upon the
carrion of thy unsavory, and stinking Pamflett; a fit book to be joined
with Scoggins works, or the French Mirror of Madness. The very Title
discovers the wisdom of the young man: as an old Fox not long since
bewrayed himself by a flap of his tail; and a Lion, they say, is soon
descried by his pawe; a Cock by his comb; a Goat by his bearde; an Ass by
his ear; a wiseman by his tale; an artist by his terms.

Papp with an hatchet: alias, A Figg for my God-sonne:
or, Crack me this nutt: or, a Country Cuffe,
that is, A sound box of the care, and caetera.
Written by one, that dares call a Dog a Dog.
Imprinted by John Anoke, and John Astile, for the Bailey
of Withernam, Cum priuilegio perennitatis:
And are to be sold at the sign of the Crabbtree Cudgel in
Thwacke-coate Lane.
What devise of Martin, or what invention of any other, could have set a
fairer Oriental Star upon the forhead of that foul libell? Now you see the
brande, and know the Blackamore by his face, turn over the leaf; and by the
wittiness of his first sentence, aim at the rest. Milk is like milk: hoony
like hoony: Papp like papp: and he like himself; in the whole anotable
ruffler, and in every part a dowty braggard. Room for a roister: so that's well
said: itch a little further for a good fellow: now have at you all, my gaffers
of the railing religion: it is I, that must take you a pegg lower. I Will make such
a splinter run into your wits: and so forth in the same lusty tenor. A
very artificial beginning, to move attention, or to procure good-liking in
the reader: unless he wrote only to roister-doisters, and hacksters, or
at-least to iesters, and vices. Oh, but in his Preamble to the indifferent
reader, he approves himself a marvelous discreet, and modest man of the
soberest sort, were he not provoked in conscience, to aunsweare contrary to his
nature, and manner. You may see, how grave men may be made light, to defend the
Church. I perceive, they were wise, that at riotous times, when youth was
wantonnest, and knavery lustiest, as in Christmas, at Shrofetide, in May, at
the end of Harvest, and by such wild fittes, created a certain extraordinary
Officer, called a Lord of Misrule, as a needful governor, or Dictatour, to
set things in order; and to rule unruly people; with whom otherwise there
were no Ho. So, when Reuell-rout begins to be a current Autour; or
Hurly-burly a busy Promotour: room for a roister, that will bore them thorough
the noses with a cushion; that will bung-vp their mouths with a Collyrium of
all the stale iestes in a country; that will suffer none to play the Rex, but
himself. For that is the very depth of his plot: and who ever began with more
roisterly terms; or proceeded with more ruffianly scoffs; or concluded with
more hairebrain'd tricks; or wearied his reader with more threadbare iestes;
or tired himself with more weather-beaten cranckes? What scholar, or
gentleman, can read such alehouse and tinkerly stuff without blushing? They
were much deceived in him, at Oxford, and in the Sauoy, when Master Absolon
lived; that took him only for a dapper and deft companion, or a
pert-conceited youth, that had gathered-togither a few pretty sentences, and
could handsomely help young Euphues to an old Simile: and never thought him any
such mighty doer at the sharp. Bur I Will, I Will, I Will, is a parlous fellow at a
hatchett: hese like Death: hele spare none: hele show them an Irish trick:
hele make them weep Irish: hese good at the sticking blow: his Posie, what
care I? Vie stabbes, good Ecclesiastical learning in his Apology; and good
Christian charity in his Homily. Muster his arrant braueries together: and
where such a terrible killcowe, or such a vengeable bullbeggar to deal withal?
O dreadful dubble V that carriest the dubble stoccado in thy pen, what a
dubble stabber would thou be, were thy hand as tall a fellow, as thy heart, or
thy wit as lusty a ladd, as thy mind? Other good fellows may tell Tales of
Gawin: thou art Sir Gawin revived, or rather Terror in person. Yet shall I
putt a bean into Gawins rattling scull: and tell thee, where thy slashing
Long-sword comes short? Thou professest Railing; and emproouest thiselfe in
very deed an egregious Railer, as disdaining to yield unto any He, or She
Scolde of this age: but what says my particular Analysis? Dubble V is
old-excellent at his Cornucopiae; and I warrant you, never to seek in his
Horne-booke: but debar thossame horeson Tales of a tubb; and put him beside
his Horning, Gaming, Fooling, and Knauing: and he is no boddy, but a few
pilfred Similes; a little Pedanticall Latin; and the highest pitch of his wit,
Bulls motion, alias the hangmans apron. His Ryme, forestalled by Elderton,
that has Ballats lying a steep in ale: his Reason, by a Cambrige wagg, a
twigging Sophister, that will Ergo Martin into an ague, and concludes
peremptorily, Therefore Tiburne must be furred with Martins: nothing left for
the Third disputer, but Railing thorough all the moodes, and figures of
knauerie, as they come fresh, and fresh to his hand. All three iumpe in eodem
tertio: nothing but a certain exercise, termed hanging, will serve their
turn: (if it be his destiny, what remedy?) they must draw cuttes, who shall
play the Hangeman: and that is the argument of the Tragedy, and the very papp
of the hatchet. These are yet all the Common-places of his great Paper-boke,
and the whole Inuentarie of his wit: though in time he may happily learn to
play at ninehole-nidgets; or to canuas a liuerie flowt thorough all the
Predicaments of the four, and twenty orders. When I first took a glancing
vewe of I Will, I Will, I Will, and durst scarsely, be so hardy, to look the hatchet in
the face: methought his Imagination, was hedded like a Saracen; his stomach
bellyed, like the great Globe of Orontius; and his breath, like the blast of
Boreas in the great Mapp of Mercator. But when we began to renew our old
acquaintance, and to shake the hands of discontinued familiarity, alas good
Gentleman; his mandillion was ouercropped; his wit paunched, like his wives
spindle; his art shanked, like a lath; his conceit as lank, as a shotten
herring; and that same blustering eloquence, as bleake, and wan, as the Picture
of a forlorn Loouer. Nothing, but pure Mammaday, and a few morsels of
fly-blowne Euphuisme, somewhat nicely minced for puling stomachs. But there be
Painters enough, though I go roundly to work: and it is my only purpose, to
speak to the purpose. I long sithence found by experience, how Dranting of
Verses, and Euphuing of sentences, did edify. But had I consulted with the
Prognostication of John Securis, I might peradventure have saved some loose
ends for afterclapps. Now his nephew Hatchet must be content to accept of such
spare intertainement, as he finds.

It was Martins folly, to begin that cutting vain: some others oversight, to
continue it: and doubble Us. triumph, to set it agogg. If the world should
applaude to such roisterdoisterly Vanity, (as Impudency has been prettily
suffered to sett-vpp the creast of his vaineglory:) what good could grow of it,
but to make cuery man madbrayned, and desperate; but a general contempt of all
good order, in Saying, or Doing; but an Universal Topsy-turuy? He were a very
simple Orator, a more simple politician, and a most-simple Divine, that should
favor Martinizing: but had I been Martin, (as for a time I was vainly
suspected by such madd Copesmates, that can surmize any thing for their
purpose, howsoever unlikely, or monstrous:) I would have been so far from
being moved by such a fantastical Confuter, that it should have been one of
my May-games, or August-triumphes, to have driven Officials, Commissaries,
Archdeacons, Deanes, Chauncellors, Suffraganes, Bishops, and Archbishops, (so
Martin would have flourished at the least) to entertain such an odd
light-headded fellow for their defense; a professed iester, a Hick-scorner, a
scoff-maister, a playmunger, an Interluder; once the foil of Oxford, now the
stale of London, and ever the Apesclogg of the press, Cum Priuilegio
perennitatis. Had it not been a better course, to have followed Aristotle's
doctrine: and to have confuted leuity with gravity, vanity with discretion,
rashness with advise, madness with sobriety, fire with water, ridiculous Martin
with reverend Cooper? Especially in Ecclesiastical causes: where it goes
hard, when Scoggin, the Iouiall fool, or Skeleton the Malancholy fool, or
Elderton the bibbing fool, or Will Summer the chollericke fool, must play the
feate; and Church Matters cannot be discussed without rank scurrillity, and
as it were a Synod of Diapason fools. Some few have a civil pleasant vain,
and a dainety spleen without scandale: some such percase might have repayed the
Marr-prelate home to good purpose: other obscenity, or vanity confuteth
itself, and impeacheth the cause. As good forbear an irregular fool, as
bear a fool heteroclitall: and better abide a comparatiue knave, that
pretends religion, then suffer a knave superlatiue, that sets cock on
hoope. Serious matters would be handeled seriously, not upon simplicity, but
upon choice; nor to flesh, or animate, but to disgrace, and shame Leuity. A
glicking Pro, and a frumping Contra, shall have much-adoe to shake hands in
the Ergo. There is no end of gird^s, and bobbes: it is sound Arguments, and
grounded Authorities, that must strike the definitive stroke, and decide the
controversy, with mutual satisfaction. Martin be wise, though Brown were a
fool: and Papp-hatchet be honest, though Barrow be a knave: it is not your
heauing, or hoising coile, that buildeth-vpp the walls of the Temple. Alas
poor miserable desolate most-woefull Church, had it no other builders, but
such architects of their own fantasies, and such maisons of infinite
contradiction. Time, informed by secrcte intelligence, or resolved by curious
discovery, spares no cost, or travail, to prevent Mischief: but employeth
her two worthy Generals, Knowledge, and Industry, to clear the coast of
vagarant errors in Doctrine; and to scour the sea of rouing conuptions in
Discipline. Room was not reared-vpp in one day; nor cannot be pulled down in
one day. A perfect Ecclesiastical Discipline, or autentique Policy of the
Church, (that may auowe, I have neither more, nor less, then enough; but just
the number, weight, and measure of exact government) is not the work of One
man whosoever, or of one age whatsoever: it requires an incredible-great
judgment: exceeding-much reading in Ecclesiastical histories, Councels,
Decrees, Laws: long, and ripe practice in Church-causes. Platformes offer
themselves to every working conceit; and a few Tables, or Abridgements are
soon dispatched: but, whatsoever pretext may coulerably be alleged,
undoubtedly they attempt, they know not what, and enterprise above the
possibility of their reach, that imagine they can in a Pamflet, or two,
contriue such an omnisufficient, and incorruptible Method of Ecclesiastical
government, as could not by any private meditation, or public occasion be
found-out, with the studdy, or practice of fifteen hundred years. I am not to
dispute, as a professed Divine; or to determine, as a severe Consour: but a
scholar may deliver his opinion with reason; and a friend may lend his advise
at occasion: especially when he is urged to speak, or suspected for silence.
They must license me to dissent from them, that autorise themselves to
disagree from fo many notable, and worthy men, in the common reputation of so
long a space. They condemn superstitious, and credulous simplicity: it were a
fond simplicity to defend it, where it swarueth from the Truth, or strayeth
out of the way: but discretion can as little commend opiniotiue and preiudicate
assertions, that strive for a needelesse, and dangerous Innovation. It is
neither the Excess, nor the Defect, but the Mean, that edifyeth.
Superstition, and Credulity, are simple Creatures: but what are Contempt, and
Tumult? What is the principal cause of this whole Numantine War, but
affectation of Nouelty, without ground? If all without exception, from the very
scholars of the Primitive, and heroical school, wanted knowledge, or zeal:
how rare, and singular are their blessings, that have both, in so plentiful,
and incomparable measure? Assuredly there were many excellent wits, illuminate
minds, and devout souls before them: if nothing matchable with them, what
greater Marvel in this age? Or if they were not rightly disciplined, that
lived so Virtuously, and Christianly together; what an inestimable treasure is
found, and what a clear fountain of holy life? Where are godly minds become,
that they embrace not that sacred society? What aile Religious hands, that
they stay from buildingvpp the City of God? Can Platos Republique, and Mores
Vtopia win hearts: and cannot the heavenly Jerusalem conquer souls? Can
there be a greater impiety, then to hinder the rearing-vp of those celestial
walls? why forgets the gross Church, that it ought to be the pure kingdom
of heaven? To zeal, even speed is delay; and a year, an age. But how
maturely, and iudiciously some busy motions have been considered-vpon by their
hot sollicitours, it would not pass unexamined. A strong Discipline stands
not upon feeble feet: and a weak foundation will never bear the weight of a
mighty Jerusalem. The great shoulders of Atlas oftentimes shrink and saint
under the great burden of heaven. The Tabernacle of Moses; the Temple of
Solomon; the Golden Age of the Primitive Church; and the silver regiment of
Constantine, would be looked-into, with a sharper, and cleerer eye. The
difference of Commonwealthes, or regiments, requires a difference oflawes, and
orders: and those laws, and orders are most souerain, that are most agreeable
to the regiment, and best proportioned to the Commonwealth. The matter of
Elections, and offices, is a principal matter in question: and how many not
only ignorant, or curious, but learned, and considerate wits, have lost
themselves, and found error, in the discourse of that subject? But how
compendiously might it be concluded, that is so infinitely argued; or how
quietly decided, that is so tumultuously debated? I rely not upon the
uncertainty of disputable rules; or the subtilitie of intricate arguments; or
the ambiguitie of doubtful allegations; or the casualtie of fallible
experiments: but ground my resolution upon the assurance of such politic,
and Ecclesiastical Principles, as in my opinion can neither be deceived
grosely, nor deceive dangerously. Popular Elections, and offices, as well in
Churches, as in Commonwealthes, are for popular states: Monarchies, and
Aristocraties, are to celebrate their elections, and offices, according to
their form of government, and the best correspondence of their states,
Civil, and Ecclesiastical: and may justify their good proceeding by good
divinity. As they gravely, and religiously proved, that in the flourishing
propagation, and mighty increase of the Catholic Church under Princes,
before, in, and after the Empire of Constantine, were driven to vary from some
primitive Examples: not by unlawful corruption, as is ignora^tly surmised; but
by lawful provision, according to the exigence of occasions, and necessity of
alteration in those ouerruling cases: as appears by pregnant evidence of
Ecclesiastical histories, and Canons; wherewith they are to consult, that
affect a deep insight in the decisio^ of such controversies; and not to leap
at all adventures, before they have looked about the^, as well backward, as
forward, and as well of the one side, as of the other. Consideration, is a good
Counselor: and Reading, no badd Reme^brancer; especially, in the most
essential Common-places of Doctrine, and the most important matters of
Government. Ignorance may someway be the father ofZeale, as it was wont to be
termed the moother of Devotion: but blind men swallow-downe many flies; and
none more, then many of them, that imagine they know all, and conceit an
absolute omnisufficiencie in their own platformes, with an universal contempt
of whatsoever contradiction, special, or general, modern, or ancient: when
undoubtedly they are to seek in a thousand points of requisite, and necessary
consideration. Lord, that men should so please, and flatter themselves in their
own devises: as if none had eyes, but they. God never bestowed his divine
gifts in vain: they are not so lightly to be rejected, that so gravely
demeaned themselves, instructed their brethren, reclaimed infidels, converted
countries, planted Churches, confounded Heretics, and incessantly travailed
in Gods causes, with the whole devotion of their souls: howsoever some can be
content to think, that since the Apostles, none ever had the spirit of
Understanding, or the minds of sincerity, but themselves. Pardon me pure
intelligences, and incorruptible minds. The ancient Fathers, and Doctors of
the Church, wanted neither learning, nor judgment, nor conscience, nor zeal:
as some of their Greek, and Latin works very notably declare: (if they were
blind, happy men that see:) and what wiser Senates, or hollyer Congregations,
or any way more reverend assemblies, then some General, and some Provincial
Councels? Where they to a superficial opinion, seem to sett-vp a Gloss,
against, or beside the Text; it would be considered, what their considerations
were; and whether it can appear, that they directly, or indirectly proceeded
without a respective regard of the Commo^wealth, or a tender care of the
Church, or a reverend examination of that Text. For I pray God, we love the
Text no worse, from the bottom of our hearts, then some of them did. They are
not the simplest, or dissolutest men, that think, Discretion might have leave
to cut his coat according to his cloth; and commend their humility, patience,
wisdom, and whole conformity, that were ready to accept any requisite order
not unlawful, and to admit any decent, or seemly rites of indifferent
nature. Put the case, just as it was then, and in those countries; and what if
some suppose, that even M. Calvin, M. Beza, M. Meluin, or M. Cartwright,
(notwithstanding their new deseignementes) being in the same estate, wherein
they were then, and in those countries, would have resolved no otherwise in
effect, then they determined. Or if they did not so perfectly well, I pray God
we may. Howbeit none so fit to reconcile contradictions, or to accord
differences, as he that distinguishes Times, Places, Occasions, and other
swaying Circumstances; high points in government, either Civil, or
Ecclesiastical. As in the doubtful Paragraphs, and Canons of the Law of man;
so in the mystical oracles of the Law of God; Qui been distinguit, been docet:
in the one, when he uses no distinction but of the Law, or some reason
equipollent to the Law: in the other, when he interprets the scripture by the
scripture, either expressly by conference of Text with Text, or collectiuely by
the rule of Analogy. In cases indifferent, or arbitrary, what so equal in
general, as Indifferency: or so requisite in special, as conformity to the
positive I awe, to the custom of the Country, or to the present occasion? To
be perverse, or obstinate without necessary cause, is a peevish folly: when by
such a duetyfull, and justifiable order of proceeding, as by a sacred League,
so infinite Variances, and contentions may be compounded. To the clean, all
things are clean. S. Paul, that laid his foundation like a wise architect,
and was a singular frame of divinity, (omnisufficiently furnished to be a
Doctor of the Nations, and a Conuertour of People) became all unto all, and as
it were a Christian Mercury, to win some. Oh, that his Knowledge, or Zeal
were as rife, as his Name: and I would to God, some could learn to behave
themselves toward Princes, and Magistrates, as Paul demeaned himself, not
only before the King Agrippa, but also before the two Roman Procuratours of
that Province, Felix, and Festus: whom he entreated in honorable terms,
albeit ethnicke governors. Were none more scrupulous, then S. Paul, how
easily, and graciously might diverse Confutations be reconciled, that now rage,
like Civil Wars? The chiefest matter in question, is no article of belief,
but a point of policy, or government: wherein a Judicial Equity being duly
observed, what lets but the particular Laws, Ordinances, Injunctions, and
whole manner of Jurisdiction, may rest in the disposition of Sovereign
Authority? Whose immediate, or mediate acts, are to be reverenced with
Obedience, not countermaunded with sedition, or controled with contention. He
is a bold subject, that attempteth to bind the hands of sacred Majesty: and
they love controversies well, I trow, that call their Princes proceedinges into
Controversy. Altercations, and Paradoxes, as well in Discipline, as in
Doctrine, were never so curiously curious, or so infinitely infinite: but when
all is done, and when Innovation has set the best countenance of proof, or
persuasion, upon the matter; Kingdoms will stand, and Free-Citties must be
content. Their Courts, are no Presidents for Royal Courts: their Councels, no
instructions for the Councels of Kings, or Queens: their Consistories, that
would master Princes, no informations for the Consistories under Princes: their
Discipline, no Canon, or platform for sovereign government, either in Causes
Temporal, or Spiritual. And can you blame them, that marvel, how of all
other Tribunals, or benches, that Jewish Synedrion, or Pontifical Consistory
should so exceedingly grow in request, that put Christ himself to death, and
was a whipp for his dearest Apostles? I am loath to enter the listes of
argumentation, or discourse, with any obstinate mind, or violent wit, that
weeneth his own Conceit, a clear Sun without Eclipse, or a full Moon
without wanes: but since Importunacy will never linne molesting Parliaments, and
Princes, with Admonitions, Aduertisements, Motions, Petitions, Repetitions,
Solicitations, Declamations, Discourses, Methods, Flatteries, Menaces, and all
possible instant means of enforcing, and extorting the present Practice of
their incorruptible Theorie; it would be som-bodies task, to hold them alittle
occupied, till a greater Resolution begin to subscribe, and a surer Provision
to execute. May it therefore please the busiest of those, that debar
Ecclesiastical persons of all Civil jurisdiction, or temporal function, to
consider; how every petty Parish, in England, to the number of about 52000.
more, or less, may be made a Jerusalem, or Metropolitan Sea, like the noblest
City of the Orient, (for so Pliny calls Jerusalem): how every Minister of
thesayd Parishes, may be promoted to be an high Priest, and to have a
Pontifical Consistory: how every Assistant of that Consistory, may emprooue
himself an honorable, or worshipful Senior, according to his reverend
calling: (for not only the Princes of Families, or the Princes of Tribes, but
the Princes of Cities, or Judges, the Decurions, the Quinquagenarians, the
Centurions, the Chiliarkes, were inferior Officiers to the Seniors): how a
Princely, and Capital Court, and even the high Council of Parliament, or
supreme Tribunal of a Royal City, (for there was no Seniorie in Iudaea, but
at Jerusalem; saving when the Proconsul Gabinius in a Roman Policy divided
that nation into five parts, and appointed four other Consistories), how such
a Princely, and stately Court, should be the pattern of a Presbitery in a
poor Parish: how the Principality, or Po^tificalitie of a Minister according
to the degenerate Sanedrim, should be sett-vpp, when the Lordship of a Bishop,
or Archbishop, according to their position, is to be pulleddowne: finally how
the supremacy over Kings, and Emperors should be taken from the highest
Priest, or Pope, to be bestowed upon an ordinary Minister, or Curate: and how
that Minister should dispense with Aristotle's Law of instruments, (...): or
become more mighty then Hercules, that could not encounter two charges attonce:
or at-least how that Civil Court, that mere Civil Court, (for so it was;
before it declined from the first institution; even as merely civil, as the
Roman Senate) should be transformed into a Court merely Ecclesiastical. When
these points are considered; if withal it be determined by evident
demo^stration, as clear as the Sun, and as invincible as Gods-word, that
whatsoever the Apostles did for their time, is immutably perpetual, and
necessary for all times: and that nothing by way of special respect, or
present occasion, is left to the ordinance, disposition, or provision of the
Church, but the strict and precise practice of their Primitive Discipline,
according to some Precepts in S. Paul's Epistles, and a few Examples in the
Acts of the Apostles: So be it, must be the suffrage of us, that have no Voice
in the Sanedrim. All is concluded in afewe pregnant propositions: we shall not
need to trouble, or entangle our wits with many Articles, Injunctions,
Statutes, or other ordinances: the General, Provincial, and Episcopal
Councels, lost much good labor in their Canons, Decrees, and whatsoever
Ecclesiastical Constitutions: the works of the fathers, and Doctors,
howsoever ancient, learned, or Orthodoxall, are little, or nothing worth:
infinite studdies, writings, commentaries, treatises, conferences,
consultations, disputations, distinctions, conclusions of the most-notable
Scholars in Christendom, altogether superfluous. Wellworth afewe resolute
Aphorisms; that dispatch more in a word, then could be boulted-out in fiften
hundred years; and roundly determine all with an Vpsy-downe. No reformation
without an Vpsy-downe. In deed that is one of Machiauels Positions: and seeing
it is proved a piece of sound doctrine, it must not be gain-sayd. Every head,
that has a hand, pull-downe the pride of Bishops, and set up the humility of
Ministers. Diogenes tread upon Platos pomp. An universal reformation be
proclaimed with the sound of a Iewes-trumpe: let the Pontifical Consistory
be erected in every Parish: let the high Priest, or Archbishop of every Parish,
be enstalled in Moses chaier, (it was Moses, not Aarons Chayer, that they
challenge in their Senate: and he must be greater then Hercules, that can
fulfill both). let the Ministry be a Royal Priesthood; and uery Minister
within the precinct of his territory, and the dominion of his Segniorie,
reign like a Presbiter John: let it everlastingly be recorded for a souerain
Rule, as dear as a Jews eye, that Josephus alleges out-of the Law; Nihil
agat Rex, sine Pontificis, and Sentorum sententia. Only let thesayd Pontife
beware, he prove not a great Pope in a little Room; or discover not the
humor of aspiring Stukely, that would rather be the king of a moulhill, then
the second in Ireland, or England. Some Stoiques, and melancholy persons have
a spice of ambition by themselves: and even Iunius Brutus the first, was somway
a kind of Tarquinius Superbus: and Iunius Brutus the second, is not altogether
a mortified Creature, but bewrays as it were some relics of flesh, and
blood, as well as his inwardest friend Eusebius Philadelphus. I dare come no
nearer: yet Greenwood, and Barrow begin already to complain of surly, and
solemn brethren: and God knows, how that Pontifical chayer of estate, might
work in man, as he is man. Mercury sublimed, is some what a coy, and stout
fellow: and I believe, those high, and mighty Peers, would not stick, to
look for a low, and humble leg. Every man must have his due in his place:
and honor aliably belongs to redoubted Seniours. That is their proper title
at Geneua. Now if it seem as clear a case in Policy, as in Divinity; that
one, and the same Discipline may serve diverse, and contrary forms of
regiment; and be as fit for the head of England, as for the soote of Geneua:
the worst is, Aristotle's Politiques must be burned for heretics. But how
happy is the age, that in stead of a thousand Positive Laws, and Lesbian
Canons, has found one standing Canon of Polycletus, an immutable Law of
sacred government? And what a blissful destiny had the Commonwealth, that
must be the Model of all other Commonwealthes, and the very Center of the
Christian world? Let it be so for ever, and ever, if that Pamflet of the Laws,
and Statutes of Geneua, as well concerning Ecclesiastical Discipline, as Civil
regiment; deserve any such singular, or extraordinary estimation, either for
the one, or for the other. If not; are they not busy men, that will needs
bear a rule, and strike a maine stroke, where they have nothing to do, or are
to be ruled? It were a good hearing in my ear, that some of them could govern
themselves, but in reasonable wise sort, that are so forward to swey kingdoms,
and to swing Churches after their new fashion; and can stand upon no ground,
but their own. If certain of them be godlyer, or learneder, then many other,
(according to their fauorablest reputation,) it is the better for them: I would
also, they were wiser, then some of them, whom they impugn. Surely I fear,
they will be found more peremptory in Censure, then sound in Judgment; and
more smart in reproof, then sharp in proof. And may it not be a probable
doubt, how they have compared together the Law of Gods people, and the Gospel
of Christ's Church in the Bible: or how they have studdied Josephus, Philo, and
Egesippus of the Jewish affairs; or Sigonius of the Hebrew Commonwealth; or
Freigius his Mosaicus; or their own Bonauentura of the Judicial Policy; that
fetch their Jurisdiction from the Sanedrim corrupted; and ground their
Reformation upon the Jews Thalmud, the next neighbor to the Turks Alcoran.
Had Ramus Treatise of Discipline come to light; they would long-ere-this have
been ashamed of their Sanedrim, and have blushed to foist-in the Thalmud, in
steed of the Bible. God help poor Discipline, if the water be like the
Conduit, the Oil like the Lamp, and the Plant like the Tree. Abraham was the
beginning: David the midst: and Christ the end of the Hebrew history: his
Gospel, not his ennemies Thalmud, the pure fountain of reformation, and the
only clear resplendishing Sun, that gives light to the stars of heaven,
and earth; unto which the Church, his most dear and sweet spouse, is more
deeply, and more incomprehensibly bounden, then the day unto the Sun, that
shines from his glistering chariot. It is not for a Pontifical Seniory or a
Mechanical Eldership, to stopp the course of any river, that successively
flows from that liquid fountain: or to putt-out any Candle, that was
originally lighted at that inextinguible Lamp. The Church has small cause, to
dote upon the Coosen-germane of Tyranny: and the Commonwealth has no great
affection to the Sworn-brother of Anarchy. Certainly States need not long to
interteine tumultuous, and neuer-satisfied Innovation. Good my masters, either
make it an evident, and infallible case, without sophistical wrangling, or
personal brawling; that your unexperienced Discipline, not the order
approved, is the pure well of that divine Spring, and the clear light of that
heavenly Sun: or I beseech you, pacify yourselues, and surcease to endaunger
kingdoms with vnneedefull vprores. Crooked proceedings would be rectified by a
right, not a crooked line: and Abuses reformed, not by abuling the persons, but
by well-vsing the things themselves. I spare my ancients, as well at home as
abroad: yet Beza might have been good to some Doctors of the Church; and
better then he is, to Ramus, Erastus, Kemnitius, and sundry other excellent men
of this age: (neither can it sufficiently appear, that the two famous Lawyers,
Gribaldus, and Baldwinus, were such monstrous Apostataes, or poisonous
Heretics, as he reports): and whither some other, nearer hand, have not
been too-familiarly bold with their Superiors, of approved learning, and
wisdom, meet for their reverend, and honorable calling; my betters Judge.

Modesty is a Civil Virtue, and Humility a Christian quality: surely Martin is
too too-malapert, to be discreet; and Barrow too too-hoat, to be wise: if they
be godly, God help Charity: but in my opinion they little wot, what a Chaos of
disorders, confusions, and absurdities they breed, that sweat to build a
reformation in a monarchy, upon a popular foundation, or a mechanical plott;
and will needs be as fiery in execution, even to wring the Clubb out-of
Hercules hand, as they were aerie in resolution. Alas, that wise men, and
reformers of states (I know not a weightier Province) should once imagine, to
find it a matter of as light consequence, to seniorise in a realm, over the
greatest Lords, and even over the highness of Majesty; as in a town, over a
company of mean marchantes, and meaner artificers. I will not stick, to make
the best of it. M. Calvin, the founder of the plott, (whom Beza styles the
great Calvin) had reason to establish his ministry against Inconstancy, and to
fortify himself against Faction, (as he could best devise, and compass with
the assistance of his French party, and other favorites) by encroaching upon a
mechanical, and mutinous people, from whose variable and fickle mutability he
could no otherwise assecure himself. As he sensibly found not only by daily
experiences of their giddy and factious nature, but also by his own expulsion,
and banishment: whom after a little trial, (as it were for a dainety nouelty,
or sly experiment) they could be content to use as kindly, and loyally, as they
had used the old Bishopp, their lawful Prince. Could M. Cartwright, or M.
Trauerse seize upon such a City, or any like popular town, Heluetian, or
other, where Democraty rules the roast: they should have some-bodies good leave
to provide for their own fecurity; and to take their best advantage upon
tickle Cantons. Some one peradventure in time would canton them well-enough;
and give a shrewd pull at a Metropolitan Sea, as sovereign, as the old
Bishoprike of Geneua. It were not the first time, that a Democraty by degrees
has proved an Aristocraty; an Aristocraty degenerated into an Oligarchy; an
Oligarchy amounted to a Tyranny, or Principality. No Rhetorique Climax so
artificial, as that Politic Gradation. But in a just kingdom, where is
other good assurance for Ministers, and meeter Councels for Princes, then such
swarms of imperious Elderships; it is not for subjects to usurp, as
Commanders may tirannise in a small territory. Unless they mean to sett-vp a
general Deformation, in lieu of an Universal Reformation; and to bring-in an
order, that would soon prove a diluge of disorder; an ouerflow of Anarchy;
and an open Fludgate, to drown Policy with licentiousnes, nobility with
obscurity, and the honor of realms with the baseness of Cantons. They that
long for the bane, and plague of their Country, pray for that manyhedded, and
Cantonish reformation: in issue good for none, but the high Judges of the
Consistory, and their appropriate Creatures: as I will justify at large, in
case I be ever particularly challenged. I am no pleader for the regiment of the
feet over the head, or the government of the stomach over the heart: surely
nothing can be more pernicious in practice, or more miserable in conclusion,
then a commanding authority in them, that are borne to obey, ordained to live
in private condition, made to follow their occupations, and bound to homage.
You that be scholars, moderate your invention with judgment: and you that be
reasonable gentlemen, pacify your selves with reason. If it be an injury, to
enclose Commons; what justice is it, to lay-open enclosures? and if Monarchies
must suffer popular states to enjoy their free liberties, and amplest
fraunchises, without the least instringment, or abridgment: is there no
congruence of reason, that popular states should give Monarchies leave, to use
their Positive laws, established orders, and Royal Prerogatives, without
disturbance, or confutation? Because meaner Ministers, then Lords, may become
a popular City, or territory, must it therefore be an absurdity in the
majesty of a kingdom, to have some Lords spiritual amongst so many
temporal: as well for the fitter correspondence and combination of both
degrees; their more reverend private direction in matters of conscience; their
weightier public Counsel in Parlaments, and Synods; the firmer assurance of
the Clergy in their causes; and the more honorable estimation of Religion in
all respects: as for the solemner visitation of their Dioces, and other
competent Jurisdiction. It is Tyranny, or vamglorie, not reverend Lordship,
that the Scripture condemns. There were Bishops, or as some will have them
termed, Superintendents, with Episcopal superiority, and jurisdiction; in the
golden age of the Apostles: Timothy of Ephesus; Titus of Crete; Mark of
Alexandria; James of Jerusalem; Philemon of Gaza; the eloquent Apollos of
Caesarea; Euodius of Antioche; Sosipater of Iconium, according to Dorotheus, of
Thessaloniea, according to Origene; Tychicus of Chalcedon; Ananias of Damascus;
and so forth. Diverse of the ancient Fathers, and Doctors, as well of the
Oriental, as of the Occidentall Churches, were Bishops, reverend Fathers in
Christ, and spiritual Lords. The Same style, or title of reverence, has
successively continued to this age, without any empeachment of value, or
contradiction of note; saving that of the angry Malcontent, and proud
heretic Aerius, scarsely worth the naming. What cruel outrage has it lately
committed, or what heinous indignity has it newly admitted, (more then other
aduauncementes of Virtue, or styles of honor,) that it should now be
cancelled, or abandoned in all have? Would God, some were no stouter, or
hawtier without the title, then some are with it. Many temporal Lords, Dukes,
Princes, Kings, and Emperors, have showen very-notable effectual examples of
Christian humility: and may not spiritual Lords carry spiritual minds? I
hope, they do: I know, some do: I am suer, all may; notwithstanding their
ordinary title, or an hundred plausible Epithits. I would the Lordship, or
pomp of Bishops, were the greatest abuse in Commonwealthes, or Churches. I
fear me, I shall never live to see so happy a world upon the Earth, that
advised Reformation should have nothing worse to complaine-off, then that
Lordship, or pomp. What may be, or is amiss, in any degree; I defend not:
(the delict of some one, or two Prelates, were it manifest, ought not to
redounde to the damage, or detriment of the Church): what may stand with the
honor of the Realm; with the benefit of the Church; with the approbation of
antiquity, and with the Canon of the Scripture, I have no reason to impugn,
or abridge. I have more cause to suspect, that some earnest dealers might be
persuaded to dispense with the name of Lordship in Bishops, on condition,
themselves might be the parties: that would not secularlie abuse the title to
any private pomp, or vanity, but religiously apply it to the public
administration of the Church, according to the first institution. Were
dalliance safe in such cases; I could wish the experiment in a person, or two,
in whose complexions I have some insight. Doctor Humfry of Oxford, and Doctor
Fulke of Cambridge, two of their standard-bearers a long-time, grew conformable
in the end, as they grew riper in experience, and sager in judgment: and why
may not such, and such, in the like, or weightier respects, condescend to a
like toleration of matters Adiaphorall? Since it will be no otherwise, (maugre
all Admonitions, or whatsoever zealous Motives) better relent with favor, then
resist in vain. Were any fair offer of preferme^t, handsomely tendered unto
some, that gape not greedily after promotion, nor can-away with thissame
servile waiting, or plausible courting for living: I doubt not but wise men
would see, what were good for themselves, commodious for their friends, and
convenient for the Church. If they should obstinatly refuse Deaneryes, and
Bishoprics, I should verily believe, they are moved with stronger arguments,
and pregnanter autorities, then any, they have yet published in Print, or
uttered in disputation: and I would be very glad to confer with them, for my
instruction. Sound reasons, and autenticall quotations may prevail much: and
no such muincible defense, as the armor of Proof. In the mean time, the
cause may be remembered, that incensed the foresaid sactious malcontent, Aerius,
to maintain the equality of Bishops, and other Priests, when himself failed
in his ambitious suite for a Bishopric: and all rests upon a case of
conscience, as nice and squeamish a scruple with some zealous Marr-prelates, as
whither the Fox in some good respects, might be won to eat grapes. They that
would pregnantly try Conclusions, might peradventure find such a temptation,
the materiallest and learnedest Confutation, that has yet been Imprinted.
Melancholy is deeply wise; and Choler resolutely stout: they must persuade
them essentially, and feelingly, that will move them effectually. Were they
entreated to yield, other arguments would subscribe of their own gentle
accord; and ingenuously confess, that Opinion is not to prejudice the Truth,
or Faction to derogate from Authority. Possession, was ever a strong defendant:
and a just title makes a puissant adversary. Bishops will goouerne with
reputation, when Marr-Prelats must obey with reverence, or resist with
contumacie. Errors in doctrine; corruptions in manners; and abuses in offices,
would be reformed: but degrees of superiority, and orders of obedience are
needful in all estates: and especially in the Clergy as necessary, as the
Sun in the day, or the Moon in the night: or Cock-on-ho^pe, with a hundred
thousand Curates in the world, would prove a mad Discipline. Let Order be the
golden rule of proportion; and I am as forward an Admonitioner, as any
Precisian in England. If disorder must be the Discipline, and confusion the
Reformation, (as without difference of degrees, it must needs) I crave pardon.
Anarchie, was never yet a good States man: and Ataxie, will ever be a badd
Churchman. Thatsame lusty Downfall, is too-hoat a Policy for my learning.
They were best, to be content to let Bishoprics stand, that would be loath to
see Religion fall, or the Clergy trodden under foot. He conceiueth little,
that perceives not, what bonds hold the world in order, and what tenures
maintain an assurance in estates. Were Ministers Stipendaries, or Pensionars,
(which has also been a wise motion) and all without distinction, alike
esteemed, that is, all without regard, alike contemned, and abiected, (which
would be the issue of unequal Equallity); woe to the poor Ministry: and the
cunningest practice of the consistory, should have much-adoe, to stopp those
gapps, and recure those sores. Never a more succourlesse Orphan; or a more
desolate widow; or a more distressed Pilgrim; then such a Ministry: until in
a thirsty, and hungry zeal, it should eftsoons retire to former provisions,
and recoouer that ancient Economy Ecclesiastical. The surest revenue, and
honorablest salary of that coat; much-better iwis, the^ the soldiers pay, or
the Seruing-ma^s wages. Equality, in things equal, is a just Law: but a
respective valuation of persons, is the rule of Equity: and they little know,
into what inco^gruities, and absurdities they run headlong, that are weary of
Geometrical proportion, or distributive Justice, in the collation of public
functions, offices, or promotions, civil, or spiritual. God bestows his
blessings with difference; and teaches his Lieutenant the Prince, to estimate,
and prefer his subjects accordingly. When better Autors are alleged for
equality in persons Unequal; I will live, and dye in defense of that
equality; and honor Arithmeticall Proportion, as the only balance of
Justice, and sole standard of government. Meane-while, they that willbe wiser,
then God, and their Prince, may continue a pecuish scrupulositie in subscribing
to their ordinances; and nurrish a rebellious Contumacie, in refusing their
orders. I wish unto my friends, as unto miselfe: and recommende Learning to
discretion, conceit to judgment, zeal to knowledge, duty to obedience,
confusion to order, Uncertainty to assurance, and Unlawful novelty to
lawful Uniformity: the sweetest repose, that the Commonwealth, or Church can
enjoy. Regnum diuisum, a souerain Text; and what notabler Gloss upon a
thousand Texts? Or what more cordial restoratiue of Boddy, or Soul, then,
Ecce quam bonum, and quam iucundum? Sweet my masters, be sweet: and without the
least bitterness of unnecessary strife, tender your affectionatest deuotio^s
of Zeal, and Honor, to the best contentment of your friends, your Patrons,
your Prince, the Commonwealth, the Church, the Almighty: which so dearly
love, so bountifully maintain, so mightily protect, so graciously favor, and
so indulgentially tender you. Confound not yourselues: and what people this
day more blessed, or what nation more floorishing? Some fervent, and many
counterfeit loouers, adore their mistresses; and commit Idolatry to the least
of their bewties: oh, that we knew what a Sacrifice, Obedience were; and what a
Jewel of Jewels he offers, that presents Charity. Without which, we may
talk of Doctrine, and discourse of Discipline: but Doctrine is a Parrat;
Discipline an Echo; Reformation a shadow; Sanctification a dream without
Charity: in whose sweet boosome Reconciliation harbors; the dearest friend
of the Church, and the only Est Amen of so infinite Controversies. That
Reconciliation settle itself to examine matters barely, without their veales,
or habiliments, according to the counsel of Marcus Aurelius: and to define
things simply, without any colors, or embellishments, according to the
precepts of Aristotle, and the examples of Ramus: and the most-endlesse
altercations; being generally rather Verbal, then real, and more
circumstantiall, then substantial; will soon grow to an end. Which end
humanity hasten, if there be any spice of humanity; divinity dispatch, if
there be any remnant of divinity; heaven accomplish, if the graces of heaven
be not lockedvpp; and Earth embrace, if reconciliation has not forsaken the
Earth. If Falsehood be weak, as it is weak, why should it longer hold-vpp
head: and if Truth be truth, that is, great and mighty, why should it not
prevail? Mostexcellent Truth, show thiselfe in thy victorious Majesty; and
mauger whatsoever encounter of wit, learning, or fury, prevail puissantly.

These Notes, if they happen to see light, are especially intended to the
particular Use of a few, whom in affectionate good will I would wish to stay
their wisdoms. Did I not entirely pity their case, and extraordinarily
favor some commendable parts in them, they should not easily have cost me
half thus many lines; every one worse bestowed, then other, if constancy in
error, be a creddit; in disobedience, a bond; in vice, a virtue; in misery,
a felicity. He that writ the premises, affects Truth as precisely, as any
Precisian in Cambrige, or Oxford; and hates even Love itself, in comparison
of Truth, which he is ever to tender with a curious devotion: but a man may be
as blind in ouerseeing, as in seeing nothing: and he may shoot farther from
the mark, that ouershooteth, then he that shoots short, or wide: as always
some motespying heads have so scrupulously ordered the matter, Vt intelligendo
nihil intelligerent. I would be loath to fall into the hands of any such
captious, and mutinous wits: but if it be my fortune, to light upon hard
interteinement, what remedy? I have had some little tampering with a kind of
Extortioners, and barratours in my time: and fear not greatly any bugges, but
in charity, or in duty. Wrong him not, that would gladly be well-taken, where
he meaneth-well; and once for all protests, he looueth humanity with his
heart, and reuerenceth divinity with his soul: as he would rather declare
indeed, then profess in word. If he erreth, it is for want of knowledge, not
for want of Zeal. Howbeit for his fuller contentment, he has also done his
endeavor, to know something on both sides; and laying-aside Partiality to the
persons, has privately made the most equal and sincere Analysis of their
several allegations, and proofs, that his Logique, and divinity could
sett-downe. For other Analyzes he ouerpassed, as impertinent, or not specially
material. After such examination of their autorities, and arguments, not with
a rigorous Censure of either, but with a favorable Construction of both: Pardon
him, though he presume to deliver some part of his animaduersions in such
terms, as the instant occasion presents: not for any contentious, or
sinister purpose (the world is too-full of litigious, and barratous pens) but
for the satisfaction of those, that desire them, and the advertisement of
those, that regard them. Who according to any indifferent, or reasonable
Analysis, shall find the sharpest Inventions, and weightiest Judgments of
their leaders, nothing so autenticall, or current, as was preiudicatly
expected. It is no piece of my intention, to instruct, where I may learn: or
to controwle any superior of quality, that inconscience may affect, or in
Policy seem to countenance that side. With Martin, and his applauders;
Brown, and his adherents; Barrow, and his accomplices; Kett, and his sectaries;
or whatsoever Commotioners of like disposition, (for never such a flush of
scismatique heads, or heretic wits), that like the notorious H. N. or the
presumptuous David Gorge, or that execrable Seruetus, or other turbulent
rebels in Religion, would be Turkesing, and innouating they wott not what; I
hope it may become me, to be almost as bold; as they have been with Judges,
Bishops, Archbishops, Princes, and with whom not? howsoever learned, wise,
virtuous, reverend, honorable, or souerain. Or if my cool dealing with them,
be insupportable; I believe their hot practicing with Lords, and Princes, was
not greatly tolerable. Be, as it may: that is done on both sides, cannot be
undone: and if they ween, they may offend outragiously without injury; other
are suer, they may defend moderately with justice. When that seuen-fold Shield
fails, my plea is at an end; albeit my making, or marring were the Client.
Whiles the seuen-fold Shield holdeth-out, he can do little, that cannot hold
it up. A strong Apology, enhableth a weak hand: and a good cause is the best
Advocate. Some sleep not to all: and I watch not to euery-one. If I be
understood with effect, where I wish at-least a demurrer with stayed
aduisement, and consultation; I have my desire, and not will tediously importune
other. I doubt not of many contrary instigatio^s, and some bold examples of
turbule^t spirits: but heat is not the meetest Judge on the bench, or the
soundest Divine in disputation: and in matters of government, but especially in
motions of alteration, that run their heads against a strong wall; Take heed
is a fair thing. Were there no other Considerations; the Place, and the Time,
are two weighty, and mighty Circumstances. It is a very-nimble feather, that
will needs outrunne the wing of the Time; and leave the sails of regiment
behind. Men are men, and ever had, and ever will have their imperfections:
Paradise tasted of imperfections: the golden age, whenever it was most
golden, had some dross of imperfectio^s: the Patriarchs fealt some fits of
imperfections: Moses tabernacle was made acquainted with imperfectio^s:
Salomo^s Temple could not clear itself from imperfections: the Primitive
Church wanted not imper fections: Constantines devotion found imperfections:
what Reformation could ever say? I have no imperfectio^s: or will they, that
dubb themselves the little flock, and the only remnant of Israel; say? we
have no imperfectio^s. Had they none, as none have more, then some of those
Luciferian spirits; it is an unkind Bird, that defiles his kind neast; and
a proud husbandman, that can abide no tares amongst wheat, or vpbraideth the
Corn with the Cockle. There is a God above, that hears prayers: a Prince
beneath, that tendereth supplications: Lords on both sides, that Patronise
good causes: learned men, that desire Conference: time, to consider upon
essential points: Knowledge, that loves zeal, as zeal must reverence
knowledge: Truth, that displayeth, and inuesteth itself: Conscience, that is
a thousand witnesses, even against it self. When the question is de Re; to
dispute de Homine is sophistical: or when the matter depends in
controversy, to cavil at the form is captious: the abuse of the one, were it
proved, abolisheth not the use of the other: what should impertinent secrecies
be revealed; or needles quarrels picked; or every proposition wrinched to the
harshest sense? What should honest minds, and excellent wits, be taunted, and
bourded, without rhyme, or reason? What should insolent, and monstrous
Phantasticality extol, and glorify itself above the clouds, without cause,
or effect? When, where, and how should Martin Junior be purified; Martin Senior
saintified; Brown Euangelistified; Barrow Apostolified; Kett Angelified; or
the Patriarch of the loouely Familistes, H.N. deified, more then all the world
beside? Were it possible, that this age should afford a divine and miraculous
Elias: yet, when Elias himself deemed himself most desolate, and complained
he was left all-alone; there remained thousands living, that never bowed
their knees unto Baal. But Faction, is as sure a Keeper of Counsel, as a sieve:
Spite, as close a Secretary, as a skummer: Innovation, at the least a bright
Angel from heaven: and the foresaid abstractes of pure divinity, will needs
know, why Iunius Brutus, or Eusebius Philadelphus should rather be Pasquils
incarnate, then they. If there be one Abraham in Vr; one Lot in Sodom; one
Daniell in Babylon; one Jonas in Niniue; one Job in Huz: or if there be one
David in the Court of Saul; one Obadia in the Court of Achab; one Jeremy in
the Court of Zedechias; one Zorobabel in the Court of Nabuchodonosor; one
Nehemias in the Court of Artaxerxes; or any singular blessed One in any good,
or bad Court, City, State, Kingdom, or Nation; it must be One of them: all
other of whatsoever dignity, or desert, what but reprobates, apostataes,
monsters, tyrants, pharisees hypocri tes, false prophets, belly-gods,
worldlinges, ravenous woolues, crafty foxes, dogs to their vomit, a generation
of vipers, limbs of Satan, Devils incarnate, or such like. For Erasmus poor
Copia Verborum, and Omphalius sorry furniture of inuectiue and declamatory
phrases, must come-shorte in this comparison of the railing faculty. I know no
remedy, but the prayer of Charity, and the order of Authority: whom it
concerns to deal with libels, as with thorns; with phansies, as with
weeds; and with heresies, or scismes, as with Hydras heads. It has been
always one of my observations, but especially of later years, since these
Numantine skirmishes: The better scholar indeed, the colder scismatique; and
the hotter scismatique, the worse scholar. What an hideous and incredible
opinion did David Gorge conceive of himself? H.N. was not affraide to insult
over all the Fathers, Doctors, schooleme^, and new-writers, ever since the
Eua^gelists, and Apostles: Brown challe^ged all the Doctors, and other
notablest graduats of Cambridge, and Oxford: Kett, though something in
Astrology, and Physic, yet a raw Divine, how obstinate, and intractable in
his fantastic assertions? Barrow takes upon him, not only above Luther,
Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Brentius, and all the vehementest Germane
Protestants; but also above Calvin, Viret, Beza, Marlorat, Knox, Meluin,
Cartwright, Trauerse, Fenner, Penry, and all our importunest sollicitours of
reformation; howsoever qualified with gifts, or reputed amongst their
fauorits. Illuminate Understanding, is the rare byrd of the Church; and graund
intendimentes come by a certain extraordinary, and supernatural revelation.
One Unlearned Singularist has more in him, then ten learned Precisians: Give
me the brave fellow, that can carry a Dragons tail after him. Tush,
Vniuersitie-learning is a Dunse: and Schoole-diuinitie a Sorbonist. It is not
Art, or Modesty, that makes a Rabi Alphes, or a ringleader of multitudes.
David Gorge the Archprophet of the world: H. N. the Archeuangelist of Christ:
and Barrow the Archapostle of the Church. Superhappy Creatures, that have
illuminate understanding, and graund intendiments at the best hand. Miraculous
Barrow, that so hugely exceeds his ancients in the pure art of Reformation.
But undoubtedly his Kingdom cannot flourish long: as he has blessed his
Seniors, so he must be anointed of his Iuniors: me thinks I see an other, and
an other headd, suddenly starting-vpp upon Hydras shoulders: farewell H.N.
and welcome Barrow: adieu Barrow, and All-haile thou Angelical spirit of the
Gospel, whose face I see in a Crystal, more pure, then Purity it self: the
depression of one, the exaltation of an other: the corruption of one, the
generation of an other: no seed so fertile, or rank, as the seed of scisme,
and the sperme of heresy. Christ aid his assaulted fort; and bliss the seed
of Abraham: and in honor of excellent Arts, and worthy Professions, be it ever
said; The best-learned, are best-aduised.

Even Cardinal Sadolet, Cardinal Poole, and Omphalius, commended the mild,
and discreet disposition of Melancthon, Bucer, and Sturmius, when they first
stirred in Germany: the Queen Moother of France, and the Cardinal of
Lorraine praised Ramus, albeit he was known to fauourise the Prince of Condy:
Iouius praised Reuclin, and Camerarius, as Peucer praised Iouius, and Bembus:
Osorius praised Ascham, as Ascham praised Watson: and who praised not Sir John
Cheek; how exceedingly did Cardan praise him? Sir Thomas Smith, her Majesty's
Ambassador in France, in the reigns of Henry the Second, Francis the Second,
and Charles the Ninth; was honored of none more, then of some French, and
Italian Cardinals, and Bishops: the Kings sons favored his son, as well
after, as before their Coronation. Neander in his late Chronicle, and later
Geographie, praises here, and there certain Papists: and did not Agrippa,
Erasmus, Duarene, and Bodine occasionally praise as many Protestants? It was a
sweet, and divine Virtue, that stirred-vp love, and admiration in such
adversaries: and doubtless they carried an honest, and honorable mind, that
forgot themselves, and their friends, to do their enemies reason, and Virtue
right. A virtue, that I often seek, seldom find; wish-for in many, hope-for
in some, looke-for in few; reverence in a Superior, honor in an inferior;
admire in a friend, love in a foe; joy, to see, or hear, in one, or other.
Perverse natures are forward to disguise themselves, and to condemn not only
Courtesy, or humanity, but even humility, and charity itself, with a
nickname of Newtralitie, or Ambidexteritie: term it, what you list, and
miscall it at your pleasure: certes it is an excellent and souerain quality,
that in a firm resolution never to abandon Virtue, or to betray the Truth,
steals interteinement from displeasure, favor from offense, love from
^nitie, grace from indignation; and not like Homers Siren, but like Homers
Minerua, traineth partiality to a liking of the adverse Party; dissension to
a commendation of his Contrary; error to an embracement of truth; and even
Corruption himself to an advancement of valor, of desert, of integrity, of
that moral, and intellectual good, that so graciously insinuates, and so
forciblie emprooueth itself. Oh, that learning were ever married to such
discretion; wit to such wisdom; Zeal to such virtue; contention to such
morality: and oh, that such private government might appear in those, that
plead most importunatly for public government. Oh, that Plato could teach
Xenocrates; Aristotle, Callisthenes; Theophrastus, Aristotle; Eunapius,
Iamblicus; to sacrifice to the sweet Graces of Mercury. What should I veil,
or shadow a good purpose? Oh a thousand times, that Melancton could train
Iunius Brutus; Sturmius, Philadelphus; Ramus, Beza; Jewel, Cartwright;
Deering, Martin; Baro, Barrow; to embrace the heavenly Graces of Christ, and to
kiss the hand of that divine Creature, that passes all Understanding. What a
felicity were it, to see such heads as pregnant, as Hydras heads; or Hydras
heads as rare, as such heads?

It is not my meaning, to deface, or prejudice any, that Unfeignedly means
well: if Percase I happen to touch some painted walls, and godly hypocrites,
(Godliness is become a strange Creature, should they be truly godly) let them
keep their own Counsel, and cease to affect new reputation by old heresies.
The Jews had their holly-holly-holly Essaeans: their separate, and precise
Pharisees: their daily regenerate, and Puritan Hemerobaptistes: their fervent,
and illuminate Zelotistes: only in shape men, in conversation Saints, in
insinuation Angels, in profession Demigods; as descended from heaven, to bless
the Earth, and to make the City a Paradise, that washed their feet. Jesus
bless good minds from the black enemy, when he ^ireth himself like an
Angel of light. Judas the Gaulonite, in the reign of Herod the Great, was an
hot tossed, and a marvelous Zelotist; when the Emperor Octauian taxing the
world, and assessing Judea, like other nations, who but he, in the abundance of
his mighty Zeal, was the man, that set it down for a Canonical Doctrine;
That the people of God, was to acknowledge no other Lord, but God; and that it
was a flauish bondage, to pay any such exaction, or imposition unto Augustus:
and having giuenout that principle, for an infallible rule, or rather a sacred
law, very vehemently solicited and importuned the people (as the manner is) to
live, and dye in the cause of their God, and their liberty. But sweet Christ
was of a milder and meeker spirit; and both paid tribute himself to avoid
offense; and set it down for an eternal Maxim in his Gospel; Give unto
Caesar, that belongs unto Caesar, and unto God, that belongs unto God.
Zealous Judas the Gaulonite, and fervent Simon the Galilean, two singular
reformers of the Judicial Synagoge, pretended fair for a pure Type, or
exquisite platform of the soundest, exactest, and precisest Hebraicall
Discipline: but what profane Idolatry so plagued that divine Commonwealth,
as thatsame scrupulous Zeal? or what made that blessed state, utterly
miserable, but thatsame unruly, and tumultuous Zeal; that would not be content
with reason, until it was too late? For a time, they supposed themselves, the
worthiest, and rarest Creatures in Judea, or rather the only men of that
state; and in a deep conceit of a neat and undefiled purity, divorced, or
sequestered themselves from the corrupt society of other: but alas, that any
purified minds should pay so dearly, and smartly for their sine Phansies;
which cost them no less, then the most lamentable overthrow of their whole
Commonwealth. You that have Languages, and Arts, more-then diverse other of
good quality, and can Use them with Method, and a certain ^usible opinion of
great learning, be as excellent, and singular, as you possibly can for your
lives, in a direct course: but be not peevish, or odd in a crooked balke, that
leads out-of the Kings highway, and Christ's own path, into a maze of
confusion, and a wilderness of desolation: the final end of these endless
Contentions, if they be nototherwise calmed by private discretion, or
cutt-short by public order. The first example of division, was perilous: and
what ranks, or swarms of insatiable scisme, incontinently followed? It is a
mad world, when every crew of conceited Punyes, puffed-vp with a presumptuous,
or fantastical imagination, must have their several complot, or faction; as
it were a certain Punicall war: whose victory will be like that of Carthage
against Room, if it be not the sooner quieted. Remember Judas the Gaulonite;
and forgett not yourselues: inordinate Zeal is a pernicious Reformer: and
Destruction, a dear purchase of Plotts in Moone-shine. S. Paul the heroical
Apostle, could not find a more excellent way, then Charity, the most-souerain
way of Faith, and Hope: any other deseigne of purity, or singularity,
builds not up, but pullethdowne; and of more then a Million in hope, proves
less then a cipher in effect. What the salvation of David Gorge? a nullitie:
what the deification of H. N? anullitie: what the glorification of Kett? a
nullitie: what the sanctification of Brown? a nullitie: what the co^munitie of
Barrow? a nullitie: what the plausibilitie of Martin? a nullitie: what a
thousand such popular motives, allectiues, incensiues, aggrauations of the
least corruption, amplificatios of the highest felicity, new lands of
promise, ouerflowing with milk, and honny, fools Paradises, glorious
innouations; but present shame, wretched confusion, utter ruin, everlasting
infamy, horrible damnation, and a mosthideous (...) Eue^ the (...) at hurly
ourly of the Church, the imagined heavenly Discipline; and the very topfyturuy
of the state; the pretended-diuine Reformation; of two mighty (...), what can
they possibly emprooue themselves, but silly (...), (...) most pitiful
nullitie? Sweet Charity, (...) bitter garboiles: and seeing they so instantly,
and (...) affect a perfect Platform, give them a most-curious, and exquisite
Table of pure Reformation, even the true Picture of Thiself. Surer Prevention
of mischief, and ruin, I know none.

I had here bidden Martin in the Vintry farewell, and taken my leave of this
tedious Discourse; (for no man takes less delight in Inuectiues); were I not
newly certified of certain fresh, and frantique practices for the erection of
the Synedrion in all have: whose (...) are weary of melancholy Proiects, and
begin to (...) on a cholerique course. Hot arguments are fiercely threatened,
in case the Discipline be not the sooner (...): but methinks that warm course
should scarsely be the style of pure Mortification: and happily softer fire would
make sweeter malt. A little (...), does not much amiss in capital, or
dangerous (...). It were well, the blowing bellows might be (...) to (...)
their wind for a fitter opportunity: or if fire boilyng in the stomach, must
needs breake-out at the mouth; the best comfort is, the Country (...) death
sufficient provision of water, to encounter, the terriblest Vulcanist, that
brandisheth a burning sword, or a fiery tongue. Howbeit some looker-on, (...)
fear not greatly the flame, cannot but marvel at the smoke; and had rather
see them, breathing-out the fume of divine Tobacco, the of furious rage. I have
read of Politic Jews, that for their commodity have become Christias; whom
in Spain, and Italy they term (...): but that Politic Christians for any
benefit, promotio^, or other regard whatsoever, should practice to become Jews,
in doctrine, or in discipline, in earnest, or in devise, in whole, or in part,
it were strange, and almost incredible; if the world were not grown a mostrous
(...) for his advantage; and the voice of Jacob proved a more gaynfull
Stratageme for the hands of Esau, then ever the hands of Esau were for the
voice of Jacob. I charge not any, that are clear; (would there were no more
Jewish Pharisees, then Hebrew Worthies); but let not them accuse me for
speaking, that condemn themselves for doing; or show themselves Saints in the
Premises, that will scantly prove honest men in the Conclusion. All are not
ledd with the same respects, that hang on the same string: some are carried with
one consideration, some with an other: some tender divinity, as their soul;
some love Religion, as their boddy; some favor the Gospel, as their fortune:
I doubt not, but some desire Discipline for Conscience; and do none coouet
Reformation for gain; or were it impossible, to point-out a Retaliado Convert,
in the whottist throng of those fresh Proselites? If there be no Retaliados in
Christendom, I am glad I have said nothing: if there be, they may so long
mock other in words, that at-last they will most deceive themselves in
deeds. I am beholding to the old Jury; but have no great fancy to a new,
either in London, or elsewhere; when amongst diverse other histories of Jewish
enormities, I remember how an ancient Archbishop of Canterbury, one John
Peckam, was feign to take order with the Bishop of London then being, for the
dissolutio^, and destruction of all the Synagoges in his Dioces. The less
need of any such order at this instant, all the better. I will not dispute,
whither a Synodrion presuppose a Synagoge; or whither it be not as
insupportable a yoke for any King, or mighty state, as it was for King Herod,
or the Romans, that found it intolerable: (methinkes the wisest Sanedrist of a
thousand, should hardly persuade me, that he is a friend of Princes, or no
enemy of Monarchies): but I know so much by some, none of the meanest
Scholars; or obscurest men in Europe, touching their opinion of the old, and
new Testament, of the Thalmud, of the Alcoran, of the Hebrew, Christian, and
Turkish Histories; that I deem any thing suspicious, and perilous, that
anyway inclines to Iudaisme; as fell an adversary to Christianity, as the
Wolf to the Lamb, or the Goshawk to the Dooue. Grant them an inche; they
will soon take an ell with the advantage: and were any part of their
Discipline one foot, could the boddy of their Doctrine want an head? or might
not the Parish prove a disorderly Congregation, as bad as a Synagoge, where
the Judicial bench were a Synedrion? The Jews are a subtle, and mischeeuous
people: and have cunningly inuegled some students of the holly tongue, with
their miraculous Cabala from Moses, their omnifcious Cosmologie from Solomon,
their Caldaean sapience from Daniell, and other profound Secrets of great
pretense: but their liberal gifts bite like their Usury; and they are finally
found to interteine them best, that shutt them quite out-of doors, with their
Sanedrim, and all. They can tell a precious tale of their divine Senate; and of
their Venerable Meokekim, reverenced like living Laws: but were all judgments
actually drawn to the divine Senate, and all laws solemnly to be fetched
from the Venerable Meokekim, as from speaking Oracles; might not these, and
their other Metaphysicall mysteries, be enregistred in the same Thalmud; or
might it not prove a pinching Reformation for Christendom: I have tasted of
their Verbal miracles; and cannot greatly commend their personal virtues: but
their real Usury is known through-out the Christian world, to be an
unmerciful Tyrant, and I fear me, their Consistoriall Iurisdiotio^ would
grow a Cruel griper; especially being so Universally extended in every
Parish, as is intended by the promoters thereof, and powerably armed with that
supreme, and Vncontrowlable authority, which they affect in causes
Ecclesiastical. A brave spiritual motion, and worthy not only of these
pidling sturres, but even of a Trojan war. Yet their Precedent, the Mosaicall
Synedrion, was a Civil Court, (as is before mentioned, and would be
reconsidered) cum mero imperio: and when it became mixed, it was not merely
Ecclesiastical; and when it became merely Ecclesiastical, of a Po^tifical
Consistory, it soon proved a Tyrannical Court; and by your good leave, was
as nimble to encroach upon Civil causes, being an Ecclesiastical Court, as
ever it was to intermeddle with Ecclesiastical causes, being a Civil Court.
The finest Methodists, according to Aristotle's golden rule of artificial
Bounds, condemn Geometrical precepts in Arithmetique, or Arithmeticall
precepts in Geometry, as irregular, and abusiue: but never Artist so
licentiously heterogenised, or so extrauagantly exceeded his prescribed limits,
as Ambition, or Coouetice. Every Miller is ready to convey the water to his
own mill: and neither the high Priests of Jerusalem, nor the Popes of Room,
nor the Patriarchs of Constantinople, nor the Pastors of Geneua, were ever
hasty to bind their own hands. They that research Antiquities, and inquier
into the priuities of Practices, shall find an Act of Praemunire is a
necessary Bridle in some cases. The first Bishops of Room, were undoubtedly
virtuous men, and godly Pastors: from Bishops they grew to be Popes: what more
reverend, then some of those Bishops; or what more Tyrannical, then some of
those Popes? Aaron, and the high-Priestes of Jerusalem, and of other
ceremonial nations, were their glorious Mirrours; and they deemed nothing
too-magnificall, or pompous, to breed an Universal reverence of their sacred
authority, and Hierarchy. We are so far alienated from imitating, or
allowing them, that we cannot abide our own Bishops; yet withal would have
every Minister a Bishop, and would also be fetching a new Pattern from old
Jerusalem, the moother-sea of the High Priesthood. So the world (as the manner
is) will needs runne-about in a Circle: pull-downe Bishops; set up the
Minister; make him Bishop of his Parish, and head of the Consistory, (call
him, how you list, that must be his place): what will become of him within a
few generations, but a high Priest in a low Jerusalem, or a great Pope in a
small Room? And then, where is the difference between him, and a Bishop, or
rather between him, and a Pope? not so much in the quality of his
Jurisdiction, when in effect he may be his own Judge, as in the quantity of
his Dioces, or temporalties. Or in case he be Politic; as some Popes have
been glad for their advantage, to tyrannise Popularly, so he may chance be
content for his advancement, to popularise tyrannically: and shall not be the
first of the Clergy, that has cunningly done it with a comely grace.
Something there must be of a Monarchy in free states: and something there will
be of free states, in a Monarchy. The discreeter, and Vprighter the Curate is,
the more circumspectly he will walk, and degenerate the less. Yet what
generation without degeneration: or what revolution without irregularitie? One
inconvenience begets an other: enormities grow like evil weeds: take heed
of a mischief: and where then will be the corruptions? Or how shall defection,
(acknowledging no primacie, or superiority in any person, or Court) retire to
his first institution: if percase there should grow a Conspiracy in
fellowship; one Consistory justify an other for advantage; and their whole
Synods fall-out in consequence, to be like their Parts? Men may err: and
frailty will slipp. What should I allege Historyes, or autorities? It is no
news for infirmity to fall, when it should stand; or for appetite to rebel,
when it should obey. Every son of Adam, a reed shaken with the wind of
passion, a weak Vessel, a Scholar of imperfection, a Master of ignorance, a
Doctor of error, a Pastor of concupiscence, a superintendent of avarice, a
Lord of ambition, a Prince of sin, a slave of mortality. Flesh is flesh; and
Blud a Wanton, a chaungeling, a compound of contrary elements, a reuoulting
and retrograde Planet, a Sophister, an hypocrite, an impostour, an Apostata, an
heretic; as conuertible as Mercury, as variable as the weathercock, as
lunatique as the Moon; a generation of corruption, a Whore of Babylon, a limme
of the world, and an impe of the Devil. It is their own argument in other
men's case: and why should it not be other men's argument in their case, Unless
they can show a personal Privilege ad imprimendum solum? They may speak, as
they list: terms of sanctification, and mortificatio^, are free for them, that
will use them: but the Common opinion is, even of the forwardest skirmishers at
this day, they do like other men; and live like the children of the world, and
the brethren of themselves. Some of them have their neighbors good leave, to
be their own Proctors, or Aduocats, if they please. Yet how probable is it,
they are now at their very best, and even in the neatest and purest plight of
their incorruption, whiles their minds are abstracted from worldly thoughts,
to a high meditation of their supposed-heauenly Reformation: and whiles it
necessarily behooves them, to stand charily and nicely upon the credit of
their integrity, sincerity, preciseness, godliness, Zeal, and other
virtues? When such respects are over, and their purpose compassed according to
their hearts desire; who can tell how they, or their successors may use the
Keys; or how they will besturr them with the Sword: If Flesh prove not a Pope
Ioane; and Blood a Pope Hildebrand, good enough. Accidents, that have happened,
may happen again: and all things under the Sun, are subject to casualtie,
mutabilitie, and corruption. At all adventures, it is a brave Position, to
maintain a souerain, and supreme authority in every Consistory; and to exempt
the Minister from superior Censure; like the high Priest, or greatest
Pontiffe, whom Dionysius Haly carnasseus calls (...). He had need be a wise,
and Conscionable man, that should be a Parlame^t, or a Chauncerie unto
himself: and what a furniture of divine perfections were requisite in the
Church, where so many Ministers, so many spiritual high Justices of Oier, and
Terminer: and every one a supreme Tribunal, a Synod, a General Council, a
Canon Law, a heavenly Law, and Gospel unto himself? If no Serpent can come
within his Paradise, safe enough. Or were it possible, that the Pastor,
(although a man, yet a divine man) should as it were by inheritance, or
succession, continue a Saint from generation to generation: is it also
necessary, that the whole company of the redoubted Seniors, should wage
everlasting war with the flesh, the world, and the Devil; and eternally
remain an incorruptible Areopage, without wound, or scarre? Never such a
College, or fraternity upon Earth, if that be their inviolable order. But God
help Conceit, that builds Churches in the Air, and platformeth Disciplines
without stayne, or spott.

They complain of corruptions; and worthily, where Corruptions encroche, (I am
no Patron of corruptions): but what a surging sea of corruptions would ouerflow
within few years, in case the sword of so great and ample authority, as that
at Jerusalem most capital, or this at Geneua most redoubted, were putt into
the hand of so little capacity in government, so little discretion in
Discipline, so little judgment in causes, so little moderation in living, so
little constancy in saying, or doing, so little gravity in behavior, or so
little whatsoever should procure reverence in a Magistrate, or establish good
order in a Commonwealth. Travail thorough ten thousand Parishes in England;
and when you have taken a favorable view of their substantiallest, and
sufficientest Aldermen, tell me in good sooth, what a comely show they would
make in a Consistory; or with how solemn a presence they would furnish a
Council Table. I believe, Grimaldus did little think of any such Senators,
when he writ de Optimo Senatore: or did Doctor Bartholmen Philip, in his
Perfect Counselor, ever dream of any such Cou^sellours? Petty
Principalities, petty Tyrants; and such Senats, such Senators. Wit might
devise a pleasurable Dialogue betwixt the Leather Pilch, and the Velvet Coat:
and help to persuade the better, to deal neighbourly with the other; the
other to co^te^t himself with his own calling. I deny not, but the short
apron may be as honest a man, or as good a Christian, as the long gown: but
methinkes he should scantly be so good a Judge, or Assistant in doubtful
causes: and I suppose, Ne Suitor vltra crepidam, is as fit a Proverb now, as
ever it was, since that excellent Painter rebuked that saucy Cobbler. Every
subject is not borne to be a Magistrate, or Officer: and who knows not, whose
creature Superior Power is? They are very-wise, that are wiser then he, by
whose divine permission, every one is that he is. The Laconicall Ephory has
lately borne a great swing, in some resolute Discourses of Princes, and
Magistrates; that thought they saved the world from the abomination of
desolatio^, when they found-out a bridle, or yoke for Princes: but old
Aristotle was a deep Politician in diebus illis: and his Reasons against that
Ephorie (for Aristotle confuted the Ephorie with sounder arguments, then ever
it was confirmed to this day) would not yet perhaps be altogether contemned:
That so great judicial causes were committed to men, endued with so little, or
no Virtue: That the poor Plebeians for very penury were easily bribed, and
corrupted: That there ensued an alteration of the state, the good Kings being
feign to currie favor with their great Masters, and to become Popular. Whither
this would be the end, and may be the mark of those, or our Populars, I offer
it to their consideration, that are most interessed in such motions of Ephoryes
and Senioryes. The world is beholding to brave and heroical minds, that like
Hercules, would practice means to pull-downe Tyranny, small, or great: and
reform whole Empires, and Churches, like the three victorious Emperors,
surnamed Magni, Constantine, Theodosius, and Charles. Thanks, were an
insufficient recompense for so noble intentions. It must be a guerdon of value,
that should counteruaile their desert, that pretend so fatherly, and Patronly a
care of reedifying Commonwealthes, and Churches. Some voluntary Counselors
do well in a State: and men of extraordinary vocation, singularly qualified
for the purpose, are worth their double weight in gold. When other sleep, they
watch when other play, they work: when other feast, they fast: when other
laugh, they sigh: whiles other are content to be lulled in security, and
nusled in abuse, they occupy themselves in devising pregnant bonds of
assurance, and exquisite models of Reformation. Which must presently be
advanced without further consultatio^: or they have courage, and will use it
in maintenance of so divine abstractes. Melancholy is peremptory in
resolution: and Choler an aeger Executioner. Were it not for those two
invincible arguments, there might still be order taken with other reasons, and
autorities whatsoever. They do well to presupppose the best of their own
deseignes, and to giue-out Cards of Fortunate Islands, artificially drawn:
but as I never read, or heard of any people, that committed swords into such
hands, but bought their experience with loss, and had a hard penyworth of
their soft cushion: so in my simple consideration, I cannot conceive, how
Ignorance should become a meeter Officer, then Knowledge; Affection a more
incorrupt Magistrate, then Reason; headlong Rashness, or wilful Stubbernesse,
a more upright Judge, then mature Deliberation; base Occupations enact, and
establish better orders, then liberal Sciences, or honorable Professions; (any
traffic, howsoever current, or aduantageous, has been judged indecent for a
Senator); tagg, and ragg administer all things absolutely-well, with due
provision against whatsoever possible inconveniences, where so many faults are
found with persons of better quality; that incomparably have more skill in the
administration of public affairs; more knowledge, and experience in causes;
more respect in proceeding; more regard of their credit; more sense of
dangerous enormities, or contagious abuses; more care of the floorishing and
durable estate of the Prince, the Commonwealth, and the Church. Na, I can see
no reason, according to the best grounds of Policy, that ever I read, but
for every Civil tyranny, or Petty misdemeanour, that can possibly happen
now, the government standing as it does; there must needs Vpstart a hundred,
and a hundred barbarous tyrannies, and huge outrages, were the new platformes,
Acts of Parliament; and the Complotters, such high Commissioners, as are
described in their own proiects, the floorishes of Unexperienced wits. When
they have nothing else to allege, that should make them superior, or equal
to the present Officers; Conscience must be their Text, their Gloss, their
Sanctuary, their Tenure, and their strong hold. Indeed Conscience, grounded
upon Science, is a double Ancher; that neither deceives, nor is deceived: and
no better rule, then a regular, or public Conscience; in divinity ruled by
Divinity, in law, by Law, in art by Art, in reason by Reason, in experience by
Experience. Other irregular, or private Conscience, in Public functions, will
fall-out to be but a lawless Church; a ship-mans hose; a iugglers stick; a
fantastical freehold, and a conceited Tenure in Capite: as interchaungeable
as the Moon, and as fallible as the wind. How barratous, and mutinous at
every puff of Suggestion, let the world judge. I would there lacked a present
Example, as hot, as fresh: but hot love, soon cold, and the fittes of youth
like the showers of April. There goes a pretty Fable of the Moon, that on a
time she earnestly besought her moother, to provide her a comely garment, fit
and handsome for her boddy: How can that be, sweet daughter, (quoth the
moother) since your body never keeps at one certain state, but changes every
day in the month? That private Conscience, the sweet daughter of Fancy, be
the Moral: and the assurance of the Common People, where there wants a
curb, the application. What Chameleon so changes his color, as Affection?
or what Polypus so variable, as Populus, chorus, fluuius? Doctor Kelke, when
he was Vicechauncelour in Cambridge, would often tell the Aduocats, and
Proctors in the Consistory there, that he had a knacke of Conscience, for
their knacke of Law. Truly the man, as he was known to be learned, and
religious, so seeemed to carry a right-honest, and harmless mind, and would
many times be pleasantly disposed after his blunt manner: but in very deed his
Conscience (be it spoken without appeachme^t of his good memory) other-whiles
proved a knacke, and admitted more inconveniences, (some would have said,
committed more absurdities) then became the gravity, and reputation of that
judicious Consistory. Yet were this newplotted Consistory erected, according
to the map of their own imagination, even upon the topp of the presumed mount
Sion: by the favor of that goodly prospect I dare undertake, amongst so many
thousand Ministers, with Episcopal, or more then Episcopal authority, there
must be but a few hundred Judges, like Doctor Kelke; and a very great dearth
of such Assistants, or Seniours, as that floorishing University affourdeth.
Alas, many thousands of them, Unworthy to carry the Beadles staff before the
(...); of their books after the other: how (...) for supreme, or free (...), I
report me (...) you. It is notably said of Aristotle in his Politiques: He that
would have the Law to rule, would have a God to rule: but he that commi^eth
the rule to a man, commits the rule to a beast. The Law, is a mind without
appetite; a soul without a boddy; a Judge without flesh, and blood; a balance
without Partiality; a mean without extremes. Where Conscience is such a Law,
I am for Conscience, let us professeno other Law; let us build us Consistories,
and (...) of Equity let us dwell in those (...) of Integrity: let us honor
that incorruptible scepter of Sincerity: let us set the Impetiall crown upon
the head of that Policy; and let that Discipline wear the Po^tificall miter.
The world wrongeth itself infinitely, if it runs not to the gaze of that
bewtifull (...); or refuses any order (...) that sacred Oracle. Otherwise, if
men be men, and that Co^sistory, no quire of Angels, or (...) of Saints, but a
meeting of neighbors, some of them rude, and gross enough, after the homelyest
guise, for without miraculous illumination, it must necessarily be so in most
Parishes): now I beseech you, has not Considernation some reason, to fear the
Delphical Sword: And the conuenied party, that was nothing affrayde of the
Deane, or the Canons; they, quoth be, are good Gentlemen, and my favorable
friends, but the Chapter is the (...); would (...) go high hand to say (...)
for the new (...), as for the old Chapter. Our Minister is a Zealous (...):
(...) such, and such my honest neighbors: but God bless me from the (...)
Consistory. They that can skill of (...), and know the ^, or what you please;
can hardly hope for any such Paradise, or All-hallowes in hoony lane, as is
plausiblie pounrayed in some late drawghts of Reformatio; sweeter in discourse,
then in practice. I will not prophecy of Continge^ts in speculation: but were
their Complot a matter (...), it is possible that even the Platformers
themselves, should have no such exceeding cause, (...) joy in their redoubted
Seniours. Some Potestats are queint men, and will by firres bear a brain,
maugre the best reason, or Purest Comscience in a Consutorie. And God knows,
how the People would digest it, (especially after some little trial of their
(...) rigor, and other (...) dealing) that their neighbor Whatchicalt,
sometime no wiser then his fellows, and such, and such a Freeholder of this,
and that homely (...), (somewhat base for a Senator) should so iollily perke
on the bench, amongst the Fathers Conscript, when some, that have a state of
inheritance, or maintain themselves upon ciuiler trades, must humbly wait at
the bar, and yield themselves obedient to the stern commandments of those
sage benchers. Iwis, the penny is a strong argument with such natures: and he
that (...) the heauiest purse, how unmeet soever he may seem for a
Consistory, (...) himself mightily wronged, (...) he be taken for the best,
or one of the best in the Parish: and if for his countenance, or other
charitable respect, he will not stick sometime to pleasure a good fellow, or a
poor neighbor, (some good fellows are killcowes, and some poor neighbors
all-hart) he may perhaps get (...) hardy partakers, and bare himself for as
mighty a man in the borrowgh, or village, as some of the foresaid redoubted
(...). How that would be allowed in Consistory, or how a thousand suites,
quarrels, vprores, and (...) mightbe pacified, yet vnprouided-for, or
vnthought-vpon by the compendious Summists; it would be considered in time,
whiles there is leisure from Practice. For after the Consistory is once up; in
such sweating harvest of most-busie business, a simple Pragmatique may easily
Prognosticate, how small a remnant of leisure will (...) for consideration.
There was much adooe, and other whiles little help, first at Jerusalem, with
one (...), and then at Geneua with one Seniorie, the two only exemplary
Presbiteryes: (for other Primitive Elderships will not fit the turn): what a
wonderful (...) would one, and some 52000. (...) make in England. Were not our
Reformation likely to prove a greater Sweat, or a (...), then any in Graftons,
Stowes, or Holinsheds Chronicle? Martin, under correction of your high Court of
Conscience, give me leave to bethink me attonce, upon the (...) of your
Discipline, and Phaetons regiment, in the hot Countries of the Orient. When
his brave (...) came to the Execution; solitaque lugum (...); a light
beginning, a heavy ending;

Necscit, qua sititer; nec sisciat, imperet illis: and so forth: (it is not
conceit, or courage, but skill, and authority, that manageth government with
honor): what was the issue of that yonkerly and presumptuous enterprise, but a
Diluge of fire, as ruthful, and horrible, as Deucalions Diluge of water?

Magne (...) cum moenibus Vrbes:
Cumque suis totas populis intendia Gentes.
In (...). You can best translate it yourselfe: and I leave the warm
application to the hot Interpreter: with addition of that short, but weighty,
and most remarkable advertisement;

Poenam Phaeton, pro munere poscis. Phaeton, thou desire thy ruin for thy
advancement: and Martin, thou affectest, thou wottest not what: a Discipline?
a confusion: a Reformation? a deformation: a Salve? a plague: a Bliss? a
curse: a Commonwealth? a Common-wo: a Happy, and Heavenly Church: a wretched,
and hellish Synagoge. Amount in imagination as high, as the hawtiest conceit
can aspire; and platform the most-exquisite deseignes of pure Perfection, that
the nicest curiosity can devise: were not the wisest on your side,
most-simplie simple in weying the Consequents of such antecedents, they would
never so inconsideratly labor their own shame, the misery of their brethren,
the desolatio^ of the Ministry, and the destruction of the Church. Good Martin
be good to the Church, to the Ministry, to the state, to thy country, to thy
patrons, to thy friends, to thy brethren, to thiselfe: and as thou loouest
thiselfe, take heed of old Puritanisme, new Anabaptisme, and final
Barbarism. Thou art young in years, I suppose: but younger in enterprise, I
am assured. Thy age in some sort pleads thy pardon: and could thou with
any reasonable temperance advise thiselfe in time, as it is high time to
assuage thy stomachous and ouerlashing outrage; there be few wise men of
quality, but would pity thy rash proceeding, and impute thy wanton
seurrilous Vein to want of Experience, and Judgment, which is seldom ripe in
the Spring. I will not stand to examine the Spirit, that speaks, or
endighteth in such a phrase: but if that were the tenor of a godly, or zealous
style, methinkes some other Saint, or godly man, should someway have used the
like elocution before: unless you meant to be as singular in your form of
writing, as in your manner of censuring; and to publish as grave an Innovation
in words, as in other matters. Some spiritual motion it was, that caused you
so sensibly to apply your rufling speech, and whole method, to the feeding
and tickling of that humor, that is none of the greatest students of
Divinity, unless it be your Divinity; nor any of the likelyest creatures to
advance Reformation, unless it be your Reformation. But whatsoever your
motion were, or howsoever you perfuaded yourselfe, that a plausible and
roisterly course would win the hearts of good fellows, and make ruffians
become Precisians, in hope to mount higher then Highgate, by the fall of
Bishopfgate; some of your well willers hold a certain charitable opinion, that
to reform yourselfe, were your best Reformation. Good Discipline would do
many good; and do Martin no harm; had he leisure from trainyng of other, to
train himself, and as one termed it, to trim his own beard. Howbeit in my
Method, Knowledge would go before Practice, and Doctrine before Discipline. I
challenge (...), or none for learning, which I rather love as my (...), or
(...) as my Patron, then profess as my Faculty: but some approved good
Scholars of both Universities, and some honorable wisemen of a higher (...),
take (...) to be none of the greatest Clerks in England; and (...), how he
should presume to be a Doctor of Discipline, that has much-adoe to show
himself a Master of Doctrine. For mine own part, I hope he is a better
Doctrinist, then Disciplinist: or else I must needs (...); Pride is a busy
man, and a deepet Counselor of (...), then of himself. (...) become public
persons; and may do well in some other, being well employed: but (...)
persons, and the common erewes of Platformers, might have most use of private
designements, appropriat to their own Vocation, Profession, or quality. When
I find Martin as neat a reformer of his own life, as of other men's act^, it
shall go hard, but I will in (...) measure proportion my commendation to the
singularity of his desert; which I would be glad to crown with a garland of
present, and a diadem of future praise. For I long to see a (...) without a
creast; and would (...), to (...) without a fault; or only with such a fault,
as for the (...) should deserve, or for the strangeness might challenge, to
be. Chronicled, like the Eclipse of the Sun. The State Demonstratiue, not
ouerlaboured at (...) would (...) be employed in blasoning a creature of such
perfections: and the very soul of Charity (...) to drink of that clear Aqua
Vitae. It is not the first time, that I have preferred a Gentleman of deeds,
before a Lord of words: and what if I once by way of familiar discourse said?
I was a Protestant in the Antecedent, but a Papist in the Consequent: for I
liked Faith in the Premises, butwished works in the Conclusion: as S. Paul
begins with Justification, but ends with Sanctification: and the
Schoolmen reconcile many Confutations in one distinction; We are justified by
Faith apprehensiuely; by Works declaratiuely; by the blood of Christ,
effectiuely. I hope, it is no euillsigne, for the flower to floorish, for the
tree to fructify, for the fire to warm, for the Sun to shine, for Truth to
embrace Virtue, for the Intellectual good to practice the Moral good, for the
cause to effect. He meant honestly, that said merrily; He took S. Austins, and
S. Gregory's by Paul's, to be the good friends of S. Faithes under Paul's. What
needs more? If your Reformation be such a restoratiue, as you pretend; what
lets, but the world should presently behold a Visible difference between
the fruits of the pure, and the corrupt diet? Why cease the heavenly
Discipline, to perme her own Apology, not in one or two scribled Pamflets of
counterfeit Complements, but in a thousand living Volumes of heavenly Virtues?
Divine Causes were ever wont to fortify themselves, and weaken their
adversaries, with divine Effects, as conspicuous as the brightest Sunshine.
The Apostles, and Primitive founders of Churches were no railers, or scoffers:
but painful trauailers, but Zealous Preachers, but holly livers, but
fayre-spoken, mild, and loouing men, even like Moses, like David, like the
son of David; the three gentlest (...), that (...) walked upon Earth.
Wheresoever they became, it appeared by the whole manner of their meek, and
sweet proceeding, that they had been the servants of a (...) Lord; and the
Disciples of a sweet Master: in (...), that many (...), which knew not God,
(...) them, as the (...), or Orators of some God; and were (...) persuaded, to
conceive a divine opinion of him, whom they so divinely Preached; and even to
believe, that he could be no less, then the son of the great God. Their
miracles got the hearts of (...): but then Sermons, and (...), were greater won.
ders, then their miracles, and won more raulshed souls to heaven. Then
Doctrine was full of power: their Discipline full of Charity: their Eloquence
celestial: their Zeal (...): their Life (...): their Conversation (...) their
Profession, Humility; their Practice, (...); their (...), Humility. Read the
sweet (...), replenished with many cordial narrations of their (...) Virtues:
and peruse the most rigorous Censures of their professed enemies, Pliny,
(...), Tacitus, Antoninus, Symachus; Lucian, Libanius, Philostratus, Eunapius,
or any like, Latinist; or Grecian, (I except not Porphyrie, Hierocles, or
Julian himself) and what Christian, or heathen judgment, with any
indifferency can deny, but they always demeaned themselves, like
well-affected, faire-conditioned, innocent, and kind persons; many ways
gracious, and somewayes admirable Peace was them war: Unity their
multiplication: good words, and good deeds, their edifying instruments: a
general humanity toward all, wheresoever they travailed; and a special
beneficence toward (...) one, with whom they conuersed, one of their Souerain
means, for the Propagation of Christianity. They knew his merciful, and
Godfull meaning, that in an infinite and incomprehensible love, descended from
heaven to save all upon Earth; and remembered how graciously his divine Self
(...), to converse with Publicans, and other sinners: what a sweet, and
peerlesse Example of humblest Humility he gave his Disciples, when with his
own immaculate hands he washed their feet: how appliably he framed himself
to the proper disposition of every Nation, in drawing unto him the Magicians of
the East, with the wondrous sight of a new Star; in moving the (...) with
miracles, and Parables; in showing himself a Prophet, and the very Messiah, to
the Samaritans; in sending eloquent Paul to the eloquent Grecians, Zealous
Peter to the devout Hebrews, and virtuous Romans, his brother Andrew to the
stout Scythians, incredulous (...) as to the infidel Parthians, and so forth:
what a (...) and precious dear Testament he left behind him, and with how
unspeakable favor he bequeathed and disposed the rich hereditaments, and
inestimable gooddes of his kingdom: how nearly it concerned the members of one
body, without the least intestine disagreement, or faction, to tender and
cherish one another with mutual indulgence: how frutefully the militant Church
had already increased by Concord, like a Plant of the triumpha^t Church, whose
blissful consort incomparably passes the sweetest harmony. The effect of
such divine motions was heavenly: and whiles that celestial course continued,
with an inviolable consent of United minds, even in some dissension of
opinions, (for there was ever some difference in opinions) the Gospel reigned,
and the Church floorished miraculously. It would make the heart of Piety, to
weep for joyful compassion, to remember how the Blood of those, and those
most-patient, but more glorious Martyrs, that might be slain, but not
vanquished, was the Seed of the Church. The Church, that grew victorious, and
mighty, by the beheading of Paul, and James; by the crucifying of Peter,
Andrew, Philip, and Simon; by the stoning of Stephen; by the burning of Mark,
and Barnabas; by the flaying of Bartholmew; by the murdering of Thomas with a
dart, of Matthew with a sword, of Matthias with an axe, of James Alphaeus with a
club; of how many renowned Martyrs with how many cruel and tyrannical
torments; immortal monuments of their invincible Faith, and most honorable
Constancy. When Asperitie, and Discord, degenerating from that Primitive
order; took an other course, and began to proceed, more like Furies of hell,
then Saints of the Church, or honest neighbors of the world: alas, what
followed? And unless we retire to our principles, although mischief upon
mischief be bad enough, yet ruin upon ruin will be worse. It is not a
ruffianly style, or a tumultuous plot, that will amend the matter: some
Apostolical virtues would do well; and thatsame Evangelical humility were
much-worth. In the mean season, suerly reverend Bishops, and learned Doctors,
albeit corruptible men, should be meeter to administer or govern Churches,
then lusty Cutters, or insufficient Plotters, albeit reformed creatures. Sweet
Martin, as well Junior, as Senior, (for Iuniours, and Seniours are all one, as
old Master Raye said in his maioraltie) and you sweet whirlewinds, that so
fiercely besturr you at this instant; now again, and again I beseech you,
either be content to take a sweeter course; or take all for me. My Interest in
these causes is small: and howsoever some busy heads love to set themselves
aworke, when they might be otherwise occupied, yet by their favors, there is a
certain thing, that passes all Understanding; which I commend Universally
unto all, especially unto my friends, and singularly unto miselfe. Nulla salus
bello: pacem te poscimus omnes. No Law to the Feciall Law; nor any Conquest to
Pacification. Would Christ, Reformation could be entreated to begin at itself;
and Discipline would be so good, as to show by example of her own house, where
she inhabiteth, and consorteth, what a Precious, and heavenly thing it were for
a whole kingdom, to live in such a celestial harmony of Pure Virtues, and all
perfections. Theoricks, and Idees are quickly imagined in an aspiring
fantasy: but an inviolable Practice of a divine excellency in humane
frailty, without excess, defect, or abuse, doubtless were a Crystal worth
the seeing, and a glorious Mirror of eternal Imitation. When Contemplation
has a little more Experience, it shall find, that Action is scantly so
smooth, and nimble a creature, as Speculation: two notable Preside^ts in
Concreto, more rare, then twenty singular Types in abstracto: they that shoot
beyond the mark in imagination, come short in trial: good inte^tions were
never too-rife, and the best intentie^s have gone astray. All men are not of
one mould: there is as great difference of Ministers, and Aldermen, as of other
persons: even where the spirit is strong, the flesh is sometime found weak
enough: and the world, is a world of temptations, murmurings, offenses,
quarrels, trespasses, crimes, and continual troubles in one sort, or other.

If the precisest, and most scrupulous Treatises, have much-adooe to uphold the
credit of any perfection, or estimation, with their own associats; (how many
heads, so many plottes) what may Reason conceive of the assurance, or maturitie
of their judicial, or other moral Proceedings in Esse? When His, and His
Scripture, after some pretty pausing, is become Apocryphal with his, and his
own adherents, whose writing was Scripture with many of them; how can any of
them ascertaine, or resolve themselves of the Canonical incorruption, or
autenticall omnisufficiencie of his, or his actual government? When even He,
that within these few years was alleged for Text, has so emprooued his
authority with a number of his feruentest brethren, that he will now be scantly
allowed for a current Gloss; why should defeated Affection any longer delude
itself with a preiudicate and vain imagination of an Alchimisticall
Discipline, not so sweet in conceit, as sower in proof; and as defective in
needful provision, as excessive in (...) presumption? If Second cogitations be
riper, and sounder, then the first; may not Third, or Fourth consultations take
more and more aduisement? If Bishops-gate be infected, is it impossible for
Alders-gate to be attainted? and if neither can be long clear in an Universal
plague of Corruption, what reason has Zeal to fly from Gods blessing into a
warm Sun? What a wisdom were it, to change for the worse? or what a
notorious folly were it, to innouate, without infallible assurance of the
better? What Politic state, or considerate people, ever labored any
Alteration, Civil, or Ecclesiastical, without Pregnant evidence of some
singular, or notable Good, as certain in consequence, as important in
estimation? To be short, (for I have already been ouer-long, and shall hardly
qualify those headdie younkers with any Discourse) had Martin his lust, or
Penry his wish, or Vdal his mind, or Brown his will, or Ket his fancy, or
Barrow his pleasure, or Greenwood his harts-desire, or the freshest
Practitioners their longing, (even to be Judges of the Consistory, or Fathers
Conscript of the Senate, or Domine fac totum, or themselves wott not what);
there might fall-out five hundred practicable cases, and a thousand disputable
questions in a year, (the world must be reframed anew, or such points decided)
wherewith they never disquieted their brains, and wherein the learnedest of
them could not say A. to the Arches, or B. to a Battledore. If the grauer
motioners of Discipline (who nodoubt are learneder men, and might be wiser: but
M. Trauers, M. Cartwright, Doctor Chapman, and all the grayer heads begin to
be stale with these Noouellists) have bethought themselves upon all cases, and
cautels in Practice, of whatsoever nature, and have thoroughly provided against
all possible mischieffs, inconveniences, and irregularities, as well future, as
present; I am glad they come so well prepared: suerly some of the earnestest
and egrest sollicitours, are not yet so furnished. Words are good fellows,
and merry men: but in my poor opinion, it were not amiss for some sweating,
and fierce dooers at this instant, that would down with Clement, and up with
Hildebrand, either to know more at home, or to sturr less abroad. It is no
trifling matter in a Monarchy, to hoise-vp a new Authority, like that of the
Jewish Consistory above Kings, or that of the Lacedemonian Ephorie above
Tyrants, or that of the Roman Senate above Emperors. Howbeit if there be no
remedy, but M. Fire must be the Pastor, M. Aier the Doctor, goodman Water
the Deacon, and goodman Earth the Alderman of the Church; let the young Calfe,
and the old Ass draw Cuttes, whither of their heads shall wear the garland.
And thus much in generality touching Martinizing, being urged to defend it, if
I durst: but for fear of indignation I durst not. The several
particularities, and more gingerly nicityes of rites, signs, terms, and what
not? I refer to the discussion of professed Deuines; or reserve for more ley
sure, and fitter occasion.

As for that new-created Spirit, whom double V. like an other Doctor Faustus,
threateneth to coniure-vpp at leisure, (for I must return to the terrible
creature, that subscribeth himself Martins Double V. and will needs also be
my Tittle-tittle) were that Spirit disposed to appear in his former
likeness, and to put the Necromancer to his purgation, he could peradventure
make the coniuring wisard for sake the center of his Circle, and betake him to
the circumference of his heels. Simple Creature, iwis thou art too-young an
Artist to conjure him up, that can exorcise thee down: or to lamback him with
ten years preparation, that can lamskin thee with a days warning. Out upon
thee for a cowardly lambacker, that stealest-in at the back door; and
think to filch advantage on the backwing. Knaves are backbiters; whores
bellybiters; and both sheepebiters. Pedomancie fitter for such Coniurers, then
either Chiromancie, or Necromancie, or any Familiar Spirit, but contempt. It
is some-boddyes fortune, to be baunted with backfreendes: and I could report a
strange Dialogue betwixt the Clarke of Backchurch, and the Chaunter of
Pancridge, that would make the better visard of the two to blush: but I favor
modest ears; and a thousand honest tongues will justify it to thy face, Thou
art as itwere a gross Idiot, and a very Ass in presenti, to imagine that thou
could go scotfree in this fawcy reckoning, although the party coniured
should say nothing, but Mum. Honesty goes never Vnbacked: and Truth is a
sufficient Patron to itself: and I know One, that has written a Pamflet,
entitled Cock-alilly, or, The white son of the Black Art. But he that can
massacre Martins wit, (thou remembrest thine own phrase) can rott Pat-hatchets
brain: and he that can tickle Mar-prelate with taunts, can twitch double V. to
the quick: albeit he threaten no less, then the siege of Troy in his
Note-booke, and his pen resounde, like the harnessed woombe of the Trojan
horse. I have seen a broad sword stand at the door, when a poinado has
entered: and although I am neither Ulysses, nor Outis, yet perhaps I can tell,
how No-boddy may do, that someboddy cannot do. Polyphemus was a mighty
fellow, and coniured Ulysses companions into excrements: (few Giants ever so
hideous, as Polyphemus): but poor Outis was even with him, and No-boddy
coniured his goggle eye, as well. I prey-thee sweet Pap, insult not overmuch
upon quiet men: though my pen be no-boddy at a hatchet, and my tongue less
then no-boddy at a beetle; yet Patience looueth not to be made a cart of
Croiden; and no such libbard for a lively Ape, as fordead Silence. The merry
Gentleman deuiseth to disport himself, and his Copesmates, with a pleasurable
conceit of quaking ears: and all my works, at least six sheets in quarto,
called by miselfe, The first tome of my familiar Epistle: two impudent lies,
and so known notoriously. He might as truly forge any lewd, or villainous
report of any man in England; and for his labor challenge to be preferred to
the Clarkship of the whetstone: which he is hable to maintain sumptuously,
with a mint of queint, and Uncouth Similes, dainty monsters of Nature. I must
deal plainly with the Spawne of ra^ke Calumny: his knauish, and foolish
malice palpably bewrays it self in most-odious fictions; meet to garnish the
foresaid famous office of the whetstone. But what says his own courageous
Pen, of his own aduenturous ears? If ripping-vp of Lives make sport, have
with thee knuckle deep: it shall never be said, that I dare not venture mine
ears, where Martin hazards his neck. Some men are not so prodigal of their
ears, how lavish soever Martin may seem of his neck: and albeit every man
cannot compile such graund Volumes as Euphues, or rear such mighty tomes, as
Pap hatchet; yet he might have thought, other poor men-haue tongues, and
pens to speak something, when they are provoked unreasonably. But loosers
may have their words, and Comedians their acts: such dry bobbers can lustely
strike at other, and cunningly rapp themselves. He has not played the
Vicemaster of Poules, and the Foolemaster of the Theater for naughtes: himself
a mad (...), as ever twangd, never troubled with any substance of wit, or
circumstance of honesty, sometime the fiddle-sticke of Oxford, now the very
babble of London, would feign forsooth have some other esteemed, as all men
value him. A workman is easily descried by his terms: every man speaks
according to his Art: I am threatened with a Babble, and Martin menaced with a
Comedy: a fit motion for a Iester, and a Player, to try what may be done by
employme^t of his faculty: Bables and Comedies are parlous fellows to
decipher, and discourage men, (that is the Point) with their witty flowers,
and learned Ierkes; enough to lash any man outof countenance. Na, if you shake
the painted scabbard at me, I have done: and all you, that tender the
preservation of your good names, were best to please Pap-hatchet, and fee
Euphues betimes: for fear less he be moved, or some One of his Apes hired,
to make a Play of you; and then is your credit quite-vndone for ever, and
ever: Such is the public reputation of their Plays. He must needs be
discouraged, whom they decipher. Better, anger an hundred other, then two such;
that have the Stage at commandment, and can furnish-out Vices, and Devils at
their pleasure. Gentlemen, beware of a chafing pen, that sweateth-out whole
realms of Paper, and whole Theaters of Iestes: it is adventure, if he dye not of
the Papersweat, should he chance to be never so little ouerchafed. For the
Iest-dropsie is not so peremptory. But no point of Cunning, to the Tale of the
Tubb: that is the profounde mystery, and the very Secret of Secrets. The sweet
Sisters Answer, that in her conscience thought Lechery the Superficies of
sin, (a rare word with women, but by her answer she should seem to be
learned): the true Tale of one of Martins godly sons, that having the
Company of one of his sisters in the open fields, said he would not
smoother-vp sin, and deal in hugger-mugger against his conscience: (the
Historiographer has many privy intelligences): the sober tale of the Eldest
Elder, that received forty Angels at his Table, where he sat with no less
then forty good dishes of the greatest dainties, in more pomp, then a Pope:
(he was not of the starued Pythagorean, or Platonicall diet: but liberal
exhibition may maintain good hospitality): the Zealous Looueletter, or
Corinthian Epistle to the widow, as honest a woman, as ever burnt malt: (the
wooer, or the Register of Aretines Religion): the holy Oath of the Martinist,
that thinking to swear by his conscience, swore by his Concupiscence: (did not
he forget himself, that expressly affirmed? Martin will not swear: but with
Indeed, In sooth, and In truth, bele cogg the dye of deceit:) these, and the
rest of those bawdie Inventions, wherewith that brothellish Pamflet flows,
smell somewhat strongly of the Pumpe; and show the credibilitie of the Author,
that dares allege any impudent, profane, or blasphemous fiction to serve his
turn. So he may soon make-vp the autenticall Legendary of his Hundred merry
Tales: as true peradventure, as Lucians true narrations; or the heroical
historyes of Rabelais; or the brave Legendes of Errant Knights; or the
egregious prankes of Howleglasse, Friar Rush, Friar Tuck, and such like; or the
renowned Bugiale of Poggius, Racellus, Luscus, Cincius, and that whole Italian
crew of merry Secretaryes in the time of Pope Martin the fifth; of whom our
worshipful Clerks of the whetstone, Doctor Clare, Doctor Bourne, M.
Scoggin, M. Skeleton, M. Wakefield, diverse late Historiologers, and happily this
new Talefounder himself, learned their most-wonder-full faculty. Committing
of matrimony; carousing the sapp of the Church; cutting at the bumme Card of
conscience; besmearing of conscience; spelling of Our Father in a horn book;
the railing Religion; and a whole sink of such arrant phrases, savor whotly
of the same Lucianicall breath, and discoouer the minion Secretary aloof.
Faith, quoth himself, thou will be caught by thy style: Indeed what more
easy, then to find the man by his humor, the Midas by his ears, the Calfe
by his tongue, the goose by his quill, the Play-maker by his style, the hatchet
by the Pap? Albertus Secrets, Poggius Fables, Bebelius iestes, Scoggins tales,
Wakefields lies, Parson Darcyes knaueries, Tarletons tricks, Eldertons
Ballats, Greenes Pamflets, Euphues Similes, double Us phrases, are too-well
known, to go unknown. Where the Vein of Braggadocio is famous, the artery
of Pappadocio cannot be obscure. Gentlemen, I have given you a taste of his
Sugerloafe, that weeneth Sidneyes daintyes, Aschams co^fites, Cheeks succats,
Smithes co^serues, and Mores iunkets, nothing comparable to his pap. Some of
you dreamed of Electuaryes of Gemmes, and other precious restoratiues; of the
quintessence of Amber, and Pearl dissolved, of I wott not what incredible
delicacies: but his Gemmemint is not always current; and as busy men, so
painted boxes, and gallipots must have a Vacation. Yet welfare the sweet heart
of Dia-pap, Dia-fig, and Dia-nut, three sovereign Defensatiues of the
Commonwealth, and three cordial Comfortatiues of the Church. It is a good
hearing, when good fellows have a care of the Commonwealth, and the Church:
and a godly motion, when Interluders leave penning their pleasurable Plays, to
become Zealous Ecclesiastical writers. Bona fide, some have written notably
against Martinisme: (it were a busy task for the crediblest Precisian, to
empeach the credit of Doctor Bancroft, or Doctor Sutcliff): but this Mammaday
has excellently knocked himself on the sconse with his own hatchet. I will
castaway no more ink upon a Compounde of simples. The Pap is like the
hatchet: the fig like the nut: the Country-cuff like the hangmans apron: the
dog like the dog: John Anoke, and John Astile like the baily of Withernam: the
sign of the Crabtre cudgel like twackcoate Lane: Martins hanging like
Pappadocios mowing: Huff, Ruff, and Snuff, the three tame ruffians of the
Church, like double V: never a lay in the barrel, better herring: the
beginning, the midst, and the end, all in one pickle. Some roses amongst
pricks, do well: and some lillyes amongst thorns, would have done no harm.
But Envy has no fancy to the rose of the garden: and what cares Malice for
the lilly of the Valley? Would, fair Names were spelles, and charms against
foul Affections: and in some respects I could wish, that Divinity would give
Humanity leave to conclude otherwise, then I must. I could in courtesy be
content, and in hope of Reco^ciliation desirous, to mitigate the harshest
sentences, and mollify the hardest terms. But can Truth lie: or Discretion
approve folly: or Judgment allow Vanity: or Modesty abide Impudency: or
good manners sooth bad speeches: He that penned the aboouementioned
Cock-alilly, saw reason to display the Black Artist in his collier coolours:
and thought it most-vnreasonable, to suffer such light and empty vessels, to
make such a loud, and proud rumbling in the air. Other had rather hear the
learned Nightingale, then the Unlearned Parrat; or taste the wing of a Lark,
then the leg of a Raven. The finest wits prefer the loosest period in M.
Ascham, or Sir Philip Sidney, before the tricksiest page in Euphues, or
Pap-hatcher. The Muses, shame to remember some fresh quaffers of Helicon: and
which of the Graces, or Virtues blusheth not, to name some lusty tospots of
Rhetorique? The stately Tragedy scorneth the trifling Comedy: and the
trifling Comedy flowteth the new Ruffianisme. Wantonness was never such a
swillbowle of ribaldry: nor Idleness ever such a carowser of Knauerie. What
honest mind, or Civil disposition, is not accloied with thesenoisome, and
nasty gargarismes? Where is the polished and refined Eloquence, that was wont
to bedeck, and embellish Humanity? Why should learning be a niggard of his
excellent gifts, when Impudency is so prodigal of his rascal trish-trash?
What dainty, or neat Judgment begins not to hate his old love, and loath
his ancient delight, the Press, the most-honorable Press, the most-villanous
Press? Who smileth not at those, and those trim-trammes of gawdie wits, how
floorishing Wits, how fading wits? Who laugheth not at I Will, I Will, I Will; or
gibeth not at some hundred Pibalde fooleryes, in that harebraind Declamation?
They whom it neerelyest pincheth, cannot silence their just disdain: and I am
forcibly urged to intimate my whole Censure, though without hatred to the
person, or derogation from any his commendable gift, yet not without special
dislike of the bad matter, and general condemnation of the vile form. The
whole Work, a bald Toy, full of stale, and wooden Iestes; and one of the most
paltry things, that ever was published by graduate of either University; good
for nothing but to stop mustard pottes, or rub gridirons, or feather rattes
neastes, or such like homely use. For Stationers are already too-full of such
Realms, and Commonwealthes of Wast-paper; and find more gain in the lilly
pot blanke, then in the lilly pot Euphued: a day, or two fine for sheets, and
afterward good for grosers: Vanitas vanitatum, the foam of grudge, the froth of
leuitie, the scum of corruption, and the very scurfe of rascallitie: nothing,
worthy a Scholar, or a Civil Gentleman: altogether fantastical, and fond,
without ryme, or reason: so odly hudled, and bungled together, in so madbraine
sort, and with so brainesicke stuff, that in an Ouerflowe of so many
frivolous, and ridiculous Pamflets, I scarsely know any One in all points, so
incomparably vain and absurd, whereunto I may resemble that most toyishe and
piperly trifle, the fruit of an addle, and lewd wit, long-since dedicated to a
dissolute, and desperate Licentiousness. Oh what a Magnifico would he be, were
his purse as heavy, as his head is light, and his heart frank? Even thatsame
Very Mirror of Madness, hangs together with some more coherence of reason;
and smells not so rankly of the Tavern, the Alehouse, the Stews, the
Cuckingstoole, or other such honest places, as that drunke^, and shameless
Declamation; Unbeseeming any, but an Orator of Bedlam, a Rhetorician of
Bridewell, or Discourser of Primerose hill. And although thatsame French
Mirror, be ex Professo devised in a mad garish Vein, and stuffed with geere
homely enough, fit for a Libertine and frantique Theme: yet does it no so
basely borrow of the Ruffians bag, the Tapsters spigot, the Pedlars pack, the
Tinkars bugget, the Knaves trusse, and the Roges fardle: unto all which, and
other Autors of like reputation, but chiefly to the Hangmans apron, (that, that
is the biggin of his wit), this worthy Autour is deeply beholding for great
part of his fine conceits, and dainty learning; precious ware for Euphued
creatures, and fantastical colrs: whose wild and madbraine humor nothing
fitteth so just, as the stalest dudgen, or absurdest balductum, that they, or
their mates can invent, in odd and awke speeches, disguisedly shapen after the
antic fashion, and monstrously shorn, like old Captain Listers spa^nel. They
that affect such ruffianish braueryes, and divide their roisterdoistring Iestes
into Cuttes, slashes, and foines, may bestow the reading: for any other of
whatsoever quality, or calling, it will do them as much good, as dirt in their
shoes, or draffe in their bellyes: and in good sooth there is all the use,
Civil, or Ecclesiastical, that I can find of this Babees papp: whom for his
sweet interteinement with papp, figg, and nut, I officiously recommende to the
Ship of Fools, and the Galeasse of knaves. When he uses himself with more
modesty, and his friends with more discretion, I may alter my style: (let him
change, and I am changed): or if already he be ashamed of that coniuring
leaf, foisted-in like a Bumcarde, I have said nothing. Till he disclaimeth his
injury, in Print; or confesses his oversight, in writing; or signifies his
Penitence, in speech: the abused party, that had reason to set-downe the
Premises without favor, has cause to justify his own hand without fear;
and is as well in equity to auowe Truth, as in charity to disauowe Malice. At
Trinity hall: this fifth of November: 1589.

SO then of Pappadocio: whom nevertheless I esteem a hundred times learneder,
and a thousand times honester, then this other Braggadocio; that has more
learning, then honesty, and more money, then learning, although he truly
entitle himself, Pierce Penniles, and be elsewhere styled the Gentleman
Raggamuffin. Nash, the Ape of Green, Green the Ape of Euphues, Euphues the
Ape of Envy, the three famous mammets of the press, and my three notorious
feudists, draw all in a yoke: but some Scholars excel their masters; and
some lusty blood will do more at a deadly pull, then two, or three of his
yokefellowes. It must go hard, but he will emprooue himself, the incompatable
darling of immortal Vanity. Howbeit his friends could have wished, he had not
showen himself to the world, such a ridiculous Suffenus, or Shakerly to
himself, by aduauncing the triumphall garland upon his own head, before the
least skermish for the victory: which if he ever obtain by any valiancie, or
bravure, (as he weeneth himself, the valiantest and brauest Actour, that ever
managed pen) I am his bondsman in fetters, and refuse not the humblest
vassalage to the sole of his boot. Much may be done by close confederacy, in
all sorts of coosenage, and legierdemane: Monsieur Pontalais in French, or
Messer Vnico in Italian, never devised such a nipping Comedy, as might be made
in English, of some leagers in the queint practiques of the Crosbiting Art: but
I have seen many Bearwardes, and Butchers in my time; and have heard of the
one, what belongs to Apes; and have learned of the other, not to be affrayde
of a doosen horned beasts: albeit some one of them should seem as dreadful,
as the furious dun Cow of Dunsmore heath, the terriblest foman of Sir Guy.
Aesops Ox, though he be a suer ploughman, is but a slow workman: and Greenes
Ape, though he be a nimble Iuggler, is no suer executioner. Yet well-worth the
Master-Ape, and Captaine-mammet, that had a hatcher, as well as Papp; a Country
cuffe, as well as a fig; a crabtree cudgel, as well as a nutt; something of a
mans-face, with more of an Apes-face. Had his pen been muzled at the first, as
his mouth has been bunged since, these fresh Euphuistes would never have
adventured upon the whip, or the bobb: but Silence is a slave in a chain; and
Patience the common Pack-horse of the world. Even this brat of an Apesclogge,
that can but mowgh with his mouth, gnash with his teeth, quauer with his ten
bones, and brandish his goose-quill; presuming of my former sufferance, lays
about him with the said quill, as if it were possessed with the sprite of
Orlando Furioso, or would teach the clubb of Gargantua to speak English. For
the flaile of Ajax distrawght, or the clubb of Hercules enraged, were but
hedge-stakes of the old world; and vnworth the naming in an age of puissance
emprooued horribly. The newest Legendes of most hideous exploits, may learn a
new Art to kill cow men with peremptory terms, and bugges-wordes of certain
death. Pore I must needs be plagued; plagued? na, brayed and squised to
nothing, that am matched with such a Garga^tuist, as can devour me quick in a
sallat; and thundreth more direful threatenings against me, that only touched
him; then huge Polyphemus rored against Ulysses, that blinded him; or banning
Virgill reared against Arius, that spoiled him. Genus irritabile Vatum. The
generation of rauing Poets, is a swarm of gad-bees; and the anger of a moodie
rimester, the fury of a Waspe. A mad Tiger, not like a mad Waspe; and a chafed
Wildbore, not comparable to a chafed gad-bee. Take heed of the man, whom
Nature has marked with a gag-tooth; Art furnished with a gag-tongue; and
Exercise armed with a gagpenne; as cruel and murdrous weapons, as ever drew
blood. The best is, who has time, has life. He means not to come upon me
with a cowardly stratageme of Scarborough warning: he uses a certain gallant
Homericall Figure, called Hysteron-proteron, or the Cart before the horse; and
with a resolution menaceth the effect, before the Causes be begotten. When the
iron Cart is made, and the fiery horses foled, they shall bring the mighty
Battringram of terms, and the great Ordinance of miracles, to town: ask not
then, how he will plague me. In the mean season, it is a wonder to see, how
courageously he takethon with his hostisses needles, and his botchers bodkins.
Indeed a good Soldier will make a shrewd shift with any weapons: but it is a
marvelous heart, that threatens Ruin, ruin, ruin, with the dint of a bodkin,
and the blade of an awle. Where such an other Rodomont, so furious, so
valorous, so redoutable? There is a piece of a good old Song, peradventure as
ancient, as the noble Legende of Sir Beuis, or Sir Lancelot du Lake:
Dubba-dubba-dubb, kill him with a clubb:


And he will not dye, kill him with a fly. He that made that Ryme in jest,
little considered, what a gad-fly may do in earnest. It is small wisdom, to
contemn the smallest enemy: the gad-fly is a little creature; but some little
creatures be stingers: never fauchon better managed, then some tidy
penneknifes: and what will he do, when he rusheth upon me with the tempestuous
Engines of his own wit, that keeps such a horrible coile with his
Schoole-fellowes poinado? An Ape is never to seek of a good face, to set upon
the matter. Blessed Euphues, thou only happy, that have a train of such good
countenances, in thy floorishing greene-motley livery: miserable I, the
unhappiest on earth, that am left desolate. Ah, but that might be endured:
every man is not borne, to be the leader of a band: every bird carries not
Argus eyes displayed in her tail: Fame is not every boddies Saint: to be
forsaken, is no great matter; to be utterly undone, is miserable. That, and the
Vnmercifullest persecution that may be invented, is cruelly proclaimed against
quiet him, that was once thronged and pestred with followers: but when he began
to giue-ouer that green haunt, and betook himself to a riper Profession,
Diomedes companions were changed into birds. Times alter: and as Fortune has
more sectaries, then Virtue; so Pleasure has more adherents, then Proffit: I
had no sooner shaken of my young troop, who^ I could not associate as before,
but they were festiually reinterteined by some nimble wightes, that could take
the advantage of opportunity (with good visages you may be suer), and had
purposely line in wait to climb in Print, by the fall of their Seniours: like
ambitious Planets, that enhaunse their own dignities, by the combustion, or
retrogradation of their fellow-Planettes. Much good may that advancement do
them; and many dainty webbs may I see of those fine Spiders: but although I
dote upon curious workmanship, yet I love not artificial poison; and am
almost angry with the trimmest Spinners, when they extort venom out-of
flowers, and will needs defile their friends Libraries with those encroching
cobwebbs. I wis it were purer Euphuisme, to win hoony out-of the thistle; to
sweeten Aloe with sugar; to perfume the stinking Sagapenum with musk; and to
mitigate the heat of Euforbium with the (...) of the lilly. Tush, you are a
silly humanitian of the old world: that was the simplicity of the age, that
loved friendship, more then gold, and esteemed every thing fine, that was neat,
and holesom: all was pure, that was seasoned with a little salt; and all trim,
that was besprinkled with a few flowers: now the fiercest Gunpouder, and the
rankest pikesawce, are the brauest figures of Rhetorique in esse: and he the
only man at the Scriueners Pistol, that will so incessantly haunt the
Ciuilian, and Divine, that to avoid the hot chase of his fiery quill, they
shall be constrained to ensconse themselves in an old Vrinall case. Give me such
a Bonifacius. Now wellworth some terms of Aqua fortis at a pinch: and welcome
Vrinall case, a fit sconse for such valiant terms; and a meet Bulwark against
that fiery quill. I have already felt his pulse; and cannot well cast his
water, without an Vrinall, either old, or new: but an old Vrinall will not so
handsomely serve the turn: it would be as new, as the Capcase of Strange
News: but a pure mirror of an impure stale; neither gross, the clearer to
represent a gross substance; nor green, the liuelyer to express some green
colors, and other wanton accidents; nor anyway a harlot, the trulyer to
discoouer the state of a harlatrie. I have seen as hot an Agent made a tame
Patient; and gladd to ensconse the dregs of his shame in an old Vrinall. It
is a blabb: but not every man's blabb, that casts a sheepes-eye out of a
Calues-head; but a blabb with judgment; but a blabb, that can make excrements
blush, and teach Chawcer to retell a Canterbury Tale. But such great Judicials
requier some little studdie: and S. Fame is disposed to make it Hallyday. She
has already put-on her wispen garland over her powting Croscloth: and behold
with what an Imperial Majesty she comes riding in the ducking-chariot of
her Triumph. I was never so sick of the milt, but I could laugh at him, that
would seem a merry man, and cannot for his life keepein the breath of a fumish
fool. Phy, long Megg of Westminster would have been ashamed to disgrace her
Sunday bonet with her Satterday wit. She knew some rules of Dccorum: and
although she were a lusty bounsing rampe, somewhat like Gallemella, or maid
Marian, yet was she not such a roinish rannell, or such a dissolute
gillian-flurtes, as this wainscot-faced Tomboy; that will needs be Danters
Maulkin, and the only hagge of the Press. I was not wont to endight in this
style: but for terming his fellow Green, as he was notoriously known, the
Scriuener of Crosbiters; the founder of ugly oaths, the green master of the
black art; the mocker of the simple world, et caetera: see, how the
daggletaild rampalion bustleth for the franktenement of the dunghill. I
confess, I never knew my Inuectiue Principles, or confuting terms before: and
perhaps some better Scholars are nigh-hand as far to seek in the kind
rudiments, and proper phrases of pure Nasherie. Why, thou errant Butter whore,
(quoth he, or rather she) thou Cotqueane and scrattop of scolds, will thou
never leave afflicting a dead carcass, continually read the Rethorique Lecture
of Ram ally? A wisp, a wisp, a wisp, ripp, ripp you kitchinstuffe wrangler.
Holla Sir, sweeter words would do no harm. Doubtless these emphaticall
terms of the ally, were laid asteepe for some other acquaintance, not for me:
(good fellows must be furnished with Oratorie, meet for their company): but
it is some men's evil luck, to stu^ble in the way, when Will Summers weapon is
ready drawn: and yet more possible for him to stay the swing of his eger hand,
then for Maulkin to stay the dint of her moodie tongue; that can teach the
Storme-winde to scould English; and pleads natural possession of the
Cuckingstoole. It is good policy, to yield to the fury of the tempest: (the
resolutest hearts are feign to yield to the imperious Jurisdiction of Storms,
and Shrewes): and the stamping feind, in the Hoat-house of her foming Oratorie,
will have the last word. Sweet Gossip, disquiet not your loouely self: the
dunghill, is your freehold; and the Cuckingstoole, your Copyhold: I know none
so rank-minded, to enter upon your proper possessions thy riot: and incase thou will needs also, be the Schoolemistris of Ramme-ally, certainly thou desire
but thy right; that can read a Rhetotorique, or Logique Lecture to Hecuba in
the Art of rauing, and instruct Tisiphone herself in her own gnashing
language. Other He-or She-drabs, of the curstest, or vengeablest ranks, are
but dipped, or dyed in the Art: not such a Belldam in the whole kingdom of
Frogs, as thy croking, and most clamorous Self. Even Martins Unbridled
style, and Pap-hatchets reastie eloquence, is but a curtaild jade to thy
longtaild Colt. Let the Clock strike: I have lost more hours; and loose
nothing, if I find Equity. Should the Butterwhore, besturre herself like an
arrant Knight, and try all the conclusions of her cherne, she might
peradventure in some sort pay thee home with Schoolebutter: but undoubtedly she
should have much adooe, to stop thy Ouen-mouth with a lidde of Butter, that
have swapped-downe a pound of Butter at a piece of a Breakefast, or else there
be lies; and art such a Witch for a cherne, or a cheese-presse, as is not to be
found in the Mallet of Witches, or in Monsieur Bodines Daemonomania. Three
meals of a Lazarello, make the fourth a Woolner: and it is a crauen
drying pan, that is affrayde of a Butterwhore. No, no; the butterwhore is thy
bondmaide in a bunch of keys: and take heed syrrha, the Cheeseknaue be not
her bondma^ in a load of logges. She comes not of the blood of the
threateners: but kitchinstuffe, and a Cole-rake have in times past been of some
familiar acquaintance: and it is a badd paier of Tongues, that cannot make as
good sport at a pinch, as a paier of Bellows. Though a dish of buttered pease,
be no great Warrior; yet a mess of buttered artichokes, may perhaps hold you
some pretty tacke. Only I bar thossame hoursonne unlawful terms, steeped
in cisternes of Aqua fortis, and Gunpowder: and have at you a gentle crash;
when it shall please the Vrinall, and the Dairy, to give me leave to play, with
a butter-fly. I do you, the uttermost credit in the world, that am ever glad
to seek dilatorie excuses, and to crave a term ad deliberandum. The fortune
of the field, with pike, or pen, is like the luck of Navigations, or the hap
of marriage: and I love not greatly, to chopp upon maine-chaunces. Nothing
Venture, nothing loose; none of the worst rules, or cautels for their
security, that can tell Stories of hap-hazard; and have known some gallants
more hardy, then wise. Humanity is desirous of Peace with the best; and of
truce with the worst: and truly I never longed to fight it out with flat
strokes, Until I must needesly needs: but if there be no remedy by treaty,
or amicable composition, although I was ever a sloweworme in the Morning, yet I
cannot abide to go to bed with a Dromedarie. I cannot marvel enough, how the
nimble Be should be engendered of the sluggish Ox, or the lively waspe of the
dead horse: but Nature is a miraculous, and omnipotent workman; and I find it
true by Experience, that I must learn to imitate by Example, or prejudice
miselfe by favoring other. To prejudice, were a small matter, where the party
leuelleth at no great matter: but when a man's credit is assaulted with
bugges-wordes, and his wit beleaguered with the euer-playing shot of the
Press; Wisdom must pardon him, whom Folly assaileth; and Humanity dispense
with a necessary Apology. I would I might make it a Policy, to make
myaduersarie much, and much, and much better, then he is: that I might
reencounter him with the more reputation, or the less disparagement: but it is
his glory, to shame himself notoriously; and he will needs proclaim his own
vanities in a thousand sentences, and whole Volumes of ribaldry; not to be read
but upon a muck-hill, or in the priuyest privy of the Bordello. Let his Vices
sleep on a down pillow: would, I could awaken his Virtues; and stopp their
mouths, that wish me in sober earnest, not to foil my hands upon such a
contemptible rascal; but to let the reckles Villain play with his own shadow:
(Truth is my witness, diverse honest men of good reckoning, and sundry
worshipful Gentlemen, have advised me in those very terms expressly): but
sithence I ca^ do him no good by persuasion, it were folly to suffer him to
do me harm by detraction. You that are not ascertained of the lewd, and vile
disposition of the man, imagine as favorably of him, as Charity can possibly
conceive of an impudent Railer, and a profane mouth: but you, that can skill
of learning, and love Schollership, give him his desert: do Equity right, and
him no wrong, that wrongeth whom he lists. They that have leisure, to
castaway, (who has not some idle hours to loose?) may peruse his guegawes
with indifferency: and find no Art, but Euphuisme; no wit, but Tarletonisme;
no honesty, but pure Scogginisme; no Religion, but precise Marlowisme; no
consideration, but mere Nashery: in brief, no substance, but light feathers;
no accidents, but lighter colors; no transcendents, but lightest fantasies;
that sty abooue the highest region of the clouds, and purpose to have a saying
to the man in the Moon. His mountains of Imagination, are too-apparent: his
designements of Vanity, too-visible: his plots of Ribaldry, too-palpable: his
forms of libelling, too-outragious: S. Fame, the goddess of his devotion: S.
Blase, the idol of his Zeal: S. Awdry, the lady of his love: and the young
Vicar of old S. Fools, his ghostly Father. I have heard of many notable proud
fools: read of many egregious aspiring fools: seen many hautie vayneglorious
fools: woondred at many busy tumultuous fools: but never saw such a famous
arrogant conceited fool, the very transcendent fool of the Ship; that hugely
contemns all the world, but his own Flimflams; and against all Policy,
makes his adversary more then an Ass, and less then nothing; whose victory
otherwise might peradventure have seemed something. But to ouercrow an Ass,
is a sorry Conquest; and a miserable Trophy for so douty a Squier. There were
ways enough of aunswearing, or confuting, with variety, and reason; to his
own credit, the satisfaction of other, and my contentment: although he had
not desperately, and scurrilously broken-out into the fowlest and filthiest
scurfe of odious terms, that Villainy could invent, or Impudency utter. Iwis
he might have spied a difference, between staring, and starke-blinde;
between raging, and starke-madd; between confuting, and rank railing in the
grossest sort. Had he seasoned his style with the least spice of discretion,
or tempered his unmeasurable licentiousness with any moderation in the world;
or hadd he not most arrantly labored, to show himself the very brazen
forhead of Impudency, and the iron mouth of Malediction, without all respect:
he might easily have found me the calmest, and tractablest adversary, that
ever he provoked; as reasonable for him, as for miselfe, in causes of Equity;
and as partial to foe, as to friend, in controversies of Truth. But it is the
topp-gallant of his brauest bravure, to be a Creator of Asses, a Confuter of
Asses, and a Conqueror of Asses: Asses are borne to bear; and Birds to soar
aloft. No wings, to the wings of Self-conceit; nor any sails, to the sails
of words: but hagard wings are sometimes clipped; and hoised sails
oftentimes humbled. Words amou^t, like Castles of vapors, or pillars of
smoke, that make a mighty show in the Aier, and straight Vanishaway. Howbeit
Envy, is a soking Register: and Spite, a Remembrancer of trust. That would be
written in a glass of wine, is otherwhiles found in tables of marble, and
indentures of wainescot. The Oestridge can devour the rust of Iron; and the
gall of present Obloquy may be brucked: but the note-booke of malice, is a
monument of Tuchstone; and the memorial of Feude, the clawe of an Adamant.
Pride swells in the pen of arrogance: Vanity bubleth in the mouth of
folly: Rancour boileth in the heart of Vengeance: mischief hammereth in the head
of Villainy: and no such Art memoratiue, as a Crabtree deske. But in contempt of
Pride, I will speak one proud word: Vain Nash, whom all posterity shall call
vain Nash, were thou the wisest man in England, thou would not; or were
thou the valiantest man in England, thou durst not have written, as thou have
desperately written, according to thy green wit: but thou art the boldest
bayard in Print; a hare-braind fool in thy head; avile swad in thy heart; a
foul liar in thy throat; and a vainglorious Ass in thy pen: as I will
prove upon the carcass of thy wit, and courage, through-out all the
Predicaments of proof. I hate malice in miselfe: but love not to be an
Vpholster of stuffed, and bombasted malice in other. And because thou termest
me an old Fencer; (indeed I was once Tom Burleys Scholar); and need
displing, as much as any rakehell in England: Wheresoever I meet thee next,
after my first knowledge of thy person, (not for mine own revenge, but for thy
correction) I will make thee a simple fool, and a double swad, as well with my
hand, as with my tongue; and will engraue such an Epitaph, with such a
Kyrieeleson upon thy scull, as shall make thee remembered, when Sir Gawins scull
shall be forgotten. Some bibber of Helicon, will deem it worth eternal
record. And if thou entreat me not the fayrer, (hope of amendment preuenteth
many ruins), trust me, I will batter thy carrion to dirt, whence thou camst;
and squise thy brain to sniuell, whereof it was curdled: na, before I leave
poudring thee, I will make thee swear, thy father was a Ropemaker; and
proclaim thiselfe, the basest drudge of the Press; with such a strange
Confutation of thine own strange News, as shall bring Sir Vainglory on his
knees; and make Master Impudency blush, like a Virgin. Thy wit already makes
buttons: but I must have S. Fame disclaim her black Sanctus; and Nashes
devout Supplication to God, to forgive Pierces reprobrate Supplication to the
Devil. It must be roundly done: or I will with a charm for a full stomach,
make the gorge of thy belching Rhetorique, and the pau^ch of thy surfeiting
Poetry, fling figures upward, and downward. Phy, what need that be spoken?
True: there is choice enough of sweeter flowers; and neat Oratory interteineth
neatest Civility; (what relish so pleasant, as the breath of Suada; or what
smell so aromaticall, as the voice of the Muses?) but the mouth of a rude Ass,
can taste no other lettice; and the spawne of a beastly dogfish, will understand
no other language but his own. Fury must be tamed with Fury, according to
Homer, that teaches the God of the field to strike home; obstinacy awed with
obstinacy; force mastred with force; threatenings cooled with threatenings;
contempt answered in his own toungue: and seeing the wild Colt is so
unreasonably lusty, I mean percase either to make his courage crowch forward,
or his Art winch backward. I have twenty and twenty charms, for the breaking
of stubborn iades, for the biting of mad dogs, for the stinging of
Scorpio^s, for the darting of Vrchins, for the haunting of sprites, for the
storming of tempests, for the blasting of lightning, for the rattling of
thunder, and so forth; even for the craking of an hundred Paphatchets, or a
thousand Greenes, or ten thousand Nashes Peagooses. And in case all happen to
fail, (for it must be a mighty Exorcisme, that can coniure-downe Spite) I have
a Probatumest, of a rare and powerable virtue, that will hold the nose of his,
or his conceit to the grindstone; and make gentle Villainy confess, all the
shreddes, and rags of his slashingest terms, are worn to the stumpes. The
desperate fool may clawbacke himself awhile: but it is possible, he may soon
find by sound Experience; He brayeth open war against him, that can bray
the Asse-drumme in a mortar; and stamp his Iewes-trumpe to Pindust. Tom
Drum, reconcile thiselfe with a Counter-supplication: or suerly, it is
fatally done; and thy S. Fame utterly undone world without end. As sauory a
Saint, by the verdict of that excellent Gentlewoman, as the cleanely
disbursing of the dirtpurse of Sir Gargantua, that made king Charlemaine, and
his worthy Chiualry, laugh so mightily, that their heads aked eight days
after. A meet Idol for such a Beadman.

I have digressed from my purpose, and wandered out-of my accustomed way: but
when the buttermilke goes on Pilgrimage, you must give the butterwhere leave
to play the arrant knight a crash, and to make it ganging week for once.
Ganging week? na, a ganging day, I trow, is a large allowance; and enough to
betire a poor straggling wench for all her bragges. Never sorry less so
pitifully aweary of her ragged petticote, and dagled tail; the tattered
livery of the confuting Gentleman. Let it go; and the wispe go with it. I
honor the meekest Humility; but scorn the infolentest Arrogance under my
foot; and say to the highest Imagination of Vanity, Thou art a proud Fopp.
When thou carriest thy wit loftiest, and prankest-vpp thy selfelooue in his
gawdiest colors, Thou art but an Asses head, and a Peacockes tail. Love
other; and thou may be looued of other for pure Charity: hate other, and thou
art one of the most odious paddes in the world: a Turk, for M. Aschams Archers
to shoote-at; and a Jews eye, for Christian needles. Now a little breathing
pawse will do no harm.

Were not Malice as wilful in maintaining abuse, as rash in offering the same;
and Arrogance as obstinate in the Conclusion, as violent in the Premises: I
readily could, and willingly would undertake a more temperate, and pleasing
course: but the fairest offer is fowly contemned; the gentlest suite unkindly
repulsed; say I, what I can, malice will be itself; or do I, what I can,
Arrogance will be itself: and no other impression can sink into the heart of
Spite, or the ear of Pride, but instigations of Spite, or suggestions of
pride. Other motives, are mere simplicities: and every treaty of pacification,
or parley of reconciliation, the shaking of an aspen leaf. The Devils Orator,
is an Heralde of war, not a Legate of Peace: and his Dammes Poet, the rankest
challe^ger at short, or long, that ever sent defiance in white, or black. To
refuse the trial, would in the common opinion seem a shame; to accept the
offer, in the best judgments is a shame: to take the foil, were a discredit;
to give the foil, is no credit. A hard case, where Patience may be supposed
simple, and auengement will be reputed unwise; where I cannot hold my peace
without war upon war, nor speak without blame upon blame; where I must
either be a passive, or an active Ass in Print. I stand not upon the point of
honor, or upon terms of reputation: but as it is a glory for the inferior,
to offer the combat, like the Cha^pion of prowes, or the Duellist of courage;
so I would the superior might refuse that without prejudice, which he cannot
undertake without disparagement, or perform without obloquie. To spoil Pierce
Penniles, were a poor booty: and to make Thomas Nash kiss the rod (by her
favor, that has pleasurably made him a Sulta^ Tomu^boius, and another
Alma^nus Hercules, the great Captain of the Boys) were as sorry a victory; but
only in her Bello Euboico, or in her main-battaile of Scouldes. Yet seeing he
provoke me so malapertly hand to hand; and seeing the infancy of his fancy
will not otherwise be weaned from his cranke conceit: better such a victory
with some inconvenience, (for I hope, I may without arrogance presume of the
victory) then continual disturbance with more and more mischief. Hector never
raged amongst the Grecians, nor Achilles amongst the Trojans; as Meridarpax,
the most furious, and thriseredoubted Captain of the mise, rushed upon the
woeful frogs, in that Heroical battle. But Meridarpax himself, in his
^npetuous, and massacrous sallyes, never made such a havoc of the miserable
frogs: as this Swash-pen would make of all English writers, howsoever
garnished with eloquence, or stored with matter, might he be suffered to hew
them down, like stocks, or shrubbes, without co^trowlement. He will soon be
ripe, that already (...) so lusty onsets; and threateneth such desperate maine
carreers, as surpass the fiercest Caualcads of Bellerophon, or Don Alonso d'
Aualos. Nothing curtaileth the courage of his bravery, or daunteth the swelling
chiualry in his nostrels, but that excellent learning is not esteemed, as it
deserves: nor singular men advanced, according to the merits of their
worthiness. Might Penniles, singular Penniles, be the Preferrer of his own
Virtue, or Judge of his own cause; (as he courageously contendeth): I believe,
a Velvet coat were scantly good enough for his wearing, that now remains
most humbly, and thrise-affectionatly bounden to the Right-honorable
Printing House, for his poor shifts of apparel, and his rich capp of
maintenance. An Anatome of the Mind, and Fortune, were respectively as
behoouefull and necessary, as an Anatome of the Body: but this
Captain-Confuter, (like galla^t Lobbellinus in a new livery) neither knows
himself, nor other: yet presumes he knows all things, with an overplus of
somewhat more, in knowing his Railing Grammar, his Rauing Poetry, his Roisting
Rhetorique, and his Chopping Logique: with whose help, he has thwitled the
milpost of his huge, and omnipotent conceit, to a pudding-pricke of Strange
News. Strange news indeed, that Pierce Penniles should create more Asses in
an hour; then the brave king of France, (now the mightiest Warrior in
Christendom, and a great aduauncer of valor,) has dubbed Knights in his
reign. The Ironyes of Socrates, Aristophanes, Epicharmus, Lucian, are but
Carterly derisions: the Ironyes of Tully, Quintilian, Petrarch, Pontane,
Sanazarius, king Alphonsus, but the sorry Iestes of the Counsell-table Ass,
Richard Clarke: the Ironyes of Erasmus in his praise of Folly; of Agrippa in
his disprayse of Sciences; of Cardan in his Apology of Nero, like Isocrates
commendation of Busiris, or Lucians defense of Phalaris the Tyrant, but Good
Bear bite not: the Ironyes of Sir Thomas More in his Vtopia, Poemes, Letters,
and other writings; or of any their Imitatours at occasion, but the girdes of
every milkemaide. They were silly country fellows, that commended the Bald
pate, the Fever quartane; the fly, the flea, the gnat, the sparrow, the wren,
the goose, the ass; flattery, hypocrisy, coosinage, bawdery, leachery,
buggery, madness itself. What Dunse, or Sorbonist cannot maintain a
Paradoxe? What Pesant cannot say to a glorious Soldiour? Pulchre mehercule
dictum, and sapienter: or, Laute, lepide, nihil supra: or, Regem elegantem
narras: or, a man is a man, though he have but a hose upon his head: or so
forth. No such light payment Gabriell, at Pierce Penniles, or Thomas Nashes
hand. They are rare, and (...) wits, that can roundly call a man Ass at
every third word; and make not nice, to befoole him in good sullen earnest,
that can strangle the prowdest breath of their pens, and means to borrow a
sight of their giddiest brains, for a perfect Anatome of Vanity, and Folly.
Though strong drink fumeth, and Aqua fortis fretteth; yet I will not exchange
my Milkemaides Irony, for his Draff-maides assery. It is not the first time,
that I have disputed de Vmbra Asini; and proved the Fox, the finder; as wily a
pigeon, as the cunning Goldsmith, that accused his neighbor, and condemned
himself. A melancholy boddy, is not the kindest nurse for a chearely mind:
(the Iouiall complexion is souerainly beholding to Nature): but I know not a
finer transformation in Ovid, then the Metamorphosis of dudgen earnest into
sport; of harsh sower into sweet; of loss into gain; of reproach into credit;
of whatsoever badd occurrence into some good. I was never so splenetique, when
I was most dumpish, but I could smile at a friseiest, when the good man would
be pleasurable; and laugh at fustion earnest, when the merry man would be
surly. Strange News will be as pleasant as a cricket, by Cattes panges: and
where such a Turlery-ginkes of conceit, or such a gibbihorse of pastime, as
Strange News? But fillip him, or twitch him never so little; and not such a
powting waspe in Ramme-ally, or such a winching jade in Smithfield. Then Ass,
and worse then a Cumane Ass, and fool, and dolt, and idiot, and Dunse, and
Dorbell, and dodipoul, and Gibaltar, and Gamaliell Hobgoblin, and Gilgilis
Hoberdehoy; and all the rusty-dusty iestes in a country, are too-little for his
great Confutation, that is lineally descended ab Equis ad Asinos; and
taketh-on, like Hob-all-as, a stout king of the Saracens. When I am better
grammered in the Accidents of his proper Idiotisme, and grown into some more
acquaintance with his confuting Dictionary; I may peradventure conster, and
pierce the whole Alphabet of his sweet Eloquence a little better; and make some
farther trial of M. Aschams double translation, a pretty exercise in a fit
subject. Meanewhile I am glad, to see him swim up to the beardlesse chinne
in a Sea of hoony, and ypocrase, that so lately was plunged in a Gulf of other
liquor, and parlously dashed upon the horrible Rock of desperation. It is
good, they say, to be merry, and wise.

Poggius was merry, and Panormitan wise: Marot was merry, and Bellay wise:
Scoggin was merry, and the Lord Cromwell wise: Green was merry, and Sir
Christopher Hatton wise: Nash is merry, and there be enough wise, though his
mothers son be Pierce Penniles. Or if thou beist wise, or would seem no
fool, beware of Casual ties, and a new Attractiue. Thy toungue is a mighty
Loadestone of Asses; and must do as much for thine own natural ears, as the
Magnes does for Iron. As good do it at-first, as at-last: and better voluntary
confession with favor, then enforced profession with more shameful penance.
Balaams Ass was wise, that would not run upon the Angels sword: Aesops Ass no
fool, that was gladd to fawn upon his master, like a Dog: Lucians Ass,
albeit he could not fly, like the witch his hostisse, (whose miracles he
thought to imitate, had not her gentle maid coosened him with a wrong box)
yet could he Politiquely save himself, please, or ease his masters, delight
his mistrisses, show many artificial feats, amaze the beholders, drink the
purest wine in Thessalonica, and finally eat roses, as well as thistles:
Apulius Ass, was a pregnant Lucianist, a cunning Ape, a loouing worm, and
(what worthyer praise?) A golden Ass: Machiauels Ass of the same metal, and
a deep Politician, like his founder, could provide for One, better then the
Sparrow, or the Lilly: Agrippas Ass, a wonderful compou^d, and (may I say?)
a divine beast, knew all things, like Solomon, and bore all burdens, like
Atlas. The great Library of king Ptolomy in Egypt, reported to have been
replenished with seventy thousand Volumes, not such a Library of books, or
such an University of Arts, and Sciences, as Agrippas Ass. They that
reverence the wondrous Prophecies of the Cumane Sibyll, A malthea, the chiefest
of the ten inspired Sibylles; defend, or favor the excellent qualities of the
Cumane Ass; esteemed by Varro, the most profitable servant of that Country,
and by Columella the most necessary Instrument of all Countries. Every Ass is
naturally a well disposed creature, and (as the learned Rabbines have written)
a mirror of clemency, patience, abstinence, labor, constancy, and divine
wisdom. No such Schoolmaster for a wild boy, or a rash fool, as the sober,
and stayed Ass; the Countryman of the wise Apollo, and the seven wise masters.

Venerat and senior pando Silenus asello. Silenus the tender foster-father, and
sage tutour of the wanton and frolic Bacchus, afterward how brave, and
fruitful? What an Oriental worthy? What an Indian Conqueror? What a
festival God? When Priapus, the shameless God of the garden, (so gentility
called that leacherous Devil) attempted to surprise Vesta sleeping; what an
honorable piece of service performed the honest Ass, that with his loud
braying detected that villainous assault? What heathen memorial more shameful
to that infamous God, the^ the solemn Sacrifice of that famous beast,
celebrated by the Lampsacens, in reuengement, and reproach of that treasonable
enterprise? But what treason, like the treason of Politic Achitophell, and
plausible Absolon, that most disloyally, and desperately rebelled against the
sacred majesty of the most valorous, and incomparable worthy kind, David? And
what reward, or advancement meeter for such treason, then hanging? And who
carried the wise Achitophel to hanging, but his own foolish Ass? And who
carried the desperate Absolon to hanging, but his own sober mute? What should
I surcharge your memory with more histories attonce? He that remembers the
government of Balaams Ass, Aesops Ass, Lucians Ass, Apuleius Ass,
Machiauels Ass, Agrippas Ass; the Cumane Ass, the Rabbines Ass, Apollos
Ass, the seven Sages Ass, Silemas Ass, Priapus Ass, Achitophels Ass, and
Absolons mule; little needs any other Tutour, or Counselor. Some would
presume to allege the singular, and peerlesse example of the Christian Poet:
Ille viam ostendit, vili qua vectus asello


Rerum Opifex. Agrippa, Cardan, Trithemius, Erasmus, and diverse other notable
Scholars, affecting to show the variety of their reading, and the
omnisufficie^cie of their learning, have been boulder in quoting such reverend
examples, upon as light, or lighter occasion: but humanity must not be
too-sawcie with divinity: and enough is better then a Feast. Sweet Apuleius,
when thou have wiped thy mouth with thine own Asse-dung; and thine own
Toungue has said unto thy Pen, Pen thou art an Ass: then fellow-asses may
shake hands, and they clapp their hands that have heard the Comedy of
Adelphi, or the two Asses: a more notable Pageant, then the Interlude of the
two Sosias, or the two Amphitryos, or the two Menaechmi, or the two Martin
Guerras; or any such famous Pair of the true person, and the counterfeit. But
Asses carry mysteries: and what a riddle is this? that the true man should be
the counterfeit; and the false fellow the true Ass. Or what a Secret in
Philosophy shall I reveal, as unto the sons of the Art: when I tell you,
Asses milk is restoratiue, good for the gowte, for the blouddie flixe, for the
clearenesse of the skin: Asses blood, good for the fever lurdane: Asses
flesh sodden, good for the Leprosy: Asses liver roasted, good for the falling
sickness: Asses hooues burned to ashes, good also for the same sickness, for
the kings evil, for woomen laboring with a dead burden: Asses bones
well-boiled, good against the empoisonment of the sea-hare: Asses stale, good
for the raines of the back, and a fine decoratiue to bewtifie the face by
taking-of spots, and blemishes: Asses dung, a sweet nosegay to staunch blood,
a souerain sumigation to expel a dead birth out-of the moothers woombe, and a
fair emplaster for a foul mouth, as it might be for the mouth of Bawdery in
ryme, or of Blasphemy in prose. No Homericall Machaon, or Podalirius,
comparable to the right Ass; that teaches the greatest Empiriques,
Spagiriques, Cabalists, Alchimistes, Magicians, and occult Philosophers, to
wrapvp their profoundest, and Vnreuealable mysteries in the thickest skin, or
rather in the closest intrals of an Ass. I would; some open-mouthed
Libertines, and professed Atheists had as deeply learned that cunning lesson.
Even the dead carcass of the Ass, ingendreth the flying Scarabe, or soaring
Beetle, the noble and Unreconcilable feudist of the Aegle: of whom my brave
adversary, the famousest dor-beetle of this age, has learned to contemn, and
deprave the two mounting Aegles of the heavenly art of Poetry, Buchanan in
Latin Verse, and Bartas in French meeter: Whose gross imperfections he has
also vowed to publish; with an irrefragable Confutation of Beza, and our
floorishingest New-writers, as well in divinity, as in humanity; only divine
Aretine excepted. But no thunderblasing affrighteth, or touches the right
Aegle: and the least feather of the right Aegle, can soon devour the bastard
wings of other envious, and quarrelous birds. What carrion Ass was the Sire
of this unappeasable Scarabe; or what Scarabe shall be the son and heir of
this carrion Ass; I leave it wholly to the discourse of the learned Aegles,
that were ever molested with the buzzing fly, and shall ever be haunted with
the braying Beast. I must spin-vp my task. And because the wild-asse wants a
picker-deuant, let him drink his own Urine, tempered with Spicknard, as he
carouseth Helicon; and according to the tradition of Vitalis de Furno, it will
procure, and increase hair; as kindly, as the Artificial liniment of Doctor
Leuinus Lemnius for a comely Beard. And incase he fears his fellow Greenes
sluttish disease, let him read the natural histories of the Ass, and the
Sheep, in Aristotle, Pliny, or Gesner; and he shall find it one of their
special Privileges, to be exempted from the arrest of the sixfooted Sergeant,
a continual haunter of other hairy beasts, and only favorable to the good
Ass, and the gentle Sheep. Or if happily he would be shod with a pair of
everlasting shoes, like the talaria of Mercury, (for alas that any Gentleman
of worth, or correctour of the Lord du Bartas, should lie in the Counter in his
boots for want of shoes); Albertus, and Cardan will teach him to make
incorruptible shoes of the durablest part of an asses hide, immortal leather.
And o sweet Muses of Parnassus, are not the sweetest pipes, and pleasantest
instruments made of Asses bones? or do not the skillfull Geographers, Strabo,
and Pliny, call dainty Arcadia in Peloponesus, (the native country of the great
Apollo) the Land of Asses? Was not the renowned Pan, the Politic Captain of
the co^querous Bacchus, and a supposed God in the Painim world, an Arcadian
Ass? Was not Prince Arcas, the brave son of king lupiter, after his death
honored with the glorious memorial of the Great Bear in heaven, an Arcadian
Ass? Was not the Little Bear, his moother Calisto, an Arcadian Ass? Was not
her father, the drad Tyrant, Lycaon, an Arcadian Fox, an Arcadian Woolfe, an
Arcadian Ass? Was not the mighty Atlas, the father of Maia, and grandfather of
Mercury, an Arcadian Ass? was not Mercury himself, the mostnimble, and
supereloquent God, an Arcadian Ass? Was not Astrophill, excellent Astrophill,
(an other Mercury at all dexterities, and how delitious a Planet of heavenly
harmony,) by his own adoption, an Arcadian Ass? Histories are no snudges in
matters of note: and asses had never less cause to be ashamed of asses. When
wise Apollo, when Valorous Pan, when employable Mercury, when surmounting
Atlas, when the Great, and Little Bear of heaven, when excellent Astrophil,
glory in the honorable title of Arcadian Asses, who would not coouet to be
recoonted in that memorable Catalogue? What generous, or noble Antiquity, may
wage comparison with Statius Arcadians,

Astris, Lunaque priores. Sweetness itself was the daughter and darling of
Arcadia: and Arcadia the mother, the nurse, the dug, the sweet-hart of
Sweetness itself. O the sugarcandy of the delicate bagpipe there: and o the
licorise of the divine dulcimers there. No marvel though his Music be
sweeter, and sweeter, that is as fine an Asinus ad lyram, as the famous
Disciple of the worthy Ammonius; and has Greenes mellifluous Arcadia at his
fingers ends, the very funeral of the Countess of Pembrookes Arcadia. His
other habiliments, and complements be innumerable: and I know not an Ase, but
has some good quality, that is, some special property of an Ass, either
proffitable for commodity, or pleasurable for delight, as an Ass may be
proffitable, or pleasurable, either simply, or in some respect. It was not for
nothing, that the brauest king, that ever reigned upon Earth, Alexander the
Great, even greater, then any Mars, or Jupiter, that ever brandished scepter in
the world; in his Royal and Valorous judgment preferred the Ass before the
man, when being solemnly commanded by Oracle, to sley the first living
Creature he should fortune to meet withal, if after his puissant, and
conquerous manner he would that day obtain the Victory; he happened to meet a
good honest Countryman, riding upon an Ass: whose present sacrifice, as a
most acceptable Oblation, made him Victorious. Less marvel of the Archbishops
answer, in mensa Philosophica, and Pontans Dialogues, that having reverently,
and devoutly Preached on Palm Sunday, of the She-Asse, whereupon Christ in
humility voutsafed to ride; and after his lowly Sermon mounting upon his losty
palfry, was riding his way; somewhat fatherly and graciously stayed awhile, to
hear the old woomans suite, that came hastily running toward him, and boldly
taking his horse by the bridle; now I beseech your Grace, quoth she, is this
the She-Asse, whereupon Christio humility rode? No, moother, quoth he, but a
poor fool of that rich Ass, and I a humble servant of that high Lord. Good
enough, quoth the wooman, I knew not before, that the gentle She-asse your
Grace Preached of, had such goodly foles: yes, mother, quoth the Bishop, and a
great deal goodlier, then mine: and so departed, leauingbehind him an
everlasting memory of thatdeuout Sermon, and that weighty Communication with
the wooman, in honor of the Ass, a fruitful parent of many goodly, and
pompous foles. I will not trouble Boccace, or Poggius for Tales. He was a
natural fool, that would have giden his livery again unto his Lord, because
it was embrodered with Asses heads, which made a comely show upon his
garment, and might ful-well have beseemed some richer coats. Could the mill,
the plough, the pack, the hamper, the paniar, the cloakebagge, the burden, the
fardell, the bag and baggage, the ^udgell, the goade, penury, famine,
patience, labor itself speak; all other Apologies were superfluous: they
would frame a substantial and necessary defense of the Ass; and Experience
would declame in commendation of his perpetual Exercise, travail, industry,
Valor, temperance, sufferance, magnanimity, and constancy, the honorablest and
inuinciblest virtues in the world. The wisest Economy makes especial account
of three singular members; a merchants ear; a pigges mouth; and an Asses
back. A short note, but worth all Tussers, or Catos husbandry. Had I more
experience in some cases, I could say more; and as my experience in those cases
may happen to increase, or amount, I will not fail to tender my deuoire. I
have penned large Discourses in praise of studdy, meditation, conference,
exercise, industry, vigilance, and perseverance, the worthiest things in the
circuit of the Earth, (nothing under heaven, equivalent to labor): and
whatsoever I have addressed in their behalf, I may in sort all edge in honor
of the Ass; and compile whole Volumes in his commendation, more auailable for
commodity, and more necessary for Use, then the works of some great Commenters
in humanity, Philosophy, history, and other higher Professions. He that can
kindly play the right Ass, in ignorance will find knowledge, in poverty
wealth, in displeasure favor, in ieoperdy security, in bondage freedom, in
war peace, in misery felicity. Who so thoroughly provided for both fortunes,
as he: or who so strongly armed against all casualties, as he^ or what Seneca,
Epictetus, Boethius, Petrarch, or Cardan, so effectual a Schoolmaster of
Sustine, et Abstine, as he^ or who such an Oeconomer to live, as he: or who
such a Philosopher to dye, as he^ or what Physician for the boddy, like him: or
what Lawier for the substance, like him: or what Divine for the mind, like
him? or where such a Practitioner of Virtue, as he: or where such a
Fortune-wright, as he? or finally where such an apt subject for the Civil, and
moral reformation of the Prudent Augustus, the good Traian, the gentle Marcus
Antoninus, the virtuous Alexander Seuerus, the drad Septimius Seuerus, or any
honorable Prince, or Politic Tyrant, that with a reverend authority, would
establish Virtuous, and awful orders of government in his dominions?

But what an Ass am I, that proceed so coldly, and dully in the Apology of so
worthy a Creature? What will you say, Gentlemen, if I can prove with pregnant
arguments, artificially drawn from all the places of Invention, according to
Ramus, Rodolphes, or Aristotle's Logique; that the fire-breathing Oxen, and
mighty Dragon, which kept the most-famous Golden Fleece, the glorious prize of
brave Jason, were Asses of Colchos: that the watchful, and dreadful Dragon,
which kept the goodly Golden Apples, in the Occidentall Islands of the Ocean,
called Hesperides, one of the renowned prizes of dowty Hercules, was a
West-Indian Ass: that the golden-horned, and brasen-footed Menalian heart, the
fierce Erymanthean Bore, the hideous birds Stymphalides, the puissant Nemaean
Lion, and the seuen-hedded Lernaean Hydra, which Hercules slew, were Asses of
Arcadia, and other adjacent countries of Morea: (for Maenalus, and Erymanthus
were hills in Arcadia, Stymphalus a lake in Arcadia, Nemaea a wood in Argolis,
and Lerna a fen in Argolis, an other shire of Morea): that the Serpent with the
golden creast, which kept the rich fountain of Mars in Greece, and was slain
of valiant Cadmus, was an Ass of Boetia, so called a boue, where the Prophet
Amphiaraus breathed Oracles: that the huge Serpent, Python de monte, engendered
shortly after Deucalions deluge, which the Arcadian god of Wisdom killed with
his arrows, the first founders of the Pythian Games, was a mighty Ass of the
mountains: that the mounting Aegle, into which king Jupiter turned, not
himself, but Ganymedes, (whom he took with him, as his flying Page, and used
as his standing cupbearer) was a faithful servant, and a perpetual Ass:
that the hondredeyed Argus, whom Queen Juno appointed the keeper of Io, the
fairest creature of the Arcadian herd, and whom Mercury Iullabyed asleep with
a sweet Syrinx, or Arcadian Pipe, (many Stratagemes, and mysteries in that
Arcadian Pipe) was a blind Ass of Arcadia: I skip a thousand memorable
Histories; that all they, by whatsoever noble, or glorious names entitled,
that having charge of greatest importance, and inestimable Value, committed to
their vigilant and ielous custody, did attonce forgo their treasure, their
honor, and their life (as many great personages for want of circumspection
have done) were notorious Arch-asses. If I cannot substantially prove all
this, and for a need euict by necessary, and immediate demonstration, that the
great world is a great Ass, as well actu, as Potentia; and the Microcosme, a
little Ass, as well habitu, as affectione; say I am a notable Ass, as well re,
as nomine. The Philosopher, that seeking-about with a candle at high noone,
could not find a Man in a populous market; without a candle would soon have
pointed at a fair of Asses; and could quickly have discoouered a fruitful
generation in every element, in the water, on the Earth, about the fire, in the
Aier. And the wiseman, that said without exception, Stultorum plena sunt
omnia; might easily have been entreated, to have set it down for a souerain
Maxim, or general rule; Asinorum plena sunt omnia. The thundering Orator
Demosthenes, was not affraide to taunt Minerua, the armed Goddess of fine
Athens, for exhibiting favor to three unreasonable beasts, the Owl, the
Dragon, and the People: counting the People the most importunate and
intolerable beast of the three, by whose appointment he was banished the dainty
City, the only seat of his reigning Eloquence. If the people of fine Athens,
were such a barbarous and senseless brute, as their excellentest Orators,
Philosophers, Captains, Counselors, and Magistrates found to their cost:
and if the people of brave Room, the Lady, and Empress of the world, were
such a bellowing beast of many heads, as Horace called it, Tully proved it,
Scipio fealt it, and Caesar himself rued it; what may be said of other people?
Floorishing Greece in many hundred years acknowledged but seven wise-me^ of
special note; as the ancient world acknowledged but seven miracles, or
magnificall spectacles worth the seeing: and Callimachus a sweet Poet,
recording the memorable, and wonderful things of Peloponesus, termed them
Paradoxes. Vortuous Italy in a longer term of dominion, with much adooe bred
two Catos, and One Regulus: but how many Syluios, Porcios, Brutos, Bestias,
Tauros, Vitellios, Capras, Capellas, Asinios, and so forth? Other
singularities, meet matter for Tullyes Paradoxes. The world was never given to
singularities: and no such monster, as Excellency. He that speaks, as other
use to speak, auoideth trouble: and he that does, as most men do, shall be
least woondred at. The Ox, and the Ass, are good fellows: the Libbard, and
the Fox, queint wisardes: whatsoever abooue the common capacity, or usual
hability, a Paradoxe. I will not bethink miselfe of the rigorous sentences of
Stoicall Philosophers, or the biting Apothegs of seditious Malcontents, or the
angry sayings of froward Saturnistes, or the tumultuous Proverbs of mutinous,
people: (I have small affection to the reasons, that are drawn from
affection): but were not the world, an Universal Ox, and man a general Ass,
how were it possible, that so many counterfeit slightes, crafty conueiances,
subtle Sophistications, wily coosenages, cunning impostures, and deep
hypocrisies should ouerflow all: so many opinions, Paradoxes, sects, scismes,
heresies, apostasies, idolatrics, Atheismes should pester the Church: so many
frauds, shifts, collusions, coouens, falsifications, subornations,
treacheries, treasons, factions, commotions, rebellions should disturb the
Commonwealth? It is a world to consider, what a world of Follyes, and Villainies
possesses the world: only because the world is a world, id est, an Ass. And
would the Press suffer this scribbling Ass to dominere in Print, if it were
not a Press, id est, an Ass? Might it please his confuting Aship, by his
favorable permission to suffer One to rest quiet; he might with my good leave
be the grau^d General of Asses, or reign alone in his proper dominion, like
the mighty Assyrian king, eue^ Phul Assar himself, the famous son of the
renowned Phul Bullochus. For so the Gentlewooman has entitled him in a place,
or two, that has vowed the Canonizatio^ of Nashes S. Fame, in certain
Discourses of regard, already dispatched to my satisfaction, and almost
accomplished to her own intention. It may peradventure be his fortune, to
leave as glorious a nephew behind him, as ever was the redoubted
Lob-assar-duck, an other noble king of Assyria; not forgotten by thesaid
excellent Gentlewoman, but remembered with such a grace, as bewtifieth divine
wits. Kindhart has already offered faier for it: and were it not that the
great Phul Assure himself had forestalled and engrosed all the commodities of
Assyria, with the whole Encomium of Asses, into one hand; it should have gone
very-hard, but this redoubted Lob-assar-duck would have retailed, and regrated
some precious part of thesaid commodities, and aduauncements. He may happily in
time by especial favor, and approved desert, (what means of preferment, to
especial favor, and approved desert?) be interteined, as a chapman of
choice, or employed as a factour of trust; and have some stables of Asses at
his appointment, as may seem meetest for his carriages, and conueiances. For
mine own part, I must be contented to remain at his devotion, that has the
whole generation of Assyrians at commandment; with a certain personal
privilege, or rather an Imperial Prerogative, to create and enstall Asses at
pleasure. Had I not lately reuisited the Assyrian History, with thesaid
virtuous Gentlewooman, one of the gallantest ornaments of her sex; I might
perchance have omitted this small parcel of his great honor, and left the
commendation of the Ass more imperfect: which notwithstanding I must still
leave most-vnperfect, in respect of his unspeakable beau-desert. Unto whom for
a farewell, I ca^ wish no more, then accomplished honor; nor no less, then
athleticall health. A short exhortation, will serve Socrates, to continue like
himself. A roach not sounder, then a haddocke, or the stockfish, that
Plinytermeth Asellus: and nothing so unkindly hurts an Ass, as the two
melancholy beasts, cold, and the drowsy sickness; the cause, why Asses
cannot abide to inhabit the most-cold, and frosen territories of Scythia; but
are glad to seek their fortunes in other countries, and to colonise in warmer
seats. Blame him not, that says; The weather is cold, and I am weary with
confuting: and in another place; Had I my health, now I had leisure to be
merry: for I have almost washed my hands of the Doctor. Now I see thou art a
good fellow by thine own confession, and (...) not give the Asses head for the
washing: Cold, and the drowsy sickness, are thy two mortal enemies: when
they are fled the Country, like fugitive, and dismal birds, (...) us have a
flitch of mirth, with a fiddle of the purest Asse-bone: only I bar the
Cheeke-bone, for fear of Sampsons tune, more then heroical. But the
spring-tooth in the iawe, will do us no horme, although it were a fountain of
Muscadell, or a conduict of Ypocrase. Many are the miracles of right Virtue:
and he (...) an infinite Labyrinth, that goeth-about to praise Hercules, or the
Ass: whose Labors exceed the Labors of Hercules, and whose glory
surmounteth the topp of Olympus. I were best to end, before I begin; and to
leave the Author of Asses, where I found the Ass of Autors. When I am better
furnished with competent provision, (what provision sufficient for so mighty a
Province?) I may happily assay to fulfill the Proverb, by washing the Asses
headd, and setting the crown of highest praise upon the crown of young
Apuleius, the heir apparent of the old Ass, the most glorious Old Ass.

I have written in all sorts of humors priu^tly I am persuaded, more then any
young man of my age in England. They be the words of his own honorable mouth:
and the golden Ass, in the superabunda^ce of his rich humors promises many
other golden mountains; but has neuera scrat of silver. Had Aristophanes
Plutus been outwardly as libe, rall, as Greenes Mercury was inwardly prodigal,
he must needs have been the only Oriental Star of this Language: and all
other writers, old, or new, in prose, or verse, in one humor or other, but
sorry Occidentall St^rres. C^nely external defects, queth himself, are cast in
his dish: for internal graces, and excellentest perfections of an accomplished
mind, who but he? Come divine Poets, and sweet Orators, the silver streaming
fountains of flowingest wit, and shiningest Art: come Chawcer, and Spencer;
More, and Cheek; Ascham, and Astely; Sidney, and Dier; come the dearest sister
of the dearest brother, the sweetest daughter of the sweetest Muses, only One
excepted, the brightest Diamant of the richest Eloquence, only One excepted,
the resplendentest mirror of Feminine valor, only One excepted; the
Gentlewooman of Courtesy, the Lady of Virtue, the Countess of Excellency, and
the Madame of immortal Honor: come all the daintiest dainties of this
toungue, and do homage to your Vertical Star; that has all the sovereign
influences of the eloquent, and learned Constellations at a beck, and
Paradiseth the Earth with the ambrosiall dewes of his incomprehensible wit.
But what should I dally with hoony-bees; or presume upon the Patience of the
gentlest Spirits, that English Humanity affourdeth? Pardon me Excellent
minds: and I will here dismiss my po^re milkemaide, nothing appliant to the
delicate humor of this minion Humorist, and Curtesan Secretary. Shall I say?
Phy upon arrant knavery, that has never sucked his fill of most-odious Malice:
or, Out-vpon scu^rilous, and obscene Villainy, nusled in the boosome of
filthiest filth, and hugged in the arms of the abominablest hagges of Hell. Be
it nothing to have railed upon Doctors of the University, or upon Lords of
the Court, (who^ he abuses most-infamously, and abiecteth as co^temptuously,
as me): but what otherdesperate varlet of the world, durst so villan: usly have
diffamed London, and the Court, as he notoriously has (...) these raseall
terms? Tell me, is there (...) place so (...) is Lady London? not a wenche
sooner creepes out of the shell, but she is of the Religion. The Court I dare
not touch, but suerlie there be many falling Stars, and but one true Diana.
Not a wenche, a very Universal Proposition, in so large, and honorable a
City: and but One, a very short Exception to a general rule of the Court.
Floorishing London, the Staple of Wealth, and Madame-towne of the Realm, is
there no place so lewd, as thy self? and Noble Court, the Palace of Honor,
and Seat of Majesty, have thou but One true Diana? Is it not nigh-hand time,
the young haddock were caught, that can already nibble so prettily? Was he,
think you, lodged in Cappadocia, for sleeping by the Sun, and studying by
the Moon? Whom, or what, will not he shortly confute with an ouerrunning
fury, that so bravely aduentureth upon London, and the Court, all-attonce?
Honor, regard thy good reputation; and staunch the rank blood of this arrant
Author; as honest a man, as some honest wooman I could name, that keeps her
honesty, as she does her Friday fast. Suffer him to proceed, as he presumes,
and to end, as he begins: and look for a rarer beast in England, then a
Woolfe; and a stranger monster in Print, then the divine Ruffian, that
entitled himself, Flagellum Principum, and proved Pestis Rerumpublicarum. My
Toungue is an infant in his Idiotisme; and I had rather bless my pestilentest
enemy, then curse any: but some little plain dealing dooith not otherwhiles
amiss, where nothing but flat, and rank grosenesse blotteth the paper,
infecteth the aier, depraueth the good, encourages the badd, corrupts youth,
accloieth age, and annoyeth the world. Good faith is my witness, I neither
affect to obscure any light in an adversary; nor desire to quench any honest
courage in an enemy; but wish every gift of heaven, or earth, of mind, or
body, of nature, or fortune, redoubled in both, even in the greenest adversary,
and wildest enemy: in whom I honor the highest, and love the lowest degree of
excellency; but am not easily coosened by Imperfection, branded with the
counterfeit mark of perfection. I am ouer-ready to pardon young ouersights,
and forgive inconsiderate offenses: but cannot flatter Folly, or fawn upon
Vanity, or cocker Ignorance, or soothvp Untruth, or applaude to Arrogance,
either in foe, or fre^d. It concerns every man to look into his own estate
with his own eyes: but the young man, that will neither know himself, nor
acknowledge other, must be told in brief, what the common opinion reports at
large. He has little wit: less learning: lest judgment: no discretion:
Vanity enough: stomach at will: superabundance of selfeconceit: outward liking
to few, inward affection to none: (his defense of Green, a more b^ting
condemnation, then my reproof): no reverence to his patrons: no respect to his
superiors: no regard to any, but in contemptuous, or ce^sorius sort: hatred,
or disdain to the rest: continual quarrels with one, or other: (not such an
other mutterer, or murmurer, eue^ against his familiarest acquaintance): an
euer-grudging, and repining mind: a ravenous throat: a gluttonous mawe: a
dro^ken head: a blasphemous tongue: a fisking wit: a shittle nature: a
reuolting, and rennegate disposition: a broking, and huckstering pen: store
of rascal phrases: some little of a brabling Scholar: more of a rauing
scould: most of a roisterly s^uing: nothing of a Gentleman: less then nothing
of a fine, or cleanly Artist. And as for terms of honesty, or ciuility,
(without which the sharpest Invention is Unsavory, and the daintiest elocution
loathsome); they are Gibridge unto him; and he a Jewish Rabbin, or a Latin Dunse
with him, that uses any such form of monstrous terms. Aretine, and the
Devils Orator, would be ashamed to be convicted, or endighted of the least
respective, or ceremonious phrase, but in mockage, or coofenage. They neither
fear Goodman Satan, nor master Beelzebub, nor Sir Reverence, nor milord
Government himself: o wretched Atheism, Hell but a scarecrow, and Heaven but
a woonderclout in their doctrine: all vulgar, stale, and simple, that is not a
note abooue Goddes-forbid. Whom durst not he appeach, revile, or blaspheme,
that forged the abominablest book in the world, De tribus impostoribus mundi:
and whom will he forbear, in any reason, or conscience, that has often
protested in his familiar hauntes, to confute the worthy Lord du Bartas, and
all the famousest moderne-writers, saving him only, who only meriteth to be
confuted with unquenchable Volumes of Heauenand Hell-fier. Perionius deciphreth
the foul precepts, and reprobate examples of his Moral Philosophy, in an
inuectiue Declamation, generally addressed unto all the Princes of
Christendom, but especially directed unto the most-Christian French king,
Henry the Second. Agrippa detesteth his monstrous veneries, and execrable
Sodomies. Cardan blasoneth him the most-impudent Ribald, that ever took pen
in hand. Manutius inuesteth him the Ring leader of the corruptest bawdes, and
miscreantest rakehells in Italy. His familiar acquaintance, Sansouino, does him
never awhitt more creddit, then needs. Tasso disdaineth his insolent and
insupportable affectation of singularity. Iouius in his Elogies voutsaueth him
not the naming. Doubtless he was endued with an exceedingodd wit: and I never
read a more surpassing-hyperbolicall style. Castilios Courtier after a
pleasurable sort, graceth him with a deep insight in the highest Types, and
Idees of humane perfections, whereunto he most curiously, and insatiably
aspired. His wanton disciples, or Vainconceited favorites, (such crows, such
eggs) in their fantastical Letters, and Bacchanall Sonnets, extol him
monstrously, that is, absurdly: as the only Monarch of wit, that is, the
Prodigal son of conceit; and the mortal God of all Virtue, that is, the
immortal Devil of all Vice. Oh, what grandiloquous Epithits, and supereminent
Titles of incredible and prodigious excellency, have they bestowed upon the
Arch-miracle of the world, Signior Vnico? not so little as the huge Gargantua
of prose, and more then the heauen-surmounting Babell of Ryme. But what
approved man of learning, wisdom, or judgment, ever deigned him any honor
of importance, or comme^dation of note: but the young darling of S. Fame,
Thomas Nash, alias Pierce Penniles, the second Leuiathan of Prose, and an other
Behemoth of ryme? He it is, that is borne, to glorify Aretine, to disgrace
Bartas, and to vndooe me. Say I, write I, or do I, what I can, he will haunt,
and trounce me perpetually, with spritish works of Supererogation, incessant
tormentours of the Ciuilian, and Divine. Yet some-boddy was not wont to
endight upon aspen leaves of paper: and take heed Sirrah, of the Fatal Quill,
that scorneth the sting of the busy Be, or the scratch or the kittish shrew.
A Be? a drone, a dorre, a dor-bettle, a dormouse. A shrewe? a drab, a hag, a
flibber-gibbet, a makebate, the pickthanke of Vanity, the pickpocket of
foolery, the pickpurse of all the palteries, and knaueries in Print. She does
him no wrong, that does him right, like Astraea, and has styled him with an
immortal pen; the Bawewawe of Scholars, the Tutt of Gentlemen, the Tee-heegh
of Gentlewomen, the Phy of Citizens, the Blurt of Courtiers, the Poogh of good
Letters, the Faph of good manners, and the whoop-hooe of good boys in London
streets. Nash, Nash, Nash, (quoth a lover of truth, and honesty) vain Nash,
railing Nash, craking Nash, bibbing Nash, baggage Nash, swaddish Nash, rogish
Nash, Nash the bellweather of the scribbling flock, the swishswash of the
press, the bumm of Impude^cy, the shambles of beastlines, the poulkat of
Pouls-churchyard, the shrichowle of London, the toade-stoole of the Realm, the
scorning-stocke of the world, and the horrible Co^futer of four Letters. Such
an Antagonist has Fortune allotted me, to purge mela^choly, and to thrust me
upon the Stage: which I must now load, like the old subject of my new praise.
There is no warring with Destiny: and the Lord of my leisure will have it so.
Much good may it do the puppy of S. Fame, so to confute, and so to be confuted.
Where his intelligence fails, (as God wotteth, it fails often) he will be
so bold, without more inquiry, to check the common sense of Reason, with the
proper sense of his Imagination, infinitely more high in conceit, then deep in
understanding: and where any phrase, or word presumes to approach within his
swing, that was not before enrowled in the Common-places of his paperbooke, it
is presently mere Inkhornisme: albeit he might have heard the same from a
thousand mouths of Judgment, or read it in more then an hundred writings of
estimation. Pythagoras Silence was wont to be a rule for Ignorance, or
Immaturity: (no better bitt for unlearned, or inexpert youth, then Pythagoras
Silence:) but Understand, or not Understand, both are one: if he understand, it
is Dunsery: if he understand not, it is either Cabalisme in matter, or
Inkhornisme in form: whether he be ripe, or unripe, all is raw, or rotten,
that pleases not his Imperial taste. Had he ever studied any Pragmaticall
Discourse; or perused any Treaties of Confederacy, of peace, of truce, of
intercourse, of other foreign negotations (that is specially noted for one of
my Inkhorne words); or researched any acts, and monuments, Civil, or
Ecclesiastical; or looked into any Laws, Statutes, Injunctions,
Proclamations, (na, it is one of his witty flowtes, He begins, like a
Proclamation: but few Treatises better penned, then some Proclamatio^s): or had
he seen any autenticall instruments, Pragmatique articles, or other Politic
Traicts: he would rather have woondred I should Use so few formal terms,
(which I purposely avoided, as not so vulgarly familiar) then have marvelled at
any, which I used. He is of no reading in comparison, that does not acknowledge
every term in those Letters to be autenticall English; and allow a thousand
other ordinary Pragmaticall terms, more strange then the straungest in those
Letters, yet current at occasion. The ignorant Idiot (for so I will prove him
in very truth) confuteth the artificial words, which he never read: but the
vain fellow (for so he proves himself in word, and deed) in a
fantastical emulation presumes to forge a misshapen rablement of absurd, and
ridiculous words, the proper bodges of his newfangled figure, called
Foolerisme: such as Inkhornisme, Absonisme, the most copious Carminist, thy
Carminicall art, a Prouiditore of young Scholars, a Corrigidore of
incongruitie, a quest of Caualieros, Inamoratos on their works, a Theological
Gimpanado, a Dromidote Ergonist, sacrilegiously co^taminated, decrepite
capacity, fiactionate person, humor (...), merriments vnexilable, the
horrisonant pipe of inueterate antiquity; and a number of such Inkhornish
phrases, as it were a pan of outlandish collops, the very bowels of his
profoundest Schollerisme. For his Eloquence passes my intelligence, that
cleapeth himself a Calimunco, for pleading his Companions cause in his own
Apology: and me a Pistlepragmos, for defending my friends in my Letters: and
very artificially interfuseth Finicallitie, sillogistrie, disputatiue right,
hermaphrodite phrases, declamatorie styles, censoriall moralizers, vnlineall
usurpers of indgement, infamizers of vice, new infringement to destitute the
inditeme^t, deriding dunstically, banging abominationly, vnhandsoming of
diuinityship, absurdifying of phrases, ratifying of truthable and eligible
English, a calm dilatement of forward harmefulnesse, and backward irefulnesse,
and how many sundry dishes of such dainty fritters? rare iunkets, and a
delicate service for him, that co^piled the most delitious Commentaries, De
optimitate triparum. And what say you Boys, the flatteringest hope of your
moothers, to a Porch of Panim Pilfryes, Pestred with Praises? Dare the pertest,
or deftest of you, hunt the letter, or hawk a metaphor, with such a
Tite-tute-tate? He weeneth himself a special penman; as he were the headman
of the Pa^fletting crew, next, and immediately after Green: and although he be
a harsh Orator with his toungue, (even the filed Suada of Isocrates, wanted
the voice of a Siren, or the sound of an Echo) yet would he seem as fine a
Secretary with his pen, as ever was Bembus in Latin, or Macchiauell in
Italian, or Gueuara in Spanish, or Amiot in French: and with a confidence
preasseth into the rowte of that humorous ra^ke, that affects the reputation
of supreme Singularity. But he must crave a little more acquaintance at the
hand of Art, and serve an apprentishood of some nine, or ten years in the shop
of curious Imitation (for his wild Fantasy will not be allowed to maintain
comparison with curious Imitation) before he will be hable to perform the
twentieth, or fortith part of that sufficiency, whereunto the cranknesse of his
Imagination already aspireth; as more exquisite, then the Atticisme of
Isocrates, or more puissant then the fury of Tasso. But how insolently soever
gross Ignorance presumes of itself, (none so hawty, as the bafest Bussard):
or how desperately soever foole-hardy Ambition aduaunceth his own colors,
(none so foole-hardy, as the blindest Hobb): I have seldom read a more garish,
and pibald style in any scribbling Inkhornist; or tasted a more unsavory
slaumpaump of words, and sentences in any sluttish Pamfletter; that denounces
not defiance against the rules of Oratory, and the directions of the English
Secretary. Which may here, and there stumble upon some tolerable sentence,
neighbourly borrowed, or featly picked out-of some fresh Pamflet: but shall
never find three sentences together, worth any allowance: and as for a fine,
or neat period, in the dainty and pithy Vein of Isocrates, or Xenophon, marry
that were a periwig of a Siren, or a wing of the very bird of Arabia, an
inestimable relic. Tush a point, neither curious Hermogenes, nor trim
Isocrates, nor stately Demosthenes, are for his tooth: nor painting Tully, nor
caruing Caesar, nor purple-dying Liuy, for his humor. It is for Cheek, or
Ascham, to stand leuelling of Colons, or squaring of Periods, by measure, and
number: his pe^ne is like a spigot; and the Wine Press a dullard to his
Ink-presse. There is a certain lively, and frisking thing, of a queint, and
capricious nature, as peerlesse as namelesse, and as admirable, as singular,
that scorneth to be a booke-woorme, or to imitate the excellentest
artificiality of the most renowned worke-masters, that antiquity affourdeth.
The wit of this, and that odd Modernist, is their own: and no such mineral
of richest Art, as praegnant Nature; the plentifullest woombe of rare
Invention, and exquisite Elocution. Whuist Art: and Nature advance thy
precious Self in thy most gorgeous, and magnificent robes: and if thy new
descant be so many notes above old Aela, Good-now be no niggard of thy sweet
accents, and heavenly harmony; but teach the antike muses, their right Leripup.
Desolate Eloquence, and forlorn Poetry, thy most-humble Suppliants in forma
pauperum, cladd in mournful and dreery weeds, as becomes their lamentable
case, (...) prostrate at thy dainty foot, and adore the Idoll-excellency of
thy monstrous Singularity. O stately Homer, and lofty Pindarus, whose wit
mounteth like Pegasus; whose verse streameth like Nilus; whose Invention
flameth like Aetna, whose Elocution, rages like Sirius; whose passion
blustereth like Boreas, whose reason breaths like Zephirus; whose nature
sauoreth like Tempe, and whose Art perfumeth like Paradise: o the mightiest
Spirits of courageous Vigor, of whom the delicate Grecian, worthy Roman, and
gallant Vulgar Muses learned their shrillest tunes, and hyperbolicall notes: o
the fiercest Trompets of heroical Valor, that with the strange Sympathy of
your divine Fury, and with thossame piercing motions of heavenly inspiration,
were wont to ravish the affections, and even to mealt the bowels of brauest
minds: see, see what a woondrous quaime -- But peace milkemaide: you will
still be shaming yourselfe, and your bringing-vpp. Had thou learned to
discern the fairest face of Eloquence, from the fowlest visage of Barbarism;
or the goodlyest frame of Method from the ill-fauoredest shape of Confusion: as
thou can descry the finest flower from the coursest branne, or the sweetest
cream from the sowrest whey: peradventure thou would dote indeed upon the
bewtifull and dainty feature of that natural style, that appropriate style,
upon which himself is so deeply inamored. I would it were out-of
peradventure: no man more greedy, to behold that miraculous Art of emprooued
Nature. He may malapertly brag in the vain ostentation of his own natural
conceit; and if it please him, make a Golden Calfe of his wooden stuff: but
show me any half page without piperly phrases, and tinkerly composition: and
say I am the simplest Artist, that ever looked fair Rhetorique, or sweet
Poetry in the face. It is the destiny of our language, to be pestred with a
rablement of botchers in Print: but what a shameful shame is it for him, that
makes an Idol of his own pen, and raiseth-vpp an huge expectation of
paper-miracles, (as if Hermes Trismegist were newly risen from the dead, and
personally mounted upon Danters Press), to emprooue himself as rank a
bungler in his mightiest work of Supererogation, as the starkest Patchpannell
of them all, or the grosest hammer-drudge in a country. He disdaineth Thomas
Delone, Philip Stubs, Robert Armin, and the common Pamfletters of London, eue^
the painfullest Chroniclers tooe; because they stand in his way, hinder his
scribbling traffic, obscure his resplendishing Fame, or have not Chronicled
him in their Catalogues of the renowned modern Autors, as he meritoriously
meriteth, and may peradventure be remembered hereafter. But may not Thomas
Delone, Philip Stubs, Robert Armin, and the rest of those misused persons, more
disdainfully disdain him; because he is so much vayner, so little learneder,
so nothing eleganter, then they; and they so much honester, so little obscurer,
so nothing contemptibler, then he? Surely Thomas, it were policy, to boast
less with Thomas Delone, or to atchieue more with Thomas More. If Vaunting, or
craking may make thee singular, thy Art is incomparable, thy Wit
superexcellent, thy Learning omnisufficient, thy memory infinite, thy dexterity
incomprehensible, thy force horrible, thy other gifts more then admirable: but
when thou have gloried thy uttermost, and struggled with might, and (...), to
seem the Great Turk of Secretaries; if my eyesight be any thing in the Art of
endighting, (wherein it has pleased favor, to repute me something), upon my
credit for ever, thou have nothing in thee of valor, but a railing Gall, and a
swelling Bladder. For thy pen is as very a Gentleman Foist, as any pickpurse
living: and, that which is most-miserable, not a more famous neckverse, then
thy choice; to thiselfe pernicious, to youth dangerous, to thy friends
grievous, to thy adueriaries pitiful, to Virtue odious, to learning
ignominious, to humanity noyous, to divinity intolerable, to authority
punishable, to the world contemptible. I longed to see thy best amendment, or
worst auengement: but thy gay best, vt supra, proves nothing; and thy main
worst, vt insra, less then nothing. Never silly man's expectation so deluded
with contrary events upon the Stage, (yet Fortune sometime is a queint
Comedian, far beyond the Supposes of Ariosto) as these Strange News have
coony-caught my conjecture; more deceived, then my Prognostication of the last
year, which happened to be a true Prophet of some dismal Contingents. Though I
never phansied Tautologies, yet I cannot repeat it enough: I looked for a
treaty of pacification: or imagined thou would arm thy quill, like a stowt
champion, with the complete harness of Wit, and Art: na, I feared the brazen
shield, and the brazen boots of Goliath, and that same hideous spear, like a
weauers beam: but it is only thy fell stomach, that blustereth like a
Northeren wind: alas, thy wit is as tame, as a duck; thy art as fresh, as
sower ale in summer; thy brazen shield in thy forehead; thy brazen boots in
thy heart; thy weauers beam in thy toungue; a more terrible lance, then the
hideous spear, were the most of thy Power equivalent to the least of thy
Spite. I say not; what aileth thy Gorgons head? or what is become of thy
Sampsons locks? (yet where miracles were promised, and atcheiuements of
Supererogation threatened, they had reason, that dreaded unknown forces): but
o blastes of divine Fury, where is your supernatural prowess? and o horn of
abundance, what means this dearth of plenty, this penury of superfluity,
this infancy of eloquence, this simplicity of cunning, this stupiditie of
nimblenesse, this obscurity of bravery, this nullity of omnisufficiencie? Was
Pegasus ever a cow in a cage, or Mercury a mouse in a cheese, or Industry a
snaile in a shell, or Dexterity a dog in a d^blet, or legierdemane a
sloweworme, or Viuacitie a lasie-bones, or Entelechy a slugplum? Can lively,
and winged spirits suppress the divinity of their ethereall, and Seraphical
nature? Can the thunder toungue-tye, or the lightning smoother, or the tempest
calm, or love quench, or Zeal lukewarm, or valor manicle, or excellency
mew-vpp, or perfection geld, or supererogatio^ combe-cutt itself? Is it not
impossible, for Humanity to be a spittle-man, Rhetorique a dummerell, Poetry a
tumbler, History a bankrowt, Philosophy a broker, wit a cripple, courage a
jade? How could the sweet Mermaids, or dainty Nymphs find in their tender
hearts, to be so far divorced from their queintest, and galiardest minion?
Art, take heed of an aeger appetite, if a little greedy devouring of
singularity will so soon get the hicket, and make thee (as it were) belch
the sloouens Oratorie, and (as a man would say) parbreake the sluttes Poetry.
Pure Singularity wrong not thy arch-excellent Self, but embrace him with both
thy arms, that huggeth thee with his five wits; and cowll him with thy two
coral bracelets, that busseth thee with his two ruby lips, and his three
diamant powers, natural, animal, and vital. Precious Singularity how can
thou choose but dote upon his alabaster neck, whose inuentiue part can be no
less, then a sky-co^loured Sapphire, like the heavenly devises of the
delitious Poetesse Sappho, the godmoother of that azure gemme; whose
Rhetorical figures, sanguin and resplendishing Carbuncles, like the flamy
Pyrops of the glistering Palace of the Sun; whose alluring persuasions,
Amethists; whose cutting girds, adamants; whose conquering Ergos, loadestones;
whose whole conceit as green, as the greenest Jasper; whose Orient wit, the
renowned achates of king Pyrrhus, that is, the tabernacle or chauncell of the
Muses, Apollo sitting in the midst, and playing upon his Iuory harp most
enchauntingly. Is it possible, those powerful words of antiquity, whose
mighty influence was wont to debase the miraculous operation of the
most-vertuous stones, herbs, and stars (Philosophy knows the incredible
force of stones, herbs, and stars) should be to seek in a panting inspired
breast, the closet of revealed mysteries, and garden of infused graces? What
locks, or bars of Iron, can hold that quicksiluer Mercury, whose nimble
vigor disdaineth the prison, and will display itself in his likeness, maugre
whatsoever empeachment of iron Vulcan, or wooden Daedalus? I hoped to find,
that I lusted to see, the very singular subject of that invincible and
omnipotent Eloquence, that in the worthiest age of the world, entitled
heroical, put the most-barbarous tyranny of men, and the most-sauage wildness
of beasts, to silence; and arreared wonderful admiration in the hart-roote
of obstinatest Rebellion, otherwise how intractable? Had I not cause to
platform new Theorickes, and Idees of monstrous excellency, when the
parturient mountain of miracles, was to be delivered of his mighty burden of
Supererogation? Who would not ride post, to behold the chariot of his Triumph,
that glories, as if he had won both the Indyes from the Spaniard; or
Constantinople from the Turk; or Babylon from the Sophi? But holla brave
Gentlemen, and alack sweet Gentlewoomen, that would so feign behold S. Fame in
the pomp of her majesty; never poor suckling hope so incredibly crosbitten
with more then excessive defection. I looked, and looked for a shining Sun of
Singularity, that should amaze the eyes, and astonish the hearts of the
beholders: but never poor shimering Sun of Singularity, so horribly
eclipsed. I perceive, one good honest aker of performance, may be more worth,
then a whole land of Promise. Take heed aspiring minds, you that deem
yourselues the Paragon wits of the world; less your hills of iollity be
converted into dales of obscurity; and the po^pe of your glory, become like
this pumpe of shame. Even when Envy boiled his ink; Malice scorched his pen;
pride parched his paper, Fury inflamed his heart; S. Fame raged, like S. Georges
Dragon: mark the Conclusion: the weather was cold; his style frost-bitten; and
his wit nipped in the head. Take away the flaunting and huffing braueries of
his railing tropes, and craking figures: and you see the whole galiarde of his
Rhetorique, that flowteth the poor Philippiques of Tully, and Demosthenes: and
mocketh him, that chanced to name them once in four Letters; as he used their
word Entelechy, now a vulgar French, and English word, once in four, and
twenty Sonnets. The wise Priest could not tell, whither Epiphany were a
man-saint, or a wooman-saint, or what the devil it was. Such an Epiphany to
this learned man is Entelechy; the only quintessence of excellent, and divine
minds, as is abooue mentioned; showing whence they came by their heavenly and
perpetual motion. What other word could express that noble and vigorous
motion, quicker then quicksiluer; and the lively spring, or rather the Vestall
fire of that euer-stirring Virtue of Caesar, Nescia stare loco: a mystery, and
a very Chimera to this swadd of swaddes, that begins like a Bullbeare,
goethon like a bullock, ends like a bullfinch, and has never a sparkle of
pure Entelechy. Gentlemen, now you know the good nature, and handsome Art of
the man; if you happen upon a feather, or some morsel for your likyng, (it is
a very sorry Book, that yields nothing for your liking) thank the true
Author, of whose provision you have tasted; and say not but Thomas Nash has
read something, that affecting to seem an University of sciences, and a Royal
Exchange of tounges, would be thought to have devoured Libraries, and to know
all things, like Iarchas, and Syfarion, na, like Adam, and Solomon, the
archpatrons of our new Omniscians. If he did so in verity, it were the better
for him, and not the worse for me: but you see his doing, and my suffering.
Neither I, nor my betters can please all: nor he, nor his Punyes will displease
all: but as in the best something remains, that may be amended, without
derogation to their credit; so in the worst there may appear something, worth
the allowance, with no great commendation to their person. Were I disposed to
discourse, as sometime I have been forward upon less occasion, for the only
exercise of my style, and some practice of my reading; I could with a facility
declare at-large, that may briefly be rouched. Amongst so many notable works
of divine wits, excepting the works of Gods own finger; there is not any so
absolutely excellent, wherein some blemish of imperfection may not be noted:
n^ramongst amongst so many contemptible Pamflets, any so simply base, but may
yield some little fruit of advertisement, or some few blossoms of discourse. In
the souerain workmanship of Nature herself, what garden of flowers without
weeds? what orchyard of trees without woormes? what field of Corn without
cockle? what ponde of fishes without frogs? what sky of light without
darkness? what mirror of knowledge without ignorance? what man of Earth,
without frailty? what commodity of the world without discommodity? Oh! what an
honorable, and wonderful Creature were Perfection, were there any such visible
Creature under heaven? But pure Excellncy dwells only abooue; and what
mortal wised me can accleere itself from error? or what heroical virtue can
justify, I have no vice? The most precious things under the Sun, have their
defaultes: and the vilest things upon Earth, want not their graces. Virgill
could enrich himself with the rubbish of ^nnius: to how many rusty-dusty
Waines was brave Liuy beholding? Tully, that was as fine as the Crusado,
disdained not some furniture of his predecessors, that were as course, as
canuas: and he that will diligently seek, may assuredly find treasure in
merle, corn in straw, gold in dross, pearls in shell-fishes, precious stones
in the dunghill of Esope, rich jewels of learning, and wisdom, in some poor
boxes. He that remembers Humfrey Cole, a Mathematical Mechanicia^, Matthew
Baker a ship wright, John Shute an Architect, Robert Norman a Nauigatour,
William Bourne a Gunner, John Hester a Chimist, or any like cunning, and
subtle Empirique, (Cole, Baker, Shute, Norman, Bourne, Hester will be
remembered, when greater Clerks shall be forgotten) is a proud man, if he
contemn expert artisans, or any sensible industrious Practitioner, howsoever
Vnlectured in Schools, or Unlettered in books. Even the Lord Vulcan himself,
the supposed God of the forge, and thunder-smith of the great king Jupiter,
took the repulse at the hands of the Lady Minerua, whom he would in ardent
love have taken to wife. Yet what wit, or Policy honoreth not Vulcan? and
what profounde Mathematician, like Digges, Hariot, or Dee, esteems not the
pregnant Mechanician? Let every man in his degree enjoy his due: and let the
brave enginer, fine Daedalist, skillful Neptunist, marvelous Vulcanist, and
every Mercuriall occupationer, that is, every Master of his craft, and every
Doctor of his mystery, be respected according to the uttermost extent of his
public service, or private industry. I cannot stand to specify
particularities. Our late writers are, as they are: and albeit they will not
suffer me to balance them with the honorable Autors of the Romans, Grecians,
and Hebrews, yet I will crave no pardon of the highest, to do the simplest no
wrong. In Grafton, Holinshed, and (...); in H^ywood, Tuffer, and Gowge; in
Gas^igne, Church^, and Floide; in Rich, Whetstone, and Monday; in Stany hurst,
France, and Watson; in Kiffin, Warner, and Daniell; in an hundred such vulgar
writers, many things are commendable, diverse things notable, somethings
excellent. France, Kiffin, Warner, and Daniell, of whom I have elsewhere more
especial occasion to entreat, may happily find a thankful remembrance of
their laudable travails. For a polished, and garnished style, few go-beyonde
Cartwright, and the chiefest of his Confuters, furnished writers: and how few
may wage comparison with Reinolds, Stubbes, Mulcaster, Norton, Lambert, and the
Lord Henry Howarde? whose several writings the silver file of the workman
recommendeth to the plausible interreinement of the daintiest Censure. Who can
deny, but the Resolution, and Mary Magdalens funeral tears, are penned
elegantly, and pathetically? (...) of Witchcraft, dismasketh (...) impostures,
and in certain principal Chapters, and special passages, hitteth the nail
on the head with a witness: howsoever I could have wished, he had either dealt
somewhat more courteously with Monsicur Bodine, or (...) him somewhat more
effectually. Let me not forget the Apology of sundry proceedings by
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, or, the Answer to an Abstract of certain Acts
of Parliament, Injunctions, Canons, constitutions, and Synodals Provincial:
unless I will skip two of the most-materiall, and most-formall Treatises, that
any English Print has lately (...). Might I respe^ presume to intimate my
slender opinion, without flattery, or other indecency: methought ever Doctor
Whitgift (whom I name with honor) in his Sermons was pithy: Doctor Hutton
profound: Doctor Young piercing to the quick: Doctor Chaderton copious: M.
Curtes elegant: M. Wickam sententious: M. Drant curious: M. Deering sweet:
Doctor Still sound: Doctor Underhill sharp: Doctor Matthew fine: M. Lawherne
galla^t: M. Dooue eloquent: M. Andrews learned: M. Chaderton methodicall: M.
Smith Patheticall: sundry other in their proper vein notable, some exquisite,
afew singular. Yet which of the best has all perfections? ( nihil omni ex
part beatum) or which of the meanest has not some excellency? I cannot
read-ouer all: I have seldom heard some: (it was never my happ to hear
Doctor Cooper, Doctor Humfry, or Doctor Fletcher, but in Latin): and I would
be loath to injury, or prejudice any, that deserves well, Viua voce, or by pen.
I deem him wise, that makes choice of the best; auoideth the worst; reapeth
fruit by both; despises nothing, that is not to be abhorred; accepts of any
thing, that may be tolerated; interteineth every thing with commendation,
favor, co^tentment, or ame^dment. Lucians ass, Apuleius ass, Agrippas ass,
Macchiauels ass, miself since I was dubbed an ass by the only Monarch of
asses, have found sauory herbs amongst nettles; roses amongst prickles;
berryes amongst bushes; marrow amongst bones; grain amongst stubble; a little
corn amongst a great deal of chaff. The abiectest naturalls have their
specificall properties, and some wondrous virtues: and Philosophy will not
flatter the noblest, or worthiest naturals in their venoms, or impurities. True
Alchimy ca^ allege much for her Extractions, and quintessences: and true
Phisique more for her corrections, and purgations. In the best, I cannot
commend the badd: and in the baddest, I reject not the good: but precisely
play the Alchimist, in seeking pure and sweet balmes in the rankest poisons. A
pithy, or filed sentence is to be embraced, whosoever is the Author: and for the
lest benefit received, a good mind will render dutiful thanks, even to his
greatest enemy. o Humanity, my Lullius, or o Divinity, my Paracelsus, how
should a man become that piece of Alchimy, that can turn the Rattesbane of
Villainy into the Balm ofhonesty; or correct the Mandrake of scurrility with
the myrrh of courtesy, or the saffron of temperance. Conceive a fountain of
contentation, as it were of Oil, or a bath of delight, as it were of nectar:
and prefer that saffron, or myrrh, that odoriferous saffron, or aromaticall
myrrh, before this souerain Oil; and that Balm, that (...) Balm, before
this heavenly nectar. No natural Restoratiue, like that saffron, or myrrh,
the very death of contention; nor any artificial Cordial, like that Balm,
the very life ofhumanity, or should I rather say? the very life of life. We
have many new Methods, and platformes; and some nodoubt as exquisite, as
scrupulous; but assuredly it were an excellent method, and singular platform,
to honor the wise, and moderate the fool; to make-much of the learned, and
instruct the ignorant; to embrace the good, and reform the badd; to wish harm
to none, and do well to all; and finally (for that is the scope of this, and
some other Discourses) to commend the Fox, and praise the Ass. Martin
himself is not altogether a waspe: nor Brown altogether a Cankerwoorme: nor
Barrow altogether a Scorpion: nor happily Kett altogether a Cockatrice. Take
heed of the snake in the grass, or the padd in the straw; and fear no
bugges. Be Martin a Martin Guerra; Brown a browne-bill; Barrow a wheelbarrow;
Kett a kight; H. N. an O. K; if any sound judgments find themselves beholding
unto them in any point of aduisement, or consideration (fingular men, and
namely Scismatiques, and Heretics were ever wont to have some thing, or
other, extraordinary, and remarkable) they may without my contradiction
confess their beholdingness; and for so much profess a recognisance of their
dett. I thank Nash for something: Green for more: Pap hatchet for much more:
Perne for most of all. Of him I learned to know him, to know my enemies,
to know my friends, to know miselfe, to know the world, to know fortune, to
know the mutability of times, and slipperinesse of occasions: an inestimable
knowledge, and incomparably more worth, then Doctor Gregory's (...) mirabilis,
or Politians (...). He was an old soaker indeed: and had more wit in his
hoary head., then six hundred of these floorishing green heads, and lusty
curled pates. He would either wisely hold his peace: or smoothly flatter me to
my face: or suerly pay-home with a witness: but commonly in a corner, or in a
maze, where the Autour might be uncertain, or his packing intricate, or his
purpose some way excusable. No man could bear a heavy injury more lightly: or
forbear a learned adversary more cunningly: or bourde a wilful friend more
dryly: or circumuent a dangerous foe more covertly: or countermine the deepest
underminer more suttelly: or lullaby the circumspectest Argus more sweetly: or
transform himself into all shapes more deftly: or play any part more kindly.
He had such a Patience, as might soften the hardest heart: such a sober-moode,
as might ripen the greenest wit: such a slye dexterity, as might quicken the
dullest spirit: such a scrupulous manner of proceeding in doubtful cases, as
might putt a deep consideration into the shallowest phantasy: such a
suspicious ielousy, as might smell-out the secretest complot, and defeat any
practice: such an inextricable sophistry, as might teach an Agathocles to
hypocrise profoundly, or a Hieron to tyrannise learnedly. Whereas other carried
their hearts in their toungues, and their heads in their pens; he liked no
such simplicity, but after a smugge, and fleering guise, carried his toungue in
his heart, his pen in his head; his dagger in his sleeue; his love in his
boosome, his spite in his pocket: and when their speech, writing, or
countenance bewrayed their affection, (as the manner is), nothing but his fact
discovered his drift; and not the Beginning, but the End was the interpreter of
his meaning. Some of us, by way of experiment, assayed to feel his pulse, and
to tickle his wily veins in his own vein, with smoothing, and glosing as
handsomely, as we could: but the bottom of his mind, was a Gulf of the maine,
and nothing could sound him deeply, but the issue. Iwis elder men had been
too-young to manage such an enterprise with success: and the finest
intelligencer, or sagest Politician in a state, would undoubtedly have been
grauelled in the execution of that rash attempt. He could speak by contraries,
as queintly as Socrates; and do by contraries, as shrewdly as Tiberius: the
master of Philip de Comines, Jews the French king, one of the busiest,
ielousest, and craftiest Princes, that ever reigned in that kingdom, might
have borrowed the Foxes satchell of him: and peradventure not only Aesops, or
Archilochus Fox, but even Lysanders Fox, Aristomenes Fox, Pisistratus Fox,
Ulysses Fox, Chirons Fox, and Proteus own Fox might learn of him, to play the
Fox in the hole. For Stephen Gardiners Fox, or Macchiauels Fox, are too-young
Cubbes, to compare with him; that would seem any thing, rather then a Fox, and
be a Fox rather then any thing else. Legendaries may record woonderments: but
examine the suttellest Counsels, or the wilyest practices of Gargantua
himself, and even Gargantua himself, albeit his gown were furred with two
thousand, and five hundred Fox-skinnes, might have been his Pupil. And I
doubt not but he that worshipped Solemn in Leone, after some few Lectures in his
Astronomy, would have honored Solemn in Vulpe. He once kept a Cubbe for his
pleasure in Peter-house in Cambridge (as some keep birds, some squirrels, some
puppyes, some apes, and so forth), and ministered notable matter to S. Maryes
Pulpet, with Stories of the Cubb, and the Fox, whose Acts, and Monuments are
notorious: but had the young-one been as cunning an Artist for his part, as the
Old-one was for his; I believe, all the Colleges in both Universities, or in
the great University of Christendom, could not have patterned the young man
with such an other Batchelour of sophistry, or the old master with such an
other Doctor of Hypocrisy. Men may discourse at pleasure, and feed
themselves with Carpes, and Pikes: but I have known few of so good a nature,
so deuoide of obstinacy; so far alienated from contumacy; so contrary to
frowardness, or testiuenesse; so tractable, so buxom, so flexible; so
appliable to every time, place, and person; so curious in observing the least
circumstance of importance, or advantage; so conformable to public
proceedings, and private occasions; so respectfull to every one of quality; so
courteous to men of woorship; so dutiful to men of honor; so ceremonious in
tendering his devotion to his good Lords, or good Ladies; so obedient to
authority; so loyal to majesty; so indifferent to all, and in all. He was
gentle without familiarity, (for he doubted contempt): severe without rigor,
(for he feared od^ousnesse): pleasant without leuity, (for he regarded his
estimation): grave without sole^nity, (for he curred popular favor): not rash,
but quick; not hasty, but speedy; not hot, but warm; not eger in show, but
earnest indeed; no barker at any, but a biter of some; round, and sound. The
Clergy never wanted excellent Fortune-wrightes: but what Bishop, or Politician
in England, so great a Temporiser, as he, whom every alteration found a
new-man, even as new as the new Moon? And as he long yawned to be an
Archbishop, or Bishop, in the one, or other Church, (they wronged him, that
termed the Image of both Churches, a neuter): so did he not arch-deserue, to be
installed the puling Preacher of Humility, humility, humility; and the gaping
Orator of Obedience, obedience, obedience? Was not ever Pax vobis, one end of
his gasping Sermon, and the very foot of his warbling Song? Be it percase a
small matter to temporise in four alterations of Kings, and Queens: but what
an Ambidexterity, or rather Omnidexterity had the man, that at one, and the same
meeting, had a pleasing Toungue for a Protestant, a flattering Eye for a
Papist, and a familiar nodd for a good fellow? It was nothing with him to
Temporise in genere, or in specie, according to Macchiauels ground offortunate
success in the world; that could so formally, and featly Personise in
indiuiduo. He must know all the sinews of commodity, and acquaint himself
with all the ioints of advantage, that will live, and teach other to live. o
foelix Cato, tu solus nosti Viuere. Or if Cato were ouer-peremptory, and
Stoicall, to enjoy that felicity, o foelix Perne, tua solius Ars viuendi.
Doubtless it were better for the world, by infinite masses of millions, could
the barbarous, and Tragical Tyrants, Saturn, and Mars, two devilish Gods,
moderate their fury, as he could do: or the hypocritical, and Comicall
Tyrants, Jupiter, and Mercury, two godly Devils, temper their cunning, as he
could do. It was in him, to give instructions unto Ovid, for the repenning of
his Metamorphoses anew: and he better merited the name of Vertumnus, then
Vertum nus himself. His designements were mysteries: his Courcels, Oracles:
his intentions like Minotaure in the Labyrinth: his actions like the
Stratagemes of Fabius: his defiance like the welcome of Circe: his menaces,
like the songs of the Sirens: his curses, like the blessings of those witches
in Aphrica, that forspoke, what they praised, and destroyed, what they wished
to be saved. I have seen spannels, mungrels, libbards, antelops; scorpions,
snakes, cockatrices, vipers, and many other Serpents in sugar-worke: but to
this day never saw such a standing dish of Sugarworke, as that sweet-toungued
Doctor; that spoke pleasingly, whatsouer he thought; and was otherwhiles a
fair Prognostication of foul weather. Such an autenticall Irony engrosed, as
all Oratory cannot eftsoons counterpane. Smooth voices do well in most
societies; and go currently away in many recknings, when rowgh-hewne words do
but lay blocks in their own way. He found it in a thousand experiences; and
was the precisest practitioner of that soft, and tame Rhetorique, that ever I
knew in my dealings. And in case I should prefer any man of whatsoever quality
before him, for a stayed government of his affections, (which he always
ruled, as Homers Minerua brideled Pegasus), or for an infinite and bottomless
patience, sibb to the patience of Anaxarchus, or ^ob, I should injury him, and
mine own conscience, exceedingly. Were he handeled, as London kennels are used
of sluttes, or the Thames of sloouens; he could pocket-it-vp, as handsomely, as
they; and complain in as few words, as any channel, or river in England,
when they are most contumeliously depraved. His other virtues, were colors in
grain: his learning, lawne in starch: his wisdom, napry in suddes: his
conscience, the weather in April, when he was young; the weather in September,
as he grew elder; the weather in February, toward his end; and not such a
current Prognosticatio^ for the fifty years, wherein he floorished, as the
Ephemerides of his Conscience. For his smug, and Canonical countenance,
certainly he might have been S. Boniface himself: for his fair, and formal
speech, S. Benedict, or S. Eulaly: for his merry co^ceits, S. Hillary: for his
good husbandry, (he was merry, and wise) S. Seruatius: for his invincible
sufferance, S. Vincent the Martyr: for his retracting, or recanting, S.
Augustine: for his not seeing all things, S. Bernard: for his preaching to
geese, S. Frauncis, or S. Fox: for his praying, a S. Pharise: for his fasting,
a S. Publicane: for his chastity, a Solin virgin: for his pastoral devotion,
a Shepherds Calendar: for his Fame, an Almanacke of Saints. But if cuer any
were Patience incorporate, it was he: and if ever any were Hypocrisy incarnate,
it was he; unto who^ I promised to dedicate an eternal memorial of his
immortal virtues, and have paid some little part of my vows. I twice, or
thrice tried him to his face, somewhat sawcily, and smartly: but the Picture of
Socrates, or the Image of S. Andrew, not so immovable: and I still reverence
the honorable remembrance of that grave, and most eloquent Silence, as the
sagest lesson of my youth. Had Nash a dram of his wit, his Answer should
have been Mum; or his Confutation, the sting of the Scorpion. Other Strange
News, like Pap-hatchets rapp with a Babble, are of the nature of thatsame
snowt-horned Rhinoceros, that biteth himself by the nose; and besturre them,
like the dowty fencer of Barnewell, that played his taking-vp with a
Recumbentibus, and his laying-downe with a broken pate in some three, or four
corners of his head. He must revenge himself with a learned Discourse of
deepest Silence, or come better provided, then the edge of the rasour, that
would be valued as wise, as that Apollo Doctor. Whose Epitaph none can display
accordingly, but some Sprite of the Air, or the fire. For his Zeal to God,
and the Church, was an aerie Triplicity: and his devotion to his Prince, and the
State, a fiery Trigon. And suerly he was well-aduised, that comprised a large
History in one Epithet, and honored him with the title of the Thrise-learned
Deane. Only I must needs grant, one such secret, and profound enemy, or
shall I say? one such thrise-secret, and thrise-profound enemy, was
incomparably more pernicious, then a hundred Hatchets, or Country-cuffes; a
thousand Greenes, or Cunny catchers; an army of Nashes, or Pierces Penniles; a
forest of wild beasts; or whatsoever Ilias of professed Evils. It is not the
threatener, but the underminer, that works the mischief: not the open
assault, but the privy surprise, that terrifieth the old soldier: not the
surging flood, but the low water, that affrayeth the expert Pilot: not the
high, but the hidden rock, that endangereth the skillful Mariner: not the
busy Pragmaticall, but the close Politician, that supplanteth the puissant
state: not proclaimed war, but pretended peace, that strikes the deadly
stroke. What Historian remembers not the subtle Stratagemes of king Bacchus
against the Indians: of king Midas against the Phrygians: of king Romulus
against the Sabines: of king Cyrus against the Lydians: of many other Politic
Conquerours, against sundry mighty nations, Principalities, Segniories,
Cities, Castles, Fortresses? Brave Valor may sometime execute with fury: but
Prowess is weak in comparison of other practices: and no puissance to
Policy; no rage to craft; no force to wit; no pretense to Religion, (what
spoils under color of Religion?) no text to the gloss; what will not the
gloss maintain by hook, or crook? It was not Mercuries woodknife, that
could so easily have dispatched Argus, the Lieutenant of Queen Juno, had not
his inchau^ting Pipe first lulled him asleep. And was not Ulysses in greater
reoperdy by the alluring Sirens, charming Musicians, then by cruel Polyphemus,
a boisterous Giant? Undoubtedly Caesar was as singularly wise, as vnmatchably
valiant; and rather a Fox, then a Lion: but in his wisdom he was more
affrayde of Sylla, the^ of Marius; of Cato, then of Catiline; of Cassius, then
of Antony; of Brutus, then of Pompey; to be short; of Saturn, then of Mars; of
Mercury, then of Jupiter himself. It were a long discourse, to survey the wily
trains, and crafty fetches of the old, and new world: but whosoever is
acquainted with Stratagemes, ancient, or modern, knows what an hourde of
Policies lurketh in the shrowde of Dissimulation: and what wonders may be
achieved by unexpected suprizes. The professed enemy rather encombreth
himself, and annoyeth his friends, the^ overthrows his adversary, or
oppresses his foes. Alexanders, and Caesar's sudden irruptions made them the
Lords of the world, and masters of kings: whiles greatest threateners got
nothing, but greatest loss, and greater shame. What should I speak of the
first founders of Monarchies, (...), and Cyrus? of the Venturous Argo-pilots?
of the worthy Heroes? of the dowtiest Errant Knights? of the brauest men in all
ages? whose mightiest engine, (notwithstanding whatsoever hyperbole of Valor,
or fury) was Scarborough warning; and whose Conquestes were as soon
knowen-abroad, as their Invasions. No power, like the unlikely assault: nor any
mischief so peremptory, as the unlooked for affliction. He that warns me,
armeth me; and it is much, that a prepared mind, and boddy may endure: but
unsuspected accidents are hardly remedied: and in the fairest weather of
security, to offer the fowlest play of hostility, is an incredible advantage.
So Caesar Borgia, the souerain Type of Macchiauels Prince, wan the Dukedom of
Vrbin, in one day. So the Emperor Charles the Fiftes Army, passing thorough
Room, occursiuely sacked the City, and enriched themselves exceedingly. So
many invincible states have been suddenly ruinated: and many puissant
personages easily vanquished. Brave exploites, where the Cause as honorable, as
the Effect admirable. But honorable, or dishonorable, Policy was ever a privy
Council, whose Posie, Dolus, an Virtus: Glory a rau^shing Oration: Ambition a
Courser: Love a hoat-spurre: Anger a fierbrand: Hope a grain of
mustard-seede: Courage an errant Knight: Couetice a merchant Ve^turer: Fury a
fierce executioner; whose word, the sword, and whose Law, Non qua, sed quo. As
Monarchies, Principalities, and Conquestes; so Pety-gouernements, Segniories,
Lieutenantships, Magistracies, Masterships, Felowships, have their coolerable
practices: and nothing is cunning, that is apparent. The Fox preaches Pax
vobis, to the Capons, and geese: and never worse intended, then when the best
pretended. Horaces, or rather Borgiaes,

Astutaingenuum Vulpes imitata Leonem; the deepest ground of highest
policies, and the very Stratageme of Strategemes. The glorious Indian
Conquestes are famously known to the world: and what was the Valorous Duke of
Parma in his brauest Victories, but Vulpes imitata Leonem, and a new compounde
of old Stratagemes? Iouius Fox in his militar, and amorous Empreses, may call
himself a Fox: but some learned Clerks, and judicious Censours, profound
Politiques, like Macehiauell, or Perne, (for Macchiauell never discoursed with
his pen, as Perne devised with his mind) would go very-nigh to call him a
goose, that gave for his mott: Simul astu, et dentibus vtor. And his Griphen in
some opinions, was never awhit the more terrible, for that lusty Posie, a jolly
heroical verse in a Grammar School:

Vnguibus, et rostro, atque alis armatus in hostem. I never read that
Alexanders Bucephalus, or Caesar's courageous horse, had any such, or such
glorious Posies: and I believe Beuisses Arundell was no great braggard with
motts. The Trojan Horse, or rather the Grecian Horse, was not such an Ass, to
advance himself with any such proud Imprese, as, Scandit fatalis machina
muros: but ministered ruthful, and tragical matter of that hawty Posie to the
stately Poet. Did the flying Pegasus of the redoubted Bellerophon, before his
aduenturous expedition against the hideous Lion-dragon Chimaera, that is,
against the fierce savages, which inhabited that fier-vomiting mountain in
Lycia, provide to arm himself with a brave Posie; or boast of his horrible
mother Medusa, or of his own Gorgonean wings? Did the fiery horses of the
Sun, that is, of the hoattest East-countryes, threaten Prince Phaeton, or the
world, with a dreadful Verse?

Tune sciet ignipedum Vires expertus Equorum. May not peradventure the prowdest
horse be countermotted with a poor fragment of Statius? Seruiet asper Equus.
Or may not happily the dowtiest Ass be emblemed with a good old devise? insulso
tribulus sapit asper asello. The rowghest nett is not the best catcher of
birds: nor the finest policy, a professed Termaga^t. Although Lysanders oxen
said nothing, yet the Fox Lysander could tell, which of them was a sluggarde,
and which laborious. It is not the Verbal mott, but the actual Imprese, that
argues a generous, or noble mind. Children, and fools use to crake: Action,
the only Emblem of Iugurth, and the notablest fellows; whose manner is,
Plurimum facere; minimum de se loqui: the honorablest devise, that worthy
Valor can invent. The Tree is known by the fruit; and needs no other
Posie: the gallantest mott of a good Apple Tree, is a good apple; of a good
warden-tree, a good warden; of a good limon-tree, a good limon; of a good
palm, a good date; of a good Vine, a good grape; and so fourth: their leaves,
their Prognosticatio^s; their blossoms, their boasts; their branches, and
boughs, their bravery; their fruit, their arms, their emblemes, their
nobility, their glory. I dare not say, that Pittacus was as wise, as he, that
begins like front-tufted Occasion, (for Occasion is balde behind), and
ends like Ouids loouer, (for Ouids loouer must not attempt, but where he will
conquer): few resoluter mottes, then Aut nunc aut nunquam: and what Valianter
Posie, then Aut nunquam tents, aut perfice: but Pittacus was one of the seven
famous Masters, and in his sage wisdom thought it a sober lesson, Foretell
not, what thou intendest to atcheiue, less peradventure being frustrate, thou
be laughed to scorn, and made a notable flowtingstocke. Perhaps he was an
Ass; and speaks like a Fool: (for who is not an Ass, and a fool with this
Thomas Wisdom?) but some plain men are of his opinion, and will hardly
believe that the fra^kest braggards are the doubtiest dooers. Were I a
collectour of witty Apothegs, like Plutarch, or of pithy Gnomes, like Theognis,
or of dainty Emblemes, like Alciat: suerly Pittacus should not be the last, at
the least in that Rhapsody. Meane-while it is nothing out-of my way, to praise
the close, or suspicious Ass, that will not trouble any other with his privy
Counsel, but can be content to be his own Secretary. There be more queint
experiments in an University, then many a politic head would imagine. I
could nominate the man, that could teach the Delphicall Oracle, and the
Aegiptian Crocodile to play their parts. His Civil toungue was a riddle; his
Ecclesiastical toungue a Hieroglyphique; his face a visard: his eyes
cormorants: his ears martyrs: his wit a maze: his heart a iuggling stick: his
mind a mist: his reason a veil: his affection a curb: his conscience a
mask: his Religion a triangle in Geometry: his Charity a Syllogism in
Celarent: his hospitality aleuen months in the year, as good, as good
Friday: for one month or very near, he was resident upon his Deanery, and kept
open house in the I Will, like Ember week. Of an other man's, noman more liberal:
of his own, noman more frugall. He deeply considered (as he did all things)
that good Economy was good Policy: that it was more wisdom to borrow, the^
to lend gratis: that the ravens croking loses him many a fatt pray: that the
forstalling, and engrosing of privy commodities, was a pretty supply of privy
Tithes: that many a little, by little and little makes a mickle: that often
return of gain amounts: that the Fox never fares better, then when he is
cursed most: that a silver picklocke was good at a pinch; and a golden hook a
cunning fisher of men: that every man was nearest to himself, and the skin
nearer, then the shirt: that there were many principles, and precepts in Art,
but one principal maxim, or souerain cauteil in practice, Si non cast, tamen
caute: that there was no security in the world, without Epicharmus incredulity,
Dions Apistie, or Heywoods Fast bind, and fast find: that Bayard in the
stable, and Legem pone, were substantial points of Law: that many things are
hypothetically to be practiced, which may not Categorically be revealed: that
two friends, or brethren may keep counsel, when one of the two is away: that
Vnum necessarium: and so forth. For, Vincit, qui patitur, would go nigh-hand to
open the whole pack, and tell wonderful Tales out-off School. Pap-hatchet
talks of publishing a hundred merry Tales of certain poor Martinists: but I
could here dismaske such a rich mummer, and record such a hu^dredwise Tales of
memorable note, with such a smart Moral, as would undoubtedly make this
Pamflet the vendiblest book in London, and the Register one of the famousest
Autors in England. But I am none of those, that utter all their learning
attonce: and the close man (that was nomans friend, but from the teeth ontward,
nomans foe, but from the heart inward) may percase have some secret friends, or
respective acquaintance; that in regard of his calling, or some private
consideration, would be loath to have his coat blased, or his satchell
ransacked. Beside, what methodicall Artist, would allow the Encomium of the
Fox, in the praise of the Ass, unless I would prove by irrefragable
demonstration, that the false Fox was a true Ass; as I once heard a learned
Physician affirm, if a goose were a Fox, he was a Fox. Yet suerly by his
favor, who could sharply judge, and durst freely speak; He was a Fox, and a
half, in his whole body, and in every part of his soul: albeit I will not
deny, but he might in some respects be a Goose, and after a sort (as it were)
an Ass: especially for defeating one without cause, and troubling the same
without effect, that for ought he knew, might possibly have it in him, to
requite him alive, and dead. Let the wronged party not be iniuried: and I dare
avowe, he never did, nor ever will injury, or prejudice any, in deed, word, or
intention: but if any whosoever will needs be offering abuse in fact, or
snip-snapping in terms, since other remedy shrinketh, he may peradventure not
altogether pass vnaunswered. He thinks not now on the booted fool, that
always ietteth in his startups, with his Stilliard hatt in his drousie eyes:
but of an other good ancient Gentleman, that might have been his father for
age; his tutour for learning; his counselor for wisdom; his creditour for
silver; his Catechist for Religion, and his Ghostly father for devotion, He
once in a scoldes policy, called me Fox between jest, and earnest: (it was
at the funeral of the honorable Sir Thomas Smith, where he preached, and where
it pleased my Lady Smith, and the coexecutours to bestow certain rare
manuscript books upon me, which he desired): I answered him between earnest,
and jest, I might happily be a Cubb, as I might be used; but was ouer-you^g to be
a Fox, especially in his presence. He smiled, and replied after his manner,
with a Chameleons gape, and a very emphaticall nodd of the head. Whosoever, or
whatsoever he was; certes my old backfrend of Peter-house, was the lock of
cunning conueyance: but such a lock, as could not possibly be (...) any key,
but the key of opportunity, and the hand of advantage. If Opportunity were
abroad, Iodocus was not at home: where Occasion presented Advantage, Policy
wanted no dexterity; and the light-footed Fox was not so swift of foot, as
nimble of wit, and quick of hand. Some, tht called him the lukewarm Doctor,
and likened him to milk from the Cow, found him at such a fit ouerwarme for
their feruentest zeal: and I remember a time, when One of the hottest furnace,
showing himself little better then a Cow; He a in quauering voice, and a
lightning spirit, taught the wild roe his lesson. Have was not so forward to
run to a commodity, but Speed was swifter to fly to an advantage: and where
Have somewhat grosely bewrayed his forwardness, Speed very finely marched in a
cloud, and found the goddess Hypocrisy as sly a Conductrisse, as ever was
fair Venus to Aeneas, or wise Minerua to Ulysses, in their queint passages. We
may discourse of natural Magique, and supernatural Cabale, whereof the
learnedest and crediblest antiquity has recorded wonderful Histories: but it
is the rod of Mercury, and the ring of Gyges, that work miracles: and no
Mathematician, Magitian, or Cabalist may counteruaile him, that in his
heroical expeditions can walk in a cloud, like a Vapor, or in his divine
practices go invisible, like a Spirit. Brave Minds, and Ventrous Hearts,
thank him for this inualuable Note, that could teach you to atcheiue more with
the little finger of Policy, then you can possibly compass with the mighty
arm of Prowess. Os else in my curious observation of infinite Histories,
Hypocrisy had never been the great Tyra^t of the world, and the huge
Antichrist of the Church. The weapon of the Fire, and Aier, is Lightening: the
weapon of the Earth, and Water, Cunning. Was not he shrewdly encountered, that
was prestigiously besieged, and inuisi. bly undermined with that weapon of
weapons? What other supply could have seconded, or rescued him, but Death; that
had often been the death of his Life in his worthiest Friends, and was
eftsoons the death of his Death in his wyliest enemy. Whose Spite was
intricate, but detected: and whose Subtility marvelous, but disuailed: and he
that disclosed the same, is perhaps to leave an immortal Testimonial of his
Indian Discoouery. In the mean time, as the admirable Geometrician Archimedes
would have the figure of a Cylinder, or roller engraued upon his Toombe: so it
were reason, the thrise-famous Divine, should have the three-sided figure, or
equilater Tria^gle, imprinted upon his Sepulcher: with this, or some worthier
Epitaph, devised according to the current Method of Tria sequuntur Tria.

The Coffin speaks.
Ask not, what News? that come to visit wood:
My Treasure is, Three Faces in One Hood:
A chaungling Triangle: a Turnecoate rood.
A lukewarm Trigon: a Three-edgedtoole:
A three-oard galley: a three-footed stool:
A three-wing'd weathercock: a three-tongu'd School.
Three-hedded Cerberus, woe be unto thee:
Here lies the Only Trey, and Rule of Three:
Of all Triplicities the A. B. C.
Somebody owes the three-shapen Geryon a greater duty, in recognisance of his
often-promised courtesies; and will not be found Ungrateful at occasion. He
were very simple, that would fear a coniuring Hatchet, a railing Green, or a
threatening Nash: but the old dreamer, like the old dog, biteth sore, and no
foe to the flattering Perne, or pleasing Titius: that have sugar in their
lips, gall in their stomachs; water in the one hand, fire in the other;
peace in their sayings, war in their doings; sweetness in their exhortatio^s,
bitterness in their canuasses; reverence in their titles, cooue^ in their
actions: notable men in their kind, but pitch-branded with notorious
dissimulation; large promisers, compendious performers; shallow in charity,
profounde in malice; superficial in theory, deep in practice; masters of
Sophistry, Doctors of Hypocrisy; formal friends, deadly Enemies;
thrise-excellent Impostours. These, these were the Only me^, that I ever
dreaded: especially thatsame od man Triu^ Litteraru^, that for a linsy-woolsie
wit, and a cheuerell conscience was A Per se A: other braggardes, or threatners
whatsoever I fear, as I fear Hobgoblin, and the Bugges of the night. When I
have sought-vp my day-charmes, and night-spelles, I hope their power to hurt,
shall be as ridiculously small, as their desire to affright, is outragiously
great. I never stood stiffly in defense of mine own hability, or sufficiency:
they that empeach me of imperfection in learning, or practice, in discoursing,
or endighting, in any art, or profession, confute me not, but confirm mine own
confession. It is only my honesty, and credit, that I endeavor to maintain:
other defectes I had rather supply by industry, the^ cloak by excuse: and
refer the decisio^ of such points to the arbitreme^t of Indiffere^cy: to
which also I prefer the Praises of my dispraisers: and beseech Equity to
render them their due, with a largess of favor. Judgment is the wisest
reader of Books: and no Art of distinctions, so infallible, as grounded
Discretion: which will soon discern between White, and Black: and easily
perceive, what wants, what superaboundeth; what becomes, what misbecommeth;
what in this, or that respect deserves commendation; what may reasonably, or
probably be excused; what would be marked with an Asteriske, what noted with a
black coal. As in metals, so in styles he has slender skill, that cannot
descry copper from gold, tin from silver, iron from steel, the refuse from
the rich vein, the dross from the pure substance. It is little of Value,
either for matter, or manner, that can be performed in such perfunctory
Pamflets, on either side: but how little soever it be, or may appear, for mine
own part I refuse not to underly the Verdict of any courteous, or equal
censure, that can discern betwixt chalk, and cheese. Touching the matter,
what wants, or might be expected here, shall be particularly, and largely
recompensed, as well in my Discourses, entitled Nashes S. Fame, which are
already finished, and attend the Publication: as also in other Suppleme^ts
thereof, especially those of the aboue-me^tioned Gentlewoman, who^ after some
aduiseme^t it pleased, to make the Strange News of the railing Villan, the
cussionet of her needles, and pinnes. Though my scriblings may fortune to
continue awhile, and then have their desert, according to the laudable custom;
(what should toys, or dalliances live in a world of business?) yet I dare
undertake with warrant, whatsoever she writes, must needs remain an
immortal work; and will leave in the actiuest world an eternal memory of the
silliest vermin, that she shall voutsafe to grace with her bewtifull, and
allectiue style, as ingenious as elegant. Touching the manner, I take it a nice
and frivolous curiosity for my person, to bestow any cost upon a trifle of no
importance: and am so ouershaddowed with the floorishing branches of that
heavenly plant, that I may seem to have purposely prevented all comparison, in
yielding that homage to her divine wit, which at my hands she has
meritoriously deserved. Albeit I protest, she was neither bewitched with
entreaty; nor iuggled with persuasion; nor charmed with any corruption: but
only moved with the reason which the Equity of my cause, after some little
communication, in her Unspotted Conscience suggested. They that long to
advance their own shame (I always except a Phoenix, or two) may bravely enter
the listes of comparison, and do her the highest honor in despite, that they
could possibly devise in a serviceable devotion. She has in my knowledge read
the notablest Historyes of the most-singular woomen of all ages, in the Bible,
in Homer, in Virgill, (her three souerain Books, the divine Archetypes of
Hebrew, Greek, and Roman Valor); in Plutarch, in Polyen, in Petrarch, in
Agrippa, in Tyraquell, in whom not, that have specially tendered their diligent
deuoir, to honor the excellentest woomen, that have lived in the world: and
commending the meanest, extolling the worthiest, imitating the rarest, and
approouing all according to the proportion of their endowments, enuieth none,
but Art in person, and Virtue incorporate, the two preciousest creatures, that
ever floorished upon earth. Other woomen may yield to Penelope: Penelope to
Sappho: Sappho to Arachne: Arachne to Minerua: Minerua to Juno: Juno to none of
her sex: She to all, that use her, and hers well: to none of any sex, that
misuse her, or hers. She is neither the noblest, nor the fairest, nor the
finest, nor the richest Lady: but the gentlest, and wittiest, and brauest, and
inuinciblest Gentlewoman, that I know. Not such a wench in Europe, to vnswaddle
a fair Baby, or to swaddle a foul puppy. Some of you may aim at her
personage: and it is not the first time, that I have termed her style, the
tinsell of the daintiest Muses, and sweetest Graces: but I dare not
Particularise her Description according to my conceit of her beaudesert,
without her license, or permission, that stands upon masculine, not feminine
terms; and is respectively to be dealt withal, in regard of her courage,
rather then her fortune. And what, if she can also publish more works in a
month; the^ Nash has published in his whole life; or the pregnantest of our
inspired Heliconists can equal? Could I dispose of her Recreations, and some
others Exercises; I nothing doubt, but it were possible (notwithstanding the
most-curious curiosity of this age) to breed a new admiration in the mind of
Contempt, and to restore the excellentest books into their wo^ted estate, even
in integrum. Let me be notoriously condemned of Partiality, and simplicity, if
she fail to accomplish more in gallant performance, (now she has condescended
to the spinning-vpp of her silken task) then I ever promised before, or may
seem to insinuate now. Yet she is a wooman; and for some passions may
challenge the general Privilege of her sex, and a special dispensation in
the cause of an affectionate friend, devoted to the service of her excellent
desert; whom he has found no less, then the Handmayd of Art, the mistres of
Wit, the Gentlewoman of right Gentleness, and the Lady of right Virtue.
Howbeit even those passions she has so ordered, and managed, with such a witty
temper of violent, but advised motions, full of spirit, and blood, but as full
of sense, and judgment, that they may rather seem the marrow of reason, than
the froath of affection: and her hoattest fury may fitly be resembled to the
passing of a brave career by a Pegasus, ruled with the reanes of a Mineruas
bridle. Her Pen is a very Pegasus indeed, and runs like a winged horse,
governed with the hand of exquisite skill. She it is, that must return the
mighty famous work of Supererogation with Benet, and Collect. I have touched
the booted Shakerley alittle, that is always riding, and never rides; always
confuting, and never confuteth; always ailing something, and railing any
thing: that shamefully, and odiously misuseth every friend, or acquaintance, as
he has served some of his fauorablest Patrons, (whom for certain respects I
am not to name), M. Apis Lapis, Green, Marlow, Chettle, and whom not? that
saluteth me with a Gabrielissime Gabriel, which can give him the farewell with
a Thomassissime Thomas, or an Assissime Ass; yet have not called him a filthy
companion, or a scuruy fellow, as all the world, that knows him, calls him:
that in his Pierce Penniles, and Strange News, the Bull-beggers of his
courage, has omitted no word, or phrase of his railing Dictionary, but only
Tues Starnigogolus: and has Valiantly vowed to have The Last Word, to dye
for it.

Plaudite Victori, Iuuenes hic quotquot adestis:
Nam me qui vicit, doctior est Nebulo.
The best is, where my Answer is, or may be deemed Insufficient, (as it is
commonly ouer-tame for so wild a Bullock), there She with as Visible an
Analysis, as any Anatome, strippeth his Art into his doublet; his wit into his
shirt; his whole matter, and manner into their first Principles; his matter in
Materia^ Primam; his manner in formam primam; and both in Priuationem Vltimam,
id est, his Last Word, so gloriously threatened. I desire no other favor at
the hands of Courtesy, but that Art, and Wit may be her readers; and Equity
my judge: to whose Impartial Integrity I humbly appeal in the Premises: with
dutiful recommendatio^ of Nashes S. Fame, eue^ to S. Fame herself: who withher
own floorishing hands is shortly to erect a Maypole in honor of his
Victorious Last Word. Doubt ye not, galla^t Gentlemen, he shall find the
guerdon of his Valor, and the meede of his meritorious work. Though my Pen be
a slugplum, look for a quill, as quick, as quicksiluer; and pity the soary
swain, that has incurred the indignation of such a quill; and may
everlastingly be a miserable Spectacle for all libelling rakehelles, that
otherwise might desperately presume to venture the foil of their cranke folly.
The stay of the Publicatio^, rests only at my instance: who can conceive
small hope of any possible account, or regard of mine own discourses, were
that fair body of the sweetest Venus in Print, as it is redoubtably armed with
the complete harness of the brauest Minerua. When his necessary defense has
sufficiently accleered him, whom it principally concerns to acquitt himself:
She shall no sooner appear in person, like a new Star in Cassiopea, but
every eye of capacity will see a conspicuous difference between hor, and other
myrrours of Eloquence: and the woeful slave of S. Fame must either blindfilde
himself with insensible (...), or behold his own notorious folly, with
most-shamefull shame. It will then appear, as it were in a clear Vrinall,
whose wit has the greenesicknesse: and I would deem it a greater marvel,
then the mightiest wonder, that happened in the famous year, 88. if his cause
should not have the falling sickness, that is encou^tred with an arm of such
force. M. Stowe, let it be enchronicled for one of the (...), or miracles of
this age, that a thing lighter then Tarletons Toy, and vayner then Shake^leyes
conceit, that is, Nash, should be the subject of so inualuable a work: and be
it known to Impudency by these Presents, that his brazen wall is battred to
Pindust, and his Iron gate shaken all to nothing. It is in the least of her
energeticall lines to do it: more easily, the^ a fine thread cracketh a ^gling
Bell. A pretty experiment: and not unlike some of her strange inventions, and
rare devises, as forcible to move, as feat to delight. The issue will resolve
the doubtfullest mind: and I am content to refer Incredulity, to the
visible, and palpable evidence of the Term Probatory. When either the Light of
Nature, and the Sun of Art must be in Eclipse: or the shining rays of her
singular gifts will display themselves in their accustomed brightness; and
discoouer the base (...) of that mischievous Planet, that in a vile ambition
seeks the exaltation of his fame, by the depression of their credit, that are
hable to extinguish the proudest glimze of his Lamp. Her rare perfections can
liuelyest blason themselves: and this pen is a very insufficient Orator to
express the heavenly bewties of her mind: but I never knew Virtue, a more
inviolable Virgin, then in her excellent self: and the day is yet to come,
wherein I ever found her Wit a defective, or Eclyptique creature. She
knows, I flatter not her Fortune: and if I honor her Virtue, whofe confirmed
modesty I could never see disguised with any gloss of commendation; who can
blame me for discharging some little part of a greater duty? She has in mere
gratuity bestowed a largess upon her affectionate servant; that imputes
the same, as an excessive favor, to her hyperbolicall courtesy, not to any
merit in himself: but the lesser my desert, the greater her liberality; whom
I cannot any way reacquite, farther then the zeal of a most-deuoted mind may
extend; as incessantly thankful, as infinitely debtfull. For to address a
plausible discourse, or to garnish a Panegyricall Oration in her praise, as
occasion may present; will appear to be a task of Civil Justice, not any
piece of Civil courtesy, when her own silver Tractes shall publish the
precious valor of her golden Virtues, and decipher the inestimable worth of
the Author by her divine handyworke. At the first vewe whereof, as at the
piercing sight of the amiablest Beauty, who can tell how sudden Passions may
work? or what a sting, some tickling Interiection may leave in the heart, and
liver of affection? I am ever prone to hope, as I wish, even the best of the
worst: and although wilful Malice be a stiff, and stubberne adversary to
appease, yet I have seen a greater miracle, then the pacification of
Paper-warres, or the atonement of Inkhorne foes. There She stands, that with
the finger of Industry, and the toungue of Affability, has acheiued some
stranger woonders, upon as rough, and harsh fellows, as

The noddy Nash, whom every serving Swash
With pot-iestes dash, and every whip-dog lash:
(for the ryme is more famous, then was intended): and with the same causes
emprooued, why may She not directly, or violently accomplish the same effects?
or what is impossible to the persuasiue, and Patheticall influence of Reason,
and Affection? It is a very dismal, and caitiue Planet, that can find in his
heart to encounter those two gracious Stars, with malicious aspectes: which he
must despitefully encounter, that will obstinatly oppose his peevish rancour to
her sweet Ciuility. In case nothing else will prevail with insatiable Envy,
and unquenchable Malice, (for so I am eftsoons informed, whatsoever course be
taken for the mitigation of his rage): yet I am vehemently persuaded in
Physique, and resolved in Policy, that the Oil of Scorpions will finally
heal the woondes of Scorpions. I know One, that experimentally proved what a
rod in lie could do with the curstest boy in a City; and found the Imparatiue
mood a better Orator, then the Optatiue. It may fortune, the same man has
such a Whipsydoxy in store for a Iack-sauce, or unmannerly puppy, as may
School him to turne-ouer a new leaf, and to cry the pittifullest Peccaui of a
woeful Penitent. For my part, whom at this instant it smartly behooves to be
resolute, I confess I was never more entangled, and intricated in the
discourse of mine own reason, then since I had to do with this desperate Dick;
that dares utter, and will cogge any thing, to serve his turn. Not to confute
him, in some respects were perhaps better: to confute him, is necessary. Were
it possible, to confute him in not confuting him, I am of opinion, it would be
done: (for Insolency, or any injury would be repressed by order of Law, where
order of Law is a sufficient remedy: and Silence, in some cases were the finest
Eloquence; or Scorn, the fittest answer): and happily I could wish, not to
confute him in confuting him, (for the discoouery of Cunny catchers does not
greatly edify some bad minds): but seeing he is so desperate, that he will not
be confuted with not confuting, I must desire his Patience, to be alittle
content to be confuted with confuting, rather after his, or others guise, then
after my manner. Answer not a fool according to his foolishness, lest thou
also be like him: answer a fool according to his foolishness, lest he be
wise in his own conceit. They are both Proverbs of the wisest Master of
Sentences: of whom also I have learned, that to the horse belongs a whipp; to
the ass a snaffle; to the fools back a rod. Let noman be wiser then Solomon.
The fooles-head must not be suffered to coy itself: the colt must feel the
whip, or the wande; the ass the snaffle, or the good; the fools back the
rod, or the cudgel. Let the colt, the Ass, the fool beware in time: or he
may peradventure feel them indeed: with such a Tuautem, as has not often
been quauered in any language. If Peace; or Treaty may not be heard, War
shall command Peace; and he musle the mouth of rankest Impudency, or fiercest
hostility, that can do it; and do it otherwise, then is yet imagined: and yet
nothing like that inspired Gentlewooman. Whose Pen is the shot of the
musket, or rather a shaft of heaven, swifter then any arrow, and mightier then
any handweapon, when Courtesy is repulsed, and hostility must enforce amity:
but otherwise how graciously amiable, how divinely sweet? Gentlemen, look upon
the lovely glistering Star of the morning; and look for such an Orie^tall
Star, when She displayeth the resplendishyng beams of her bright wit, and
pure bounty. Meane-while, if some little shimering light appear at a little
creuise, I have my request; and some pretty convenient leisure, to take order
with an other kind of Strange News in Westminster Hall. It is some men's
fortune to have their hands full of vnneedefull business attonce: and for
miselfe, I should make no great matter of two, or three such glowing Irons in
the fire, were it not some small grief, or discouragement, to consider, that
nothing can be perfectly, or sufficiently performed by halues, or fragments.
Which necessary interruption has been the utter disgrace of the premises; and
a great hinderance to my larger Discourses, more ample trifles. I can but crave
pardon; and prepare amends, as leisure and occasion may aff^urde opportunity.
Learned wits can skilfully examine, and honest minds will uprightly consider
Circumstances, with courteous regard of Favor, or due respect of Reason: in
whose only Indifferency, as in a safe, and sweet harborough, I repose my whole
affiance, and security, as heretofore. And so for this present I surcease to
trouble your gentle courtesies: of whose Patience I have (according to
particular occasions) sometime unmannerly, but modestly; often familiarly, but
sincerely; most-what freely, but consideratly; always confidently, but
respectively; in every part simply, in the whole tediously presumed under
correction. I writ only at idle hours, that I dedicate only to Idle Hours:
or would not have made so unreasonably bold, in no needefuller Discourse, then
the Praise, or Supererogation of an Ass.

This 27. of April: 1593. Your mindful debtour, G.H.

FINIS.
Errors escaped in the Printing. With certain Additions to be inserted.
Page. faults. amended. 26 forangoy, read agony. 31 scholeth, schooleth. 49
bewixt betwixt. 67 railing style, without the two pricks, or colon. 85 very
Minister every Minister. 90 instringment infringement. 98 not will will not.
107 looker-on lookers-on. 121 such sweating such a sweating. 139 or discourser
or a discourser. 147 thy riot by riot. 201 suprises surprises. 205 at the least
or the least. 219 Oriental Orient.

KNow also, Gentle Reader, that it was the Writers meaning to divide this
Treatise into three books: the Second beginning at the Advertisement to
Paphatchet, and Martin Mar-prelate: the Third at, So then of Pappadocio: but in
the Original, or uncorrected copy there was not any such division expressly
sett-downe: neither were the Additions following, inserted in their proper
places, but annexed to the end of the Third book, and noted thus.

In the First Book, page 46. after Cloud, insert. What speak I of one, or
two Inglish Paragons? or what should I blason the gallant, and brave meeters of
Ariosto, and Tasso, always notable, sometimes admirable? All the noblest
Italian, French, and Spanish Poets, have in their several Veins Petrarchised,
that is, looued wittily, not grosely, lived ciuilly, not lewdly, and written
deliciously, not wantonly. And it is no dishonor for the daintyest, or
diuinest Muse, to be his scholar, whom the amiablest Invention, and
bewtifullest Elocution acknowledge their master. All posterity --

In the Second Book, Page. 77. after edifieth, insert. Plato comparing
Aristotle, and Xenocrates together; Xenocrates, quoth he, needs a spur:
Aristotle a Bridle. And if Princes, or Parlaments want a goade, may not
Subjects, or Admonitions want a snaffle? Is there pretense, for Liberty to
advise the wisest, or for Zeal to pricke-forward the highest: and no reason
for Prudence to curb Rashness, or for Authority to reane Licentiousness? May
Judgment be whoodwinked with frivolous traditions: and cannot Fantasy be
enueigled with newfangled conceits? Superstition and Credulity --

In the same book, Page. 87. after Innovation, insert. And I hope he was not
greatly unadvised, that being demanded his opinion of the Eldership in
question; answered, he conceived of the Eldership, (as it is intended, and
motioned in England) as he thought of the Elder-tree, that whatsoever it
appeared in show, it would in trial prove frutelesse, seedelesse, bitter,
frail, troublous, and a friend to surging waves, and tempestuous storms. And
being further pressed touching the forward Zeal of dowtie Martin Seniour,
lively Martin Iuniour, pert Penry, lusty Barrow, and some other brag
Reformistes: (for that rolling stone of Innovation, was never so turled and
tumbled, as since those busy limbs began to rowse, and besturre them, more
then all the Pragmatiques in Europe): when young Phaeton, quoth he, in a
presumptuous resolution would needs rule the Chariot of the Sun, as it might
be the temple of Apollo, or the Church of S. Paul, or some greater Province
(for the greater Province, Commonwealth, or Monarchy, the fitter for Phaetons
reformation): his sudd^ine ruin ministered matter of most lamentable tears, to
his dear mother, and loving Sisters; in so much, that they were pitifully
changed, as some write into Elder-trees, as some, into Poplars. Si^fleuit
Clymene: sic and Clymencides altae: as it might be the mournful Church, and
her wailing members, woefully transmewed into Elders, or Poplars. Good my
Masters, --

In the Third book, Page 205, after Policy, insert. that Learning was to be
commended, but Lucre, and Preferme^t to be studied: that he sows in vain,
which moweth not his own advantage: that nothing was to be bestowed, without
hope of vsance: that Love, or Hatred avail not, but where they may prevail:
that Affections were to be squared by occasion, and Reasons to be framed by
proffit: that names of partialities, sects, and divisions, either in Civil,
or Religious causes, were but foolish words, or pelting terms; and all were
to be estimated by their valuatio^ in esse: that the true squire, and right
Geometrical compass of things, is ability, the only thing, that by a
sovereign prerogative deserves to be called Substance: that according to
Chawcers English, there can be little adling, without much gabbing, that is,
small getting, without greatlying, and cogging: that it was --

These four Additions in their several books, I commend to the correction
of the courteous Reader: and so take my leave.

FINIS.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, my very good friend, M. Doctor Haruey.
GOod M. Doctor Haruey, promise I account debt, especially to so especial a
friend: and therefore I have now again labored to discharge miselfe of it. I
would I were of desert to set-forth your long-deserued praise, and of hability
to express your singular habilities, in style, knowledge, and other most
commend a^evertues. What is in my power, the least of your frend^s shall
command: what is not, I can but wish: which I would m^st earnestly wish, if
that might serve, though I never should wish more. I will not trouble your
grauer studies, but pray for your healthes continuance: and will most willingly
perform more, if occasion serve.

Oxford, this 10. of July. 1593. Yours ever to command, John Thorius.

Sonet.
Defamed by One, who most himself defameth,
Write worthy Haruey: for the wise applaude thee:
Shame be his hyer, that fowly himself shameth,
And would of thy deserved right desraude thee.
And if you force the undeserved wrong,
Wherewith some simple Ignorant distaines thee:
You in your Wisdom may exceed as long,
As he in Folly foolishly disdaines thee.
For sharpe-eyde Equity has descride to all,
Th'iniurious vain, that settes his pen to school:
Whose railing tendes unto your wisdoms fall,
And proves all fond, to prove himself a Fool.
Which monstrous Folly would be leaft in have:
As Wisdoms age will make him know at last.
John Thorius.

Enclosed in the same Letter.
ANd that I might not be held last in remembrance, though absent, that in your
presence have sought the selfe-proffering cause of after-memory: I have once
more, (as he, that deuoteth himself, and his poor labors to your good
liking), how badly you may see, but how heartily I would you could see, or I
could say; writ these my pure devotions, and Zealous lines: with as true desire
to honor yourselfe, according to your worth, as I have been wanting the
desert, which your courteous nature has affourded me. I request Sir, but your
acceptance, and your favor, which if I gain, I have got more, then my due:
and so wishing your continual bliss, I end, as one with often prayers desiring
to be held,

Your bound by much desert, An^ny Chewt.

Sonet.
Proceed most worthy Lines, in your disdain,
Against the false Suggestions you abuse:
Whose rascal style deserved has to gain
The hateful title of a railing Muse.
Doubtless the wisest, that shall chance to read you
In true Judicial of a quiet thought,
Will give applause unto the wit, that bread you,
And you shall win the good, that you have sought.
Win more: and since the fool defames you still,
The fool, whom Shame has stained with foul blott,
Perform on him your discontented will:
Fame shall be your meede: Shame shall be his lot.
And so proceeding, you shall so redeem
The name, that he would drown in black esteem.
Subscribed, Sh: VVy:

for, Shores Wife.

Sur l'Apologie de Monsieur le tres-docte and tres-eloquent Docteur Haruey: par
le Sieur de Fregeuille du Gaut.
Celuy qui prouoque publie sa defense,
Peut auecques raison sa cause deployer;
La Loy de Talion ne peut moins, qu'ottroyer
Just permission de repayer l'offence.
Mais celuy qui enfle, a escrire commence,
A diffamer autruy, tachant a s'employer:
De droit ne peut pretendre adueu ou bon loyer,
Ains l'infame intent luy vient pourrecompense.
^aime pourtant par tout vnstile modere,
Mesmes si on respond au sot demesure,
Car on n'a point raison d'imiter sa sottise.
Marri suimon d'Haruey de te voir prouoque,
Mais tres-aise qu'estant indignement pique;
Ta Docte response est eloquente and rassise.
His Sonet, that will justify his word, and dedicateth Nashes S. Fame to
Immortality.
A Dame, more sweetly brave, then nicely fine;
Yet fine, as finest Gentlewomen be:
Brighter, then Diamant in every line;
Is Penniles so VVitlesse still? quoth She.
If Nash will felly gnash, and rudely slash:
Snip-snap a crash, may lend S. Fame a gash.
Skill read the Ryme, and put it in Truths purse:
(Experience kisseth Reconcilements hand):
If warning-peece be scorned, Spite may hear worse:
Though Love no warrior be, Right leads a band.
How feign would Courtesy these iarres surcease?
How glad would Charity depart in peace?
But if Sir Rash continue still Sir Swash;
He lives, that will him dash, and lash, and sqwash.
Haec quoque culpa tua est: haec quoque poena tua est.
An other occasional admonition.
Fame roused herself, and began to swash about:
Boys swarmed: youths thronged: bloudes swore: brutes rea^'d the howt:
Her meritorious work, a Wonderclowte:
Did ever Fame so bravely play the Lowte?
I chaunc'd upon the Ryme: and wondered much
What courage of the world, or Mister wight
Durst terrible S. Fame so rashly tuch,
Or her redoutable Bull-begging knight.
Incontinent I heard a piercing voice,
Not Ecchos voice, but shriller then a Lark:
Since Destiny allottes no wiser choice,
Pastime appose the Pickle-herring clarke.
Quiet thy rage, Imperious Swish-swash:
Or Woe be to thy horrible trish-trash.
Est been, non potuit dicere: dixit, Erit.
An Apostrophe to the Health of his abused Friends.
Live Father sweet: and miscreant Varlets dye,
That wrong my parent Heart, and brother Eye.
Dearest of Eyes, contemn thy caitiue foes:
Kindest of Hearts, enjoy thy firm repose.
Sky, with a Patron Eye aspect that Eye,
That Eye, espoused to the Virgin Sky.
Art, with a Loouer heart preserve that Heart,
That Heart, devoted to the heavenly Art.
Blessings, descend from your Empyreal throne,
And lend a bounteous ear to suppliant moan.
Ambrosiall springes of cleerest influence,
Fountains restoratiue of cordial bliss,
Deigne Zeal prostrate your tendrest indulgence,
And souerainly redress that is amiss.
L'enuoy.
Volumes of Thanks, and Praise, your store combine
In passionatest Hymns, and Psalms divine.
The Printers Postscript.
SWeet Gentlemen, having committed the Premises to the Press, and acquainting
certain learned and fine men with some other of the commendatory Letters, and
Sonnets of M. Thorius, and M. Chewt: there was such an especial liking
conceived of two other their writings, that I was finally entreated, or rather
ouertreated, to give them also their welcome in Print; as not the unfittest
lines, that have been published to interteine lasie hours, or to employ
drowsy eyes. Sometime in the brauest shows there is little performed: and
sometime a poor Publicane may work as great a work of Supererogation, as a
proud Pharise. I am not the meerest to blase other men's arms: and they are
best furnished to be their own tongues, that can so well plead for
themselves, and their friends. I can but recommende their learned exercise, and
mine own unlearned labor, to your gentle acceptance.

To the right worshipful, my very assured friend, M. Doctor Haruey.
MY silence thus long, good M. Doctor Haruey, was not occasioned either by
forgetfulness, or by negligence: but rather for want both of convenient
leisure, and of sufficient argument: being very unwilling to spend time often
in writing of vnmateriall lines, or to trouble any especial friend with reading
them. Yet because amity is maintained by this loouing kind of i^tercourse:
and because Custom has allowed, that Affection induced, to express a
careful memory of the continuance of friendship, by writing even upon small, or
no occasion: though the Letter were signed with nothing else, but, Sivales,
been est: egovaleo: lest longer silence might cause me to incur just
reprehension, and that you may receive some slender token of my often thinking
on you: I send you enclosed three Stanzaes, though simple in conceit, or other
regard, yet were they equal to my good will, they would undoubtedly excel,
and should be some way suitable to your right excellent gifts. If they please,
or not displease you, and may seem worthy, or not altogether unworthy to serve
as foiles with my other Sonnets, which you received before, to those much
worthier Verses, which you have of much happier Poets, then miselfe: you may
therein do your pleasure, whereto only they are consecrated. Thus hoping that
you are persuaded of me, as of one affectionatly your own to use, and
command at your appointment, I leave you with my most hearty, and humble
recommendations.

Oxford: the 3. of August. 1593. Yours always at command, John Thorius.


Stanzaes.
Among the Greeks, sweet Homers copious Verse
Foregoing times to Fames swift wings commended:
The Latins, Virgils noble work rehearse:
Nor yet in these were ancient praises ended.
Demosthen's rich style, thorough Greece was blazed,
And Tullyes forcing toungue made Room amazed.
Our modern Age to egall with the passed,
The Italian pleasing Muse has done her best:
The learned French Pens have themselves surpassed,
And worthy English wits have bannisht rest.
Midst whom, who not emblason Harueys name,
Wrong him, themselves, and Englands growing Fame
Yielding fond Nash thy glory shall not stain,
But rather shall en^rease thy praise hereby:
Thy friends shall know thy indgement not so vain,
But thou dis^ernes where true desert does fly.
And thy desert by so much shall seem greater,
By how much thou art known to know thy better.
John Thorius.

Sir, such a patheticall Ass have I found deciphred in your most learned and
witty Discourse of that po^re Creture, as I know will prove the eternal
Memoratiue of one M. Nash. Yet I by Experience have found more: that it is the
nature of a true Ass, (to which Ass peradventure this was dedicated) that a
green Fig being handsomely tied to his chappes, he no sooner smells it, but
he follows his nose so far, that he scapeth fair in uneven ground, if he
breaks not his neck. And this Note I would not but impart unto you: as a
Caveat worthy to be remembered amongst other secrets of that beast.
Fordoubtlesse your philosophical Ass will make Alchimy upon it. I pray you
dispose of it at your best pleasure. When any other such Memorandum fortunes
into my hand, you shall see it: and so in have recommending you to your better
studies, I rest at your service.

Sir, An: Chapter


The Asses Figg.
So long the Rhennish fury of thy brain,
Incenst with hot fume of a Stilliard Clime,
Lowd-lying Na^h, in liquid terms did rain,
Full of absurdities, and of slaundrous ryme.
So much thy Pot-i^sts in a T apster (...),
(For that is the Q^intessance of thy (...))
Thy tossepot m^iesty, and thy Fame did rumor,
In wondrous Ag^nyes of an Alehouse passion.
So well thy wydemouth'd, or thy Oisterwh^re phrase
(Yet-Gentry bragges her of thy lousy degree)
Aptly has known thine Armory to blase
In terms peculiar unto none but thee.
So soon flue Penniworth of thy groser with
(Yet thou art witty, as a woodcock would be)
More then autentic all; has learned to get^
Thy Muse entitled, as it truly should be.
And now so neatly has thy railing merit
(I should have said Ram ally meditations)
Procured applause unto thy Clarret spirit,
And sack-sopt miseries of thy Consutations.
That now each Iuy-bush weeps her Tears in (...):
The Fish-wiues Commonwealth, at^k For^orne,
Moornes in small drink, sharp, single, sour, and stale:
And thy long-booted gentry, ragged and torn
Wailes now petitions to the Devils good grace:
Although the last, God knows, got little meede.
But thow'lt to Hell, when Shifts can have no place,
Perhaps to Hanging too, when time shall need.
Yet first wilt ride, rail, ryme me down to Hell:
(Oh but beware strange bugg^s at such a game):
I have a trick, to teach a Goose to spell
Himself an Ass, out-off his Asses name.
An: Chapter

FINIS.

