THE CHRISTIAN LIFE AND DEATH, OF MISTRESS KATHERIN BRETTERGH, LATE wife of
Master WILLIAM BRETTERGH, of Bretterghoult, in the County of Lancaster
Gentleman. With the manner of a bitter conflict she had with Satan, and
blessed conquest by CHRIST, before her death, to the great glory of God, and
comfort of all beholders.

MICHA. 7. 8. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemies: though I fall, I shall
rise again: And when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.

PSALM. 37. 37. Mark the upright man, and behold the just: for the end of that
man is peace.

LONDON, Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON. 1634.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, grace and peace in JESUS CHRIST.
When Achimaaz the son of Zadoc requested that he might be the messenger to
bring David word of Absoloms death, Ioab would not suffer him: Thou shall not
(says he) be the messenger 2 Samuel 18. 19, 20.
to day, but thou shall carry news another time, but to day thou shall carry
none; for the Kings son is dead. He knew David's affection was such, that the
news of his childs death would be most heavy to him, and the messenger
himself not welcome for his message sake.

This is all our infirmity, no tidings more grievous to us, then when we hear
of the death of those whom we love. The Parent bewailes his Child, the
Husband his Wife, the Friend laments the death of his Friend, and we think it
the loss of another friend to depart with this our grief. Jacob mourned for
Joseph his son, that he would not be comforted of a long season, but
thought he would Genesis 37. 3.
weep for him as long as he lived. When the Amalekites had burned Ziklag, and
led away captive the men's wives and their children, David 1 Sa. 30. 4. Ioh. 1^.
19.
and his campany wept, till they could weep no more. When Lazarus died, his
sisters, Martha and Mary were much discomforted for him. So heavy a thing we
see it is to be severed for a time from those that are dear unto us. One
only thing there is, which is able in this case much to temper our affections;
when we see our friend to die in the Lord; that is, in comfort of conscience,
and assurance of salvation through Christ.

This blessed departure God gives to many, for diverse good purposes. First,
that the world may know that peace is the end of the just, and comfort in death
is the portion of the righteous. Secondly, That his eternal truth in our holy
profession may appear to be able to comfort us, not only in our life, but in
our death also, when all other comforts forsake us. Thirdly, that our enemies
may see our faith is not in vain. Fourthly, that the weak by their example
may be encouraged to a holy life, when they see it bring with it so happy a
death, and that they may be strengthened against the fear of death, seeing it
is always comfortable to those that lead a godly life. Fifthly, and finally,
that the friends of the departed, by their heavenly departure, may be
admonished not to mourn so much for their death, as to rejoice for their life,
and to thank God, that ever it was their lot, in any degree to be joined or
matched with so blessed servants of God.

This Gentlewoman, Mistress Katherine Brettergh was one of this number: her
life, as long as God continued it, was dear to those among whom she was, as
the life of a friend might be. Her husband, friends, kinsfolks, brethren,
sisters, and all the godly that knew her, enjoyed a great blessing of God of
her: and her death (no doubt) was grievous to her husband, as the death of a
virtuous yokefellow.

This is the thing I thought with profit might be presented to the view of
other also that knew her not: for when I had for my own private use, and the
use of my friends faithfully collected (out of the fresh memories of those that
were present, and eie-witnesses as well as my self) and set down the manner
of her sickness and death: I considered, that the knowledge thereof could not
but be welcome to all those that desire to dye the death of the righteous. And
so the same causes that moved me to collect it, gave me also occasion to
publish it. I remembered the saying of one, That it is is great piety to set
forth the virtues of the departed, if they have excelled therein; yea it is
Nazianz. Monod. Ba^ilii.
a means to increase grace in our selves. I thought so great mercy of God
showed to one among us, ought not to be forgotten, but should remain to us and
our children an example, to teach us how good God is to them that love him, and
to assure us that he will never forsake us; but, in like manner as he did her,
help and comfort us, when we shall by death be called unto him. I considered
the ungodly and uncharitable tongues of the Papists abiding in our Country,
who, since her death, have not ceased to give it out, that she died despairing,
and by her comfortless end, showed that she professed a comfortless Religion.
Wherein they bewray their malice and madness, and show themselves of what
generation they are, even a people (says Jeremy) which bend their tongues
like bows for lies: and (as David says) make Ier. 9. (...). Psalm. 11. 2.
ready their arrows to shoot at them which are upright in heart. And lastly,
when I remembered the censure given by our Savior Christ of the woman, that
powered costly ointment on his head, a little before his Passion, though some of
his Disciples unjustly blamed her for the same, saying, What needed this wast?
yet he himself did not only excuse her for that fact, saying, she did it to
bury him: but also commanded, that wheresoever the Gospel should be preached
throughout the world, there also that which she had done should be spoken of,
for a Mat. 16. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
memorial of her. Even so, seeing this virtuous Gentlewoman has been unjustly
accused by some popish persons, I thought it ^it, that she should not only be
justly excused, but also that a true history of her holy life, and Christian
death, should be now published in print, as a brief history to be seen and
read for a memorial of her.

I had no other odours wherewith to embalme her, I am but the penman, the thing
it self was her own, wrought in her by the spirit, of divine providence, the
which God grant that we may all imitate.

Amen.
The holy Life and Christian Death, of Mistress KATHERIN BRETTERGH.
THis Gentlewoman was borne in Cheshire, the daughter of John Breuen of
Breuenstapleford Esquire, well descended, and of an ancient House. Her
education before her marriage was such, as became the profession of the Gospel,
in godliness and purity of life and Religion, and well beseemed the house
where she was brought Stapleford.
up. The Scriptures she knew from a child, and by reading thereof, gained
such knowledge, that she was able readily to apply them when occasson was
offered, as we may see at the time of her death, and that so fitly, and
effectually, that she seemed to have made them her daily meditation. For the
things of this world she was moderate, and sober, and by her Christian life
and death, she might teach many Gentlewomen, how vain the pleasures and
fashions of this World are, and how far unable to bring that peace to a
distressed heart, that the embracing of true Religion can.

She used not to ga^ abroad with wandering Di^ah, to ^^ncing gr^enes, markets,
or public assemblies; but rather with Hannah Genesis 34. 1. ^^a. 1. 9 1^.
did choose to tread upon the dust of the Sanctuary, and walk in the ways of
Sion; yea, with David rather to be a doorekeeper in the house of God than to
have society with the wicked, Psalm. 84. 10.
or to dwell in the tents and tabernacles of the ungodly. The Sabbath day was
always dear and welcome to her, what time she would not be without the Word
preached, though many times she went far for it. Her delight was still to
consecrate it glorious to the Lord. And as it is said of Josiah, his heart
melted when he heard 2 Ki. 22. 19.
the Law; so may it be said of her, her heart was so tender, and full of
compassion, that oftentimes she was scene to hear Sermons, read, pray, and
meditate with tears.

She made conscience of all slave; yea, of the least sin, such as worldlings
count no sin: she never used to swear oath great nor small; nor yet to
abuse her tongue with vain or unseemly speeches; no not so much as a
iest-lye, or immodest word; neither durst she name the Name of GOD, or take
his titles in her mouth without great reverence. In private speech where she
might speak with profit, she did it so well, that her speeches might have
been delivered by a stronger vessel then her self: her words being so well
seasoned, and proceeding from such a sanctified heart, did always minister
grace to the hearers. Psalm. 16. 3.


To read, to pray, to sing, to meditate, was her daily exercise; and her
chiefest delight was in the holy society of the Saints upon earth (which I say
not for any cause, but only to show the fountain from whence her godly end
flowed, and that the World may see some there be, which choose rather to be
joined with the people Heb. 11. 25.
of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; and these I doubt
not have chosen the better part.) Finally, the precepts of the Lord were
precious unto her; for from her childehood she feared God, and walked before
him: both knowledge and sanctification did join in her, the fruits and
effects whereof did appear in her life, and was seen at her death, to the
glory of God, and comfort of all beholders.

She was not like the simple Popish women of our days, which 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7.
Act. 17, 11, 12.
are ever learning, and neuerable to come to the knowledge of the truth; but
rather like the Noble men and women of Berea, which received the Word of God
with readiness, and were able to discern of Paul and Silas preaching. But why
do I speak of Popish women, whose understandings are darker than the
darkness of Egypt: Let us come and examine many other which seem to detest
Popery, and ask them a reason of their faith; they can tell you a tale of
their ruffes, and their pride, and their vanity: but for Religion, it is the
least thing they regard, or seek to know: which I speak not so much to solace
my self in the sins and simplicity of others, as earnestly desiring all
Gentlewomen, that either knew this holy Saint of God, or hereafter shall hear
of her, in stead of your glasses at home, wherein you prick and prune, and
pin your selves, to look into this glass before your eyes, that so her
life, and death, may be an example for you to follow.

When she was about twenty years old, (by the consent of her self and her
friends) she was married to a young Lancashire Gentleman, Master William
Brettergh of Bretterghoult near Liuerpoole: one that likewise embraced
Religion sincerely, and for the same endured many grieuances at the hands of
Papists.

Two years and more she lived after she was married, and had issue only one
daughter: during which time, this couple lived together Anna Brettergh.
in such mutual joy and comfort, as well beseemed the children of God, which
make profession of his truth. And although this Gentlewomen came from the
inhabitants of Abraham, to dwell in Sodom, amidst the tents of Kedar, that is
to say, among Ps. 120. 5.
inhumane hands of bru^ish Papists, enduring many temporal grieuances from
them yet her knowledge, patience, mild inclination, and constancy for the
truth was such, as that her husband was farther builded up in Religion by her
means, and his face daily more and more hardened against the devil, and all
his plaguie agents: the Popish Recusants, Church Papists, profane Atheists,
and carnal Protestants, which swarmed together like ^ornets in those parts.

It is not unknown to Lancashire, what Horses and Cattle of her husbands were
killed upon his grounds in the night, most barbarously at two several times
by S^mi^ary Priests, (no question) and Recusants that lurked thereabouts. And
what a l^sse and hinderance it was unto him, being all the stock he had on
his grounds to any purpose: This fell out not long after she was married to
him; yet this was so far from dismaying her, or working such passions in her,
as are common to her sex, that she rather John Wright into^^squier, Richard
Orme. Raph Heaton, etc. and many (...).
rejoiced, then sorrowed; turning it into matter of praising God, and
submitting her self to his good providence. Often she would have said, It is
good that such things be; but woe be to them that do them. It is good in
God, thereby to chasten his children, and prevent some sin, which he saw us
like to fall into. It is good in respect of Gods Church, that the weak may be
confirmed in the truth; and that Papistry may be disgraced, when the World
shall see such wickedness flow from it. It is good in GOD, that so the wicked
may be without excuse at the day of judgment, when their conscience shall
tell them, that howsoever GOD suffers them to do such villainy for some just
cause known to himself; yet they commit it only of malice and revenge.
Oftentimes also in these vexations, she would have said; the mercies of God
are infinite, who does not only by his Word, but also by his Justice, make us
fit for his Kingdom. Little do our enemies know, what good by these things
they do unto us, and what wrack they bring to their own Kingdom, while they
se^ forth the wickedness thereof. Many times she would pray that God would
forgive them, which had done them this hurt, and send them repentance: and she
would call upon her husband, that he would do the like, and bless them that
cursed him. And for fear Mat. 5. 44.
lest her husband should fail in that point through infirmity and weakness,
as it is said of Job, who offered sacrifice for his sons, lest peradventure
they should sin, and blaspheme God in their Job. 1. 5.
hearts: so she never failed, but daily prayed unto the Lord to sanctify her
husbands thoughts, and direct his heart aright, only to seek Gods glory,
without either desire of revenge, or satisfying his own affections. So humble
was her spirit, so careful to avoid and prevent sin, both in her self and
others: and so mild of nature, that as Jacob with his mildness softened the
malicious Genesis 33. 3, 4.
heart of Esau his brother: and David by his kindness in the cave, changed
the fury of Saul, into weeping and confession, that David was more righteous
than he: so she by her meekness, humility, 1 Samuel 14. 17, 18.
and unspotted carriage in the World, forced some of the adversaries to
religion, to speak well of her.

For her life, she was well reported of all that knew her. Pitiful and
bountiful was she to the poor, and slacked no opportunity to do good
wherein she could; but constantly held her course, and kept her times of
praying, reading, and meditating, (wherein she had plentiful gifts) and
contiuuasly used the same at such times as were fitting for her estate, sex,
and calling. At the exercises of Religion, as prayer and instruction in her
family, she would not be wanting: besides private prayer, and meditation which
she omitted not, but used daily, both in her chamber, as also abroad secretly
and solitarily in the Orchard, Garden, or Fields, as Isacks manner was. In
reading the Scriptures she used evermore Ge. 24. 63.
to task her self, eight Chapters a day at the least, and for the time which
she saw evil or idly spent, without doing some good, she used to call the
time of tentation. Many times also she would read some godly writer, or
expositor of Scripture, or in the book of Martyrs; and was seen to weep most
bitterly, when either she had read of that which touched her affections near,
or of the cruel Martyrdom, which the dear Children of God were Exo. 13. 13.
Psalm. 16. 4. Ephesians. 5. 3. Judge. 6. 31, 32. Eccles. 4. 25. 28.
put unto, by the cruel and wicked tyrants of former days.

For Popery, she saw it so gross and foolish, that she would not once name it,
except it were to argue against it, but never for it: so zealous was she of
Gods glory, and loved the truth so entirely, that she would not once open her
mouth to plead for Baal.

Sin above all things was hateful unto her, for thereat she would have
grieved, as well when she had seen it in others, as in her self. One or two
examples I cannot omit, wherein she bewrayed a worthy spirit, sanctified by
the Spirit of God, and prepared for all the assaults of Satan. On a time, as
her husband and she were riding toward the Church, he was angry with his man:
Alas husband (quoth she) I fear your heart is not right toward God, that can
be thus angry for a trifle: And weeping she said further, you must pray
against this your affection, and always be sure your anger be of God, for
else how dare you appear this day before his Minister? And offer up your
prayers in the public congregregation of the saints of God? Another time, a
Tenant of her husbands, being behind with his rent, she desired him to bear
yet with him a quarter of a year, which he did: and when the man brought his
money, with tears she said to her husband: I fear you do not well to take it
of him though it be your right, for I doubt he is not well able to pay it, and
then you oppress the poor. So great a compassion had she of other men's
wants, that all things being duly considered, and rightly weighed, methinks I
may say of her, as Paul said of Timothy, I know none like minded. Phil. 2. 20.


Thus after she was married, she continued in the things she had learned, and
held her profession with much sincerity, that the common enemies to our
religion (the very Papists) had nothing to say against her, but confessed her
life was unreprovable. And as for the godly that knew her, they always
acknowledged that modesty, and virtuous carriage in her, joined with knowledge
and practice of all the duties of religion, that they had lust cause to report
of her, as of a sound and faithful professor of the Gospel.

Two years, and something more she lived with her husband, till about (...),
it pleased God to send her that sickness whereof on Whitsonday 1601. she died.

Her sickness took her in the manner of a hot burning Ague, (...) D^^. ^^01.
which made her according to the nature of such diseases, now and then to talk
somewhat idely, and through the tempters subtilty, which abused the infirmity
of her body to that end, as he oftentimes uses to do in many, from idle
words, to descend into a heavy conflict, with the infirmity of her own
spirit; from the which yet the Lord presently and wonderfully delivered her,
giving so joyful an issue to the tentation, that she might well use the words
of the Prophet, as afterward she did, For a moment O Lord thou did hide
thy face from me, for a little season, but with everlasting Isai. 54. (...).
mercy thou had compassion on me. On Saturday seuen-night before Whitsonday,
what time she sickened, she began to feel some May 23.
little infirmity and weakness of faith, more than she had wont to show, but
she soon overcame it. On Monday night it increased upon her, and the assault
of the enemy began to be sharp, and May 25.
so continued till the next day at afternoon; what time God delivered her, and
sent her peace, and comfort of conscience, and so increased the same in her
continually till she died. The manner of her affliction was this:

First, the severity of Gods justice, and the greatness of her sins began to
come into her mind, which much afflicted her, M. William Brettergh. Master
Will. Fox. M. Edward Aspinwall. M. John Brettergh. Mistress Ma^d Brettergh.
Mistress Scholastica Fox. William Woodward. Elizabeth Challoner.
and she would often speak of it. Then she accused her self of pride, that
she had delighted to much in her self, and her beauty. Afterward she thought
she had no faith, but was full of hypocrisy, and had not embraced religion so
earnestly, nor glorified God so worthily (especially with her tongue, which often
she repeated) nor loved him so sincerely, as she ought to have done. Sometime
she would cast her Bible from her, and say: It was indeed the book of life,
but she read the same unprofitably, and therefore feared it was become to her
the book of death. Sometimes she would say her sins had made her a prey to
Satan; a spectacle to the world; a disgrace to religion; and a shame to her
husband, kindred, and all true Christians: and here she would weep bitterly.
Sometime the original corruption wherein she was borne, troubled her, and the
sins of her parents, and the common parents of all, the eaters of the
forbidden fruit: as if that had made her unworthy of God, and were then laid to
her charge. Many times she accused her self of impatience, bewailing the want
of feeling Gods Spirit, and making doubt of her election, and such like
infirmities. She wis^^d, that she had never been borne, or that she had been
made any other creature, rather than a woman. She cried out oftentimes, Woe
woe, woe, etc. a weak, a woeful, (...) wretched, a forsaken woman, and such
like pitiful complaints against her self, with tears continually trickling
from her eyes. She complained of grievous thirst, such as all the water in the
sea could not quench (and yet when drink was given her, sometimes refused it,
sometimes took a very little of it:) sw^at burst out upon her exceedingly, and
sometime her body burned extremely. So it seemed the sorrows of death hemmed
her in, and the griefs of hell laid hold upon her. Sometimes she was very dull
in prayer, and once when she should have said, Lead us not into tentation,
she made a stop, saying, I may not pray; I may not pray (being interrupted, as
she said, by Satan) and so showed much discomfort: howbeit she was not ^^fe
till ^^e could both pray, and make confession of her faith with special
application to her self. Besides these ^^ry darts of Satan, she was once or
twice troubled with vain speeches, as of her child, the killing of her
husbands cattle, that she thought she saw a ^^re by her, etc. But every one
saw that these things proceeded of weakness, emptiness of her head, and want
of sleep, which her disease would not afford her.

These ^its, though they were for the time grievous to her self, and
discomfortable to her friends; yet were they neither long, nor continual, but
in the very midst of them would she oftentim^^ give testimony of her faith,
striving and fighting against her tentations. Many times when the ^landers by
judged her afflictions at the sharpest, would she call upon God, lifting up
her eyes and hands to heaven, and desire him to give her strength against her
tentations. Many times with a cheerful countenance she would desire those
that were by, not to faint, or to give her over, but constantly to pray, and
help her against the tempter. Once in the amidst of her tentation, being
demanded by Master William Fox: whether Will. Fox.
she did believe the promises of God, or no? and whether she could pray? she
answered. O that I could, I would willingly but he will Mark. 9. (...).
not let me. Lord I believe, help my unbelief: which she pronounced with a
still voice. And when he replied, that if she had a desire to pray and believe,
she did pray and believe, and that so effectually, that hell gates should not
overcome her, according to that of the Apostle: God accepts it according to
that a man has, not according to that a man has not: she was much comforted
thereby. (...) Cor. 8. 12.


Once after a great conflict with Satan, she said: Satan reason not with me, I
am but a weak woman, if thou have any thing to William Brettergh.
say, say it to my Christ; he is my advocate, my strength, and my redeemer, and
he shall plead for me. Sometimes when she was afflicted with the accusation of
her sins, and want of feeling Gods mercy, she would with many a pitiful sob
and much weeping, pray to the Lord Jesus Christ, to help and comfort her a
poor, woeful, John Brettergh.
distressed woman, and requested others to pray for her. And when she was
moved to make confession of her faith, she would do it oftentimes, saying the
Apostles Creed, and concluding the same Edward Aspinwall.
with words of application to her self. I believe the remission of (my)
sins, the resurrection of (my) body, and eternal life (to me) Amen. And
having done, she would pray God to confirm her in that ^aith, ever concluding
with the Lords prayer, as devoutly and reverently as any that were present. A
Christian friend, who by his daily attendance on her, discharged the duty of a
faithful Christian, standing by told her that no tentation had be fallen her,
but that which appertained to the child of God, and that God William Woodwaad.
is faithful and true, and had promised to give an issue with the tentation:
whereas she expressed great comfort.

Master Edward Aspinwall, a faithful professor of the truth, and a true
Israeli^e, was much with her in the time of her sickness, and ministered much
heavenly instruction unto her, and comforted her at all times with apt places
of Scripture, meeting with her Isai. 40. 1, 2. 28. 29, 30, 31. Isai. 41. 8, 9,
10. 13. 14. 17. 18. Isai. 4^. 1. 8. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 13. 14. 15. 16. Isai. 43.
1. 2. 5. 15. Mat. 11. 28.
temptations: and so put the sword of the spirit into her hand. He propounded
to her the most plentiful comforts of God unto his Church, in the 40, 41, 42,
and 43. Chapters of Isaiah, uttered in such speeches and phrases, a^ might most
fitly answer her discomforts. Also he directed her to consider the Passion and
Prayer of our Savior Christ, for all his, John 17. Matthew. 26. Luke 22. 23. But
especial did he often i^culcate that sweet inuitation of our Savior: Come
unto me all you that travel and be heavy laden, I will ^ase you. But the
difficulty she had sometimes to apply these generals unto her own soul in
particular, made the ease more full of anguish to her felfe, and fearful and
lamentable to the standers by: Albeit she acknowledged Gods Majesty, mercy,
faithfulness, and truth; yet still complained she of her own weakness, and
unworthiness, and could hardly appropriate each thing to her self.

To help her somewhat herein (for properly otherwise, it is the peculiar work
of the holy Spirit of God, to persuade the heart and soul of her particular
interest in these general promises) she was told, that the Almighty who was
merciful, as she had proved, and faithful, as she confessed, intended all
these mercies to as many as he did call, and make promise to. And that he
called her she must needs confess, both because that then she not only her
self read, but hard others read those blessed words of God unto her: and also
for that in former times, she had been touched with the love of God, and that
his truth: and had well profited in the detestation of sin, and imitation of
her Savior in a holy life. And for the proof thereof, she was wished to
remember in former times her Baptism, her frequenting of Sermons, and often
receiving the most comfortable repast of the holy Communion, her daily, and
almost continual exercise of reading, meditating, and praying, etc. Also he
assured her, that neither the present agony she was in, nor the speeches th^n
in that distress, tending to the signification of despair, extorted from her,
were any just causes, why either she, or any that heard her, should judge
fearfully of her, because all might see the fault was not in her will, as
appeared by her prayers, confessions, plaints, sighs, tears, and groans to God
for mercy, and full assurance in the blood of Christ; but in her judgment,
not able at that time to discern the ways of the Almighty: And therein (he
told her) she was made conformable, not only to many the holy Saints of God,
Job, Jeremy, David, and others more, but also to her head, our Lord and Savior
Christ Jesus, of whom we read, that some have cursed the day of their Job 31.
etc. Ier. 20. 14. Job 6. 4. 8. 9. Job. 16. 9. Lament. 3. etc. Psalm. 6. 3.
birth, and called for their end, and darkness to cover them: They have been
as men without hope, and swallowed up in despair: They have cried, how the
wrath of God has torn them, and the terrors of the almighty have fought
against them: They have had no peace in their souls, nor comfort in their
consciences, their prayers have been shut from God, their sins have been
terrible unto Psalm. 38. 4. etc. Psalm. 71. 7. Psalm. 77. 1. 7. etc. Psalm. 51. 5.
Psalm. 102. (...). etc. Romans 7. 24. Mat. 27. 46. Mat. 26. 38. Hob. 5. 7.
them, crying that their iniquities had gone over their heads, and were a
burden too heavy for them to bear: And they have thought themselves spectacles
of shame and reproach, and as monsters unto men: They were grieved for the
sins of their parents, and complained that they were desolate, forsaken, and
most miserable and wretched in the world; yet for all this were they still the
dear children of God, as you are this day. Nay (says he) I pray you
consider, what corments God inflicted upon his dear Son on the Cross: did
he not cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? He complained, that
his soul was heavy unto death; yet was he heard in that which he feared, and
God delivered him. After this, he read unto her the 22. Psalm, wherein David
complained partly of his own, but principally of the most bitter anguish which
our Savior Christ endured, and suffered in body and soul, putting her in
mind, that her case was not so bad as David's, not much unlike our Saviors,
who endured all that, and more for her; and therefore she had no cause to
fear, seeing Christ had obtained victory, and would undoubtedly be with her,
deliver her, and eternally glorify her with himself for evermore; and so
continually he propounded to her such comfortable places of Scripture as might
meet with her infirmities. This greatly refreshed her, and gave her occasion
many times to call upon God, for increase of grace, and deliverance from her
grievous temptations: The which God of his accustomed goodness vouchsafed, on
Tuesday, about three a clock in the afternoon, what time May ^6.
she felt her self in very good measure delivered from all her former fears
and afflictions. But on Saturday next after, which was the day before her
death, she was wholly released, and filled with such inward comfort, that it
greatly affected us that saw it.

This is the sum of that temptation which she had, wherein what can any man
see that might give just occasion to report our religion comfortless, or the
Gentlewoman died despairing? This we are sure of, that to be without temptation
is the greatest temptation: as also, that nothing ^esell her, which has not
befallen the holiest of the children of God. And she that considered her own
corruption) which how great it is in the best of Gods Saints, I need not say)
and bethought her self of the punishment due thereunto, if God in justice
should reward her; no marvel if she brake out sometime into heavy complaints.
I make no question it was the work of God in her, to suffer Satan to accuse
her, and afflict her for her sins, that so she might the better see them,
and consider the ha^nousnesse of them, and before her departure repent her of
them, and betake her wholly to Christ for the saving of her soul. And if it
pleased God thus to make her possess her sins before she died, let those which
never yet knew the weight of their sins, (...)e wise in time, and remember
that he shall never have his sin forgiven, which first or last does not
undergo a holy despair for it, and acknowledge nothing to remain in
himself, but matter of judgment and condemnation: and comfort and eternal
life to flow alone from Jesus Christ.

And as for those, which have learned to scoff at the terrors of Gods
children, and to censure such as are at sometimes cast down with feeling the
anger of God against sin, let them consider the blessed issue that God gave
to the troubles of this Gentlewoman, and let them acknowledge his work in her.
And if they will not do this, but proceed to traduce the dead, then let them
call to mind, those of the Popish crew, and persons of greater note among
them, than this Gentlewoman was, which have died most fearfully indeed.
Cardinal Sadelot, Iacobus Latomus the Divinity Fox. Act^ and Mon. p. 1^04. 61.
page 19^8.
Reader at Louaine, Ho^mester the Friar, Guarlacus, Bom^lius, Crescentius the
Cardinal, Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, and diverse the bloody
persecutors in Queen Mary's time, and some of the Popes themselves, as namely,
Francis the Monk, one of the ten popish persons converted in France, An. Dom.
1601. See Hasen Miller. historia Ies^itica, who sets down certain examples of
the Jesuits to this purpose.
Pope Six^us Quintus of late years; all which died most fearfully and
miserably, and showed manifest signs at their death, that their popish
superstition was the condemnation of their souls. And if they will judge of my
religion by my death, let them acknowledge their religion is the doctrine of
desperation, and that the truth and faith which was able to fill the heart and
to^^ue of this blessed Gentlewoman at her death, with such heavenly comforts,
is the doctrine of Christ, revealed from heaven, that we might live and dye in
it.

From Tuesday, till Whitson even, her comfort still increased, and temptations
banished away. She would th^^ very chearefully join with the company in
prayer, and singing Psalms, as occasion offered, and performed all such
duties, as was meet for her in that estate. One day, her brother Master John
Breuen of John Bruen Esquire. William Brettergh. Will. ^o^, John Brettergh.
William Woodward. John Holland. Maud Brettergh. Scholastica Fox. 1 Pet. 4. 17.
18. John Holland. William Brettergh. William Woodward.
Breuenstapleford came from his house in Cheshire to visit her, and after some
kind salutation passed between them, he said unto her: Sister, be not
dismayed at your troubles, but remember what the Apostle says, that judgment
must begin at the house of God: To whom she answered, as one that was also
very ready in the Scriptures, with the very next words following, True it is,
and if it begin at us, and the righteous shall scarce be saved, where shall the
sinners and ungodly appear? After that, she prayed with him, and sung a Psalm
with him, as one that received great comfort by him, and acknowledged in him, a
heart set to seek the things belonging to the Kingdom of Christ. During this
time, in the night with such as waked with her, she would pray and rehearse
for her comfort many texts of Scripture, and namely, the 8. to the Romans, many
times concluding and closing up that she read, or repeated, with prayer, and
most comfortable bles and applications thereof to her self, with show of such
joy and comfort, that the hearers rejoiced at it. When Richard Orme. John
Holland. William Brettergh. Will. Woodword. Will. For. Revel. 21. 6 William
Brettergh. Will. Fox. Psalm. 119. 71. 72. William Brettergh. M(...) Brettergh.
William Brettergh. (...). 8. 15. Will. Fox.
she received any meat, she prayed God not only to sanctify those creatures
for her bodily sustenance, but also to fill her soul with the waters of life,
often repeating that of the Revelation, To him that thirsts, will I give of
the waters of life freely.

One time she took her Bible in her hand, and joyfully kissing it, and looking
up toward Heaven, she said that of the Psalm: O Lord, it is good for me that
I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy statutes: The law of thy mouth is
better to me than thousands of gold and silver.

Another time she called her husband to her, and said: O Husband, beware of
Papistry, keep your self holy before the Lord: Yield not to the abomination
of the wicked, lest they rejoice, and so you dishonor God, and destroy your
own soul. Again she said, Let my little Child be brought up among the
Children of God, and in the true fear and knowledge of his Majesty; so shall I
meet her in heaven, whom now I must leave behind me on earth.

Again sometime she would pray with a low voice to her self, and that saying
of Paul, We have not received the spirit of bondage to fear any more, but the
Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba father, was much in her mouth: and the
last words Abba father, she would double oftentimes over. She would sing to her
self the last verse of the 13. Psalm. I will give thanks unto the Lord, and
praises to him sing:
Because he has heard my request, and granted my wishing.


Finally, in these and such like exercises and meditations, did she spend the
whole time of her sickness, after the Lord had once enlarged her heart from
the tentations of Satan.

But upon Saturday about eleven of the clock in the morning, Maij 30.
the Lord disclosed himself in mercy, to her more plentifully, than ever
before, and as I may say, he dealt familiarly with his handmaid: for from that
time, to her very death, which ensued the next day, the feeling of Satan's
tentations seemed quite to be banished from her; so that she made no show of
them, her thoughts were not occupied with the world, husband, child, or any
thing else, to our thinking; neither was her sickness troublesome to her, as
before it had been: but as one raised from death to life, or ravished in
spirit, so seemed she to us that stood by: her countenance joyful: her tongue
flowing with the praises of God: and her voice as most heavenly music and
melody of peace, sounding praise, and honor, and glory to God in a wonderful
manner, as follows.

About eleven of the clock she began to tremble and quake a little, and
withal she asked her husband if he would help her William Brettergh. Maud
Brettergh. Elizabeth Challoner.
with prayer to God against the tempter, saying, will ye neither pray with me,
nor bring some godly man that may put holy things into my mind, whereby I may
be able to resist Satan: having thus said, she uttered these words: O Lord
God of my salvation, help my weakness, plead thou my cause, O God of truth,
for in thee do I trust. After this, they prayed together, and she answered
Amen to every petition. Then after this she required him to read some part of
the Scripture: whereupon he read unto her the 8. to the Romans, the 91.
Psalm, and the 17. of John, the which as he read, and came to the fourth
verse, I have finished the work which thou gave me to do, and now glorify
me: She desired him to pause a while, and then said, Blessed be thy name, O
blessed Savior, perfect the work I humbly beseech thee which thou have begun
in me. Then as he read the 9. verse, I pray not for the world, but for them
which thou have given me, for they are thine: she interrupted him again,
saying, O Lord Jesus, do thou pray for me? O blessed and sweet Savior, How
wonderful! how wonderful! how wonderful are thy mercies! Read on said she,
the blessedst reading that I ever heard, the comfort whereof does sweeten my
soul. Then reading verse the 22. And the glory which thou gave me, I have
given them, that they may be one as we are one. With marvelous joy she uttered
the words of David many times over, I confess before the Lord his loving
kindness, and his wonderful works before the sons of men: for he Psalm.
107. 8, 9.
has satisfied my soul, and filled my hungry soul with goodness. When he
came to the 24. verse, Father I will that they which thou have given me, be
with me, even where I am, that they may behold my glory, which thou have given
me; Stay, said she, and let me meditate on the goodness of the Lord, for
this is the sweetest saying that ever came to my soul: for now I perceive and
feel the countenance of Christ my redeemer is turned toward me, and the
bright-shining beams of his mercy is spread over me: Oh happy am I, that ever
I was borne, to see this blessed day! Praise, O praise the Lord, for his
mercies; for he has brought me out of darkness, and the shadow of death;
he has delivered my soul from the snare of the hunter, a^^ has taken me out
of the den of Lions, even from the jaws of Leuiathan, that piercing ^^ai.
^7. 1.
and crooked serpent, and has set me in a place of rest, and sweet refreshing:
Oh praise the Lord, O my soul, all that is within me Psalm. 103. 1, (...), 3,
4.
praise his holy name: my soul praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his
benefits, which forgiueth all thine iniquities, and heals all thine
infirmities: which has redeemed thy life from the grave, and crowns thee
with mercy and compassion. This she often repented: And then again remembering
the 21. and 22. verses of the 17. of John, she said: O my sweet Savior, shall
I be one with thee, as thou art one with thy Father? And will thou glorify me
with that glory which thou had with the Father before the world was? And
do thou so love me (which am but dust and ashes) to make me partaker of
glory with Christ? What am I poor Psalm. 144. 3. Psalm. 8. 4.
wretch, that thou art so mindful of me? Oh how wonderful! how wonderful!
how wonderful is thy love! Oh thy love is unspeakable, that have dealt so
graciously with me! oh I feel thy mercies, and oh that my tongue and heart
were able to sound forth thy praises as I ought, and as I willingly would do!
oh that you all would help me to praise the holy one of Israel, the God of all
consolations! And thus for the space of five hours together at the least, she
continued praising and lauding the Lord, with such a gladsome and heavenly
countenance, testifying such inward joy, from a comfortable feeling of the
mercies of God in her soul, and using such sweet sentences and sugared phrases
of perfect and holy eloquence, as the truth thereof, if it could have been
taken, were admirable, continuing so many hours together; some part whereof
was this.

O my Lord, oh my God, blessed be thy name for evermore, which have showed me
the path of life. Thou did, O Lord, hide thy face from me for a little
season, but with everlasting mercy, thou Isai. 54. 8.
have had compassion on me: And now blessed Lord thy comfortable presence is
come, yea Lord, thou have had respect unto thy handmaid and art come with
fullness of joy, and abundance of consolations: O blessed be thy name, O Lord
my God. Then she repeated part of the 16. Psalm, saying: The Lord is the
portion of Psalm. 16. 5. 9. 11.
mine inheritance, wherefore my heart is glad, and my tongue rejoices: Thou will show me the path of life: In thy presence is fullness of joy, and at thy
right hand there are pleasures for evermore: Oh that I could therefore praise
the Lord, as he is worthy to be praised! I will sing to the Lord, I will sing
to the praise of the God of Israel: come, come, (says she) and help me, O
help me to praise Judge. 5. 3.
the Lord. And with that she began to sing the third Psalm, and continued to
the end of the Psalm, as perfectly, and with as sweet a voice, as ever she had
before in her health; and concluded with the 49. verse of the 106. Psalm. The
Lord the God of Israel, be blessed for evermore:
Let all the people say Amen, praise ye the Lord therefore.


And after this she said, O praise the Lord, for he has filled me Psalm. 16. 6.
with joy and gladness of heart, and brought me from the gates of hell, and of
death: repeating that of the 16. Psalm, My line is fallen unto me in a
pleasant place: yea I have a fair heritage, for the Lord is the portion of
mine inheritance: The place where I now am, is sweet and pleasant: oh how
pleasant is the sweet perfume of the place where I lie! It is sweeter than
A^rons composed perfume Exo. 30. ^3.
of principal spices: how comfortable is the sweetness I feel! it is like
that odor that proceeds from the golden censer, that delights R^vel. 8. 4.
my soul. The taste is precious: do you not feel it: Oh so sweet it is! yea
sweeter than my^^h, the honey, or the honey comb. Let me therefore sing again,
and again unto my Lord, and my God. Then she did sing the 19. Psalm,
beginning at the 7. verse, How per^ect is the Law of God, etc. and so on to the
end of the same. And after that spiritual rejoicing, in singing of Psalms,
she then prayed unto God faithfully, and praised the Lord again joyfully. And
being still full of these, and such like heavenly consolations, she did sing
again most heartily, unto the praise of God the 136. Psalm, Praise ye the Lord
for he is good, for his mercy indureth for ever: etc. In which Psalm, for his
mercy endures for ever, is 26. times repeated. A Christian friend coming in
at M. William Fox.
the same time, which was about six of the clock in the evening, maruelling to
see her exceeding joys, and heavenly harmony, wherein she continued with such
words and phrases, that were so spiritual, prayed for the continuance of the
same unto the end: whereupon she then burst out, relating further of her joys,
saying: William Brettergh. Will. Fox. Will. Woodward.
Oh the joys! the joys! the joys! that I feel in my soul! oh they be
wonderful! they be wonderful! they be wonderful! And after that, she prayed
for increase of faith, and that God would strenghthen her against tentations,
with continual craving of remission of sins, ever meditating of heavenly
matters, as by her sudden and often breaking out into heavenly speeches, and
phraises, did appear: for the same evening she lying still and silent for a
while, One prayed her to remember the Lord Jesus, Will. Fox.
and that she would in her heart, pray for constancy in her joyful course;
whereupon she answered with a delightsome and cheerful countenance, and
comfortable voice: Oh (said she) so I do, for the Lord is my light, and my
salvation, whom then shall I fear? Though an host pitch against me, yet my
heart shall not be afraid, Psalm. 27. 1, 3
for the Lord has said, I will not leave thee nor forsake thee. Indeed, Deuteronomy.
4. 31.
I should verily have fainted, but that I believed to see the goodness of the
Lord in the land of the living. And now my heart Psalm. 27. 13. Psalm. 108. 1.
is ready, my heart is ready and prepared, yea it pants after thee O God: as
the Heart braieth after the rivers of water, so pants my Psalm. ^2. 1, 2
soul after thee O God; my soul thirsts for God, even for the living God.
When Lord, when shall I come and appear before thy presence? etc. Saying then
further, Lord, since it has pleased thee William Brettergh.
to prepare my heart, whether to life or death, thy will be done, dispose of me
to thine own glory, I am thine Lord, work thy blessed pleasure, and good will
upon me. And after this she fell into a short slumber, and awaking said, as
the Spouse said unto Christ in the Canticles, Oh come kiss me with the kisses
of thy mouth, for thy love is better than wine? Oh how sweet the kisses of my
Cant. 1. 1.
Savior be? Then one said unto her, alluding to that place of S. Will. Fox.
John, Revel. 3. 8. and praying that the Lord would anoint her, with the
eye-salue of his grace, that she might see and behold his glory. To whom she
answered, Mine eyes are opened, mine eyes are opened, though for a while thy
were closed up, and shut; yet now I thank my God, mine eyes are opened and I
do feel and see the everliving mercies of my Christ: saying then further as
it is in the 27. Psalm. Thou said, seek my face: my heart answered to Psalm.
^7. 8. 9.
thee, O Lord, I will seek thy face. O hide not therefore thy face from me,
nor cast thy servant away in displeasure, thou have been my succor, leave me
not, nor for sake me, O God of my salvation. And being wi^led to commit her
soul into the hands of Christ, William Brettergh. Psalm. 31. 5.
she said: O Lord Jesus, thou have redeemed me, plead thou my cause, for into
thy hands alone do I commit my spirit, O thou God of truth. And then feeling
more joy to abound, one praising God with her for his great mercies showed
toward her, she further William Woodward. Mat. 11. 25
said: I give thee thanks O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have
hid these things from the wise, and men of understanding, and have opened them
unto me thy poor handmaid, which am but dust and ashes. O how merciful and
merueilous gracious art thou unto me! yea Lord, I feel thy mercy, and I am
assured of thy love, William Fox.
and so certain am I thereof, as thou art the God of truth, even so sure do I
know my self to be thine, O Lord my God; and this my soul knows right
well, and this my soul knows right well: Psalm. 139. 1^. William Brettergh.
Job 19. ^5. ^6. ^7.
which speech of her assurance, she often repeated. Presently after this
sitting up in her chair, she sung the fourth Psalm; and then being laid down
again in her bed, she confidently sp^ke these words: I am sure that my
redeemer lives, and that I shall see him at the last day, whom I shall see,
and mine eye shall behold: and though after my skin, worms destroy this body,
yet shall I see God in my flesh with these Eyes, and none other.

Then came into see her toward evening, Master William Harrison the Preacher,
praising God for her continuance, in that her M. William Harrison. William
Brettergh. Will. Fox. John Brettergh. William Woodward.
joyful and most happy course: and persuading her to an holy perseverance in
the same, she thanked him, and desired him to rejoice in Christ with her, and
to praise God for his mercies to her, and said. O Master Harrison, my soul
has been compassed about with terrors of death, fear within, and fear
without, the sorrows of hell were upon me, knots and knorres were upon my
soul, (which twice or thrice she repeated) and a roaring wilderness of woe,
was within me; but blessed, blessed, blessed, be the Lord my God, who has not
le^t me comfortless, but like a good shepherd, has he brought me into a
place of rest, even to the sweet running Psalm. 23. 2. 3.
waters of life, that flow out of the Sanctuary of God, and he has lead me
into the green pastures, where I am fed, and exceedingly comforted: yea, he
has restored my soul, and lead me into the plain and easy paths of
righteousness. The way that now I go in, is a sweet and easy way, strowed
with flowers, and as a fine sandy Psalm. 147. 14.
way; yea, it is more easy and soft than the sand, for I go and tread upon
wheat, even upon the finest flower of wheat: Oh blessed be the Lord; O blessed
be the Lord, that has thus comforted me, and has brought me now to a place,
more sweet unto me, than the Garden of Eden. Oh the joy! the joy! the delight
some joy that I feel! Oh how wonderful, how wonderful, how wonderful is
this joy! O praise the Lord for his mercies, and for this joy, which my soul
feels full well, praise his name for evermore. And these praises of God, she
sounds forth, like David's harmony, William Brettergh. William Woodward.
being endued with David's spirit, to the praise of the eternal and merciful
God, continuing all night in such like prayers and praises to God, except some
small time, that she was silent and quiet. Master Harrison prayed twice with
her that evening, as also in the morning (being Whitsunday.) After he had
prayed once with her, going then toward his public charge, she sent for him,
to pray once more with her before he went, which he did; to the joy and
gladness of heart, both of her, and all that were present: M. Edward
Aspinwall. Will. Fox. William Brettergh.
and so he took leave of her, and departed.

Another faithful man or two came presently in the morning, and diverse other
well affected, who were with her at the time of her death, and often prayed
with her that forenoone, she still John Brettergh. William Woodward. Mistress
Maud Brettergh. Mistress Scholastica Fox. Elizabeth Challoner. and diverse mo^.
Psalm. 30. 10, 11, 12.
abounding in spiritual comforts and consolations: sometimes as one awaking
out of sleep, she would say, the Lord was her keeper, and deliverer. Again,
one saying unto her, the Lord bless you: Yea, (said she) and the Lord Jesus
bless us all. And so seeming to sleep a little while, and awaking again she
said: Lord I trust in thee, have mercy upon me, give me strength to praise
thee: defend and preserve me in the hour of tentation, and lay no more upon
me, than thou will enable me to bear. Afterward being asked, if she would
have them join in prayer together again with her. O yes (said she) for
Christ's sake I desire it: saying thus to her self: Hear O Lord, and have
mercy upon me: Lord, be thou my helper: thou have loosed my sack, and girded
me with gladness: therefore will I praise thee, O Lord my God: I will give
thanks to thee for evermore, With that, all that were present did join in
prayer with her, and in conclusion ^sing the Lords prayer, which she said with
them, to thine is thy kingdom; her strength then being gone, her tongue failed
her, and so she lay silent for a while, every one iudgeing her then to be
near death, her strength and speech failing her: yet after a while lifting up
her eyes with a sweet countenance and still voice, said: My warfare Isai. 40.
(...). Psalm. 73. 25. 26.
is accomplished, and my iniquities are pardoned. Lord, whom have I in Heaven
but thee? and I have none in earth but thee: my flesh fails, and my heart
also, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. He that
preserves Jacob, and defends his Israel, he is my God, and will guide me
unto death: guide me O Lord my God, and suffer me not to faint, but keep my
soul in safety. And with that she presently fell asleep in the Lord, passing
away in peace, without any motion of body at all; and so yielded up the Ghost,
a sweet Sabbaths sacrifice about four of the clock in the afternoon, on
Whitesunday, being the last of May, 1601.

This was the death of that virtuous Gentlewoman, happily dying in the Lord,
and reaping the benefit of a holy profession: wherein we cannot but
acknowledge and reverence the mercy of God, who in our greatest infirmity
makes his grace to shine most clearly. A sure testimony of the truth of our
profession, serving to encourage us therein, and to move us to a godly life. It
must (...) be a divine. Religion, and a truth coming from God, that thus can
(...) the heart and mouth of a weak woman, at the time of death, with such
admirable comfort. And a wretched conceit, and me^re Antichristian is that
religion, which so hates and persecuteth this faith, which is thus able to
lead the true-hearted professors thereof, with such unspeakable peace unto
their graves.

Her funeral was accomplished at Childwall Church on Wednesday following,
being the third of June, 1601. And now for conclusion, seeing this blessed
Gentlewoman is taken from among us, and received into the holy habitations of
the heavenly Jerusalem, there to remain in joy, glory, and blessedness for
evermore; let us lament for our loss, but rejoice for her gain: and let us
pray, that in hear we could as willingly wish to be with her, as she is now
unwilling to be with us.

Solomon says, The memory of the just shall be blessed: but the name of the
wicked shall rot, Prou. 10. 7.

FINIS.

