THE New Prophetical King of BARBARY. OR The last news from thence in a Letter
written of late from a Merchant there, to a Gentl. not long since employed
into that country from his Majesty. Containing some strange particulars, of
this new Saintish Kings proceedings: and how he has overthrown Mulley Sidan
twice in battle, as has been very credibly related from such as were
eyewitnesses.

Imprinted at London for Arthur Ionson. 1613.

An Advertisement to the READER.
Having received this Letter following out of Barbary, from an honest English
Merchant, who has long time soiourned there, very religious, wise and
discreet, and so known among the Merchants: with whom also my self conuersed
many months, during my abode in that country; and thereafter showing it as a
matter of news to some friends, I was at length importuned to make it common,
in respect of the nouelty: est natura hominis nouitatis auida; and (as the
Proverb is) Africa semper aliquid apportat noui. Thereby to satisfy, if not
all (which) was wont to be the Poets task: Populo vt placerent quas fecisset
fabulas); yet at least wise those, who have naught else to do, Act. 17. 21
(like those Athenians in the Acts) but either to tell or hear some news:
Howbeit, I hope, it may serve to some good use also for us Christians of these
last days, Forty years (says this new saintish king or Prophet of his) and
then Christ must come to judgment as in the letter.
upon whom the ends of the world are come: to see how busily the Devil acts
his last part, now in this last age of the world, and plays his prize, for
that he knows he has but a short time, 40. years by his own calculation,
pronouncing before hand his own condemnation. For the Lord has so done his
marvelous works that they ought to be had in remembrance: And so ought the
devils works too, though in an other kind, and a Latere (as I may say) for he
is the Ape and imitator of God ( transforming himself into an Angel of light)
neither can he do any thing of himself, but by Gods permission as he has
power, commission and authority from him. And therein also many times he
plaieth the Mountibank, obtruding for true and effectual workings (as the
Apostle terms them) many false and feigned delusions. And whether true or
false, his end is still to deceive, and vent his lying arts, doctrines of
devils; and therefore in scripture worthily styled the father of lies: and his
miracles, which he works for confirmation thereof, lying wonders. And by
these his sleighty conueiances, sometimes winding here, sometimes there, has
this subtle serpent gone about from time to time, compassing the earth, to and
fro, and walking in it to deceive the world. And not only the world (I mean
the children of disobedience and misbeleefe) but if it were possible even the
very elect. Mat. 24. 24
And such must be (or rather is) the coming of Antichrist in this last age of
the world whereof we have been so long since forewarned: ( little children it
is the last time etc.) Ioh. 2. 18.
Whose coming (as the Apostle describes it) is by the effectual working of
Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders etc. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 9
And therefore God shall send them strong delusions that they should believe
lies: that all they might be damned which believe not the truth etc. O the
miserable estate of al misbeleeuers, whom the devil has thus blinded to their
utter condemnation, which sleeps not. And such is the state and condition of
these miserable Moors given over, beyond measure, to these idle and
superstitious vanities (so David calls them) I hate all them that hold of
superstitious vanities) blind prophesies dreams, naecromancie and such like,
wherein these Saints profess themselves, and hold the people in such awe for
fear of their curses (which many times fall out accordingly: (the devil
working together) as if they were Popes, such is their soueraignety. As by this
example ye may see, one of these fanaticall Saints now become a King. Scilicet
his Babylon dextris: even by these and such like arts, did that spiritual
Babylon, at the first that great Whore spoken of in the Revelation, Reave. 17. 1^
that man of sin, 2. These. 2. ^
the son:of perdition, now sitting as God in the Temple of God, and showing
himself that he is God) under the like pretense come to the height of his
supremacy, and not only making himself a King, but insulting even over Kings
and Emperors: not caring (as the Proverb is) neither for King nor Keiser, but
exalting himself against God, and all that is called God: that is to say Kings
and Princes. Be wise now therefore ye Kings, whether Christian or Heathen, the
use is general to all, beware of these Saints for all their hypocritical
show of Holiness. Saints in profession but Devils in practice. His Holiness
catexochen; even that holy one of Rome, (for so the word Saint signifies: a
Holy one) nam si hic mali est quidquam (I say no more) they are capital enemies
to the thrones of Kings. Instance this Saint who (forsooth) under a color of
Holiness, and simplicity, armed with most strong delusions, even from the
Devil himself; ye see what wonders he has wrought against Mully Sidan, yea
and what greater he promises: operae pretium est audire.

But when that bridge appears in the mouth of the Straights, as he
prophesies, and he with all his troops ariue in the Popes Dominions (the Pope
and he in the Lists together) then we shall see whether devil is the stronger.
The Lord preserve his people from their deuillish delusions. And so after this
long Preface (too long I must needs confess for so short a discourse, but that
I could not well cut it shorter) I refer it to the censure of the wise to make
use of: being the chief and maine motive, with the advice and approbation of
some godly Persons, Preachers and others, why I have published it. Which (if I
find acceptable) I may (perhaps) be encouraged to reuise some papers of my
own, all this while thrown aside, as touching the affairs and state of that
country, falling within the compass of my daily observation, during that my
employment: with other accounts of my time not altogether idly spent there,
having now but too good a leisure (since the loss of so hopeful a Master)
for such a purpose, God send us an other comforter. And so once more farewell
gentle Reader.

I. H.

Laus Deo in Saphia, the 9. of September. 1612.
GOod Sir, in most hearty manner I commend me unto you, with desire of your
good health and all other content to your hearts desire, which the Lord grant
unto you Amen.

Since my last unto you, here is great alteration in this government, as I
account you have understood before now* And because Master N. and Master F.
have been here, and heard, and seen what has passed, I do refer the
discourse to conference: For I assure my self they will visit you. Yet I will
make bold to trouble you, to advise of some perticulers as follows. The
tenth day of May was the battle between Mulley Sidan, and our new King Mulley
Om Hamet ben Abdela; not far from Marocus betwixt the mountains, and the
City, both sides very strong: Yet in man's judgment Mulley Sidan of most force
in horse and foot, and three and thirty pieces of good field ordnance. The
other no ordnance, and a few peecemen: his chiefest force Larbies of Sahara, a
place distant hence twenty days journey.

These armed with Lances, demi Lances and Azagies, Larbies are the country
people dwelling in tents. Brebers those that inhabit the mountains A^agies
are a kind of darts.
and many Larbies that came in to him, by the way as he came, some he forced,
some voluntary. And at the day of battle his people began to be dismayed,
perceiving Mulley Sidan, was very strong. But he encouraged them, saying, as
they had found that come to pass which formerly he told them, so now they
should see the like, and bid them not fear his ordnance, for only three
pieces should go off, and do no harm: the rest should take fire, but not
shoot a bullet, and he would be foremost, and go in the face of the
ordnance, and finding his words true, then at his command to fall upon his
enemies

So having satisfied his people with these persuasions sent spies to know where
Mulley Sydans ordnance lay, and so came right before it, with all his troops.
And coming within danger, at Mulley Sidans command, they gave fire, having
both Moors and Christians that knew how to manage his ordnance.

So three pieces went off, and did no hurt. But the bullets hard sing in the
air a great height, and the rest of the ordnance took fire, and burnt out the
powder, but shot no bullet that remained in, so coming nearer, the Musketeers
played upon them, with four thousand shot, yet hurt no man.

So then they came on, and Mulley Sidans people gave way and fled. They pursued
them, and slew Mulley Abdela ben Hammet, Alkaide Hammet, Benzebe^re, and many
more Alkaides, and between four and five thousand people. So put his people
into Marocus, and lay himself in the field.

He has not entered into Marocus, neither purposes till he have destroyed
his enemies, and put peace in his country. So Mulley Sidan fled and came down
to Saphia, Hackam is a chief officer in a City.
with his Hackam, Abdela Kather, Abdela Sadocke and the Jew Benwash, and a few
others (besides his mother and women, and luggedge) he made account to gather
a head again, and to give a new battle. But in vain the Larbies made a
fair show and came in to him, and received some money, cloth, and linnens from
him, and so would have betrayed him.

Whereupon he having some of his brother Mulley Shecks children with him, (to
make friendship with his brother) sent him his children, and wrote to him very
kindly, So between them I accountis peace. So stayed here so long as he durst:
for that Mulley Om Hammet persued him. Whereby he was forced to freight a ship
of Marcelleis here in port, with a French Ambassador, who came to him upon
bussines out of France, and a Fleming that was in the road: and took his
Treasure and luggage, some Women and Children, some Al^aids and Servants, and
Benwash and his followers, and went for Santa Cruz and there Landed in Sus: and
from thence to Tarradante, and there since remained, what force he has or of
his proceeding we here know not the certainty.

Some few days after his departure, came our new King into these parts, half
a days journey from Saphia, and all the Larbies came in to him and submitted
themselves, and he receives all into favor, pardoning what passed: For he
says, he comes to make peace, and is sent from God, because of the evil
government of Mulley Hammets sons the Xeriffes; Kindred of Mahomet which they
challenge.
and to stablish their Prophets religion, that was decayed, and to fight
against the Christians, and recover those parts of Christendom the king of
Spain holds from them: as Granada, Andaluzia, etc* and tells his people they
shall yet see great wonders come to pass, where they shall acknowledge he is
sent of God; he promises them Spain, Italy, and France: and having put peace
in these countries, there must now appear a Bridge in the mouth of the
straights, which has been in former time, (and so recorded in their writings)
and sunk in the sea. Now in his time it must appear to carry over the Moors:
and having gained these countries; he must reign forty years, and then must
com Christ, whom they call Sidie Nicer: and he must surrender all to him; for
he must judge the world and then all must end.

But for England, Flanders, or other parts they have not to do, they will have
friendship with us, and desire trade and traffic with us in love and
friendship, and would have his miracles and acts made known abroad the world:
I was in his Almahalla at first four days, Or Camp.
and spoke with him, and saw his behavior, and found him very humble and
courteous, with many good speeches; and pitying the injuries all the
Christians have by the ill government of his Predecessors, or Usurpers as he
counted them. A man of some thirty six years, very civil, very plain in
habit, a course tucke upon his head of died callico, Or turban A long loose
garment much like an Irish mantle.
a holland Shirt, an Alheick of lile grogram, a plain sword by his side, hanged
with a plain leather thong: a man of great wisdom and learning, as none like
amongst them, and a good Astrologer, a great Politician. And has drawn unto
him Alkaide Azus, of whom you have heard; the principal Councellor of the
land, Shecke Z^mb^e, Shecke Glowie, and many other Saints and principal men:
and since his coming married the Widow of Mulley Bufferris. And now diverse
libel in Larby verse against Mulley Sidan and his proceedings, and of further
misery must come unto him, till he and his race be consumed. And for his
government at Morocus placed his Hackam to see every one have peace, and a very
honest man for iustic^: So Morocus is in peace and quietness; and amongst the
Larbies he demands his due, either corn, horse, cattle, or money; and tells
them he coms to put peace amongst them; neither to rob the^, nor yet to lose
his right; not to give them pay, but force them to serve him, as need
requires, if they yielded not to such conditions, his sword should force them:
he came amongst them as a guest, and was to be entertained by them, and not to
give them to gain their favor. By which speeches, miracles past, and policy,
he has made them all tremble; so he puts all to silence: Some content
themselves, of the greatest in former time, to hear and see, show obedience
and say nothing: others change with the time, and have great imploiments, and
profess loialty to him, and renounce their old Master; what the event may be I
know not: for, we have learned, the hearts of Kings are in the hands of the
Lord, he turns them as rivers of waters which way he pleases.

But having been in his Almahalla, seeing the manner of it, his plainness and
policy, mixed with a show of mercy and a kind of Saintish government, I fear
me it will come to pass, according to the Fable in Aesop, when the Frogs
desired a King, a block was thrown down into the water, which dash at the
first made them fear him, but lying still they grew familiar, and sunned
themselves upon him, and grew in dislike; so had the Storke: But it were to be
wished they would now content themselves, when peace and justice is offered. If
he do continue it is like to be with trouble and bloodshed; for already the
people begin to disobey, and the Shabenites, Mulley Sidans Or Kindred.
Cast, are got to the Mountains near Marocus, and have procured some of those
Mountainers.
Brebers (as we term them) to join with them; and one Mulley Om Hammet
Bolassom, and these have robbed to the gate of Marocus; whereupon this King sent
forces to expel them, but found them so strong that they durst not meddle with
them: whereupon was forced to rehale his Almahalla some fifteen days since,
and is gone toward the Mountains, where at this present he is near frugo:
and what has passed since we know not, only expect every hour to hear some
good news that he may prevail; but here it is greatly feared, because many of
his own people be departed from him: and those Larbies he carried along with
him out of these parts, run away and returned, so if he lose, the other be the
friends of Mulley Sidan, and he is expected again: But the beginning and
rising of this king and his procedings are very strange. He is a great saint
and learned in the law, and was sought unto by many the principallest of the
land for his blessings, and favor, according to their superstition; he finds
it in ancient books writ of him by way of prophecy, that such a man of that
place named Messa (whence he is) by name Mulley Om Hamet be^ Abdela, should be
sent at this time, to put peace in the country, and to revive their law, and
put out the race of Mulley Sidan, and name of Xeriffes: and so to reign forty
years till Christ come to judgment: his beginning must be, he must strike up
a drum he should find in that Zow^^ (...) Missa, and then should repair unto
him people, to make him king. The manner of his proceedings, and what
encounters he should have, and what he found written, all the Talbies and
learned men now do confess to find the same written in their books. At his
beginning he put forth only one tent and a kitchen: so resorted to him the
Shrokies, a saintish people in their law, but otherwise in behavior very
Savages. These without pay came to him, to the number of 150. or 200. at most;
and with their help he brake Alhadge* Lemiere, and his forces, servants of
Mulley Sidan, being 5000. strong; so more of the said Shrokies came to him, to
the number of 5000. and with them and such people as joined with him in the
way, he overthrew Mulley Sidans forces thrice before the battle.

And so came to some strong places in the Mountains, never brought to
subjection in the time of Mulley Sidan, nor his father: Those with-stood him,
but he overcame them and made them pay him what he demanded, serve and obey
him; so forced the principallest Shecks in the country to come to him. After
this marched toward Morocus, and by the way was to pass a river; and the day
before he warned his people, in passing such a river no man to take up water in
their hands to drink, if he did he would die. After coming to the river weary
and hot, many not remembered, or not regarded his words, but took up water in
their hands, drunk, and anon after dyed, the rest all escaped, which struck a
fear into them to break his command, and a persuasion that he is more then a
man: For they say he is their Fatamie, that is, a Savior. Next in coming to
Morocus, diverse great Saints and Sheckes resorted together, and would go to
visit him, that they might see what he was, and understand whether that which
passed was true or not. So coming, after salutations, he told them they came
to enquire and see what news, and what wonders he did, and so meant to depart.

Now therefore, being men of account and Talbies he would satisfy them, that
they might satisfy others. So appointed them a time to come again, and to
bring such books, he nominated, with them; so they did: Then he willed them
to turn to such places, and read what they found written of him; so they did.
To wit, both his name, his beginning, and course he was to take, and withal
found written seven special marks, or signs, he must have upon his body,
a wart above his right eye, a black tooth before, a bunch of hair growing
between his shoulders, a sign of a ring in the palm of his right hand, the
sign of a spur upon the outside of his right leg; the rest I remember not.

But these and the rest he showed them which seeing they did honor him and
swore to him to serve him, and to live and die with him, or in his cause.

Next coming to a place named Dets in the mountains very strong, where much
people were gathered together against him so that some of his own people began
to faint and be afraied: he bad them fear nothing for that before to morrow
they should see there was more with him then against him: so that night, he
commanded to take up his Almahalla and march toward that place Dets: so they
did, and all night long to the thinking of al his people, there marched another
Almahalla greater then theirs, and went before them: and coming to the place
Dets vannished away, and at sight of it his enemies fled, leaft the place and
goods, al to the spoil, so coming thither had the spoil of all without
fighting. This our country man M. W. affermeth with diverse others upon solemn
oath to have seen. At his being in these parts, my self with others went to
welcome him: he entertained us very kindly, and told us he would show the
English what favor he could, and permit them free trade, willing us to take
knowledge that he was sent by Gods appointment to relieve the oppressed as well
Moors and strangers, as Christians, and al sorts, and what we had seen and
heard to advertise, saying we should see yet more strange matters come to
pass, then what had passed. His meaning as we gather is, the conquering of
Spain, France and Italy; with which oppinion he possesses the foolish and
credulous Moors. Now having bin tedious to trouble you with such news as the
time affoords (not al but part as it comes into my memory) I pray you take it
in good part: the censure hereof I leave to your wisdom and confideration. For
my own part I am persuaded, they be delusions of the devil done by
witchcraft, and permitted by the Lord, to seduce them to further error, God
deliver us Christians well from among them, and grant us the use, and true
knowledge of his holy word preached in Christian countries which here we
want, and the use and comfort of his holy Sacraments to the sealing up of our
faith in Christ Jesus Amen.

I am sorry I have nothing for remembrance, to present unto you, but God
willing when the time betters I will not be forgetful: in the mean time, I
pray you accept of these few lines in good part. So resting ever at your
service, I commit you to Gods holy tuition who bless you in this world with
health and content, and in the world to come with eternal joy, Amen.

Your loving friend to command. R. S.


Another letter received from another friend, at the same time dated the tenth
of September.
GOod Sir pardon me in that at my going away, I came not to take my leave of
you* the ship went down two days sooner than I made account off. But for all
your courtesies always toward me, I heartily thank you and remain your
debtor etc. For the state of this country, and of the wars of this new King, I
know Master S. has enlarged you more than I can a great deal. But for all
this, and the troubles Mulley Sidan has had, it is thought he will be king
again, and that in short time: staying but for a new Moon to give battle.
This Saint or king told his Shrokies which came with him at first, his coming
was to take Mazagant, Suit and Tanger, not to sight against the Moors unless
they would resist, and not let him take the Christian towns. He said again
that Mulley Sidan and his followers were Christians, one who robbed all men
without reason, killed and slew many men upon no occasions, but in his angry
mind. And withal said he drank wine, and eat oppium, therefore said it
could not be but that he was an Vn^rony, which amongst them they hold to be
an unjust, or ungodly man as they say we Christians are. His Shrokies two
thousand five hundredth almost all footmen, with no pieces, but half Lances:
that was their weapons, bareheaded men. Never in their lives they wear shert,
or cloth to their backs, but an Alheik. Which Shrokies have left this king,
and are all gonne for their country. This kings forces are of Larbies, which
are horsemen: every day they flee from him more and more. As Alkaid Side, whom
you know Alkaid of this place, is come from him with six hundredth horse. So
that very shortly Mulley Sidan is expected to come hear again. And thus with
my commendations to your good self, and all our good friends I commit you to
the Almighty.

Yours assured to command, G. B.


SInce the writing (and almost printing) of these two letters, there is nevves
come (and that for certain as I am given to understand) that Mulley Sidan is
defeated again, and has lost this last battle: so the Saint victorious
still. What the event of all these troubles may be it is hard to guess. This
country having been so long time (ever since the death of old Mulley Hamet)
so unsettled, and subject to so manifold alterations: so many years, almost, so
many alterations or government: The crown imperial tossed to and fro, from
one to another, as it were a tennis ball rather then a diadem. Non vnquam tulit
documenta, Seneca.
fors maior^ quam fragili loco starent super^^: And that may serve for another
use: a small use of all, either that has passed, or may hereafter fall out:
whereof if any thing else come to my hands, worthy observation, I shall not
withhold it, to make the rest answerable to the Preface.

FINIS.

