THE CHRISTIAN LIFE AND DEATH, OF MISTRESS KATHERIN BRETTERGH, late wife of
Master William Brettergh, of Bretterghoult, in the County of Lancaster
Gentleman; who departed this world the last of May.

With the manner of a bitter conflict she had with Satan, and blessed conquest
by Christ, before her death, (...) glory of God, and comfort of all beholders.

MICHA. 7.8. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: though I fall, I shall rise
again: And when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.

PSALM. 37.37. (...) the upright man, and behold the just: for the end of that
(...) ^^ace.

AT LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, and are to be sold by Thomas Pauier.
1612.

The holy life and Christian death, of Mistress Katherin Brettergh.
THis Gentlewoman was borne in Cheshire, the daughter of John Bruen of
Bruenstapleford Esquire, well descended, and of an ancient house. Her education
before her marriage was such, as became the profession of the Gospel, in
godliness and purity of life and religion, and well beseemed the house where she
was brought up. The Scriptures she knew from a child, Stapleford.
and by reading thereof, gained such knowledge, that she was able readily to
apply them when occasion was offered, as we may see at (...) that so fitly, and
effectually, that she (...) daily meditation. For the things (...) ^^^^erate,
and sober, and by her Christian (...) ^ath, she ^^ght teach many Gentlewomen,
how vain the pleasures and fashions of this world are, and how far unable to
bring that peace to a distressed heart, that the embracing of true Religion can.

She used not to gad abroad with wandering Dinah, Genes. 34.1. 1. Sam. 1.9.12.
to dancing greenes, markets, or public assemblies: but rather with Hannah did
choose to tread upon the dust of the Sanctuary, and walk in the wa^^^ of Sion:
yea, with David, Psalm. 84.10.
rather to be a doore-keeper in the house of God, then to have society with
the wicked, or to dwell in the tents and taberna^^^s of the ungodly. The
Sabbath day was always dear and ^^^come to her, what time she would not be
without the word preached, though many times she went far for it. Her delight
was still to consecrate it glorious to the Lord. And as it is said of Josiah,
2. King. 22.19.
his heart melted when he heard the law; so may it be said of her, her heart
was so tender and full of compassion, that oftentimes she was seen to hear
Sermons, read, pray, and meditate with tears.

She made conscience of all sin; yea, of the least sin, such as worldlings
count no sin: she never used to swearedath great nor small, nor yet to abuse
her tongue with vain or unseemly speeches; no not so much as a iest-lie or
immodest word; neither durst she name the name of God, or take his titles in
her mouth, without great reverence. In private speech where she might speak
with profit, she did it so well, that her speeches might have been delivered
by a stronger vessel then her self: her words being so well seasoned, and
proceeding from such a sanctified heart, did always minister grace to the
hearers.

To read, Psalm. 16.3.
to pray, to sing, to meditate, was her daily exercise; and her chiefest
delight was in the holy society of the Saints upon earth (which I say not for
any cause, but only to show the fountain from whence her godly end flowed,
and that the world may see some there be which choose rather to be joined with
the people of God, Heb. 11.25.
then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; and these I doubt not have
chosen the better part.) Finally, the precepts of the Lord were precious unto
her, for from her childhood she feared God and (...) knowledge and
sanctification did join in (...) ^^fects whereof did appear in her life, and
was seen at he^ (...) to the glory of God, and comfort of all beholders.

She was not like the simple Popish women of our days, which are ever
learning, 2. Tim. 3.6.7.
and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth; but rather like the
noble men and women of Berea, which received the word of God with readiness,
Act. 17.11.12.
and were able to discern of Paul's and Silas preaching. But why do I speak
of Popish women whose understandings are darker then the darkness of Egypt? Let
us come and examine many other which seem to detest Popery, and ask them a
reason of their faith; they can tell you a tale of their ruffes, (...) their
pride, and their vanities but for Religion, it is the least thing they regard,
or seek to know: which I speak not so much to solace my selte in the sins and
simplicity of others, as earnestly desiring al Gentlewomen, that either knew
this holy Saint of God, or hereafter shall hear of her, in stead of your
glasses at home, wherein you prick and prune, and pin your selves, to look
into this glass before your eyes, that so her life, and death, may be an
example for you to fol ow.

When she was about twenty years old, (by the consent of herself, and her
friends) she was married to a young Lancashire Gentleman, Master William
Brettergh of Bretterghoult near Liuerpole: one that likewise embraced Religion
sincerely, and for the same endured many grieuances at the hands of Papists.

Two years and more she lived after she was married, and had issue only one
Daughter: during which time, Anna Brettergh.
this couple lived together in such mutual joy and comfort, as well beseemed
the children of God, which make profession of his truth. And although this
Gentlewoman came from the habitations of Abraham to dwell in Sodom, amidst the
tents of Kedar, Psalm. 120.5.
that is to say, among inhumane bands of brutish Papists, enduring many
temporal grieuances from them; yet her knowledge, patience, mild inclination,
and constancy for the truth was such, as that her husband was further builded
up in Religion by her means, and his face daily more and more hardened against
the devil, and all (...) plaguie agents; the Popish Recusants, Church-papists,
(...) all Protestants, which swarmed together (...) parts.

It (...) unknown to Lancashire, what horses and cattle of her husbands were
killed upon his grounds in the night, most barbarously at two several times
by Seminary Priests (no question) and Recusants that lurked thereabouts. And
what a loss and hindrance it was unto him, being all the stock he had on his
grounds to any purpose. This fell out not long after she was married to him;
yet this was so far from dismaying her, or working such passions in her, as
are common to her sex, that she rather rejoiced, then sorrowed; turning it into
matter of praising God, and submitting her self to his good providence. n="*"
John Wrightinton Esquire. Richard Orme. Raph Heaton, etc. and many more.
Often she would have said, It is good that such things be; but woe be to them
that do them. It is good in God, thereby to chasten his children, and prevent
some sin, which he saw us like to fall into. It is good in respect of Gods
Church, that the weak may be confirmed in the truth, and that Papistrie may
be disgraced, when the world shall see such wickedness flow from it. It is
good in God, that so the wicked may be without excuse at the day of judgment,
when their conscience shall tell them, that howsoever God suffers them to do
such villainy for some just cause known to himself; yet they commit it only
of malice and revenge. Oftentimes also in these vexations, she would have said;
the mercies of God are infinite, who does not only by his word, but also by
his justice, make us fit for his kingdom. Little do our enemies know, what
good by these things they do unto us, and what wrack they bring to their own
kingdom, while they set forth the wickedness thereof. Many times she would
pray that God would forgive them, which had done them this hurt, and send them
repentance: and she would call upon her husband, that he would do the like,
Matthew. 5.44.
and bless them that cursed him. And for fear lest her husband should fail
in that point through infirmity and weakness, John 1.5.
as it is said of Job, who offered sacrifice for his sons, lest peradventure
they should sin, and blaspheme God in their hearts: so she never failed, but
daily prayed unto the Lord to sanctify her husbands thoughts, and direct his
hearts, right, only to seek Gods glory, without either desire of revenge,
or satisfying his own affections. So humble was her spirit, so careful to
avoid and prevent (...) and others; and so mild of nature, that (...) ^^^nesse
softened the malicious heart of Esau his brother: Genesis 33.3.4. 1. Sam. 24.
17.18.
(...) David by his kindness in the cave, changed the fu^^e of Saul, into
weeping, and confessing that David was more righteous then he: so she by her
meekness, humility, and unspotted carriage in the world, forced some of the
adversaries to Religion, to speak well of her.

For her life, she was well reported of all that knew her. Pitiful and
bountiful was she to the poor, and slacked no opportunity to do good
wherein she could; but constantly held her course, and kept her times of
praying, reading, and meditating, (wherein she had plentiful gifts) and
continually used the same at such times as were fitting for her state, sex,
and calling. At the exercises of Religion, as prayer and instruction in her
family, she would not be wanting: besides private prayer, and meditation which
she omitted not but used daily, both in her chamber, Genes. 24.63.
as also abroad secretly and solitarilie in the orchard, garden, or fields, as
Isaacks manner was. In reading the Scriptures she used evermore to task her
self, eight chapters a day at the least, and for the time which she saw evil
or idly spent, without doing some good, she used to call the time of
tentation. Many times also she would read some godly writer, or expositor of
Scripture, or in the book of Martyrs; and was seen to weep most bitterly,
when either she had read of that which touched her affections near, or of the
cruel martyrdom, which the dear children of God were put unto, by the cruel
and wicked tyrants of former days.

For Popery, she saw it so gross and foolish, Exodus 23.13. Psalm. 16.4 Ephesians.
5.3. Judge. 6.31.32. Eccl. 4.25.28.
that she would not once name it, except it were to argue against it, but
never for it: so zealous was she of Gods glory, and loved the truth so
entirely, that she would not once open her mouth to plead for Baal.

Sin above all things was batefull unto her, for there at she would have
grieved, as well when she had seen it in others, as in her self. One or two
examples I cannot omit, wherein she bewraied a worthy spirit, sanctified by
the spirit of God, and prepared for all the assaults of Satan. On a time, as
her husband and (...) were riding toward the Church, he was angry with his
(...) husband ^^^^th she) I fear your heart is not right toward (...), that
can be thus angry for a trifle: And weeping she said further, you must pray
against this your affection, and always be sure your anger be of God, for else
how dare you appear this day before his Minister? and offer up your prayers in
the public congregation of the Saints of God? Another time, a tenant of her
husbands, being behind with his rent, she desired him to bear yet with him a
quarter of a year, which he did: and when the man brought his money, with
tears she said to her husband: I fear you do not well to take it of him,
though it be your right, for I doubt he is not well able to pay it, and then
you oppress the poor. So great a compassion had she of other men's wants, that
all things being duly considered, and rightly weighed, me thinks I may say of
her, as Paul said of Timothy, I know none like minded.

Thus after she was married, Phil. 2.20.
she continued in the things she had learned, and held her profession with
such sincerity, that the common enemies to our religion (the very Papists) had
nothing to say against her, but confessed her life was unreprovable. And as
for the godly that knew her, they always acknowledged that modesty, and
virtuous carriage in her, joined with knowledge and practice of all the duties
of religion, that they had just cause to report of her, as of a sound and
faithful professor of the Gospel.

Two years, and somewhat more she lived with her husband, till about
Whitsontide, it pleased God to send her that sickness whereof on Whitsonday she
died.

Her sickness took her in the manner of a hot burning Ague, which made her
according to the nature of such diseases, now and then to talk somewhat idl^
and through the tempters subtlety, which abused the infirmity of her body to
that end, as he oftentimes uses to do in many, from idle words, to descend
into a heavy conflict, with the infirmity of her own spirit; from the which,
yet the Lord presently and wonderfully delivered her, giving so joyful an
issue to the tentation, that she might well use the words of the Prophet, as
afterward she did: For a moment, O Lord, Esa. 54.8. May 23.
thou did hide thy face from me, for a little season, but with everlasting
mercy thou had compassion on me. On Saturday seuen-night before
Whitsunday, what time she sickned, she began to feel some little infirmity
and (...) then she had wont to show, but she so ^^^^uer came (...) Monday night
it increased upon her, May 25.
and the assault of the enemy began to be sharp, and so continued till the
next day at afternoon; what time God delivered her, and sent her peace and
comfort of conscience, and so increased the same in her continually til she
died The manner of her affliction was this.

First, M. William Brettergh. M. William Fox M. Edward Aspinwall. M. John
Brettergh Mistress Maud Brettergh. Mistress Scholastica Fox. William Woodward.
Elizabeth Challoner.
the severity of Gods justice, and the greatness of her sins began to come into
her mind, which much afflicted her, and she would often speak of it. Then she
accused her self of pride, that she had delighted too much in her self, and
her beauty. Afterward she thought she had no faith, but was full of
hypocrisy, and had not embraced Religion so earnestly, nor glorified God so
worthily (especially with her tongue, which often she repeated) nor loved him
so sincerely as she ought to have done. Sometime she would cast her Bible from
her, and say: It was indeed the book of life, but she had read the same
unprofitably, and therefore feared it was become to her the book of death.
Sometimes she would say her sins had made her a pray to Satan, a spectacle to
the world, a disgrace to religion, and a shame to her husband, kindred, and all
true Christians: and here she would weep bitterly. Sometime the original
corruption wherein she was borne, troubled her, and the sins of her parents,
and the common parents of all, the eaters of the forbidden fruit: as if that
had made her unworthy of God, and were then laid to her charge. Many times
she accused her self of impatience, be wailing the want of feeling Gods
spirit, and making doubt of her election, and such like infirmities. She wished
that she had never been borne, or that she had been made any other creature,
rather then a woman. She cried out oftentimes, Woe, woe, woe, etc. a weak, a
woeful, a wretched, a forsaken woman, and such like pitiful complaints against
her self, with tears continually trickling from her eyes. She complained of
grievous thirst, such as all the water in the sea could not quench (and yet
when drink was given her, sometimes refused it, sometimes took a very little
of it) sweat burst out upon her exceedingly, and sometimes her body borned
extremely. So it seemed the sorrows of death hemmed her in, and the griefs
of hell laid hold upon her. Sometimes (...) very (...) prayer, and once when
she should have said, Dead us not into tentation, she made a stop, saying, I
may not pray; I may not pray (being interrupted, as she said, by Satan) and so
showed much discomfort: howbeit she was not left till she could both pray, ane
make confession of her faith with special application to her self. Besides
these fiery darts of Satan, she was once or twice troubled with vain
speeches, as of her child, the killing of her husbands cattle, that she
thought she saw a fire by her, etc. But every one saw that these things
proceeded of weakness, emptiness of her head, and want of sleep, which her
disease would not afford her.

These fits though they were for the time grievous to her self, and
discomfortable to her friends: yet were they neither long nor continual, but in
the very midst of them, would she oftentimes give testimony of her faith,
striving and fighting against her tentations. Many times when the standers by
judged her afflictions at the sharpest, would she call upon God, lifting up her
eyes and hands to heaven, and desire him to give her strength against her
tentations. Many times with a cheerful countenance she would defire those
that were by not to faint, nor give her over, but constantly to pray, and help
her against the tempter. Once in the midst of her tentation, being demanded
by Master William Fox: William Fox.
whether she did believe the promises of God or no? and whether she could pray?
she answered: O that I could, I would willingly, Mark 9.24.
but he will not let me. Lord I believe, help my unbelief: which she
pronounced with a still low voice. And when he replied, that if she had a
desire to pray and believe, she did pray and believe, and that so
effectually, that hell gates should not overcome her, according to that of the
Apostle, God accepts it according to that a man has, 2. Cor. 8.12.
not according to that a man has not: she was much comforted thereby.

Once after a great conflict with Satan, she said: Satan reason not with me,
William Brettergh.
I am but a weak woman, if thou have any thing to say, say it to my Christ; he
is my advocate, my strength, and my redeemer, and he shall plead for me.
Sometimes when she was afflicted with the accusation of her sins, and want of
feeling Gods mercy, she would with many a pitiful sob and much weeping, pray
to the Lord Jesus Christ to help and comfort her, John Brettergh.
a poor woeful, distressed woman, Edward Aspinwall.
and request others to pray for h^^. And when she was moved to make confession
of her faith, she would do it oftentimes, saying the Apostles Creed, and
concluding the same with words of application to her self: I believe the
remission of [my] sins, the resurrection of [my] body, and eternal life [to
me] Amen. And having done, she would pray God to confirm her in that faith,
ever concluding with the Lords Prayer, as devoutly and reuerontly as any that
were present. A Christian friend, who by his daily attendance on her,
discharged the duty of a faithful Christian, William Woodward.
standing by told her, that no tentation had befallen her, but that which
appertained to the child of God, and that God is faithful and true, and had
promised to give an issue with the tentation: whereat she expressed great
comfort.

Master Edward Aspinwal, a faithful professor of the truth, and a true
Israelite, was much with her in the time of her sickness, and ministered much
heavenly instruction unto her, and comforted her at all times with apt places
of Scripture, meeting with her tentations: and so put the sword of the spirit
into her hand. He propounded to her the most plentiful comforts of God unto
his Church, in the 40.41.42. and 43. Chapters of Isaiah, uttered in such
speeches and phrases, Esa. 40.1.2.28.29.30.31.
as might most fitly answer her discomforts. Also he directed her to consider
the Passion and Prayer of our Savior Christ, for all his, Esa.
41.8.9.10.13.14.17.18. Isa. 42.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.13.14. 15.16. Esa. 43.1.2.5.25.
Matthew. 11.28.
John 17. Matthew. 26. Luke 22.23. But specially did he often inculcate that
sweet inuitation of our Savior: Come unto me all you that travel and be
heavy laden, I will ease you. But the difficulty she had sometimes to apply
these generals unto her own soul in particular, made the case more full of
anguish to her self, and fearful and lamentable to the standers by: Albeit she
acknowledged Gods Majesty, mercy, faithfulness, and truth; yet still
complained she of her own weakness, and unworthiness, and could hardly
appropriate each thing to her self.

To help her some what herein (for properly otherwise, it is the peculiar work
of the holy spirit of God, to persuade the heart and soul of her particular
interest in these general promises) she was told that the Almighty who was
merciful, as she had proved, and faithful as she confessed; intended all
these mercies to as many as he did call and make promise to. And that he
called her she must needs confess, both because that then she not only her
self read, but heard others read those blessed words of God unto her: and
also for that in former times, she had bin touched with the love of God, and
that his truth: and had well profited in the detestation of sin, and
imitation of her Savior in a holy life. And for the proof thereof; she was
wished to remember in former times her Baptisine, her frequenting of Sermons,
and often receiving the most comfortable repast of the holy Communion, her
daily, and almost continual exercise of reading, meditating, and praying, etc.
Also he assured her, that neither ye present agony she was in, nor the speeches
then in that distress, tending to the signification of despair, extorted from
her, were any just causes, why either she, or any that heard her, should judge
fearefullie of her, because all might see the fault was not in her will, as
appears by her prayers, confessions, plaints, sighs, tears, and groans to God
for mercy, and full assurance in the blood of Christ; but in her judgment, not
able at that time to discern the ways of the Almighty: And therein (he told
her) she was made comfortable, not only to many the holy Saints of God, Job,
Jeremy, David, Job 3.1. etc. Ier. 20.14. Job 6.4.8.9. Job 16.9. Lament. 3. etc.
and others more, but also to her head, our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus: of
whom we read, that some have cursed the day of their birth, and called for
their end, and darkness to cover them: They have been as men without hope, and
swallowed up in despair: They have cried how the wrath of God has torn them,
Psalm. 6.3.
and the terrors of the Almighty have fought against them: They have had no
peace in their souls, nor comfort in their consciences, their prayers have bin
shut from God, their sins have been terrible unto them, crying that their
iniquities had gone over their heads, Psalm 38.4. etc. Psalm 71.7. Psalm.
77.1.7. etc. Psalm. 51.5. Psalm. 102.3. etc. Romans 7.24.
and were a burden too heavy for them to bear: And they have thought
themselves spectacles of shame and reproach, and as monsters unto men: They were
grieved for the sins of their parents, and complained that they were
desolate, forsaken, and most miserable and wretched in the world; yet for all
this were they still the dear children of God, as you are this day. (Nay
(says he) I pray you consider, what torments God inflicted upon his dear Son
upon the Cross: did he not cry out, Matthew. 27*46. Matthew. 26.38. Heb. 5.7. May
26.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? He complained, that his soul was
heavy unto death; yet was he heard in that which he feared, and God delivered
him. After this, he read unto her the 22. Psalm, wherein David complained,
partly of his own, but principally of the most bitter anguish which our
Savior Christ endured, and suffered in body and soul, putting her in mind,
that her case was not so bad as David's, nor much unlike our Saviors, who
endured all that, and more for her; and therefore she had no cause to fear,
seeing Christ had obtained victory, and would undoubtedly be with her,
deliver her, and eternally glorify her with himself for evermore; and so
continually he propounded to her such comfortable places of Scripture, as
might meet with her infirmities. This greatly refreshed her, and gave her
occasion many times to call upon God, for increase of grace, and deliverance
from her grievous tentations: the which God of his accustomed goodness
vouchsafed, on Tuesday, about three a clock in the afternoon, what time she
felt her self in very good measure delivered from all her former fears and
afflictions. But on Saturday next after, which was the day before her death,
she was wholly released, and filled with such inward comfort, that it greatly
affected us that saw it.

This is the sum of that tentation which she had, wherein what can any man
see that might give just occasion to report our religion comfortles, or the
Gentle woman died despairing? This we are sure of, that to be without tentation
is the greatest tentation: as also, that nothing befell her, which has not
befallen the holiest of the children of God. And she that considered her own
corruption (which how great it is in the best of Gods Saints, I need not say)
and be thought her self of the punishment due thereto, if God in justice should
reward her, no marvel if she brake out sometime into heavy complaints. I make
no question it was the work of God in her, to suffer Satan to accuse her, and
afflict her for her sins, that so she might the better see them, and
consider the hainousnes of them, and before her departure repent her of them,
and betake her wholly to Christ for the saving of her soul. And if it pleased
God thus to make her possess her sins before she died, let those which never
yet knew the weight of their sins, be wise in time, and remember, that he
shall never have his sin forgiven, which first or last does not undergo a
holy despair for it, and acknowledge nothing to remain in himself, but
matter of judgment and condemnation: and comfort and eternal life to flow
alone from Jesus Christ.

And as for those which have learned to scoff at the terrors of Gods children,
and to censure such, as are at sometimes cast down with feeling the anger of
God against sin, let them consider the blessed issue that God gave to the
troubles of this Gentle woman, and let them acknowledge his work in her. And
if they will not do this, but proceed to traduce the dead, Fox. Acts and Mon.
page 1904.61. page 1908.
then let them call to mind, those of the Popish crew, and persons of greater
note among them, then this Gentlewoman was, which have died most fearfully
indeed. Cardinal Sadelot, Iacobus Latomus the Divinity Reader at Louaine,
Hofmester the Friar, Guarlacus, Bomelius, Crescentius the Cardinal, Stephen
Gardener Bishop of Winchester, and diverse the bloody persecutors in Queen
Mary's time, and some of the Popes themselves, as namely, n="*" Francis the
Monk, one of the ten popish persons converted in France, Anno Dom. 1601. See
Hasen Mill. historia Iesuirica, who sets down certain examples of the
Jesuits to this purpose.
Pope Sixtus Quintus of late years: all which died most fearefullie and
miserably, and showed manifest signs at their death, that their popish
superstition was the condenmation of their souls. And if they will judge of my
religion by my death, let them acknowledge their religion is the doctrine of
desperation, and that the truth and faith which was able to fill the heart and
tongue of this blessed Gentle woman at her death, with such heavenly comforts,
is the doctrine of Christ, revealed from heaven that we might live and die in
it.

From Tuesday, Pl
till Whitian-eeuen, her comfort still incereased, and tentations vanished
away. She would then very chearefully join with the company in prayer, and
singing Psalms, as occasion offered, John Bruen Esquire. William Brettergh.
William Fox. John Brettergh. William Woodward. John Holland. Maud Brettergh.
Scholastica Fox. 1. Pet. 4.17.18. John Holland. William Brettergh. William
Woodward.
and performed all such duties as were meet for her in that estate. One day,
her brother M. John Bruen of Bruenstapleford came from his house in Cheshire to
visit her, and (...) some kind salutation passed between them, he said unto
her: Sister, be not dismayed at your troubles, but remember what the Apostle
says, that judgment must begin at the house of God. To whom she answered, as
one that was also very ready in the Scriptures, with the very next words
following: True it is, and if it begin at us, and the righteous shall scarce be
saved, where shall the sinners and ungodly appear? After that she prayed with
him, and sung a Psalm with him, as one that received great comfort by him, and
acknowledged in him, a heart set to seek the things belonging to the kingdam of
Christ. During this time, in the night with such as waked with her, she would
pray and rehearse for her comfort many texts of Scripture, and namely the 8. to
the Romans, many times concluding and closing up that she read, or repeated,
with prayer, and most comfortable uses and applications thereof to her self,
with show of such joy and comfort, that the hearers rejoiced at it. When n="*"
Richar Orme, John Holland, William Brettergh, William Woodward. William Fox.
Revel. 21.6. William Brettergh. William Fox. Psalm. 119.71.72. William Brettergh.
she received any meat, she prayed God not only to sanctify those creatures
for her bodily sustenance, but also to fill her soul with the waters of life,
often repeating that of the Revelation: To him that thirsts, will I give of
the waters of life freely.

One time she took her Bible in her hand, and joyfully kissing it, and looking
up toward heaven, she said that of the Psalm: O Lord, it is good for me that I
have bin afflicted, that I may learn thy statutes: The law of thy mouth is
better to me then thousands of gold and silver.

Another time she called her husband to her and said: O husband, beware of
Papistrie, keep your self holy before the Lord: Yield not to the abominations
of the wicked, lest they rejoice, and so you dishonor God, and destroy your
own soul. Again she said, Let my little child be brought up among the
children of God, Maud Brettergh.
and in the true fear and knowledge of his Majesty; so shall I meet her in
heaven, whom now I must leave behind me on earth.

Again, William Brettergh. Romans 8.15. William Fox.
sometime she would pray with a low voice to her self, and that saying of
Paul, We have not received the spirit of bondage to fear any more, but the
spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba father, was much in her mouth: and
the last words Abba father, she would double oftentimes over. She would sing to
her self the last verse of the 13. Psalm.

I will give thanks unto the Lord, and praises to him sing:
Because he has heard my request, and granted my wishing.
Finally, in these and such like exercises and meditations, did she spend the
whole time of her sickness, after the Lord had once enlarged her heart, from
the tentations of Satan.

But upon Saturday about eleven of the clock in the morning, May 30.
the Lord disclosed himself in mercy to her more plentifully then ever before;
and as I may say, he dealt famlliarly with his handmaid: for from that time to
her very death, which ensued the next day, the feeling of Satan's tentations
seemed quite to be banished from her; so that she made no show of them, her
thoughts were not occupied with the world, husband, child, or any thing else to
our thinking; neither was her sickness trouble some to her, as before it had
been: but as one raised from death to life, or ravished in spirit, so seemed
she to us that stood by: her countenance joyful, her tongue flowing with the
praises of God, and her voice as most heavenly music, and melody of peace,
sounding praise, and honor, and glory to God in a wonderful manuer, as
follows.

About eleven of the clock she began to tremble and quake a little, William
Brettergh. Maud Brettergh. Elizabeth Challoner.
and withal she asked her husband it he would help her with prayer to God
against the tempter, saying, Will ye neither pray with me, nor bring some
godly man that may put holy things into my mind, whereby I may be able to
resist Satan? Having thus said, she uttered these words: O Lord God of my
salvation, help my weakness, plead thou my cause, O God of truth, for in
thee do I trust. After this, they prayed together, and she answered Amen to
every petition. Then after this she required him to read some part of the
Scripture: whereupon he read unto her the 8. to the Romans, the 91. Psalm,
and the 17. of John, the which as he read, and came to the 4. verse, I have
finished the work which thou gave me to do, and now glorify me: she desired
him to pause a while, and then said, Blessed be thy name, O blessed Savior,
perfect the work, I humbly beseech thee, which thou have begun in me. Then as
he read the 9. verse, I pray not for the world, but for them which thou have
given me, for they are thine: she interrupted him again saying, O Lord Jesus,
do thou pray for me? O blessed and sweet Savior, how wonderful! how
wonderful! how wonderful are thy mercies! Read on, said she, the blessedst
reading that ever I heard, the comfort whereof does sweeten my soul. Then
reading verse the 22. And the glory which thou gave me, I have given them,
that they may be one as we are one: with marvelous joy she uttered the words
of David many times over, Psalm. 107.8.9.
I confess before the Lord his loving kindness, and his wonderful works before
the sons of men: for he has satisfied my soul, and filled my hungry soul
with goodness. When he came to the 24. verse, Father, I will that they which
thou have given me, be with me, even where I am, that they may behold my
glory, which thou have given me; Stay, said she, and let me meditate on the
goodness of the Lord, for this is the sweetest saying that ever came to my
soul: for now I perceive and feel the countenance of Christ my redeemer is
turned toward me, and the bright shining beams of his mercy is spread over
me: Oh happy am I that ever I was borne, to see this blessed day! Praise,
praise, O praise the Lord for his mercies; for he has brought me out of
darkness, Esa. 27.1. Psalm. 103.1.2.3.4.
and the shadow of death: he has delivered my soul from the snare of the
hunter, and has taken me out of the den of Lions, even from the jaws of
Leuiathan, that piercing and crooked serpent, and has set me in a place of
rest, and sweet refreshing: Oh praise the Lord O my soul, all that is within
me praise his holy name: my soul praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his
benefits, which forgiueth all thine iniquities, and heals all thine
infirmities: which has redeemed thy life from the grave, and crowns thee
with mercy and compassion. This she often repeated: And then again remembering
the 21. and 22. verses of the 17. of John, she said: O my sweet Savior,
shall I be one with thee, as thou art one with thy Father? And will thou
glorify me with that glory which thou had with the father before the
world was? And do thou so love me (which am but dust and ashes) to make me
partaker of glory with Christ? What am I poor wretch, that thou art so
mindful of me? Psalm. 144.3. Psalm. 8.4.
Oh how wonderful! how wonderful! how wonderful is thy love! Oh thy love is
unspeakable, that have dealt so graciously with me! Oh I feel thy mercies,
and oh that my tongue and heart were able to sound forth thy praises as I
ought, and as I willingly would do! Oh that you all would help me to praise
the holy one of Israel, the God of all consolations! And thus for the space of
five hours together at the least, she continued praising and lauding the
Lord, with such a gladsome and heavenly countenance, testifying such inward
joy, from a comfortable feeling of the mercies of God in her soul, and using
such sweet sentences, and sugared phrases of perfect and holy eloquence, as the
truth thereof, if it could have been taken, were admirable, continuing so many
hours together; some part whereof was this:

Oh my Lord, oh my God, blessed be thy name for evermore, which have showed me
the path of life. Esa. 54.8.
Thou did O Lord hide thy face from me for a little season, but with
everlasting mercy, thou have had compassion on me: And now blessed Lord thy
comfortable presence is come, yea Lord, thou have had respect unto thy
handmaid, and art come with fulness of joy, and abundance of consolations: O
blessed be thy name O Lord my God. Then she repeated part of the 16. Psalm,
saying: The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, wherefore my heart is
glad, Psalm. 16.59.11.
and my tongue rejoices: Thou will show me the path of life: In thy presence
is fulness of joy; and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore: Oh
that I could therefore praise the Lord, as he is worthy to be praised? I will
sing to the Lord, I will sing to the praise of the God of Israel: come, come,
(says she) and help me, Judges 5.3.
O help me to praise the Lord. And with that she began to sing the third
Psalm, and continued to the end of the Psalm, as perfectly, and with as
sweet a voice, as ever she had before in her health; and concluded with the
49. verse of the 106. Psalm:

The Lord the God of Israel, be blessed for evermore:
Let all the people say Amen, praise ye the Lord therefore.
And after this she said, O praise the Lord, for he has filled me with joy
and gladness of heart, and brought me from the gates of hell, and of death:
repeating that of the 16. Psalm, Psalm. 16.6.
My line is fallen unto me in a pleasant place: yea I have a fair heritage,
for the Lord is the portion of mine inheritance: The place where I now am, is
sweet and pleasant: Oh how pleasant is the sweet perfume of the place where I
lie! Exodus 30.23.
It is sweeter then Aarons composed perfume of principal spices: how
comfortable is the sweetness I feel! Revel. 8.4.
It is like that odor that proceeds from the golden censor, that delights my
soul. The taste is precious: do you not feel it? Oh so sweet it is! yea
sweeter then myrrh, the honey, or the honey comb. Let me therefore sing again,
and again unto my Lord, and my God. Then she did sing the nineteenth Psalm,
beginning at the seventh verse, How perfect is the law of God, etc. and so on
to the end of the same. And after that spiritual rejoicing, in singing of
Psalms, she then prayed unto God faithfully, and praised the Lord again
joyfully. And being still full of these, and such like heavenly consolations,
she did sing again most hearthly, unto the praise of God the 136. Psalm.
Praise ye the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever: etc. In
which Psalm, for his mercy endures for ever, is 26. times repeated. A
Christian friend coming in at the same time, Master William Fox.
which was about six of the clock in the evening, maruelling to see her
exceeding joys, and heavenly harmony, wherein she continued with such words
and phrases, that were so spiritual, prayed for the continuance of the same
unto the end: William Brett^^gh. William Fox. William Woodward.
whereupon she then hurst out, relating further of her joys, saying: Oh the
joys! the joys! the joys! that I feel in my soul! oh they be wonderful!
they be wonderful! they be wonderful! And after that, she prayed for
increase of faith, and that God would strengthen her against tentations, with
continual craving of cemission of sins, ever meditating of heavenly matters,
as by her sudden and often breaking out into heavenly speeches, and praises,
did appear: for the same evening she lying still and silent for a while,
William Fox.
one prayed her to remember the Lord Jesus, and that she would in her heart
pray for constancy in her joyful course; whereupon she answered with a
delightsome and cheerful countenance and comfortable voice: Psalm. 27.1.3.
Oh (said she) so I do, for the Lord is my light, and my salvation, whom then
shall I fear? Though an host pitch against me, yet my heart shall not be
afraid, for the Lord has said, Deuteronomy. 4.31.
I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee. Indeed, I should utterly have
fainted, Psalm. 27.13. Psalm. 108.1.
but that I believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the
living. And now my heart is ready, my heart is ready and prepared, yea, it
pants after thee O God: as the Heart brayeth after the rivers of water, Psalm.
42.1.2.
so pants my soul after thee O God: my soul thirsts for God, even for the
living God. When Lord, William Brettergh.
when shall I come and appear before thy presence? etc. Saying then further:
Lord, since it has pleased thee to prepare my heart, whether to life or death,
thy will be done, dispose of me to thine own glory: I am thine Lord, work
thy blessed pleasure and good will upon me. And after this she fell into a
short slumber, and awaking said, as the spouse said unto Christ in the
Canticles: Oh come kiss me with the kiss of thy mouth, Cant. 1.1.
for thy love is better then wine. Oh how sweet the kisses of my Savior be?
Then one said unto her, William Fox.
alluding to that place of S. John, Revel. 3.8. and praying that the Lord would
anoint her with the eye-salue of his grace, that she might see and behold his
glory. To whom she answered, Mine eyes are opened, mine eyes are opened,
though for a while they were closed up and shut; yet now I thank my God, mine
eyes are opened, and I do feel and see the everliving mercies of my Christ:
saying then further, as it is in the 27. Psalm: Thou said, seek my face: my
heart answered to thee, O Lord I will seek thy face. Psalm. 27.8.9.
O hide not therefore thy face from me, nor cast thy servant away in
displeasure, thou have been my succor, leave me not, nor forsake me, O God of
my salvation. And being willed to commit her soul into the hands of Christ,
she said: O Lord Jesus, thou have redeemed me, William Brettergh. Psalm. 31.5.
William Woodward. Matthew. 11.25.
plead thou my cause, for into thy hands alone do I commit my spirit, O thou
God of truth. And then feeling more joy to abound, one praising God with her
for his mercies showed toward her, she further said: I give thee thanks O
father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the
wise, and men of understanding, and have opened them unto me thy poor
handmaid, which am but dust and ashes. O how merciful and marvelous gracious
art thou unto me! yea Lord, I feel thy mercy, William Fox.
and I am assured of thy love, and so certain am I thereof, as thou art the God
of truth, even so sure do I know my self to be thine, O Lord my God; Psalm.
139.10.
and this my soul knows right well, and this my soul knows right well:
which speech of her assurance, she often repeated. Presently after this,
William Brettergh. Job 19.25.26.27.
sitting up in her chair, she sung the fourth Psalm; and then being laid
down again in her bed, she confidently spoke these words: I am sure that my
redeemer lives, and that I shall see him at the last day, whom I shall see,
and mine eye shall behold: and though after my skin, worms destroy this body,
yet shall I see God in my flesh with these eyes, and none other.

Master William Harrison. William Brettergh. William Fox. John Brettergh.
William Woodward.
Then came in to see her toward evening, Master William Harrison the Preacher,
praising God for her continuance, in that her joyful and most happy course:
and persuading her to an helie perseverance in the same, she thanked him, and
desired him to rejoice in Christ with her, and to praise God for his mercies to
her, and said: Oh Master Harrison, my soul has been compassed about with
terrors of death, fear within, and fear without, the sorrows of hell were
upon me, knots and knorres were upon my soul, (which twice or thrice she
repeated) and a roaring wilderness of woe was within me; but blessed, blessed,
blessed, be the Lord my God, who has not left me comfortless, but like a good
shepherd, Psalm. 23.2.3.
has he brought me into a place of rest, even no the sweet running waters
of life, that flow out of the sanctuary of God, and he has led me into the
green pastures, where I am fed, and exceedingly comforted: yea, he has
restored my soul, and lead me into the plain and easy paths of righteousness.
The way that now I go in, is a sweet and easy way, strowed with flowers, and
as a fine sandy way; Psalm. 147.14.
yea, it is more easy and soft then the sand, for I go and tread upon wheat,
even upon the finest flower of wheat: Oh blessed be the Lord; Oh blessed be the
Lord, that has thus comforted me, and has brought me now to a place, more
sweet unto me then the Garden of Eden. Oh the joy! the joy, the delightsome
joy that I feel! Oh how wonderful, how wonderful, how wonderful is this
joy! O praise the Lord for his mercies, and for this joy which my soul feels
full well: praise his name for evermore. And these praises of God, she sounded
forth, William Brettergh. William Woodward.
like David's harmony, being endued with David's spirit, to the praise of the
eternal and merciful God, continuing al night in such like prayers and
praises to God, except some small time, that she was silent and quiet. Master
Harrison prayed twice with her that evening, as also in the morning (being
Whitsunday.) After he had prayed once with her, going then toward his public
charge, she sent for him to pray once more with her before he went, which he
did; to the joy and gladness of heart, both of her, and all that were present:
and so he took leave of her, and departed.

Another faithful man or two came presently in that morning, and diverse
others well affected, M. Edward Aspinwall. William Fox. William Brettergh. John
Brettergh. William Woodward. Mistress Maud Brettergh. Mistress Scholastica Fox.
Elizabeth Challoner, and diverse more. Psalm. 30.10.11.12.
who were with her at the time of her death, and often prayed with her that
forenoone, she still abounding in spiritual comforts and consolations:
sometimes as one awaking out of sleep, she would say, the Lord was her keeper,
and deliverer. Again, one saying unto her, the Lord bless you: Yea (says
she) and the Lord Jesus bless us all. And so seeming to sleep a little
while, and awaking again she said: Lord I trust in thee, have mercy upon me,
give me strength to praise thee: defend and preserve me in the hour of
tentation, and lay no more upon me, then thou will enable me to bear.
Afterward being asked, if she would have the^ join in prayer together again
with her: O yes (said she) for Christ's sake I desire it: saying thus to her
self: Hear O Lord, and have mercy upon me: Lord be thou my helper. Thou
have loosed my sack, and girded me with gladness: therefore will I praise
thee, O Lord my God: I will give thanks to thee for evermore. With that, all
that were present did join in prayer with her, and in conclusion using the
Lords prayer, which she said with them, to thine is the kingdom; her strength
then being gone, her tongue failed her, and so she lay silent for a while,
every one judging her then to be near death, her strength and speech failing
her: yet after a while, lifting up her eyes with a sweet countenance and still
voice, said: Esa. 40.2. Psalm. 73.25.26.
My warrefare is accomplished, and my iniquities are pardoned. Lord whom have I
in heaven but thee? and I have none in earth but thee: my flesh fails, and my
heart also, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. He
that preserves Jacob, and defends his Israel, he is my God, and will guide
me unto death: guide me O Lord my God, and suffer me not to faint, but keep my
soul in safety. And with that she presently fell asleep in the Lord, passing
away in peace, without any motion of body at all; and so yielded up the Ghost,
a sweet Sabbaths sacrifice about four of the clock in the afternoon, of
Whitsunday, being the last of May, 1601.

This was the death of that virtuous Gentlewoman, happily dying in the Lord,
and reaping the benefit of a holy profession. Wherein we cannot but
acknowledge and reverence the mercy of God, who in our greatest infirmity
makes his grace to shine most clearly. A sure testimony of the truth of our
profession, serving to encourage us therein, and to move us to a godly life.
It must needs be a divine Religion, and a true, coming from God, that thus
can fill the heart and mouth of a weak woman, at the time of death, with such
admirable comfort. And a wretched conceit, and mere Antichristian is that
religion, which so hates and persecuteth this faith, which is thus able to
lead the true-hearted professors thereof, with such unspeakable peace unto
their graves.

Her Funeral was accomplished at Childwall Church on Wednesday following,
being the third of June. And now for conclusion, seeing this blessed
Gentlewoman is taken from among us, and received into the holy habitations of
the heavenly Jerusalem, there to remain in joy, glory, and blessedness for
evermore; let us lament for our less, but rejoice for her gain; and let us
pray, that in heart we could as willingly wish to be with her, as she is now
unwilling to be with us.

Solomon says, The memory of the just shall be blessed: but the name of the
wicked shall rot. Prou. 10.7.

FINIS.

