AN APOLOGY OR DEFENSE OF THE WATCH-VVORD, AGAINST THE VIRVLENT AND SEDITIOVS
WARD-VVORD published by an English-Spaniard, lurking under the title of N.D.

DIVIDED INTO EIGHT SEVERAL Resistances according to his so many Encounters,
written by Sir FRANCIS HASTINGS Knight.

PSALM. 122. O pray for the peace of Jerusalem, let them prosper that love thee.

PSALM. 109. Though they curse, yet thou will bless; they shall rise up and be
confounded, but thy servant shall rejoice.

LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, for Ralph Iacson. 1600.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
I Have observed (gentle Reader) from the words and writings of the learned,
that it is a Maxim or Rule in Philosophy; Finis est primus in intention, The
end aimed at is first settled in the intention of man: And finding this Romanist
to boast and brag much of his learning, it is not unlike, that like a cunning
Clerk (whatsoever his learning be) the end of this his work was the first
ground of his writing.

He proclaims Temperance in his title, he pursues the Art of Railing in the
whole process following, and in the end of all, he persuades ruin both to
Church and Commonwealth: In the first dissimulation, in the second
scurrilitie, and the third treachery is contained; for he shakes hands with
Temperance at the very first, and leaves her to rest and remain with his
title, and the leaf being turned he plungeth presently into his vain of
railing, which (if he had affected Temperance) he would never have done, and
the end shows his intention to be to bring in either a tolleration or flat
alteration of Religion.

But will thou know (Christian Reader) what forced this fellow to become so
suddenly distempred? My Watchword presented unto thee to prepare thee with a
courageous heart, and ready hand, to resist foreign malice, and home treason,
plotted and purposed by Rome and Spain, against our Sovereign and Country,
has wakened him before his time, and out of the lightness of his brain
(through ouer-watching of himself to devise and work mischief) he terms
this my book (in the beginning of his Preface) an injurious Pamphlet and a
biting Libell: my labors therein he calls a base exercise of calumniation
and railing, and in the matter thereof it pleases him to say; I spare neither
God nor man, So far forth as they concern the Catholic cause, or the cause
of them, and for this I must receive my check and refutation at his pleasure.

The injury he charge me to have done is to his Catholics, of whose
doctrine and dealing I confess (in my former book) I warn thee to beware: as
for the term of a biting Libell, thou will say (gentle Reader) when thou have
perused him and me both over, that it is a more fit addition to the title of
his temperate Ward-word which is biting, because it is full of railing, and is
a Libell, because it is slanderous against her Majesty, and the seat of her
Justice, and is thrust out without name: as for the baseness of the exercise
imputed to me for writing and publishing that book, and the cause thereof,
indeed it is a very base thing to calumniate, and rail as he does; but to lay
before Subjects the doctrine and deeds of disloyalty, and to warn them to
take heed thereof, as I have endeavored therein to do, will prove neither
calumniation nor railing.

If any simple seduced Catholic stand free from subscribing to the disloyal
doctrine of Rome, and from doing that it directs and teaches, he is not
touched by me; therefore this Champion that draws all Catholics within the
compass of my words wrongeth them more then I do: but he might have spared to
name the God of heaven, as a party in his Catholic cause, till he can prove
the cause warranted from God, and his truth, which he shall never do; yet I
must receive this worthy Gentleman's check for my labor, but he shall find it
is far from a mate, and that his Bishops are too weak to bring it to that.

The Gentleman says he is very loath to be over eager and sharp with me in
his Encounters, not only in his own worshipful disposition, but also for the
reverent respect he carries to the house and family I come of, and the
particular affection he feels toward some of my name and lineage; but this is
no sooner uttered then that he breaks out presently into these words: Who
will not confess but that lying, forging, and falsifying, ignorant vaunting,
odious scoffing, malicious calumniations, seditious interpretations, bloody
exaggerations, barbarous insultations, over them that already are in
affliction and calamity, ought to be far from the nature, pen and tongue of
a Knight or Gentleman? And who would have thought that so temperate a title
could have afforded so intemperate a style? Again, who would have expected
such raging and railing Rhetoric against me from one of so mild a
disposition, as he professes to be of, and that carried so reverend a respect
to the family whereof I am a branch, and such a feeling affection to some of
my name as he would persuade? But he has cut the throat of his temperate
title, and procl^imeth intemperance in his whole book, and I doubt (...)
break the strength of his chief wards (for all his fencing skill if he mean
to play the fencer) and to leave him altogether to his hanging-ward, which
proves always a dangerous ward if it be sharply followed by the assaylant,
but for his reverent respect to my family and his affection to some of them
(which surely I think it very slender and scunt sound to any of them) I
would advise him not to lie so open, but to betake him to a stronger and
sounder ward least be catch a double venue for his labor.

But he is provoked by me to break out into choler for that I not only (says
he) Touch the honors, states, and livings of home-borne subjects, and bring
them into question, unjustly being no way tolerable, but rush further to the
open assault of foreign Monarchies, also their honors, fame and reputations
which is less tolerable, and consequently has need of some more sharp and
forcible reiection. The former persons meant by him are made apparent before,
and therefore of them I only say this in this place, I wish them all from my
heart, that as they are home-borne, so they may be home-hearted Subjects, that
their Sovereign and country may enjoy them sound English Subjects indeed: as
for his Monarchs of Rome and Spain he has no cause to carpe at me, but to
blame themselves, for it is they, and not I that have teinted their honors,
fame, and reputations, the first of them having long sought to depose her
Majesty from her regal and supreme right within her own Dominions, the
other having made attempts to invade and make a conquest of her land, and both
of them having conspired the death of her Majesty by setting on both bastard
borne, English and b^^^h strangers to deprive her of life, this I confess I
lai^ (...) in my former book, and for this am I fiercely assaulted by this
f^^ous Romanist in his intemperate Ward-word; but w^^^e^ in discovering, or he
in defending deserve more blame, I leave (gentle Reader) to thy wise and
indifferent judgment.

The violence of the Puritan spirit is added by him for a reason why he is
provoked by me, by which words (for all his difference made between Protestant
and Puritan) both of them are apparently known to profess Christ Jesus
crucified in religion, and in true Christian policy to condemn Subjects that
shall deny or break their oath of fealty; and allegiance to their
Sovereign, for the pleasing of any earthly power or Potentate whatsoever, and
not to favor either Prince or Pope that shall usurpingly challenge our
Sovereigns princely titles from her, or ambitiously seek by invasion to
dispossess her of her kingdom, or trecherously practice by violence or any
ways else to deprive her of life; so that though he disioyne us in terms and
names, yet he shall assuredly find we all join in condemning disloyalty in
subjects, ambition in foreign Princes and Potentates, and treachery, and
treason in any of them all against the State and person of the Lords anointed:
and of this number that carry this mind, I profess my self most willingly
and gladly to be one.

This Encounterer seems to glory that the years of her Majesty grow on
fast, but the God of mercy I trust will prolong her days to the holding out
still of the Popes usurped authority, and superstitious doctrine, to the
suppressing of traitors, and treasons, and to the daunting and overthrow of
any, that shall attempt by fraud or force to bring in or maintain either; for
from these only come the garboyles by which our State has been disquieted,
and our Sovereign endangered, and from these ^^gers the Lord of might and
mercy preserve her still. ^^^^fore (gentle Reader) you may see that neither
Sir Francis nor any Protestant nor Puritan are fit subjects for this seditious
fellow to work upon, to set on foot his desired garboyles, as this
Machiuilian witted Romanist seems propound (but most injuriously) to put his
own, and his adherents traitorous practices out of memory, which are so
plentiful in number, and so manifest in fact as they can never be forgotten.

After all this he lays extreme flattery to my charge, both of the State,
and her Majesty's person in particular, which extreme charge of his (for he is
all in his extremes) because it is redoubled upon me, give me leave to refer
thee (gentle Reader) to my answer thereunto, in my resistance to his first
Encounter, only where he terms this flattery by him supposed against me) to
be a fit bait for such hooks as angle after popular favor for a further fetch:
my popularity only consists in this, to have loyalty, stand sound and
upright, and all treachery and treason suppressed. But if it please thee
(Christian Reader) to observe well this Gentleman's smooth Remitter to the Lords
after his thundering Encounters against me, with his fawning persuasion of
peace, and crouching suit for tolleration or alteration of Religion (which
before I affirm to be the first matter in his intention, and justly call the
ruin of our Church and Commonwealth) thou will easily perceive what baytes he
hooks withal, and what good he angles after under the sugared and sweet names
of peace, and unity, whereas the good of our peace stands upon a good peace,
and unless our peace may be free from present and plain danger, it can
promise little present or future good: and for his unity if it be unity in
verity (as his is not) ^eligious Christian man can, or will refuse it; but
praise (...) for it, and (if our unthankfulness bereave us not of it) we enjoy
that already by and under her Majesty with great comfort, and both of her and
it would this masked Romanist most gladly see us deprived: Notwithstanding all
his fawning and crouching to the Honorable Lords in his Remitter, their
wisdoms (I doubt not) will easily find out this subtle Synons intention,
who shameth not with a brazen face to seek to bring in his brazen horse,
laden with armed calamities for Englands ruin. I have undertaken this Popish
Champion not with any purpose to follow him in his vain of railing, for
therein I find him not matchable, nor having a disposition or desire to be
stirring in matter of this nature, being more fit to be dealt in by men
qualified with far greater gifts of learning and art then I am, but being
called as it were into the field by him, I have adventured upon the height of
his swelling pride, and have shaped him a plain and sound answer to all the
material points culled out of my former book and excepted against by him, in
which (how vainegloriously soever this proud Encounterer promises to himself
victory) I hope (Christian Reader) thou shall find me fully cleared and freed
from the force and fury of his false imputations, and biting blows, and him
directly proved a blind superstitious Papist in Religion, a false hearted
subject to his Sovereign, and a man wholly degenerate from the honest affection
of a true Englishman. And this being performed and finished, (which I held my
self bound in duty to do, for thy satisfying and mine own credit) my full
resolution is not to toil any more by contending with such railing and
wrangling spirits. And so (returning all his unjust imputations against me,
with his terms of fictions and calumniations set down in the end of his
Epistle to himself, from whom they came) I leave the scope and end of us both
to be found out by thy Christian wisdom, and the carriage of us both to be
censured as in the uprightness of thy iudgemen^, thou shall find we deserve.
To our good God I commend thee, and will now hasten to join the combat with
this proud Romanist touching his Encounters severally, and as shortly as
possibly I can.

By him that wishes your blessed proceeding in the profession of Christ his
truth and Gospel, FRANCIS HASTINGS.

AN APOLOGY OR DEFENSE OF THE WATCH-VVORD.
Resistance to the first Encounter about the manifold blessings, from God,
through her Majesty's happy Reign, powered upon this Land.
THough my intent is not to make answer either to the immodest raylings, The
scope of this Apology.
or frivolous exceptions, or vagrant excursions of this Encounterer; but only
to set down a short defense of my speeches by him impugned (because my state
of health, and disposition of my body will not bear to write volumes:) yet,
because both in the entrance of this Libell, and in other places of his
process, he does so hainously charge me with the odious crime of flattery
(which I hate naturally as a badge of a base mind, much more through Christian
knowledge as most contrary thereto,) I have thought it not amiss to shape a
short answer^ unto it. In suspicion of heresy Jerome (as Bishop Iuell
alleges) would have no man to be patient, and though I will not burst out
into any impatience (as considering more what is fit for me to speak then for
him to hear) yet I hold that in the grievous accusation of flattery I ought
not to be silent.

Flattery falsely charged upon me.
Therefore I allow it not only for witty, but worthy to be embraced for
truth, that which you allege concerning flatterers, and I hold the answer to
the question no less true in the whole, then in part. The question was, What
beasts were most perilous? And the answer is, Of all wilde-beastes a Tyrant,
and of tame-beastes a flatterer; and if you can as easily free such as you
seek with might and maine to defend, from the just imputation of tyranny, as I
shall be able to clear my self from any the least intention to flatter, you
shall do more then ever any could do for them before.

Antisthenes is reported to be wont to say, he had rather have ravens resort to
his house then flatterers, yielding this reason, that ravens do but pray upon
the carcass being dead, but flatterers devour both body and soul alive. To
enterprise the enumeration of great States and Princes through flatterers
utterly ruinated, were to undertake an endless labor but as the verse has:
Blanditiae plusquam dira venena nocent,
Sugared and sweet flatter^ ^^^^teth more,


Then deadly poison th^^gh thou drink great store. So were it not hard to show
more seigniories and kingdoms subverted by secret flattery, then by open
hostility: by how much the more earnestly I beseech the Lord, that if her
Majesty's Court cannot be altogether free from flatterers (who as burres do
commonly hang upon the sleeves of Princes,) yet by her princely wisdom she
may always epsy them, and find them out, saying as the Philosopher is
reported that was Nephew to Plato. Define adulari, nihil enim proficis cum te
intelligam, leave thy flearing and fawning, thou preuailest nothing, for I
perceive thee well enough.

But I pray you (Sir N. D.) where learned you that skill to take upon you to
affirm and prove, that to publish the commendation of Princes upon just desert
is flattery? What flattery is.
I doubt me for all your desire to be thought a great Clerk, it will trouble
you and all your colleagues to fortify this position But not to dwell long
upon this point; disdain not to hear what Democritus will tell you. Recte
quidem facta laudare honestum est, mala vero laudibus vehere adulterini est
animi and impostoris. To give due praise to good deserts is honest; but to
praise and extol evil deeds argues a corrupt and a couzening mind: and
therefore I doubt not with far more ease to free my self from flattery,
wherewith you falsely charge me for commending the good things of our land,
then you shall be able to avoid the just imputation of an adulterous and
deceiving mind in deprauing Gods blessings with your Macheuilian wit, and false
interpretations.

And if I had leisure to stand upon just retortion of unjust accusations, Arch
flatterers at Rome.
I could send you to the Popes Palace where a man may find more shameless
flatterers, then (I think) were ever to be found in any Christian Princes
Court. Panormitan (as is by sundry learned men alleged) shameth not to
flatter your Pope so far, as to make him almost equal with God. Excepto
peccato Papa potest quasi omnia facere quae Deus potest: Sin excepted the
Pope can in a manner do all things that God can do: Again another clawbacke:
Non minor honor debetur Papae, quam Angelis, etc. No less honor is due to the
Pope then to the Angels, for which cause he receives of Christian people
adorations, prostrating themselves on the ground, and the kissing of his feet,
which the Angel would not permit by John the Evangelist to be done to him.
Another, Imperatoria Maiestas tanto est inferior Papa, quanto creatura Deo: The
imperial Majesty is so much inferior to the Pope, as the creature is to God.
Others, that he is Ens secundae intentionis compositum ex Deo and homine: And
in a word, the Canonists roundly in the Gloss: Dominus Deus noster Papa: Our
Lord God the Pope. Which blasphemous flattering speech Doctor Raynolds notes
that the Cardinals, and others deputed by Gregory 13 to reuise, correct, and
purge out, such things as by error had crept into the Glosses, and annotations
in the book of decrees and decretals, etc. yet have not only not removed this
blasphemy, but not so much as given the least castigation upon it: belike
because they thought that could not fit the Pope, which the Apostle writes of
Antichrist, that he does sit as God in the Temple of God, showing himself that
he is God, unless they should suffer a place to be extant, wherein he is
plainly called, Lord God, in a popish work, by the Papists themselves
corrected, printed at Rome, and that at the Popes own special commandment:
and so much concerning your accusation of flattery.

The which yet you labor to enforce, because I take upon me to speak of
infinite blessings from Almighty God, About the blessings of this land.
by her Majesty's gracious government powered upon this land, and yet my self
(you say) confess a thousand fears and frights, and imminent perils which
hang over us in these words. I doubt not but you are men of wisdom, and can
easily conceive what dangers we stand in, by that which has been said before.
And again, The life of Religion, Queen, and Country is at the stake.

Verily if I should speak of the great blessings bestowed upon this land in
the happy establishing of true Christian Religion amongs us, and should think
the contrary, I should judge my self worthy to be taxed with so odious a
crime as flattery is. For I will say as he in the Poet: Odi etenim ceu
claustra Erebi, quicunque loquuntur,
Ore aliud, tacitoque aliud sub pectore claudunt:
I hate as gates of hell, who ever thou art
That one thing say, another think in heart.


But (good Sir) what contrariety is there in my words? No contrariety betwixt
our present dangers and our former blessings.
May not a land be truly blessed from God, in having a gracious Prince, by whom
Idolatry is removed, and true Religion planted: and yet (for want of due
acknowledgement of the Lords goodness, and true fruits of thankfulness) be by
foreign enemies maligned, or by home-traitors hazarded? Eccle. 49.
The remembrance of Josiah (says Jesus Syrach) is like the composition of
perfume, that is made by the Art of the Apothecary, it is sweet as honey in all
mouths, and as Music at a banquet of wine. He behaved himself uprightly in
the reformation of the people, and took away all abomination of iniquity, he
directed his heart unto the Lord, and in the time of the ungodly, he
established Religion. Highly was Jerusalem blessed by the reign of good
Josiah, rooting out Idolatry, and restoring to the people the book of the
Law, (as is this land likewise by the like blessed Reign of our gracious
Josiah,) and yet even in his time, for the Idolatry committed under his
Father, and Grandfather, and for their affections declining to Idolatry, and
not truly esteeming the blessings in Josiah their king powered upon them, the
Lord threatens to bring evil upon that place, and the Inhabitants thereof.
Which he did by suffering Josiah to be slain by the soldiers of the king of
Egypt, and within few years after his death, selling his own people into the
hands of the idolatrous Babilonians. For as darkness naturally follows
light, and night the day, so do great punishments accompany rare blessings,
when they are not duly esteemed as they ought.

Blessed was Jerusalem by the testimony of the Lords own mouth when he said:
My beloved had a Vineyard in a very fruitful hill, and he hedged it, and
gathered out the stones of it, and he planted it with the best plants, and
built a Tower in the midst thereof, and made a winepresse therein: But when
he looked for grapes, and it brought forth wild-grapes, the Lord threatened from
the height of this blessed estate, to cast them into the gulf of misery, to
take away the hedge from his Vineyard, that it might be eaten up, and break
down the wall thereof that it might be trodden down, etc. The Lord has not
therefore been less beneficial to us in placing so gracious an head upon the
body of this Realm, because you, and some such as your self are, do yet
remain to God ingrate, and to your Prince, and Country unnatural. Only I
beseech God, that whereas by his appointment the Olive is yet over us with her
fatnes, and the Fig with her sweetness, and the Vine with her fruitfulries,
that (amongst many other sins of our land) for our ungrateful contempt of so
great a blessing, a Bramble be not set over us, which is good for nothing, but
to burn and consume us: and so much concerning my supposed contradiction.

Now (Sir N. D.) it is your pleasure to hear my manner of speech in these
words, If I should take upon me to enter into the enumeration of all the
benefits and blessings that from the Almighty have been powered upon this
little Island of England, etc. And having thus imperfectly repeated them, you
pass the over with this slight exception, saying: That in mentioning our
little Island, I must take Scotland with me, else I err in Cosmographie, as
though England were not divided in government from Scotland, though both rest
upon one continent, and as though your self did not term this Realm an
Island, Encounter. 3. page 39.
even where you do distinguish it from Scotland. Therefore Nodum in scirpo
quaeris, and to this shift you are put very often for want of matter. But if
seems that Scotland was named here by you, chiefly to make way for your
purpose to give a glaunce at battles, murders, destruction of Countries,
Provinces, Towns, Cities, Houses, and particular men that have been in
Scotland within these forty years; as though Scotland had never tasted these
or any of these before: and then you come in with Ireland, wherein you seem to
bewail the death of the noble Desmons; whose treasons yet live by succession
in one of the same name, who (it is said) wrote ^ treason full letter, stuffed
with most intolerable opprobries and slanders against her Majesty and the
state to the King of Spain: And this I hope is no great proof of your
son^dnes to Queen or State. France and Flaunders follow to fill up the number.
But had you any respect of truth or care of modesty, you would never have made
the true Religion we profess the cause of murders, tumults, and garboyles,
which teaches dutiful obedience, and condemns all mutinies, seditions, and
rebellions.

Our Christan Religion no cause of tumults.
You should do well to have told us, who murdered the King; the Lord James, the
Lord Russell in Scotland? In France who murdered the Prince of Conde, after he
was taken prisoner, which (I think) the law of Arms will not well bear?
Likewise who they were that laid^ bloody hands upon the Admiral Chattilion,
being first shot in with a Pistol with three bullets in the streets, and
afterward slain in his chamber: And so of Marl^ret slain in his garden, and
of the famous learned man Ramus, who having paid money to ransom his life, was
beyond all humanit^e most cruelly quelled. And generally who were the Authors,
not only of the bloody massacre in Paris, but also of the like vprores in
other Cities, and quarters of the Realm, principally at Lions, Orleans, Roan,
Tolouse; in which Cities (within the space of one month) there are numbered at
the least thirty thousand godly Protestants to be slain: your holy father at
Rome (to show with what spirit he is led, and with what means he sticks to
maintain his Religion, which otherwise would fall to the ground) so soon as
he heard of this bloody tragedy, makes great joy with his Cardinals, with
their procession, with their gunshot and singing Te Deum: Yea in honor of that
Act proclayming a Iubile with great indulgence and solemnity. For Flaunders
tell us who murdered the noble Prince of Orange against whom it was proclaimed,
that who soever could bring him alive or dead, or slaie him should have five
and twenty thousand crowns. You shall find that such a Catholike-faith as
yours is, has still sought to maintain it self by such Catholic means as
these are, treasons, tumults, seditions, secret murders, and such like. As for
our true Christian Religion, it is so cause of tumults, garboyles, and murders,
as Christ's birth was of the murder of the poor infants, in which neither
Christ nor the infants ought offended, the madness was in Herod and all
Jerusalem, to be for this cause in an uproar. In a word it is Herod's Religion
which seeks to murder Christ, and the Christ's, and anointed of the Lord.

I proceed to your advertisement, A short view of blessings spiritual, and
temporal from God by her Majesty powered on this land.
for a better direction to men's judgments, that all blessings of a
Commonwealth may be reduced to two heads, the one spiritual belonging to the
soul and conscience, the other temporal concerning the body and weal
public: and that the Lord has richly blessed this land since her Majesty's
Reign, I doubt not to prove to all that have judgment and indifferency
following your own method.

Unity in verity.
And first there has been in England since this happy alteration and change
from popish superstition to Christian verity, One God worshipped in spirit and
truth, one faith, one belief, one form of service in prayer and praises to
God, one number of Sacraments (which are only two by the word of God) one head
of the Church which is Christ the Lord, as the holy Ghost testifies by the
Apostle. Him has God appointed to be the head of the Church. And his
substitute anointed, and appointed over us is our Sovereign and Queen, who
is to command and be obeyed in Christ and for Christ in all causes as well
ecclesiastical as civil, and not your proud usurping Priest at Rome; and if
you can like to look upon the harmony of confessions you shall find all the
Churches of Christendom, where the Gospel and truth of Christ Jesus is
embraced, to be of the same judgment; and in this blessed unity grounded upon
verity, the Lord for ever keep us.

A scornful reproach.
And how scornefully soever you term this to be our Parliament Religion, be it
known to you, that the reverent assembly of States, and Commons in
Parliament, have cause to praise God for their joining to present such laws,
and for her Majesty's consenting to establish such laws, as tend to so holy a
purpose, as to hem in the ignorant, that they may frequent the holy assemblies
to learn to profess and obey the truth, and to restrain the headstrong
humors of Papists and Atheists, who are forward to run astray from God and
all godliness.

As for your trick of cunning often grated upon, The terms of Puritanes and
Protestants.
with a desire to disioyne our affections, by calling some Puritanes and other
Protestants, this malicious purpose of yours, I hope the Lord of might and
mercy will turn to the good of his Church, and I trust it will please him by
his grace to direct the hearts of our Churchmen, to see how needful it is for
them to join heart and hand together to defend the doctrine of faith (which
they all hold) against the calumniations and slanders, wherewith you, and men
of your sort, seek to load the truth of our profession: and to cross the
cunning and most dangerous plots, laid also to mingle (at the least) our
blessed, and most holy profession, with a toleration of cursed Popery, if not
to alter all to Popery, to the rooting out of Gods true Religion wholly from
amongst us. And howsoever some dissent has appeared, about the toleration or
abrogation of some things: yet (I doubt not) it does, and shall well appear,
that the dissension is not such (as this turbule^t spirited fellow would feign
have it) and that all sides will manifest to the whole world, that howsoever
they may in these outward things dissentire, yet it shall be concordi discordia:
and so much for your cunningly devised distinction of Puritan and Parliament
Religion, not without a settled and grounded malice to both.

But (Sir) your vaunt of a general unity, Unity untruly vaunted of by the
Papists.
before alteration of Religion amongst us, if I had leisure to sift it, would
prove more boldly then truly uttered: for how worshipped you one God, when you
served so many Idols? Or how glorified you the Creator, when you gave his
glory unto creatures? not only to his true Saints (as to the blessed virgin
whom you call the Queen of Heaven, as God is King of Heaven, De Idol. Ecc. To.
lib. 1. ca. 1.
and one of your greatest pillars affirms (as Doctor Raynolds alleges him)
that the King of kings has given half his kingdom to this Queen, and of the
chiefest treasures of this kingdom, namely Justice, and Mercy, has reserved
Justice to himself, but his mercy he has granted to her,) but even unto
vile, base, and dumb creatures, as when they pray for their cross of metal,
that as by Christ his cross the world was delivered from the guilt of sin,
so by the merit of this cross (of metal) they that offer it, may be freed
from all the sins they have committed: and to the cross they pray, craving
that of a dumb creature, which the Creator only can give that is God, blessed
for ever.

O Crux aue, spes vnica,
Hoc passionis tempore.
Auge pijs iustitiam,
Reisque dona veniam.
All hayle (O Cross) our only hope,
In this time of the passion.
In faithful people grace increase,
And grant of sin remission.
Lact. li. 1. ca. 19.
If Lactantius should judge of your Religion he would scarce allow you to
worship God at all, who denies that creatures may be worshipped with him:
yielding this reason, Si honos idem alijs tribuitur, ipse omnino non colitur,
cuius Reltgio est, illum esse vnum, ac solum Deam credere: If the same honor
be given to others, he is not worshipped at all; whose Religion is to believe
that he is one, and the only God. The best that probably may be made of your
worshipping is, that it is like the Religion, that the Gentiles learned, which
were brought from Assiria to inhabit the Cities of Samaria; 2. King. 17.
who worshipped the Lord and Idols together.

Likewise of your own faith and belief might be showed how vain a
presumption it is, when as you are so miserably rent in sunder into so
innumerable diversities and sects of Friars, and Munkes, putting holiness in
diverse institutions of life, some being white, some black, some wearing
linen, some woollen, some going shod, some bare-foote, with infinite
diversities more which are by learned men handled: It shall be sufficient for
me, only to remember you of the stir betwixt the Franciscans and Dominicke
Friars, about the conception of the blessed Virgin; the Franciscans or gray
Friars affirming that she was never Subject one moment in her conception to
original sin; the Dominicke or black Friars teaching that she was conceived
in sin, as are all the children of Adam, which controversy occupied all
schools and universities almost throughout the whole Christian world, which
was at the length doughtelie decided by Pope Sixtus the fourth, quite contrary
to that Word which shall judge all at the last day.

Of your one head your vaunt is the like, which being the Pope, how can you
have one head, unless you reject Christ? If you mean one visible and
ministerial head; Matthew. 28.
how can that be when as Christ has promised to be with us to the end of the
world? And in the Revelation John saw him walking in the midst of the seven
golden Candlesticks: Revel. 1.
if he be thus always present with his Church, by his spirit to guide the
whole, and every member thereof; how shall any presume to take upon him to be a
ministerial head of the Church, because Christ is not visiblie present? Again
how have you had one visible head, when there has been so many Antipopes? So
often? Such tumults and schisms about the Papacy? Which though your men would
derive upon the Emperors intermedling with the election (though very falsely)
yet (as a learned man proves) of thirty schisms in the Church of Rome, (so
many as no Church can boast of besides) the worst, and the longest has been
since that time, that the election was deuolued only to the Cardinals, even
the 29. which lasted for the space of 50: years, first with two Popes at one
time, and then with three, etc. So that to cease any further to examine your
assertions (who intend only a defense of mine own by you carped at, and
traduced) your great brag of unity in your Religion, the like whereof you
deem is not amongst us to be found, is in deed nothing but mere vanity. But
to return from whence I digressed.

Liberty to read Scriptures.
Secondly, by the establishment of true Christian Religion amongst us, this
great blessing we have obtained, that the Scripture and word of God, which is
the incorruptible seed whereby we are begotten to God, the sincere milk that
as children nourishes us with the knowledge of the Rudiments, and principles
of Religion, the food of the soul, which does farther strengthen us with
increase of deeper knowledge, is no longer (as of late times) like a sealed
book, which being delivered to one that can read, and he willed to read it,
he answers he cannot because it is sealed: but we have it in our own mother
language permitted unto us, that every one may privately exercise himself in
the reading thereof, and for the confirmation of his faith, in the points that
he is taught publicly by the mouth of the Preacher, may with the men of
Berrhea daily search the Scriptures to see whether those things be so or not;
which trial the doctrine of Rome will hardly submit it self to. And this
duty of searching the Scriptures at home privately, Chrysostom requires at
the hands of his Auditors: Hom. 3. de La^^.
Idque semper hortor, etc. and this I always exhort, and will not cease to
exhort that you be not only attentive here to those things which are taught,
but that when you are at home you daily intend the reading of the holy
Scriptures; and so I take it that Saint John sets down three steps, or
degrees, whereby we are to climb up to blessedness: first private reading;
secondly public hearing; thirdly fruitful practicing of those things which by
reading and hearing we learn. Revel. 1.
Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this prophecy,
and keeps those things that are written therein.

Thirdly, this is also a great blessing, Public prayer with understanding.
that we have our public prayers in the Church in our own tongue, that the
people may understand what the Minister prays, and keeping silence while he
is speaking, may still have their minds and understandings accompany the voice
of the Minister, and in the end may jointly answer Amen, Even as not a Clerk
alone for the people (as New Rome has taught) but the whole people for
themselves were accustomed in Saint Ieromes time, as he witnesses, Hier. in
prolo. 2. in comment. in Gal.
Tota Ecclesia instar tonitrui reboat Amen: The whole Church like a mighty
thunder does sound out Amen. This also Augustine acknowledged to be a great
blessing, Aug. in Psa. 99.
Beatus populus qui intelligit Iubilationem, etc. Blessed is the people that
understands the joyful song; let us run to this blessedness, let us
understand the song, let us not sing it without understanding: Of this the
Apostle most divinely treats in the 1. Cor. 14. which though the Rhemists do
miserably strive to shake off (as Master Whitakers learnedly shows) yet
Cardinal Caietan, overcome with the evidence of truth, plainly confesses; as
in the end of that Controversy Doctor Whitakers alleges him, Exhac Pauli
doctrina, etc. By this doctrine of the Apostle we have to understand, that it
is better for the edification of the Church that the public prayers which are
made in the hearing of the people, should be uttered in a tongue common both to
the Clerks and people, then to be uttered in Latin.

Exercise in true holiness.
Hence it follows, that we learn to exercise our selves in works of true
piety, such as by the word of God we are assured are acceptable with him, not
putting holiness in works of men's devising, as superstitious observation of
days, with like difference of meats, in gadding on pilgrimage and such like,
of which may be said, that which the Lord spoke in Esaias: Who has required
these things at your hands? Esaias. 1.
Whence it has come to pass, that many lively members of Christ Jesus, being
cold, naked, and hungry have been neglected, while it was thought an holier
work to shrine in gold and silver the bones of dead men, as Erasmus in his
Colloquie or dialogue of peregrination for Religion sake does note; Erasmus.
That the golden shrine of Thomas Becket, was beset with Diamonds, Carbuncles,
with pearls and rare precious stones, Vilissima pars erat aurum, the basest
part was gold. But we (blessed be God) have learned to make the will of God
revealed in his word, the Rule and Squire of our obedience, studying to walk
in his ways, and to keep his commandments both of the first and second
table, according to that of our Savior, Two extremities in our good works to
be avoided.
If you know these things happy are ye if you do them: wherein we are taught
to strive against two extremities. First proud presumption before God, that we
put no opinion of merit in our works, but refer 1
them partly to the glorifying of our good God, according to that, Let your
light so shine before men, etc. partly to the assuring our selves of our
election by the fruits thereof, as Peter exhorts, Make your election sure by
good works, acknowledging that of Bernard, Bona opera sunt via regni, non causa
regnandi: Good works are the way wherein we must walk to the kingdom of
Heaven, but not the cause wherefore we shall obtain the kingdom. Secondly,
before 2
men we must avoid hypocritical ostentation, that we vaunt not of our virtues
as the Pharisee: O God I thank thee I am not as other men, extortioners,
unjust, or even as this Publican, etc. Luke 18.
But according to the rule of the Apostle in meekenes of mind every man to
esteem other better then himself, Phil. 2.
we must turn our eyes inward, looking upon and censuring our own
imperfections, and indeuoring to practice that good lesson Nosceteipsum. For
very true it is, that Chrysostom has speaking of Christian humility: Esto,
multum adifices, habeas elecmosynas, preces, ieiunia, etc. Be it you build
much, you use alms, fasting, and prayer, and all other virtues: without this
foundation of humility they are all in vain; yea add continence, virginity,
contempt of riches, Omnia prophana sunt, impura, abominabilia absque
humilitate: They are all profane, impure and abominable without humility.

Freedom from persecution.
Father, the entrance of our peaceable Salome to the Crown, what Halcyon days
has it brought to the poor afflicted Church of Christ ^ The little bark of
Christ Jesus before tossed with the waves and storms of furious and bloody
persecution, has now found some repose and rest under her gracious and benign
protection: so mercifully has Christ rebuked the storms and winds, when the
ship was in danger of drowning, and there is followed a great calm. Not
only they that were openly known to abhor the Romish Idolatry, refusing to
bow the knee to their blocke-almightie (as some then called them) and to honor
a piece of a Cake as their Creator, were by heaps brought to the fire: but so
violent was the fury of that Wooluish Sinagogue, against the poor Lambs of
Christ's fold, that through inforcement and by virtue of their oath, were
compelled to accuse, (against the law of nature) the wife the husband, one
brother another, etc. as in a table of persecution under Bishop Longland of
Lincoln does appear, the bloody rage of this persecution sparing neither man,
woman, nor child, wife, nor maid, lame, blind, nor creeple. But of this what
should I say more, of which nothing can be said sufficiently? but as a paineful
compiler of the ecclesiastical History thinks, all places considered where
the Romish Phalaris has intermedled, France Flanders, Italy, Spain, and
whersoeuer the gripes of this greedy griffin (as Chaucer compares him) could
r^ach: it would be hard to say, whether the Roman heathen Emperors in the
prime-daies of the Church, or the Romish Bishops in the latter, had caused more
Christian blood to be spilt. And whereas this Encounterer wringeth out a
malediction from hence, pretending by this change of Religion, the torturing,
hanging, and racking of so many learned Priests, etc. he shall never be able to
prove (so far as ever I could learn) that any one, either Priest or Layman,
learned or unlearned, has in this land these forty years, been put to death
only for being a Recusant, and of a contrary Religion; as the liberty and
home-dwelling of so many Recufants, without dread of any such danger, may
prove sufficiently. The Wolf persecuteth the Lamb, not the Lamb the Wolf. As
for those few which have suffered in these forty years, not comparable to
the number of those which were martyred in Queen Mary's five years, I am so
far off from rejoicing at their death, that with all my heart I wish, they
had never sucked the poison of treason from your Jesuits breasts, that so
they might have prevented the due and just shedding of their own bloods.

To these may be added other corporal blessings in a short view, Deliverance
from intolerable exactions.
among which this is not the least, that the establishment of true Religion
has quite removed from our necks the yoke of popish bondage^ How miserably
this poor land was oppressed and impouerished by the Popes dispensations,
exactions, contributions, besides his continual subsidy of Peter Pence
(nothing being able to satisfy his greedy appetite, and insatiable avarice)
our stories in sundry places make lamentable mention. Now he must have the
tenth of all the moueables in England, Wales and Ireland, then four marks of
every able Church; and where one was not able to reach, there the other poor
Churches must join to make up the money: shortly by a new Mandat all beneficed
men must pay the first part of their revenues, then provision of English
benefices for boys of Rome 300. at a clappe, and what not? Poor England was
continually pilled and polled, and almost sucked dry, whereof (to use one
example for many) the Nobles jointly with the Commons, complain in the Reign
of Henry the third; in which their complaint having made mention of the
continual subsidy of Peter Pence, To Pope Innocent.4. in the Counsel at
Lions. etc. 1245.
and other contributions they add these words. And now see, we beseech you,
(which is lamentable to behold) what injuries we sustain by you and your
predecessors, who not considering those our subsidies, and contributions before
remembered, do suffer also your Italians and forrayners (which be out of
number) to be possessed of our Churches and benefices in England, etc. And
immediately, which forrayners neither defending the said religious persons,
neither having the language, whereby they might instruct the flock, take no
regard of their souls, but utterly leave them of wild beasts to be devoured:
Wherefore it may truly be said of them, that they are no good shepherds, for
that neither they do know their sheep, nor the sheep do know the voice of
their shepherds; neither do they keep any hospitality, but only take up
the rents of those benefices, carrying them out of the Realm, wherewith our
brethren, our nephews, and our kinsfolks might be sustained, who could and
would dwell upon them, and employ such exercises of mercy and hospitality as
their duty required, whereof a number for mere necessity now are laymen,
and feign to fly out of the Realm. And now to the intent more fully to
certify you of the truth, you shall understand, that the said Italians and
strangers receiving of yearly rents out of England not so little as threescore
thousand marks by year, (besides other auailes and exises deducted) do reap
in the said our kingdom of England more emoluments of mere Rents then does
the King himself, being both Tutour of the Church and Governor of the land,
etc. they further proceeded in their complaint which for breuity sake I omit.
The conclusion is, miserably was this land oppressed under the Romish Pharaoh,
not only the skin flayed from the flesh, but the flesh in a manner rent from
the bones, from which by this happy change of Religion we are delivered, the
Lords name be praised therefore.

The name of peace is sweet, Long peac^.
and the thing it self both pleasant and profitable, with which blessing the
Lord has also greatly blessed this land these forty years, that in this
respect her Majesty's reign has been as the reign of Asa, of whom it is
written, that he had no war in those days, for the Lord his God had sent him
peace round about. For, as for the late tumults and stirs of Ireland, it is
evident to whom they are to be ascribed by the sending thither of Saunders and
of Italian bands by the Pope, who is the common Trumpeter of Sedition in all
Christian Commonweals, which seek to shake off the yoke of his tyranny:
There kindled (upon the like occasion) the flame of Rebellion in the North, but
(bessed be God) it vanished quickly like a smoke, Spain likewise attempted an
invasion, but with such success, as neither has he cause to boast of his
winnings, nor we to complain of our losses; for as the stars fought in
their course for Israel against Sisera, so did the winds for England against
Spain: other wars to speak of, we have had none, but such as we have
voluntarily undertaken, for the relief and support of those that were
oppressed.

And this it self is no small blessing, that England in the reign of a Woman,
Power in foreign countries.
has been the common refuge to all Christian nations, either rent asunder
with civil wars, or oppressed with foreign forces: so that a Queen has
sit as Arbitrer of peace and war amongst Christian Kings, France is witness
hereof. What should I speak of Suethland etc.? what of Flaunders, being
received into our tuition, and society? yea the Turk himself (who happily
before the renowned reign of her Majesty, had never heard the name of this
little Island) moved with the Majesty of her name, has laid arms aside, and
through her intercession, has granted peace to the Polonians being almost
brought to extremity.

To these I might add the blessing of riches, Wealth of the land,
plenty, and abundance, such as has not lightly been known in this land
before, which God has abundantly sent unto us. Whereby we have been enabled
to minister to the necessities of so many oppressed, and to sustain such
voluntary wars, as honorable respects have moved her Majesty to undertake,
for the needful succor of others, which who so sees not is blind, and who so
acknowledges not is very ingrate.

I may also add the multitude of people increased mightily since her Majesty's
first entrance to the Crown, Multitude of subjects.
a great blessing of God powered upon this land, which, God at the least has
seuen-fold increased to the number, that at her entrance she found. And if the
Encounterer in his affected show of politic wisdom, shall scorn this
blessing, and say (as he does) that I descend to very poor ones: yet I will
rather subscribe to the wisdom of Gods spirit noting it a great blessing upon
Jerusalem, and the contrary a great curse: How does the City remain
solitary that was full of people? Lamenta. 1.
her blessing was fullness of people, her plague solitarines; as also to the
wisdom of wise Solomon who thus plainly avouches, In the multitude of people
is the honor of a King, and for the want of people comes the destruction of
a Prince. Prou. 14.
I cease (because I desire brevity) to stand upon the enumeration of any more,
only I wish we may duly esteem the Lords mercies vouchsafed to us, and bring
forth the fruits of true thankfulness as the princely Prophet teaches us. O^
that men would therefore praise the Lord for his loving kindnes^ and declare
his wonderful works amongst the children of men. Psalm. 107.
As for your building of Castles in the air, by supposall of blessings that
might probably have ensued, if Religion had not been altered, because I mean
not to take the pains to follow you in your extrauagant discourses, and
because they are indeed nothing but the imaginations of an idle brain, I leave
them to Master Moors fictio Vtopic^.

Resistance to the second Encounter, about some absurd Principles of the
Papists.
Having proposed to my self a resolute determination, not to follow this
fellow (in mine answer) in his vain of Railing against me: it shall suffice,
that such as be wise, honorable, and honest shall judge between us, whose
satisfaction I desire and doubt not of, and to such I appeal to judge of the
scantling he has taken (as he terms it) of my folly and flattery, wherein
he glories so much, and I rest assured he shall find that it falls out too
s^ant inproofe against me in their judgments, so as his railing terms of
folly and flattery must return to his own custody again. Lying falsely
imputed to me.
But now must follow a fuller view of my cogging and lying which are bitter
terms I confess, yet shall they nothing trouble me, because I know mine own
freedom, and I will take occasion hereby to endeavor to make such use thereof,
as is taught me by an ancient Father. Permittitur detracti^, us caueatur
elatio: God suffers slanders to assault us, that pride may not surprise us.
And therefore take your pleasure (Sir N.D.) follow your railing humor and
spare not, I like better to bear your hard terms, then that you should loose
your occupation. Only let me tell you, that if I were disposed to play at
Tennise with you, and band back the balls that you deliver, I could so
return this charge of lying upon your tradesmen, that all the skill you have
could not save them from a fault: Walsingham an ancient Chronicler writes of
Friars in Richard the seconds time, that they were of long time so infamous for
lying, Friars and Papists brave liers.
that it was counted a good argument holding both in matter and form, This is
a Friar, ergo a lier. And it should seem the Romanistes keep still their old
wont, by that famous lie that of late they have sent us over, not only in
print, but in picture too, namely that some for the maintenance of their
Catholic Religion, have been by us here put into Bears skins, and so bayted
to death with Mastiues. A lie printed in the english College at Rome 1584.
with Gregory's 13. privilege: so great a lie as no place was fit to utter but
only Rome; but I let them pass, and come to your charge against me.

And here first you except against my speech of the clouds, and darkness, that
ouershadowed this land in Queen Mary's time, and in former times of Popery,
cyting these my words. It is not unknown to many yet living, neither can it be
hid from the younger sort that live with them, what a dark misty cloud of
Ignorance (which brought in popish Idolatry and all manner of superstition) did
ouershadow the whole land, etc. And again after, In these dark and cloudy
days least the sunshine of knowledge should disperse the mists of ignorance,
and give light to the dim of sight, etc. Popery justly charged with darkness.
The which I then truly affirmed, and do again auerre it; neither fee I any
cause for ought that you allege to retract it, since it is evident that the
people, neither having liberty to read the Scripture (which is as a light
shining in a dark place) privately at home, neither in Churches read in a
tongue that they understood: must needs be destitute of the light of Christian
knowledge. For if Babell could not be built, Scripture neither at home nor at
Church permitted to the people in a known tongue.
because each one understood not another tongue: how can it be deemed, that
the Church of Christ can be built up in spiritual knowledge, by an outlandish
tongue, which was no better understood of the people, then if they heard a tale
in Irish or Spanish told them? As for preaching, (a great means in deed to
breed knowledge, though not the only means) I will omit the matter of Sermons
in those days, Preaching, what it was in Popery.
which was (for the most part not Gods word, but men's traditions,) the
necessity of auricular confession, the benefit of pardons, and indulgences, of
pilgrimages, of applications, of masses, of giving to religious houses, of
dirges, trentals, etc. 2. King 6.
so that as Elisha led the Syrians stricken with blindness into Samaria amiddest
their enemies; so the people being debarred the light which makes all things
manifest, (I mean the reading of the Scriptures, in which they might see,
whether those things taught them were so, or not) were carried by their
teachers even to the enemies of their salvation, to trust in buying of pardons,
gadding on pilgrimage, hiring masses to be said for them after their death,
falling down and praying to dumb Idols, to forged relickes, with a number of
lying miracles, believed through them; in steed of Christ Immortal,
worshipping a piece of bread, yea in steed of Christ's blood, worshipping the
blood of a Ducke, for so the blood of Hales was plainly proved to be, and
openly showed at Paul's Cross. So that no man need doubt of the truth of the
Proverb that then was used in those times: Preaching how rare.
Once Christian men had blind Churches, and light hearts; and now they have
blind hearts, and light Churches. But this omitted, the very exercise of
preaching, (such as it was) alas how sildome was it? now and then a Friar
trotting sometimes to one Church, sometimes to another, and scattering here and
there a strawberrie Sermon. It was no common thing for Bishops, in times of
Popery, to be Preachers, though they took upon them to be Pastores Pastorum.
Boner Bishop of London, Boner.
who burned so many of Gods Saints, blessed Martyrs, faithful, and painful
Preachers (so long as they might) when the valiant Soldier of Jesus Christ,
Thomas Hawks was before him, and alleging against the Popish manner of
baptising, both the addition of many ceremonies devised by man, as their oil,
cream, salt, spittle, candle, coniuring of water, etc. as also that they
wanted the chief thing, meaning preaching, alleging the text: Go teach all
Nations baptising them, etc. by and by replieth upon Master Hawks, Matthew. ^^.
and takes this exception against that allegation. Thou speak that because
I am no Preacher. And as if to tax a Bishop for being no Preacher had been so
heinous a matter, (though the man of God answered, that he spoke the text, and
meant not of him) yet all his Doctors and servants present spoke with a loud
voice, making a great noise, he speaks it of you my Lord. And yet the latter
part of King Henry's reign, and the short, but happy reign of King Edward,
helped you to far more Preachers by their faint yielding; then in former times
of Popery have been accustomed to be, as is not only apparent in this
kingdom, but in others, if I had leisure to enlarge.

The only example of Doctor Bassinet, a man of great learning and authority
in France, shall suffice me at this time, who in his first answer to the
oration of the Bishop of Aix; (persuading to set upon the Merindo^ians, Act.
and Monuments vol. 2 page 862.
and as heretics to destroy them) confesses his own ignorance of true
Religion, till of late he fell to read the Scriptures (and yet he was a Judge
of heresy) and with all his rash condemning of those whom they call Lutherans
to death, D. Bassinets Oration.
although he was content so far to yield to punish them with fines, and
banishment, which should speak too intemperately against the constitutions of
the Church, and of the Pope: his words are thus Englished. The cause why in
conscience I am thus disquieted is this, that now of late, since I have given
my self more diligently to the reading and contemplation of the holy
Scriptures, I perceive that the most part of those Articles which they that are
called Lutherans do maintain, are so conformable and agreeing to the
Scriptures, that for my part, I can no longer gainsay them, except I should
even wilfully and maliciously resist and strive against the holy ordinances of
God: albeit hitherto, to maintain the honor of our holy Mother the Church,
and of our holy Father the Pope, and of our Order, I have consented to the
opinions and doings of the other Doctors, as well through ignorance, as also
because I would not seem to attempt any thing against the will and pleasur^ of
the Prelates, and Vicars general. Against which his confession; when the
Bishop of Aix replied thus, Is there any difference think thou, betwixt
heresies and blasphemies spoken and maintained against the holy Scriptures, and
opinions holden against our holy Mother the Church, and contrary to our holy
Father the Pope, a most undoubted and true God in earth? Art thou a Master in
Israel and know not these things? O blindness. O blasphemy.
Doctor Bassinet more fully lays open the general and common blindness and
darkness of those times in these words. Are not they those which have forsaken
Jesus Christ the fountain of living water, and have dug unto themselves
pits, or Cesterns which will hold no water? Truly even those they are, which
vaunt themselves to be the salt of the earth, and yet have no savor at all,
which call themselves Pastors, and yet are nothing less then true Pastors: for
they minister not unto the sheep the true pasture and feeding, neither divide
and distribute the true bread of the word of life, and (if I may be bold to
speak it) would it not be at this present as great a wonder to hear a Bishop
preach, as to see an Ass fly? Are not they cursed of God, which glory and
vaunt themselves to have the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and neither enter
in themselves, nor suffer them that would enter to come in, etc. By which and
infinite other evidences may appear, that there is in a manner as great
difference betwixt kingdoms professing the Gospel of Christ (as this land now
does through Gods blessing) and those that are subject to Popery, as was
sometimes between Egypt and Goshen.

This Land lived not in former times in such darkness, as lately under Popery.
As for your allegation against those my speeches, to pass by your bold
assertion, that England had continued above a thousand years under that
darkness of Popery, (the vanity whereof is by sundry learned men discovered)
it is evident by Beda his plain testimony in these words, Haec in praesenti
iuxta numerum librorum quibus lex diuina scripta est, etc. This I, land at this
present, according to the number of the books in which the law of God is
written, does search out and confess one and the self same knowledge of the
highest truth, and of the true height in live tongues, namely of the Angels, of
the Britains, of the Scots, of the Picts, and of the Latins, which in
meditation of the Scripture is made common to all the rest. Wherein he means
that the Latin tongue was common to all the learned of those four peoples, as
the vulgars were to the unlearned. So that in former times this Island had the
Scriptures in their own tongue, to be a lantern to their feet, and a light
to their steps, and delighted not in ignorance of the Scriptures, and in
darkness (as of late) as also the most and chiefest points of your blind
errors have been hatched long since the time you prescribe, as in the
particulars of the patching together of the Mass by degrees, and successively,
of the absurd doctrine of Transubstantiation, with other like, is by men of
great learning and judgment manifestly proved. Yet by the way this I note, that
by your secret confession you yield almost 600. years to the truth we
profess, before your Religion was hatched, seeing both your self and others
commonly make claim for a 1000. years.

But to pass by this, A fond Argument.
does not this Encounterer strongly (think you) refute mine assertion of the
darkness in times of Popery? when he says (speaking of the state of this
kingdom in those times,) And it was accounted then as wise, learned, valiant,
noble, and flourishing a kingdom, as France, Italy Spain, etc. An argument by
which the Religion of the heathens may as well be freed from darkness and
ignorance. For was not Rome when it had those lights of learning and
eloquence, Cicero, Crassus, Hortensius, and others; as also those famous and
wise both Counselors, and Captains Marius, Scilla, Pompey, Caesar, Cato,
Scipio, and such like, was not (I say) Rome then accounted as wise, learned,
valiant, noble, and flourishing a kingdom, as France, Italy, Spain, or any
other Christian kingdoms be at this day? and yet it is true, that their
knowledge was ignorance, and their light darkness, unless the Apostle be
deceived, who says of them all generally, Romans 1.
Their foolish heart was full of darkness, and when they professed themselves
to be wise, they became fools.

Arnobius sometimes an heathen, Arnobius.
afterward a Christian says of his former state. Venerabar (O caecitas) nuper
simulachra modo ex fornacibus prompta, in incudibus Deos, and malleis
fabricatos, etc. I worshipped of late (O blindness) Images newly taken out of
the furnace, Gods forged on the Anuiles, and framed with hammers: so truly may
it be said of the Papists, they worship (O blindness) Images newly taken out
of the furnace, crucifixes forged on the Anuiles, and framed with hammers, and
to blocks, and stocks without sense, (as if there were some power present in
them) they kneel, they pray, they crave grace of them.

Another Argument of the Papists peerless learning examined.
Your vaunt of the peerles, and unmatchable learning on your side, does neither
overthrow mine assertion, (if it were true) and yet all men know it to be vain
and childish boasting. Our ministers (as you say) dare not open their mouths,
(if they should appear with you) in schools, or matters of learning, yea they
scarce understand the very ordinary terms of the learned sciences which you
profess: not only our students, and young men, but our Doctors of Divinity,
yea our public readers (as some of you boast and crake) (as you can stoutly do
no men better) do scarce understand your course of Divinity what it means.
Is it not think you a clowdie, and Owle-like Divinity, that is covered with
such mistes of subtilties, and sophistications, as that professed deuines, men
richly furnished with deep knowledge of tongues, and arts, are scarce able to
understand the ordinary terms. I will say more for you (which in my
conscience I am persuaded is true) that if Peter and Paul those blessed
Apostles were now alive, and should come into your schools, to hear your
Lectures of scholasticall Divinity, and the rest, together with your other
exercises, and disputations: they would marvel and be astonished at your
strange Divinity which they understand not, and say (as the Apostle speaks of
those which hear prayers, 1. Cor. 14.
and preaching in an unknown tongue) yt you are out of your wits: surely they
would never acknowledge it to be consonant to that divinity, which they in
their divine Epistles commend to the Church of Christ. For it is true, that a
learned man has written, that of two distinct good things, Divinity and
Philosophy, your schoolmen have made a third bad compound, being neither
sound Divinity, nor pure Philosophy.

But (Sir) I have granted only by way of supposition (that which in truth is
not to be granted) that your men are so superior to ours in learning, Papists
learning is not very great, or their cause is bad.
that a few of yours are able to hold at school all our sunshine Clergy at
this day (as you please to term them) for term of life, and after. A proud
assertion without any shadow of proof at all, for reproof whereof I will take
a short view either of the depth of your learning, or goodness of your cause.

John Hus comes voluntarily to the Council of Constance, John Hus.
there to tender a reason of his Doctrine, and to defend publicly his
assertions: How learnedly do these grave Fathers refute him? they clap him
fast in prison, load him with chains, and fetters, not only not being
convicted, but not so much as heard, yea though he came under the Emperors
protection, and had his safe conduct, the Pope himself having likewise
consented unto it.

Martin Luther goes to Worms by disputation to defend his Doctrine, Martin
Luthers offer to dispute at Worms.
and though his friends persuaded that he should not expose himself to so
manifest peril, because the Papists had oftentimes broken their promise; yet
so assured he was of the goodness of his cause, that he neither feared the
learning, nor might of his adversaries, though never so many, but he answered
his friends, that he would enter that City in the name of the Lord Jesus,
though he knew there were as many devils set against him, as there were tiles
upon all the houses of the City: Afterward before the Emperor himself, and
the whole states of the Empire, he maintains his doctrine, answers the
adversaries, and with the Emperors favor departs in safety, though full
sore against the minds and wills of sundry Papists.

Again under safe conduct he goes to Augusta, He goes to the same end to
Augusta.
there to render a reason of his assertions to Cardinal Caietan, who on the
Popes behalf, and at his commandment proposes three things to Luther. First
that he should be better advised, and revoke his errors; secondly, he should
promise hereafter not to publish, or repeat them; thirdly, he should abstain
from all things which might trouble the Church: Luther stands to justify his
assertions, and offers there, and else where to defend them, sends in
writing a defense to the Cardinal, justifying his opinions by the Scriptures.
In a word, the Cardinal would not hear Scripture; but wills him to come no
more in his presence, unless he would recant; yet stayed he there five days
after, expecting whether the Cardinal would call him to any further
disputation, whereof when he heard nothing in all that space, he departed.

Simon Grinaeus at Spire.
At the assembly at Spire, when Simon Grinaeus heard Faber Bishop of Vienna
utter sundry absurd errors in his Sermon: he goes friendly to him, and
tells him he was sorry, that a man of such learning and authority, should
openly maintain such errors, as were both contumelious against God, and might
be refuted by the manifest testimonies of the Scriptures: and as he would
further have proceeded to the refuting of his errors, Faber breaks off his
talk, faineth as though he had been sent for by the King, and had now no
leisure to reason with him in the matter, but makes show that he was desirous
of acquaintance and longer talk with Grinaeus, and to that end prays him the
next morning to come to his Chamber. Now what was the sequel of the
disputation, or conference appointed by this learned Bishop? The Bishop
complains to the King, the Serieants were sent to apprehend Grinaeus and
carry him to prison, whereof he being warned a little before, by a reverent
aged man, was by his friends immediately conveyed over the Rhene, and so
escaped; who if he had been taken (as the Serieants were to search the house
for him almost as soon as he was out of doors) what would further have ensued
of this pretended conference is not hard to guess.

To be short, you may not forget in what a pitiful taking your Cardinal of
Lorrayne was in the Colloquie of Poissy, Colloquie of Poissy.
when he wished that either our side had been dumb that day, or all they
deaf: and these few examples, either prove your vaunt of your learning to be
so far greater then our side, to be but frivolous and vain (which you can
hardly yield unto) or at the least our cause to be better then yours, which we
rather challenge. The truth of the general proposition concerning the darkness
of those times being thus opened: I shall the less need to insist upon the
particular absurdities, wherewith this fellow faith they are unjustly charged.

Particular absurdities of Popery.
For his preface, he pleases to see and examine how I go forward in my tale
(as he terms it) which I hope to the equal reader shall appear no fable
(...) a just charge: my words which he sets down^ a^^ the^e, Unto which
clouds, mists, and darkness, was added, and wherewith was mixed, all bloody and
savage cruelty against those that desired knowledge, and were any may (...) by
Gods grace with a glimmering at small insight into true Religion: for though it
were but only a desires read upon the book of God, either old or new
Testament, then Heretic was his title, heresy was his ^ault, and for this
was he called before the Romish Clergy to receive their censure, and such
never departed from their clothes till they had branded them to the slaughter.
To which after many scoffs he says, That he is sorry the writer of that
book calls himself Knight, to whom in law of Chivalry a man should not
give the lie, but with obligation to defend it in the field. Whereunto I
briefly reply for this time, that if this masked companion will put off his
vizzard and show his face, that I may know who speaks to me, I will (through
the assistance of my God) not only lay before him his shameless reproachful
slanders, against my Sovereign and her government, and words of disgrace to
my self, but also make him such further answer, as fitteth his demerits and
my place: in the mean time I list not to fight with a shadow, nor to howte at
the Owl that flies by night.

To come to the matter, out of this one period this artificial Vulcan forgeth
two untruths properly called lies (as he says) which he imputes to me: the
first, that I say To read on the book of God, was held to be part of an
heretic: The second, That for this cause (only) men were called before the
Romish Clergy in England and branded to the slaughter. But soft Sir, you
shall find it harder to convince me of one lie, then to charge me with many,
for both in making and giving lies, you have a singular gift, and rare
dexterity. For concerning the first, Heresy with the Papists to read the
Scriptures in vulgar tongue^
the people were not only forbid to read, or hear read the Scriptures
translated by such as the Romanists call Heretics; but the Papists are
witnesses against themselves, that they forbid the reading of the Scriptures,
translated by their own Catholics, unless the Bishop or Inquisitour with
advise of their parish Priest, or confessor, give them special license
thereunto in writing: and was it not objected to John Lambert as an heretical
opinion, that heads and rulers are bound by necessity of salvation, to give
the holy Scriptures to the people in the mother language? Do not your Rhemists
in the preface of their translation of the new Testament say, they do not
publish it upon erroneous opinion, of necessity, that the Scriptures should
be always in our mother tongue, or that they ought or were ordained by God to
be read indifferently of all? Now if to think the Scriptures may be read
indifferently of all, be in your judgment an heretical opinion; then for men
so to read them is in your judgment an heretical action, whereof I would we
had not so many proofs.

But in any of the three learned tongues, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin (says the
Encounterer) none was ever deba^red to read them: this Sir is but a flourish
to face out the matter, and a coppie of your countenance to make as though you
were willing Scripture should be read of all; An objection answered.
only that you feared heretical translations: Where as first of laymen and
women, not one of a thousand understand either of those three tongues;
secondly, yourselues in those times sent not abroad any vulgar translations of
your own refining, which the people, without danger of heretical corruption,
might read; and thirdly, what your judgment is concerning the using of such
as you do send forth, is partly showed already: you should deal plainly and
confess, that (whatsoever you say for a gloss) your opinion is, that not
only those few lay men which understand any of those three learned tongues
should forbear reading the Scriptures; but even many men of your Clergy
profession.

D. Rayn de Idol. eccl. To. lib. 1. cap. 1.
An Italian Bishop told Espencaeus a great Divine of Paris, that his Countrymen
were terrified from reading the Scriptures least so they should become
heretics: Espencaeus then demanded, What study then do your Countrymen
profess? The Bishop answered, The study of both the laws Civil and Canon,
but principally of the Canon law. Do some Bishops amongst you judge the
reading of the Scriptures so dangerous, that they abstain from it for fear to
be made heretics, and yet will you face us out with permitting lay men to
read them in Hebrew, Greek, or Latin? Let Sorbon it self be witness, how
your Clergy men were wont to be exercised in the reading of the Scriptures.
For amongst the many conflicts which Robertus Stephanus had with diverse of
these learned Sorbonists about the new Testament printed by Collinaeus, when
he asked some of them in what place of the new Testament it was written, they
would answer they had read in Jerome, or in the decrees, but what the new
Testament was they could not tell: and again another great Clerk of that
College was wont about that time very often to say. I wonder that these young
men allege to us the new Testament, by this day, I had spent more then fifty
years, The Sorbonists oath.
ere I could tell what the new Testament was. What should I stand further
either to prove that ye account it heresy for lay men indifferently to read
the Scriptures (which all men know ye do) or to disprove the grossenes of your
opinion in so forbidding the reading of the Scriptures, which out of the
Scriptures themselves, and sundry testimonies of godly Fathers, as also
examples of ancient times translating the Scriptures into vulgar tongues, is by
sundry evidently proved, ye ought not to do.

To pass therefore to the second supposed untruth which you set down to be
this, For reading of the Scriptures in vulgar tongues, men were called before
the Bi^shops.
that for this cause (only) men were called before the Romish Clergy in
England, and branded to the slaughter. To justifying whereof before I proceed,
give me leave to tell you, that this word ( only) by you thrust into my words,
is one lie of your coining, though not the only one lie: for what though to
some of their charges were laid other like articles? Does that make that this
was not accounted a point of an heretic to read the scriptures in English? and
that for this men were called before your Clergy? As for example, Thomas Moore
a poor and simple man of the age of 24. years, was at Leicester in the year
1566. accnsed, coudemned, and burned, only because he said his maker was in
Heaven, and not in the Pix, no other thing being laid to his charge: If at his
judgment some other articles had been objected to him, would it not have been
true for all that, that to say his maker was in Heaven, and not in the Pix, was
counted heresy and for that cause men were called before your Clergy, and
branded to the slaughter? Our stories are full of examples out of your own
Registers, that reading of Scriptures, was accounted heresy, not to stand upon
many, under Longland Bishop of Lincoln, Agnes Wells was conuented, and
amongst other things examined whether Thurstan did ever teach her the Epistle
of S. James; Act. and Mon. ex Regist. Lin.
or the Epistles of S. Peter, and S. Paul, in English: Thomas Earl was
likewise chaeged for hearing the Epistle of S. Sames read in English: Agnes
Ashford of Chesham for teaching James Norden certain sentences of Scripture,
as Teend ye not a candle, and put it under a bushel, but set it on a
candlestick, that it may give light to all in the house, and such like. To
Robert Pope, John Morden and his wife was objected, that they recited the ten
commandments in English. To John Phips was objected that he was very ripe in
the Scriptures. Ienkin Butler appeached John Butler his own brother for
reading to him in a certain book of the Scripture, and persuading him to
hearken to the same: what should I stand to number up any more, which under
this one Bishop^ for reading them selves, or hearing read some part of the
Gospels, Acts or any the Epistles, or Revelation were called into question of
life?

The like proceeding was used by other Bishops, and namely by Tunstall then
Bishop of London, Act. and mon. ae^ testim. D. Outredi.
before whom many were conuented for that holy heresy of reading the
Scriptures: In number of whom, one going to be burned for an heretic, and
seeing the book of the Revelation bound to the stake, to be burnt with him
(which happily he had diligently read, being thereto moved with that sentence:
Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this prophecy)
spoke with a loud voice these words, O blessed Revelation, how well is it with
me, that I shall be burnt with thee! Infinite such examples might be showed
not only in our own country, but in foreign kingdoms.

I will allege only one example of a godly Bookeseller of Auignion in
France. Ibidem pa. 863.
The Bishop of Aix with other Prelates passing through the streets, every one
leading his Minion upon his arm, and buying up such filthy pictures and rimes
as were then to be sold, A godly Book seller in France
they came where there was a Bookeseller setting out French and Latin Bibles
to sail: at which sight they being much moved, said to the Booke-seller,
dare thou be so hardy to set out such merchandise to sell here in this
Town? Do thou not know that such books are forbidden? To whom the
Booke-seller answered, is not the holy Bible as good as these goodly pictures
that ye have bought for these Gentlewomen? Which speech so offended the Bishop
of Aix, that he brast forth into these words: I renounce my part of Paradise if
this be not a Lutheran. So commanding him to be apprehended, he was by the
Prelates attendants most despitefully handled, some crying out, a Lutheran, a
Lutheran, to the fire with him, to the fire with him: some beating him with
their fistes, some pulling him by the beard, others by the hair, that the
poor man was all embrued in blood before he came to the prison. The next
morning being brought before the Judges in the presence of the Prelates, the
selling of bibles in French was laid to his charge, and he was asked, whether
he knew not the Bible to be forbidden in all christendom, save only in
Latin. To which he answered, that he knew the contrary, and that he had sold
many Bibles in the French tongue with the Emperors Privilege, with other words
reproving their forbidding of Gods most holy books, which he ordained for the
instructing of the ignorant, and for the reducing again into the way such as
have gone astray: the charitable Prelates cried out, have him to the fire
without any more words; the Judge yet paused, willing him to acknowledge those
Prelates to be true Pastors of the Church, which he denying that he could do
with a good conscience, since they rejected the holy books of God, he was
immediately condemned to be burned, and the self same day executed, and for a
sign and token of the cause of his condemnation, he carried to the place of
his execution two Bibles hanged about his neck: and so exhorting the people to
read the Scriptures, he was for this cause only cruelly put to death.

Who then can doubt, but that the Romish Clergy are the true heirs and
successors of those cruel Tyrants, Antiochus, Dioclesian, Maximinus, etc. Who
like them have burned in the fire not only the Scriptures of God, but also the
bodies of them that read therein, and that to them it may be applied, that
which is written in the Machabees. 1. Match. 1.
The books of the law which they found, they burnt in the fire and cut in
pieces. Whosoever had a book of the Testament found by him, or who soever
consented unto the law, the kings commandment (the Bishops may we say) was,
they should put him to death by their authority.

I had thought this gentleman had run himself out of breath in charging me
with lies and fictions: but now follow four more (says he) but (I say) his
loud quadruple lie shall clear and discharge me of all. The first is that I
say Ignorance was held by them to be the Mother of Devotion: Ignorance with
Papists the mother of Devotion.
a strange accusation, and grievous slander (no doubt) to charge those men
with nourishing the people in ignorance, whom all the world knows to have
used strange means to bring them to knowledge. For what meant they by the
costly setting up of many fair and well gilded Images in Churches? Was it not
that they might be lay men's books, and by reading on them they might attain
knowledge? What? Pius the fifth (goodman) was he not most careful the people
might be edified, when (as it is written in his high commendation) in a
procession he was not carried on men's shoulders, as Popes used to be, but he
went on foot to the great edifying of the people? Now if the Pope will
vouchsafe to go on foot, to the end to edify the people thereby, how can it
be thought he would have them bread in ignorance? But (Sir) if you will not
forcibly writhe and wrest my proposition, to extend it to ignorance
absolutely, but understand it (as it is evident to be meant) of the ignorance
of the Scriptures, yourselfe (I hope) will free me from any fiction herein, and
will acknowledge that Doctor Fulke does justly charge your Rhemists, Doctor
Fulke.
who setting forth the new Testament in English (if that which is pestered with
so many obscure words, may be called an English translation) and yet excusing
themselves, for being of that erroneous opinion that the Scriptures should be
always in our mother tongue, or that they ought or were ordained by God to be
read indifferently of all: That Doctor Fulke (I say) does justly charge them,
that they are afraid to give over their old impudent proposition, That
ignorance of the Scriptures is the mother of Popish devotion. For what meant
the so strict forbidding to lay men the reading of the Scriptures in the
vulgar tongue? Scripture forbidden to be read.
but that their devotion should not grow of the knowledge, but of the
ignorance of the Scriptures; flat contrary to our Saviors commandment given
to the unlearned multitude of the Jews, John 5.
Search the Scriptures, for in them you think to have eternal life, and they
are they that testify of me; where the reason annexed to the Commandment,
shows to whom the Commandment appertains, even to as many as it
concerns to seek after eternal life, and to know Jesus Christ and him
crucified, which is the laytie no less then the Clergy; contrary also to
the Apostles exhortation to the Colossians being lay men, Let the word of
Christ dwell plenteously in you. Whereupon Chrysostom notes, Coloss. 3.
Chrisost. in epist. ad Coloss. ^om. 9.
Audite seculares, omnes comparate vobis biblia, animae Pharmaca, etc. Hear
you secular or lay men, every one get unto you Bibles, the Physic of your
Soul; if you will nothing else, at the least get you Testaments, the epistles
of Paul, the Gospels, the Acts, to be daily and diligent instructors to you.
In a word, contrary to the spirit of the same Apostle in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, who reproves them that they were like unto Children, and inexpert in
the word of righteousness, whereas they ought to have their wits exercised
therein, But ignorance of the Scriptures better pleases you in the people, and
shall lead them to such devotion as makes more for your advantage.

Hence has grown your device of fides Implicita, Fides implicita.
a faith wrapped and folded under the obedience of the Church, namely that it
is sufficient though they know not distinctly what they ought to believe, but
obediently submit their understanding to the Church, believing as the Church
believes, though what the Church believes they know not. This Carbonaria
fides is highly commended by Cardinal Hossius, who farther teaches the simple
lay man, that he should think it went very well with him, if he could say by
heart, the Lords prayer, the Articles of belief, and the ten Commandments,
though he knew not the meaning of the words. As for other knowledge, if any
asked him a question he should answer, that he did believe the Catholic
Church.

And this ignorance of the Scriptures, Ignorance a fruitful Mother for the
Papists.
as a fruitful mother, has brought forth many a blind daughter of gainful
devotion to your kitchen: what greater devotion was either then esteemed to be?
or indeed what act more for your advantage, then the building of Monasteries
and Nunneries, and the endowing them with great lands and revenues? And this
devout daughter, mother Ignorance of the Scriptures brought forth, which as
for the most part they were builded by Kings and great States upon some great
murder, either by wane in the field, or privately committed at home: so the
cause was as in stories may be seen,) Act. and Monu. page 139.
Pro remedio animae meae, pro remissione, and redemptione peccatorum meorum,
etc. For the relief of my soul, for the redemption and forgiveness of my
sins, etc. Which blasphemous derogation to the death and passion of Christ
Jesus, the knowledge of the Scriptures would have quickly discovered.

Devotion separated from knowledge in many of the Popish Clergy.
Yea how Devotion has been separated from knowledge, not in your lay people
alone, but in your Priests too; whilst devotion has been so tied to their
daily saying of their Ma^tins and euensong, which without deadly sin they may
not leave vnsayd, whiles in the mean time they utterly cast aside the Apostles
commandment, 1. Tim. 4.
Give attendance to reading, exhortation, and doctrine, in the answer of John
Lambert to the 25. Article to him objected may partly appear. I will only
add this one testimony, that by the confession of some of your own coat,
which have made any conscience of their carriage^ may appear, how carefully
your deuoutest Friars have been to couple knowledge with their imagined
devotion. D. Rayn. de Eccl. Romans lib. 2. cap. 5.
Franciscus Sampson general of the order of the Friars Franciscans, reproving
both their ignorance and carelesnes has these words. Pratres mei dilectissimi,
a primordio nostrae Religionis floruit conscientia, etc. My beloved brethren in
the beginning of our Religion there flourished conscience, Conscientia.
but our beauty by little and little sliding away, the first syllable was taken
away, and there remained Scientia, Scientia.
science or knowledge; but now our sins so deserving, the first syllable is
again taken away, and we remain Pura entia, and stipites and statuae, Entia.
mere things which have a being, even very stocks, and blocks. To add
further proof in a case so manifest, were to light a candle at noone day; yet
this I will add ex abundanti, Public prayer or devotion in an unknown tongue.
If public prayer in the Church and congregation of the faithful be a chief
and principal part of Devotion, made you not Ignorance the mother of their
Devotion, when as ye would not allow their public prayers in a tongue that the
people understood? Yea your Cardinal Hossius uses this reason, Hossius de
sacro vernacule legendo.
to prove that the Church service should be in the Latin tongue rather then
the vulgar, because (says he) since some used the vulgar and known tongue in
Church service, Devotion has not only not been increased, but diminished: And
our Country man, but the Popes Champion, Art. 3. pa. 75.
D. Stapleton in an English book that he writes against Bishop Iuel,
confidently affirms, that Devotion is not furthered, but hindered by a tongue
that is understood. In a word, D. Cole Deane of Paul's, and one chosen not
only to maintain the Papists assertions against the Protestants, in the
disputation at Westminster, but appointed by the Bishops and other his
Colleagues to be the mouth for them all, whose speech in the end (they all
being asked) did auow to be the mind, and saying of them all: even he in that
honorable assembly of the Council, and Nobles, and frequent concourse of the
Commons, did with great vehemency maintain this proposition in these words, I
say Ignorance is the mother of Devotion. See the 27. article betwixt B. Jewel
and Harding.
And so (Sir Encounterer) you must be forced to take it both for a maxim, and
minime, though minime tibi placet to confess a truth.

The second feigned position, wherewith it pleases this deep Clerk to charge
me, is because I say your Side holds, that it is not for lay men to meddle in
matters of Religion, etc. How the Papists allow lay men to meddle with matters
of Religion.
And for this (after your old railing fashion) you charge me with subtlety,
and impudency, my subtlety you say I show in this word ( meddle) which may
either signify, that lay men must not determine, or define of matters of
Religion; or else not to meddle or care for Religion at all. And surely (Sir)
though I may give you good leave to take it in which fence you will, for in the
former sense you will not deny, but that even Princes are restrained to do any
thing in causes of Religion, within their own dominions without your general
Viccars warrant, which Romish conceit you shall find learnedlie confuted by
Doctor Bilson, who is now Bishop of Winchester: in the latter sense, I need not
to labor any more proof, then that before is set down, touching your
breeding of Gods children in blindness and ignorance, and withholding the keye
of knowledge from them, and how will you have them meddle with, or care for
that which they know not? Though I say I may well justify both, yet let me
tell you, that you do not well distinguish the word ( meddle) for as to meddle
may signify to be present in Councels, etc. (in which sense you seclude the
Laytie from meddling with Religion) so likewise it may signify to try, and
examine by the touchstone of Gods word the doctrine there taught, To meddle
with Scriptures, is to examine by Scriptures the doctrine taught. Act. 17.
and not to believe without farther discussing whatsoever their superiors
teach them: And in this sense likewise you will not have them meddle, yet the
men of Berrhea are much commended for meddling thus in Religion, in that having
heard the Apostle they searched the Scriptures daily, to see whether those
things were so as he delivered; and to this meddling does the Apostle exhort
all. 1. John 4.
Dearly beloved believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be
of God or not. And Chrysostom thinks it an absurd thing, that all men should
not thus meddle with Religion, Quomodo absurdum non est, etc. Chrysostom. in 2.
Cor. hom. 13.
What an absurdity is that, for money we trust not other men, but count it and
tell it after them; but for more excellent things simply to follow other men's
sayings, especially since we have the exactest rule and balance of all, the
testimony of the law of God, therefore I pray and beseech you, that you will
leave what this and that man thinks, and enquire all these things of the
Scriptures.

Now how do you permit lay men thus to meddle with matters of Religion,
Papists forbid Lay men thus to meddle with Scriptures, and why.
when as ye take from them the use of the Scriptures; which (as the rule or
level serves the Architect to direct his building by, and the balance tries
the true weight of every thing) plainly shows what doctrine is true, and to
be embraced, what false and to be rejected. But no marvel that you have
forbidden them thus to meddle with matters of Religion, when you have broached
such doctrines, and maintained such opinions, as some of your selves confess
cannot be justified by the Scriptures. It is recorded that some of the
learneder sort of your Clergy, have used to say amongst their friends:
Paraleip. Abb. vrsperg pa. 448
Sic diecrem in Scholis; sed tamen, (maneat inter nos, etc.) I would say so in
the schools, but yet (let it be kept secret amongst our selves.) I think the
contrary; we say so in the schools, but yet it cannot be proved out of the
Scriptures, etc. Howsoever it may be, you will generally be loath to confess
thus much of the Scriptures, yet the Fathers you have not only mangled, and
depraved, where their testimonies were pregnant against your errors (as for
example that plain place of Gregory Nissen, Eam solummodo naturam quae
increata est, colere and venerari didicimus we have learned to adore and
worship, only that nature which is uncreated, where your Spanish Divines in
their Index expurgatorius set down this direction, Deleatur dictio, solummodo,
put out the word ( only) and sundry such places as both our learned men have
discovered, and in your Indices are to be found out. But you plainly profess,
In lex Expurg. cu^ vt si Ber. etc
(thinking it should have remained secret among your selves, and never to have
come to our knowledge,) that in the ancient Fathers you do very often deny
very many errors (meaning such sentences as make for us against you,) by
inuenting some comment or exposition, and that you do feign and devise some
convenient sense, when they are by the adversaries in disputations and
conferences objected against you: which things considered, should stir up the
spirits of all men thus to meddle with matters of Religion, and not by and by
to believe and receive every doctrine, because your Church teaches it.

And now are we come to that high and capital slander against the holy
Pope-made Saint Thomas Becket, About Thomas Becket.
whom I call a traitor, at which, the gall of this Popish Saint-seruer is so
moved, that he takes on, fretteth, and chafeth and (as another mad Ajax
Flagellifer) threatens that I shall rest with a broken head, as in another
place he speaks of cudgelling with blows, and bastinadoes wherewith he
supposes to have wrought a manly piece of work. But (Sir) pause a while, the
more rage, the less reason; and the the greater haste, commonly the worse
speed. It were good advise for you that threaten the breaking of other men's
heads, to look warily to your own, for the old verse may happily be verified
in you.

Saepe sagittantem didicit referire sagitta,
Inque virum plagae, conuersarecurre re plaga.
The arrow often upon the shooter does rebound,
And he receives ye blow yt others thought to wound,
To examine a little the state of this Becket, who was a traitor (as I affirm,
and not I only but many before me) against Henry the second, but (to use the
words of mine Author) taken up and shrined for a new Saint made of an old
Rebel, fifty years after his death, which was in the fourth year of Henry
the third. I do openly profess (to avoid all such carpers and
quarrell-pickers as this fellow is) to separate between his punishment and
death, and betwixt his cause and carriage against his Prince. The first being
outrageous against all law and order, by private persons, not publicly
authorized thereto: the second traitorous and meritorious of death, the king
having to that end just matter enough, if he had pleased by law to prosecute
the cause against him, which by sundry evidences may be showed, but some few
shall serve.

The ground of Beckets quarrels with his King.
And first if Ciprians rule be true, Non poena, sed causa facit Martyrem. It is
not the punishment, but the cause that makes the Martyr, what was the maine
ground of the controversy betwixt the King and him? was it not (as they term
them) the liberties of the Church, as this Encounterer grants? liberties not
spiritual, but carnal, not of Christ's giving, but of Antichrists devising.
There were as Authors affirm in that time of Henry the second, more then a
hundred murders, besides other felonies proved upon the Clergy, which when
the King would have punished according to the laws of the land, Becket
opposes himself, and beardeth the King in this so just an action, under title
of standing for the liberties of the Church: a holy quarrel no doubt, but such
a Martyr, such a cause.

Becket goes inta France against the kings will.
From this strange ground these proceedings ensued, there was a law and
constitution, that neither Bishop nor Clerk should go out of the land,
without the kings license, and then he should take an oath, not to procure any
hurt against the king, or any of his: notwithstanding this proud Prelate, who
durst protect felons and murderers against the King and Justice of the land,
neither reuerencing King, nor obeying his laws, passed over without license to
the King of France. Further being adjudged to prison, by the King, for refusing
to give accounts of great sums of money received by him, and Reignold Earl
of Cornwall, and Robert Earl of Leicester, being sent to him, to tell him of
the judgment set down against him; this meek Martyr, and holy Saint was so
far from the obedience of a subject, that he told the earl of Leicester in
these words: Beckets words to the Earl of Leicester.
That how much more precious the soul is then the body, so much more ought he
to obey Becket then his terreine King: So notorious and evident was the
rebellious opposition of this Popish Prelate against his lawful Prince, that
he was openly by the king, and his Nobles called Traitor, in that he refused to
give earthly honor to his King (as he had sworn to do) and therefore they
generally agreed, that he was well worthy to be handled as a perjured Traitor
and rebel, The King and Nobles adiudge Beckets a traitor.
and therefore most impudent is this Ward-worders assertion, that neither the
King nor his Officers did charge him with treason.

If you please to add hereunto, the arbitrament of this controversy put into
the French kings hands, The controversy between Becket and the King put into
the French Kings hands.
with king Henry's large offer, and Beckets proud refusal: there is no man (I
hope) that knows what it is to be an obedient subject, but will condemn him
for a rebellious Traitor. The kings offer in that arbitrament was this, There
have been (says he) Kings of England before me both of greater and less
puissance then I am, The Kings officer.
likewise there have been many Bishops of Canturburie, both great and holy
men; what the greatest and most holy of all his predecessors before him, has
done to the least of my predecessors before me, let him do the same to me, and
I am content. Which offer though it were in it self, and so deemed by all that
stood by, not only reasonable, but more then reasonable; so that they all
cried with one voice, the king has debased himself enough to the Bishop:
Proud Beckets refusal.
yet the rebellious spirit of this Archbishop would not yield unto it, nor
accept peace with his King upon so favorable a condition. What a Giant-like
pride and traitorous presumption is this, to refuse to yield so much obedience
to his Prince and Sovereign, as the greatest and holiest of his place have
always yielded to the meanest kings of this land? what needs any further
proof of Beckets treason? Yet if you will, you may remember the letter of Maud
the Empress to him: The letter of the Empress.
Wherein she charge him, that in as much as in him lay, he went about to
disinherit the king, and to deprive him of his crown: and if the Empress might
be thought to speak partially on the King her sons behalf; yet the two
Cardinals, sent by the Pope to hear all this controversy, out of question
will not condemn him without just cause. And yet in a letter sent from them to
the Pope, they do condemn him of exciting and stirring up foreign Potentates
to make war against his natural liege Lord, the words of which letter were
these. Two Cardinals censures of Becket.
William and Otho Cardinals of the Church of Rome, to Alexander the Pope, etc.
coming to the land of the king of England, we found the controversy betwixt
him, and the Archbishop of Canterbury, more sharp and vehement then we would;
for the King and the greater part about him, said, that the Archbishop had
stirred up the French King grieuouslie against him, as also the Earl of
Flaunders his kinsman; (who was very loving and kind to him before) he made
his open adversary, ready to wage war against him, as is by diverse
evidences most certain, etc. Now for a subject to stir up foreign States to
make war upon his Sovereign and country, was at all times high treason; but
that Becket did so, (by the Cardinals confession) was by diverse evidences most
certain, therefore Becket (not now his enemies, but his bre^hren, the sons
of his own mother being Judges) was a traitor.

Who then but such a one as has sold himself to all impudency and shameless
gainsaying the truth, would seek to cover Beckets rebellions, About Beckets
sainting.
by the facts of John Baptist, Ambrose, Hillarie, of Athanasius, Chrysostom,
which have as much agreement with the cause of Becket, as has light with
darkness good with evil, sweet with sower? concerning whose Saint-being I will
say nothing, since my purpose is not to search what he is with God after his
death, but what he was toward his Prince in his life, neither am I privy to
his repentance, which might be secret at the last gasp, or to Gods judgments,
into which I presume not to press. Yet you may remember, that long since, it
was a general Proverb of your Pope-made Saints, That many are worshipped for
Saints in heaven, whose souls are burning in Hell: Ex. Auentino.
and that in particular concerning Becket, great doubt was moved, as is by
writers alleged, out of Caesarius the Monk, whose words are these; Quaestio
Parisijs inter magistros ventilata fuit, vtrum damnatus, an saluatus esset ille
Thomas, etc. There was a question debated amongst the masters at Paris whether
Thomas Becket was saved or damned. To this question answers Roger a Norman,
Disputation about Becket at Paris.
that he was worthy death and damnation, because he was so obstinate against
Gods minister the king. Peter Cantar a Parisien disputed on the contrary,
Argument of miracles.
that his miracles were great signs and tokens of salvation and of great
holiness in him, etc. Which argument this Encounterer likewise urges.

Popish miracles threefold
But behold what strength is in it. For one of these we shall find to be true,
that either they seemed only, and were no miracles indeed, Only in show.
such as many by the craft and conueiance of idle Monks have been showed to the
people, as namely those miracles of the Dominicke Friars, in their hot
contentions with the Franciscans about the conception of our Lady, Act. and
Mon. page 733.
who thinking by sleight to work in the peoples heads, that which by open
preaching they durst not now attempt, devised a certain Image of the Virgin,
Ex Pencero. Munst. Ca^ione, and aliis
so artificially wrought, that the Friars by privy gynnes, made it to stir,
to make gestures, to lament, to complain, to weep, to groan, and to give
answers to them that asked, etc. until the Franciscans seeing by this means
their credits to decay, and all the alms to be conveyed to the Dominickes
box, and not being unacquainted with such cousening practices, espied their
iugling, and discovered their feined and fraudulent miracles. For which cause
four of the chiefest actors, in this iugling miracle were burned at Bern^.

Wrought by Satan.
Or secondly, if they were not counterfeite but done in deed, they were not
wrought by God, but by the power of Satan to draw men from Christ to
Antichrist.

Of these the Apostle foretells us (that whenever it comes to pass it
might not trouble us,) That the coming of Antichrist should be by the working
of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Wonders then Antichrist shall work, but they are lying wonders, both in
form, because many of them are but counterfeit; and in the end, because the
end of all is to draw men from the truth, to lies and falsehood. For what was
the end of these miracles? was it not to draw men to Idolatry? to the worship
of the relics of dead men? to shrine their bones in gold and silver, and
precious stones, as this Becket was used? was it not to draw men to
Canturburie, with their vows, and offerings by heaps, out of which the Covent
sucked no small advantage? Of this dangerous temptation by miracles to draw us
away from Christ to Antichrist, our Savior Christ has likewise graciously
forwarned us, saying: Math. 24.
That there shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets, and shall show great
signs and wonders, so that if it were possible they should deceive the very
elect. The miracles therefore which the munkish generation has wrought by the
power of Satan, to draw men to Idolatry, and to enrich themselves, I hope
shall not much move us, being forewarned of this temptation, and therefore well
armed against it, especially if we remember that the Lord wills the people of
Israel, Deuteronomy. 13.
not to credit the Prophets (though they work miracles) if thereby they seek
to draw them to Idolatry, because the Lord does this to prove them, whether
they will love the Lord their God, with all their heart, and with all their
soul.

Or else thirdly, they were never wrought, Falsely devised.
neither indeed, nor in appearance, but were devised by men of leaden hearts,
and brazen faces, (as one terms the author of your Golden legend) for the
infinite enriching of their purses, and so are they only the shameless
inventions of the Munkes idle brains, Beckets miracles.
and this seems most true in the miracles ascribed to Becket: which as by the
number they discredit themselves, amounting to the number of 270. said to be
wrought by him after his death (who never wrought any one in all his life:) so
likewise by the quality of them, being far off from all truth, and reason,
some ridiculous, some monstrous, vain, absurd, some also blasphemous, and some
so impudent, that not only they deserve no credit, altogether sauouring of
mere forgerie, but also for very shame will abash an honest pen to write of
them: Act. and Mon. pa. 204.
As namely, that three days after his death he appeared at the Altar in his
pontificalibus, commanding the Quire not to sing, but to say this office of
his Mass, Exurge quare obdormis domine, etc. Again that it was showed a Munke
in a vision, that Becket had his place appointed in heaven, with the Apostles
above Steven, Laurence, etc. Also that a Knights son being two days dead,
was revived again, so soon as he had a little of the water of Canturburie put
into his mouth, and had by his parents four pieces of silver bended to be
offered at Canturbury in the child's behalf: And further most blasphemously, that
Becket in a vision did appear and say that his blood did cry out of the earth
to God more then the blood of righteous Abel; as also that Becket, appearing to
a Priest named Thomas, told him that he had so brought to pass, that all the
names of the Munkes of the Church of Canturburie, with the names of the
Priests and Clerks, and with the families belonging to that City and Church
of Canturburie, were written in the book of life. These and many more absurd
then these are the miracles ascribed to him, to prove him a Saint, dying in so
holy a quarrel, and to fill the purses and fat the panches of idle Monks.

But miracles are not rare at Rome, Miracles not rare amongst the Papists.
the thing which may justly be thought most untrue, shall be confirmed with a
miracle: Aquinas Divinity rules in all their schools, will you doubt of the
truth of it, and try it by Scripture? that shall not need, it is confirmed by
a miracle, and that a sound one. When he was once praying to the Image of
Christ crucified, the Image spoke to him, Been scripsisti de me Thoma, qua^
ergo mercedem accipies? D. Rain. ex breuiario Romans and ex vita The. ^ius operi.
Romae editis prefixa.
You have written well of me Thomas, what reward will you have for your labor?
of which that no man may doubt, it was testified by the oath of a devout man,
which hid himself there of purpose; belike the Image had spoken to him before,
to be present secretly, and to bearewitnes of the matter.

Hiacinthus a Polonian, who dyed in the year 1257. was lately canonised for a
Saint, D. Rain. ex. seuerin^.
do ye doubt whether the Pope did well therein or not? consider the miracles
he wrought, A young man that brake his neck from his horse being carried to
Hiacinthus Tomb presently revived, and was restored whole and sound. Again, a
maid having a calfe suddenly dead, runs to his grave and prays him to
revive her calfe again: when she came home, and found the Butcher skinning of
it, the calfe moving the leg that was fleyed, lifted up the head, and was by
and by as whole as a fish. And that ye may know it is no great novelty with
these fellows, to have stocks and stones to speake^ when this Hiacinthus was
alive, and at the sudden irruption of the Tartarians, was ready to fly out of
the Church, the Image of the Virgin Marie being an huge one, and of Alablaster
called to him. Large talk between Hiacinthus and an image of Alablaster.
O son Hiacinthus, do thou fly from the hands of the Tartarians, and
leauest me, with my son to be torn in pieces and trampled under their feet?
therefore take me with thee: At which he being somewhat amazed, answered: O
glorious Virgin, this Image of yours is too heavy, how can I carry it with
me? But she replied, take it, for my son shall lighten the burden. Whereupon
he took it, and carried it in one hand, as if it had been as light as a reed,
through the great river Borysthenes, on dry foot. Here is a taste of your
strange miracles of Rome, but it is most strange that men should be so bereft
of reason and judgment to believe them. If Calphurnius were living of whom the
Poet writes, Pleno ridet Calphurnius ore, and should read the wonderful
miracles to the Popes Saints attributed, I suppose he would not only laugh
with open mouth; but even break his belly with laughing at these their
ridiculous follies. The Lord give unto us grace to love the truth, that we may
be saved: least otherwise in his just judgment he send us strong delusions to
believe such loud, and lewd lies. And so I leave Becket with all his miracles
(as in stories I find him recorded) the Kings rebel, and the Popes Saint.

The residue of the exceptions in this Encounter against me are altogether to
false and frivolous, as I might well spare the labor in giving any answer
thereto, but that this foule-mouthed fellow (who sayleth in a Sea of words)
painteth them out by the name of slanders, yea impudent and shameless slanders,
that by such mighty words he might blind the eyes, and steal away the
affections of the simple readers; therefore a word or two of each of them. The
next fained position wherewith he charge me is, that I hold The Pope and his
Clergy are to be obeyed though they command blasphemies against God and
disloyalties against Princes, which though you (Sir Encounterer) without all
shame, and contrary to your own knowledge (if you have knowledge in any thing
but in railing) do term a shameless slander: yet to as many as know Rome in
any measure, it is well known and will be found a true accusation and just
charge. The Pope will be obeyed, commanding either disloyalty or blasphemy.
For proof whereof, that which your own men have written of the infinite
power of the Pope, may abundantly suffice; namely, Though all the world would
judge in any matter against the Pope, yet we ought to stand to the judgment
of him; for he seems to have all laws in the chest of his bosom; therefore
whatsoever the Pope either allows or disalloweth, we are bound likewise to
allow or disallow the same. And whosoever is not obedient to the laws of the
Church of Rome, must be deemed an Heretic: and again, it was as great a sin
as sacrilege, to reason of any of the Popes doings; and further that the Pope
is said to have an heavenly judgment, therefore in such things as he wills,
his will stands for a reason; and though he draw infinite souls with him to
hell, yet no man may presume to say to him, Why do you thus? to whom whosoever
denies obedience, it is all one, as if he did deny the Almighty power of
God. These are all alleged out of your own decrees, and out of your own
doctors; and your holy M. Harding shameth not to tell us in his Inuectiue
against Bishop Jewel of blessed memory, that Christ now requires of us, not
to obey Peter and Paul, but him that sits in their chair: so that by this
divinity, we must obey the Pope, whatsoever Peter and Paul teach to the
contrary. This (I hope) is a sufficient justifying of my accusation. But if you
will answer me, as Blasius did Laelius, demanding whether if Gracchus did bid
him, he would set the Capitol on fire: Nunquam voluisset id quidem: Surely he
would never bid me so to do: that the Pope likewise would never command
blasphemies against God, or disloyalties against Princes: For proof against
the first, I need go no further then our example of Thomas Becket, for whom the
Pope not only commanded a solemn festival day to be kept, but in honor of
him, Blasphemy by the Pope commanded.
this blasphemous prayer to be used in that day.

Portiforium ad vsum Sarum in festo S. Tho. Caen^uar.
Tuper Thomae sanguinem quem pro te impendit,
Facnos Christ scandere quo Thomas ascendit.
By the blood of Thomas which he for thee did spend,
Make us O Christ to climb whither Thomas did ascend.
Then which what greater blasphemy can be uttered? to make any other Mediator
betwixt God and man, then the man Christ Jesus; and that by the blood and
wounds, which is the proper prerogative of him, who was wounded for our sins,
and done to death for our transgressions? But as if this were not blasphemy
enough, behold yet a greater; even Gods honor given to this Pope-holy Saint in
this prayer made unto him.

Opem nobis o Thoma porrige,
Rege stantes, iacentes erige,
Mores, actus, and vitam corrige,
Et in pacis nos viam dirige.
Thy help o Thomas unto us extend,
Rule such as stand, raise them that fall,
Our manners, deeds, and sinful life amend,
Into the way of peace eeke guide us all.
Shall I add hereunto another like example which in part I have already
touched? Sixtus the fourth takes up the controversy betwixt the ^ranciscans
and Dominicks, about the conception of the blessed Virgin, and against manifest
Scripture, plain testimonies of fathers, and the stream of his own Doctors,
decrees her conception without Original sin (so taking from Christ his
prerogative) commands the solemnizing of the feast of her conception,
excommunicating and condemning them for heretics that did gainesay it, and
granting to as many as would hear Mass devoutly, from the first euensong of
that feast, to the Octaues of the same, as many days of pardon, as Pope Vrbane
the fourth, and Pope Martin the fifth did grant for hearing the service of
Corpus Christi day. Yet here he staieth not, but not only abusing that as a
prayer to the Virgin, which was only the Angels salutation, and rather the
Angels prayer for her, then to her; for the better establishment of his new
blasphemy, adds to the express words of Scripture, commanding the Aue
Maria to be said with this addition, and giving release of sins to as many as
would invoke the blessed Virgin with the same addition. Hayle Marie full of
grace, the Lord is with thee, blessed art thou amongst women, and blessed is
the fruit of thy womb, Jesus Christ, and blessed is Anna thy mother, of whom
thy virgins flesh has proceeded without blot of Original sin. Amen. From
hence did spring these and such like points of doctrine offered to the people,
that she was not obliged to any punishment due for sin no more then Christ,
that she had no need of remission of sins, that if a Savior be taken for
him, which saves such as have merited condemnation, then was not Christ her
Savior, but only in this respect might be counted her Savior, for preserving
her from all sin, and so sustaining her from falling into condemnation; these
and such like new found blasphemies al me^ must receive, and hold her
immaculate conception under pain of excommunication.

Disloyalty by the Pope commanded.
Touching their commanding of disloyalty against Princes, I wish we had not
had too many proofs thereof, then should not our gracious Sovereign have been
so often endangered, to the extreme grief and fear of all true English
hearts, and to the hazard of utter overthrow of true Religion, and the
bringing in of a Chaos of temperall miseries upon us: which being sufficiently
known and conceived of all (but such as carry in their bosoms the like false
and flintie hearts that you do,) I will spare to repeat any, the rather
because I shall have occasion to speak of them hereafter. But how like a
Clerk you apply your three places of Scripture, alleged to prove simple
obedience due to your Prelates, the first out of Heb. 13. ver. 8. the second
out of the Ephesians. 6. verse. 6. the third out of Romans 13. verse. 5. I refer to
the godly learned; yet if you will needs strain obedience to your Popish
superiors out of these places of Scripture, I pray you entreat them (for I
will spare here to except against their offices, and authorities) to ground
their commandments upon Scripture, and not to send over their Pupils to
persuade subjects not only from obedience due to their Sovereign, and to
absolute them from their oath taken to obey, but to lay violent and bloody
hands upon the Lords anointed, whereby they show to be guided rather by the
spirit of Satan that hartened Kaine to kill Abell, then by the spirit of God
that taught David to spare Saul.

There remains now only the fourth and last charge against me in this
Encounter briefly to be discharged, About Pardons and Indulgences.
namely, that I lay to your charge (untruly as you say) that ye prescribe a
means of delivery from all dangers (even when men sinned immediately against
God) which is a pardon from the Popes holiness, and absolution from his holy
Priests. In which accusation what say I more then all the world knows to be
true? Is it not strange that these men either so unconscionably practice that
openly, and generally, which they dare not auow, and justify? or so impudently
deny, that, which they do so commonly practice the Catholic doctrine is
(says this Champion) that the Popes and Churches Indulgences avail not to
remove mortal sins, etc. neither does the pardon remit the guilt of sin,
etc. But (Sir) whatsoever your doctrine is in this point, your practice is
quite contrary; neither is it any rare thing with your almighty Pope, to
practice that generally by his infinite authority, which all his Doctors and
schoolmen are ashamed to defend. Indulgences grounded neither upon Scripture,
nor upon ancient Fathers.
For as for the authority whereupon your indulgences are grounded, your own
men confess, as namely (amongst the rest) Durandus, De Indulgentijs pauca dici
possunt per certitudinem, quia nec scriptura express de ijs loquitur, sancti
etia^ patres Ambrosius, Hilarins, Hieronymus, Augustinus minime loquuntur de
indulgentijs: Little can be certainly affirmed of indulgences, because neither
the Scripture speaks expressly of them, and the ancient fathers, Ambrose,
Hilarie, Jerome, Augustine make no mention of them. Thus your selves truly
confess that ye have neither warrant of Scripture, nor of ancient fathers for
your Popes pardons, yet go they current.

The notorious abuses whereof, even councels have condemned, as the Lateran
Council, Councels condemn the abuses of the Popes pardons
a Council held at Vienna, and even your Council of Trent too, does in
general terms condemn all abuses in these pardons, which by superstition,
ignorance, irreuerence, have crept in; though in special it name none, because
(it seems) it intended not to reform any. Notwithstanding whatsoever either
your Doctors pressed with truth do write, or your Councels for shame are
forced to decree, the Pope has forced for no shame to make marts and
merchandise of men's souls by his pardons, and to sell sin for money, as
flesh is sold in the shambles. Whereof let those verses partly bear witness,
which are written in an ancient stone in the Cathedral Church of Saint
Stephen, amongst the Bituriges in Aquitania, a few whereof I will here set
down.

Hic des deuote, caelestibus associate, Ex Chemnicio de Indulgentijs.

Mentes aegrotae per munera a sunt tibi lotae,
Ergo venitote, gentes a sede remotae;
Qui datis estote, certi de diuite dote,
Te precor accelera, spargas hic dum potes, era;
Et sic re vera, secure caelica spera.
Give frankly here, in Heaven a place prepare,
Your sickly souls by gifts clean purged are,
Come people then which dwell far from this place,
Ye that do give, rest sure of mickle grace.
I pray thee haste, give money while ye may,
Then surely hope for Heaven, at the last day.
And again.

Hic si large des, in coelo fit tua seeds,
Qui serit hic, parce comprendit in arce,
Cur tardas? tantum nummi mihi des aliquantum;
Pro solo nummo gaudebis in aethere summo.
If thou give freely here, Heaven is thy hire,
He that gives little, shall little there acquire,
Why staiest thou then? only some money give,
For only money, thou in Heaven shall live.
To which we may add the complaint of the Princes of Germany against the
Pope, The complain^ of the German Princes
exhibited in the Council at Norremberg, the third complaint being this; But
especially the burden and grieuance of the Popes pardons and Indulgences are
most importable. When as the Bishops of Rome under pretense of building some
Church in Rome, or to war against the Turk, do make out their Indulgences
with their Bulls, persuading and promising to the simple people, strange and
wonderful benefits of remission a Culpa and paena, from the guilt of their
sins, and punishment due for the same: and not in this life only, but also
after this life to them that be dead burning in the fire of Purgatory.
Through the hope and occasion whereof, true piety is almost extinct in all
Germany; While^ every ill disposed person promises himself for a little
money license and impunitie, to do what him lists: whereupon follows
fornication, incest, adultery, perjury, homicide, robbing and spoiling,
rapine and usury, with a whole stood of mischiefs, etc. By which what was the
general and current use of the Popes pardons, is evident to be seen.

Tecelius.
Tecelius the Popes Merchant, who set to sale Pope Leo the 10. his Indulgences
in Germany for ten shillings the piece, does so praise and set forth his ware,
as that his pardons not only reached to the remitting of mortal sin (which
this Encounterer would feign deny) but that his Indulgences were of such
validity, that there was no sin so great (though a man by impossible
supposition had defloured the mother of Christ) but by them might be pardoned;
and that a man by virtue of them is freed both from the guilt and punishment of
his sin. What should I add, that it suffices them not to sell pardons for
sins past, Pardous for sins to be committed.
but that this mystery of iniquity prevailed so far, as that it stretched
to pardon sins to come. The sundry forms of which Bulls, I could out of good
authors here set down, whereof (as is reported) fell out a pretty experiment
with the same Tecelius, to whom a certain Noble man comes, confessing that
he had a purpose to commit an heinous sin, and heartely prays to have a
pardon granted him for hereafter: Tecelius sets a great price upon that
ware, but yet the Noble man pays the money: shortly after, this Noble man
laying wait for Tecelius in a wood, brake open his Coffers wherein was all his
treasure that he had gotten by fale of his pardons, and robbed him. Tecelius
threatens and curses sore, but the Noble man shows him the Bull which he
bought so dearly of himself, and merrily tells him, this was the sin
which he purposed to commit, from which I am fully and in good form absolved.

I would the opinion conceived of the Popes plenarie pardons, did not induce
Subjects to commit most heinous treason against the Lords anointed, to
satisfy the Popes desire. Whereof an example may be seen in Parry, Parry.
who undertook the murdering of her Majesty, (as himself confessed)
whereunto he was the more strongly resolved by the Pardon from the Pope of all
his sins, whereof Cardinal Como in his letter assures him, the words to
this purpose I have thought good here to set down, translated into English out
of the Cardinals letter. Caines spirit.
And to the end you may be the more aided by that good spirit, which has
induced you to this: his blessedness grants you full pardon and remission of
all your sins, as you requested: assuring you that besides the merit you
shall receive in Heaven, his holiness will make himself debtor to acknowledge
your deseruings in the best manner that he may.

Now how ignorant soever you presume me to be of the difference betwixt the
Popes pardon, and the Priests absolution, because I make mention of them both
together; I would your wisdom should well know, that for this deep point of
Catholic doctrine, I am as well acquainted with the speculation (though not
practice) of it as your self. Howsoever they have some differences, yet herein
they concur as Simeon and Leui brethren in evil, that both are used as
inducements to most heinous sins, thereby to satisfy the Popes pleasure.
Sundry chronicles make mention of Simon the Monk of Swinested, Absolution.
Simon a Monk.
who poisoned King John, that before the fact he confessed his purpose to his
Abbot, who highly commended his zeal, and gave him absolution beforehand, for
the committing of this wicked act: whereunto I might join the example of
Iacobus Clemens who murdered the King of France, Iacobus Clemens
being also beforehand confessed and absolved of it. But what need I add
more, when as almost the whole world knows and cries out, of the horrible
abuses both of your Pardon-mongers, and absoluing Priests, to the strengthening
of sin, and decay of virtue?

The conclusion.
That my conclusion seems absurd in the eyes of your proud folly, I neither
marvel, nor grieve at it: notwithstanding I do again affirm; that the
blasphemy and blindness of your Popish superstition is most aparant herein. And
God be praised, that has clered the spiritual sight of our English Nation, to
hate and abhor them, and with your gibing and railing I leave you to disport
your self, because I scorn to be a companion to men of those occupations. But
if your needels eye be no straiter then to pass through confession, and to be
enioined your popish penance, your high way to heaven is broad enough,
especially when a pardon may be had in store (for some money) by virtue whereof
any Priest may give full remission of all sins at the hour of death.
Justification by faith.
As for that which you blasphemously call the open cart-way of only faith, you
shall find a straiter, and narrower passage, then you would bear the world in
hand, if you conceive not an historical faith which may be dead, but a true,
lively, and justifying faith; for though we be justified by faith only,
apprehending Christ his obedience, and merits, who was made sin for us, that
we might be made the righteousness of God in him: yet are we not justified by an
only faith, such as is void and destitute of good works; but in the person
of them that are justified faith and good works are united, and coupled
together, though in the Act of justifying they are severed, it being the proper
duty of faith alone, as a hand to appehend, and take hold of Christ, who is
made to us of God, wisdom, and righteousness, sanctification, and redemption,
that according as it is written, He that rejoices, let him rejoice in the
Lord. Heat and light are both inseparable in the fire, though it be the
property of the heat only to warm, and not of the light: so are faith and
good works coupled in as many as are justified, though we be justified through
faith only. Therefore we are necessarily to exercise our selves in good
works, dying to sin and living to righteousness, if we hope hereafter to live
with Christ eternally. For it is true that Ambrose has, Sicut sancti sunt
membra Christi; sic impij sunt membra Dioboli: As those that are holy, are the
members of Christ; so are the wicked ones the limbs of Satan: and so with the
words of the Prophet I conclude. This is the way, walk in it, Esaias. 30.
and God almighty for his Christ's sake give even you grace to find this way
in time.

Resistance to the third Encounter, about her Majesty's marvelous deliverances
from dangers, in Queen Mary's time, and since.
IT is the Common and usual practice of wrangling and cauilling spirits, for
the preventing of just accusations against themselves, first to begin and
challenge others of the same crimes whereof themselves are most guilty. So
dealt Satan the accuser of the brethren with Job, Job. 1.
saying unto God, That if he were touched in all that he had, he would
blaspheme God to his face, and yet there is nothing more common with that old
Serpent, then to curse and blashpheme God. In like manner this parasite and
slanderous Encounterer, being privy unto himself of his guiltines in
flattery, and bloud-thirsting, of both which he has given sufficient proof
throughout this his whole Ward-word, would yet notwithstanding in the entrance
of this his third Encounter, This bloody mate falsely charge me with
bloud-thirstines.
persuade the readers, that I like a Parasite do both flatter the State and
Prince, and also exasperate both the one and the other against the Recusant
Papists who live amongst us.

How unjustly he has charged me with flattery and forging, is made apparent
(I trust) to every indifferent reader in my answers before to his two first
Encounters: and how far I am from a bloody mouth, a poisoned tongue, and an
earnest desire to have all his Catholics destroyed (for so he terms the
Recusant Papists amongst us) shall by Gods grace be made plain and evident in
that which follows.

Let the beast that has two horns like a Lamb, but not of the Lamb delight
in his horns, and let the whore of Rome, that is drunken with the blood of
Gods Saints delight to gorge in blood: but the true Church of Christ, and her
children, shall be always found gentle, peaceable, and merciful, without
either the savage condition of beasts, or the barking and bloud-thirstie
condition of dogs and hounds, how reprochfully, maliciously and dishonorably
soever this Encounterer does write of ye house of Huntingdon and my self.

But before I come to the particulars handled in this Encounter, what moved you
(Sir Encounterer) thus hastily and fiercely to charge me in this place with a
bloud-thirstie humor, and to paint your margent with Sir Francis his
malignitie? do you uncharitably suspect my thoughts? or do you frowardly
pervert, and misconstrue my words? the secret thoughts are known only to
God; but if my writings do any where bewray such a savage disposition, why did
you not frame your indictment upon mine own words? what, were you moved
because I did truly and thankfully acknowledge the marvelous deliverance and
preservation of her Majesty in the days of her sister Queen Marie, which is
the first thing in this your Encounter you find fault with all? Or were you
moved, because I have faithfully related the Popish practices of bloody
Prelates, and home-borne Traitors against her Majesty both before, and since
the beginning of her Reign? Or was it because in setting down the just
judgment of God, and the punishment of Justice justly inflicted upon Doctor
Story, I do in the end thereof desire that al they which wish to Queen
Elizabeth as he did (for those be my words, pagina. 27.) may speed as he did?
Other matter I am sure you can find none from the 18. page unto the 49. of my
book, which all in this Encounter you take upon you to answer. And I pray you
(Sir) are these such matters as may justly provoke any to such fury,
outcrying, opprobrious names, and grievous accusations, as in this your
Encounter you have used against me? the matters are all justifiable, as shall
after more fully God willing appear, and as well might Cushi (who bringing
news to David of the end of Absolon said, ^. Sam. 18.
the enemies of the Lord the King, and all that rise to do thee hurt, be as
that young man is) be charged with a bloody mouth, the worm of heresy,
woodnes; and fury, as I for desiring, as I did, against her Majesty's enemies.
My heart (I thank God) is free from thirsting after the blood of any, and the
true conversion, and reformation of my countriemen who are devoted to the
Bishop of Rome, and the Romish new faith, should be more joy and comfort to
me, then any worldly thing; which both do argue that I love their persons,
though I detest their Popish Religion, and traitorous practices. I wish that
Papists may live, and that Popery may dye; and I join with Saint Augustine
concerning Papists in general, who are not particularly tainted with actual
treason: Aug. in Psalm. 37
Non oramus vt moriantur inimici, sed vt corrigantur, sie mortui erunt inimici,
iam enim correcti, non amplius erunt inimici: We pray not for the death of our
enemies, but for their correction and amendment; so our enemies shall be dead,
for being amended they shall be no more our enemies.

But now to the several parts of your Encounter as they follow in order with
as much brevity as I may: Her Majesty's marvelous deliverance in Queen
Mary's time.
It offends you greatly, that I impute her Majesty's deliverance from great
danger in the time of Queen Mary, to be wholly and only wrought to her from
Gods goodness, and this (out of the madness of your idle brain) you
blasphemously call a miracle of Milne-wheeles; but with all the crafty wit you
have (how greatly soever you vaunt thereof, imagining that I cannot understand
plain humane reason) you shall not be able, either to make her deliverance
less strange and admirable then I have said it was, or to clear any of those
that I have accused to hunt after her life at that time.

But I pray you (Sir N.D.) why should this matter so much displease you, as to
urge you to write so many lines in seeking to disprove my saying? Is it because
you would flatter her Majesty and persuade her, that she was better beloved,
then she thought she was? Or is it because you are unwilling to hear, that God
should so honor the Gospel, as to bring in the free publishing and profession
thereof into this our Land, by one that was marueilously preserved to be a
Prince and nourse unto us? Or is it because you would free those days from
such malice and cruelty, as her Majesty did sensibly perceive? Or for that
you would show your skill in carping at my sayings? Whatsoever occasion you did
take (for just cause had you none) you might have done better to have spared
your labour^ and to have said as we do with the Church in David's time upon the
like occasion in preserving David to be King of Israel. This is the Lords
doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes.

Her Majesty's deliverance and David's compared.
If any Israelite then discontented with David's government, should have said,
you are miracle-makers, and framers of miracles of Milne-wheeles, because in
humane reason there may be imagined diverse pregnant and potent causes, which
did concur to the preservation of David's life, and his admission to the
kingdom; as namely that Jonathan was his friend, he was beautiful and
valiant, he had married the Kings daughter, and the people did honor him;
should not such a one have showed himself a blasphemous deprauer of Gods
work, and an envious repiner at David his safety and honor? Yes out of
question. Look then to your self (Sir Encounterer) and learn to speak more
reverently of Gods marvelous works, and in charity rejoice with them that
rejoice: Iubemur (says Bernard) colligere fragmenta ne pereant, id est, ne
minima beneficia obliuisci, We are bidden to gather up the very fragments and
crumbs, that is, not to forget the least benefits. How much more then should we
magnify the power of God in his wonderful works? But how does he disprove
my sayings? First he labors to prove that her Majesty's life and blood was
not sought after, neither was she in such danger as I have affirmed: next he
shows certain human causes of her Majesty's preservation. That she was
subject to suspicions; and that she was had in jealousy, and did hold the
Queen and state in suspense and care, this Encounterer denies not, alleging
cunningly some such reasons thereof, as namely her inclination to true
Religion, the attempts of Wyat, Courtney, Carow, etc. and the condition of the
Queen of Scots, thereby endeavoring (after his cunning manner) both to leave
her Majesty to be suspected at the least of some disloyalty to her Sister, as
also to clear the chief pillars then of Popery from doing her wrong, and the
Queen of Scots from working of treason against her since that time.

But let him write never so cunningly, Her Majesty unjustly troubled in Queen
Mary's days.
seeking to leave the matter doubtful by way of presumption, as he shall never
be able to tainte her Majesty with the least show of disloyalty in those
days, who witnessed with her Diamond the soundnes of her heart and innocent
behavior in these words, Much suspected by me, nothing proved can be: So shall
he never be able to free either the State then from troubling and wronging of
her Majesty unjustly, neither to clear the Queen of Scots of such treasons
as she was justly condemned for. But how proves he that she was in no danger
of life? even because she was preserved. A ridiculous argument.
For (says he) there being power in them to put her to death, and no power at
home or abroad to hinder them; if there had been such a seeking after her death
as I have affirmed; then by form of argument justified by Cicero in his
Rhetoricke^^ (...) have been effected.

Alas poor fi^^ie Encounterer, must my speech which only accuses the Romish
Clergy then in place of credit to seek her life, include the King and
Queen? Or must it needs follow where there is a sovereignty and outward
strength (for that I ^^ke you mean by power) joined with will, there ye matter
must needs be effected? If this reason were good, how was Moses preserved,
there being power and will in Pharaoh to kill him? How was David preserved from
Saul, or the Prophets from Ierob^^^, or the Israelites from Ham^^s malice,
Peter from Herod's cruelty, or our Savior Christ (for a time) from the
conspiracy of the chief Jews? For in all these there was will joined with
outward power for a time; and yet the things desired not effected. Cicero his
argument holds where there is nothing supposed to hinder, and where the will
is fully bent to do a thing: but in all Sovereignty and inclination of the
will it holds not, because there may want strength, and continuance of the
party, and the will may not be thoroughly settled; as that of the Jews, they
would feign have put Christ to death, but they feared the people. God no doubt
did strangely keep Queen Marie from consenting to the bloody practice of the
Romish Clergy against her Sister; and though some of the Clergy did seek
her death, yet it might be hindered by others, and their desires by some
considerations so crossed, that though they did desire her death, yet they
could not effect it, for which the Lord of Heaven only is to be praised.

But what a shameless forehead has this Encounterer, who against so manifest a
truth, so plainly, and sensibly to be proved, does not blush to deny that
her Majesty's life was at that day earnestly and maliciously sought after?
Why was sh^e so hastily sent for when she was sick, to be brought up to the
Court, either alive, or dead, presently upon Wyats rising? why was she falsely
accused and burdened with Wyats insurrection; yea so far that he was brought
against truth and conscience to accuse her? Why was she committed to the Tower
to be a close prisoner? Why did she say Tanquam ouis, when she removed from the
Tower to Woodstocke? Why was she in many fears, and so often enforced to
bewail her estate, and to pray to the mighty God to preserve her? Was there
not a report that there was a warrant out for her execution, and did not M.
Bridges Lieutenant of the Tower go in haste to Queen Marie, and so by
certifying her prevent the bloody execution? When the sword of justice could
not by any means be drawn forth against her, what extreme dealings were
used, and what secret conspiracies plotted, for the bringing of her to an
untimely death, and the shedding of her innocent blood? I spare to write more
in so plain a matter, that reverent learned man Master Fox has at large in
his Monuments of the Church set down, the miraculous preservation of her
Majesty at that time from extreme calamity and danger of life, which who so
reads, shall with inward compassion and watrie eyes rather lament her
pitiful estate, then with a hard heart and shameless face deny so manifest a
truth as this Encounterer does.

Causes concurring to her Majesty's preservation.
As for the causes which he alleges did concur to the preservation of her
Highness, it is not denied but that some of those by him alleged, and many
others which in probable reason might be imagined, might well concur for the
working of her Majesty's security at that time; but that any of thofe was so
potent and mighty, as of necessity to make her safe from danger, or that
they or any other can be certainly alleged, to be necessary causes and
procurers of her deliverance, with all his wit, and insight into matters of
State, (of which he seems much to brag) he will never be able to show.
Certain it is that her Majesty when she was in that trouble and danger, used
these words when she protested her innocence at her landing at the Tower.
Before thee O God I speak it, having none other friends but thee alone: and as
certain it is that neither wise Statesman, nor any other can definitelie say
of these, or any other supposed causes, in these respects, or for these causes
chiefly she was preserved: what though she were gracious, amiable, and
virtuous, and much favored of the Spanish King (who in policy it may be did
by that means seek to win the peoples hearts unto him,) must it needs follow
hereupon, that therefore her innocent behavior could not be called into
question, nor her blood shed by any wicked conspiracy? The King of Spain was
far from her in her greatest trouble, and neither you, nor any other can say
that he pleaded her cause or stood openly for her freedom at any time. If
he sent the Duke of Feria to visit her, or secretly did speak for her to
Queen Marie, as Master Fox seems to confess, he did that which was seemly
and honorable in a King, and that which her place and innocence justly
deserved.

As for the general hope which you say most men had of her Majesty's being a
Catholic: if it had been either so universally conceived as you imagine, or by
such outward tokens had appeared as you have set down, how can it be true that
she was presumed by many to be inclined to a different Religion from yours, as
you a little before in this Encounter do confess? If she had been devoted so
earnestly to Popish Religion, why needed commandment to be given that she
should have Mass within her house, within two days after her committing to
the Tower? and how happened it, that her men were so unskillful to help the
Priest, that the first day there could be no Mass for want of a Clerk, and
the next day one of her yeomen at Kyrieleson made a stop, and set the Priest
being not able, or not willing to proceed any further? Her sound affection to
true Religion was the cause of all her trouble and danger in her Sisters days,
and her willing and joyful embracing of the true Christian faith, and of God
his true worship and service, has so sufficiently been witnessed ever since
the beginning of her Reign, that no man of common sense or Christian charity
has the least cause to suspect that her heart should be unsound in the
present profession of God his true Religion and Gospel.

The last cause which you allege to concur to the preservation of her
Majesty, is but a thing imagined by you seeing the matter of depriving her
Majesty of life never came to any such stately consultation as you your self
in handling this point, do plainly grant; and seeing also that in such a
case they could have found out other means, for preventing such a potent
pretender: whatsoever you say of the Spaniards affection to the Queen of Scots
at that time, I am sure all England had like to have tasted by so lamentable an
experience, that this Lady of Scotland was so affected by Spain, and sundry
of our English Espagniolized traitors, as (if through Gods goodness she had
not been cut off in time) hardly could our Sovereign have escaped with life
long, being almost daily in danger (whilst that Scottish Queen lived)
through the practice of Rome, Spain, and our home Traitors. Thus
notwithstanding all your flourishes and devises, your potent causes are too
weak to weaken my speech, the gracious work of God in preserving her Majesty
at that time appearing to every Christian and indifferent judgment, no less
miraculous and strange, then I have affirmed. God is the only proper maker of
miracles, I only acknowledge his work in delivering this my Sovereign from
danger with thankfulness, without either flattery of any person, or ambitions
seeking after honor, though you very maliciously and scornefullie do charge me
with both; but by that time that vein of your carriage in this your railing
Pamphlet be thoroughly scanned and conceived, neither your tongue nor pen will
prove any great slander. I will shut up this point with a speech of Master
John Hales used in his oration to her Majesty at her first entrance to her
reign, which seems (...) fying of my sayings, his words are these. He that
sits on high and laugheth at their madness; M. Hales Oration.
would not suffer that the malicious purposes, and most cruel devised
Injustice should have success. He did take upon him the protection of you, he
only has been your Iehosheba, that preserved you from this wicked Athalia: he
only was the Iehoiada that destroyed this cruel Athalia: he only has made
you Queen of this realm in stead this mischievous Marana: No earthly creature
can claim any piece of thanks therefore, no man's face, no man's counsel, no
man's aid has been the cause thereof.

The second thing you find fault with in this your Encounter is my affirming,
The fretting of the Papists against her Majesty now being Queen
that when our Sovereign was fully possessed of her royal seat, then Satan
began to rage, and his ministers to fret and chafe; these my words you term to
be wicked calumniations, and tales of a tubbe, to entertain fools and
ignorant people; but with how little truth and honesty, and with what
abundance of malice and folly, that which follows shall I doubt not make
apparent to the indifferent reader.

You ask how it could be that the Papists did freat and chafe, seeing they as
the greatest number, and chiefest persons did freely, and willingly place her,
crown her, anoint her, take her oath, for preserving the laws of the Realm,
and swear fidelity to her again. To which question I return the like for
answer: how could it be that Haman commanded to honor Mardocheus in the
sight of the people, should fret and chafe at his advancement, Hester. 6.
when as he was the man that arrayed Mardocheus with royal apparel, brought
him on horseback through the street, and proclaimed before him: Thus shall it
be done to the man whom the King will honor. This is no tale of a tubbe, as
this carping companion would persuade, but a truth out of Gods book, whereby
we may see that some do yield unto that outwardly in show, which in their
hearts they yield not unto, and at which, afterward they fret and chafe. And
could it otherwise be, but that they must fret and chafe, when as before her
reign in her sisters time one Ferrar that was defended by Story and Bonner,
said that he hoped that she and they that hoped she should have the Crown
should hop headless, or be fired with faggots before she should come to the
Crown: and also after her advancement to the Crown, the Bishops, and Clergy
masters as they showed themselves in the conference at Westminster, and in the
Parliament assembled very disobedient, stubborn and malicious, (whereupon some
of them were committed to prison,) so they had a consultation to have
excommunicated her, as your worshipful Cardinal Allen affirms in his 52.
page of his answer to English Justice, and (as your Rishton says) the
Archbishop of York, whose duty it was to have crowned her, Cardinal Poole
being dead, refused to do it, and so did all the Bishops, except one, and he
almost the lowest.

But I will proceed to peruse the examination of some particulars, of the
hostility by me alleged, willing the Reader by the way to consider deeply of
your grave advise, which (upon my using the words Sacred and Anointed, as
honorable and rightly appertaining to her Majesty) you offer to be advisedly
thought of, as tending to the commendation of anointing Priests and Princes,
About anointing.
and concluding strongly the great honor that her Majesty had by Catholics
at her first entrance. What, must it needs follow that anointed must be taken
for anointing with oil, or must her Majesty needs be beholding to the
Clergy for that she is called the Lords anointed? I had well hoped that your
quoting in the margent diverse places of Scripture, for confirmation of the
ceremony of anointing Priests and Princes, had been a better Bible-clerke then
so foulie to be mistaken in the 105. Psalm, Psalm. 150.
which place has been alleged for Privilege of the Popish Clergy from the
sword of Justice, notwithstanding their filthy life. The Patriarchs, Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, are called anointed, and yet were never anointed with oil.
In Esaias. 45. Cyrus is called the Lords anointed, and yet a heathen Prince:
Luke. 2.
our Savior Jesus is called anointed, and yet it is not read, that ever he
was anointed with outward oil. Princes are called the Lords anointed
chiefly because God has put them apart, and consecrated them to serve him in
place of government, because they are endued with wisdom, courage, strength,
and fear of the Lord, and because they should be profitable to the people,
gentle, and merciful, the truth is more respected then the outward ceremony
in the word anointed. Priests, Kings, and Prophets before Christ's time were
anointed with visible oil. I confess, not for such cause as you imagine that
Princes are, but to show that they were appointed of God, consecrated, and
furnished with gifts from him, as also to be types and figures of Christ, who
under the law was represented by these three offices, estates, or orders of
men. The ceremony is not now of necessity to continue; Christ without outward
anointing was called by Simeon the anointed of the Lord. So that her Majesty
may be termed honorably and deservedly the Lords anointed, and yet neither
your superstitious, and Jewish ceremony of greazing your popish Priests
commended thereby, nor her Majesty made much beholding to your Clergy for
that honor.

The first particular of hostilities which you take upon you to disprooue is my
speech of your darling Doctor Story, About D. Story.
whom because I call a bloudsucker, as David calls his persecutors Saul,
Doeg, and others, bloody men, you charge me to be light-witted, and foul
mouthed; Psalm. 5. and 59.
you may take your pleasure (Sir N.D.) at me still, as you have done, but you
know the reward of such as contemptuously reproach others with folly, or
maliciously do rail and speak evil of them undeservedly. You tell us there
are three things in my speech of Doctor Story to be considered; the words I
charge him with, my interpretation of them, and the judgment he received; in
all which if you can either convince me of untruth, or justly condemn me for
uncharitably censuring the speech, and his person, we will believe you another
time, in your proud boasting. The words (you say) were never sufficiently
proved to have been spoken by him, neither by sufficient witnesses, Stories
words.
nor by his own confession: and because the words could not serve to any
purpose, but to his own ruin (he being known to be wise and no fool,) you
would have it believed that he spoke them not at all. This is but a simple
defense (Sir Encounterer) of your stout champion, seeing the words were spoken
in the hearing of so many witnesses, both of your side and ours, in the
Parliament house, and seeing that the speech being generally testified by them
that heard him at that time, it was never, either by himself denied, or by
others that were present controlled. If Doctor Story had been so wise, as you
would persuade he was, he would never have used such impudent words, such
shameless talk, such unconscionable and cruel speeches, without any pity,
of such as he had persecuted most cruelly, as it is certainly reported he
did also at that time. As for the interpretation which you call a bloody
commentary, The interpretation of them.
it was not devised to draw blood, nor to press him down, seeing he long
since received his just judgment, it does only descrie his bloody and
disloyal heart, which caused his tongue to utter such furious and bloody
speeches. You would feign have Doctor Story not to mean the Queen by the
root, but either heresy it self, or the infected Nobility and Gentry. But
alas (Sir N.D.) your fained glosses are so far from drawing his words to
another sense, that they rather confirm the same, much like to Pilates
superscription, which being set up to show the cause of Christ's condemnation,
did yet notwithstanding proclaim his innocence, and convince them of
cruelty: for do not you a little before confess, that these words could
serve to no other purpose, but to his own ruin? and do not you here
acknowledge that the Nobility and Gentry seasoned with true Religion (which
you in the madness of your idle brain call heresy) were but inferior roots,
both which things do prove, that his words (which were these) They (meaning
the Commssioners, and Counselors in Queen Mary's time) labored only about
the young and little sprigs and twigs while they should have stricken at the
root, and clean have rooted it out) cannot be meant of any other, but of the
Prince and chief root, from whom by the great goodness of God, the general
and open profession of Christian Religion, has again sprung up in this our
land, and with whom it does continue yet still, notwithstanding that Bacon,
Cicill, Knowles and all those that you named are dead and gone. The words must
needs aim at a person, and not an heresy; at one, and not at many; at a
chief, and not at any inferior; howsoever this glosing and cunning
Encounterer would persuade us of our Queens affection to Popery, or deny
that true Religion was willingly and joyfully without compulsion and
constraint from others established and maintained by her. Rishton one of your
Masters, speaking of her before she was crowned, says, Animum in ear suum
statim patefecit, etc. 1. she presently showed her mind in Religion, both by
silencing Catholic preachers (as he calls them) as also by suffering all
those that had lived in exile for Religion, to return home: and by charging a
certain Bishop ready to celebrate before her, that he should not eleuate the
consecrate host. For which respects (as he confesses) the Archbishop of York
and the rest refused to crown her,

The judgment which Doctor Story received by the Justice of our land, was
most just, not being judged to death for these words (as you craftily, yet
very foolishlie, and falsely have set down) but for that he denied her
Majesty's Supremacy in the land, Stories judgment.
and Sovereignty over him, and pleaded himself to be no subject to the
Queen, but to the king of Spain: And this is it that your Martyr-maker Doctor
Saunders seems to insinuate in his title added to Doctor Story, showing that
he suffered for the Primacie of your Bishop of Rome: Martyrium Joan. Stor.
Angl. pro ecc. Romans primat.
but observe the blasphemy of this Pope-holy Encounterer against Christ, and
his heinous accusation out of a treacherous heart against the Magistrates, and
Justice of our land, in comparing such a traitor as Story was, with our
Savior Christ, and our Judges with Pilate. Leave your blind zeal (Sir
Romanist) which carries you so violently to such impieties, and begin at
length to embrace true Religion with us, in the fear of God, and in all
loyalty, and duty, reverence and commend the true Justice of your Country.

Whatsoever your Catholics do imagine Story to be worthy of, having made
him a Martyr, who indeed was a traitor, howsoever your self blinded with
partiality and heresy cannot find out any trespass of moment committed by him,
(though he denied our Prince to be his Sovereign and Queen) yet to every
Christian and in different reader his judgment will appear to be just, and
his offense no less then treason. Doctor Saunders indeed has made him a
Martyr in his book of the visible Monarchy of the Church, and it may be you
have a purpose to canonize him for a Saint, if there might be found a Suriu^
that by his Legions or Legend of lies would feign unto him a better life, and
some strange miracles; but it being true that the cause, and not ye punishment
does make a Martyr, and that some things had in great estimation with me^, may
be abominable in Gods sight, your traitorous Story shall be no better a Martyr,
then the Martirs of Montanus, Marcion, Nouatus heresies of whom Eusebius makes
mention. And so leaving your traitorous Doctor: let us come to ye second
hostility, wherewith you find fault, and that is the Bull of Pius Quintus with
the excommunication of her Majesty: The Bull of Pius Quintus.
concerning which Bull, it moves your patience greatly, that every where in
schools, sermons, books and places of Justice, this fact of your Pope should
be produced, as a sound witness and testimony, of the unsound and disloyal
hearts of such of your catholics, as approve your Popes dealing therein, by
which you would enforce that matter wanted wherewith to charge your traitors; at
their arraignment for there was always many and sufficient proofs, we need
not seek far for matter to convict you of most gross impieties, and cursed
practices, you have herein yielded us too great an harvest to labor in, and
our hearts desire has ever been that we might truly speak better things of
you: We charge none to be guilty of ye fact, but such as approve it, or show
themselves too forward to yield obedience unto it: and yet (sir N.D.) I think
you could hardly resolve this doubt, how a papist acknowledging your Popes
authority, and justifying his proceeding therein, may acknowledge her Majesty
to be his true and rightful Queen. For in the title to that Bull, you know the
Queen is called a pretended Queen, by the Bull she is deposed, her Subjects
are absolved from their oath of fealty and allegiance, and those that obey her
are accursed. What though all Catholics are not privy to your Popes reasons,
and informations? may it not be concluded necessarily (notwithstanding that)
that such as acknowledge the Popes supreme authority over Prices, and hold it
for a maxim, that in a definitive sentence he cannot err, are enemies to
Queen Elizabeth and the State? I know in deed some, as Master Heart, may deny
that ye Pope has any thing to do with disposing of kingdoms, and deposing of
Princes, and so the Bull may not any way concern them; but I doubt there be
but a few that will affirm the Popes supremacy in temporal things to be
usurped. But because you post over this matter to other treatises, esteeming of
me in matter of dispute, as Goliath did of David who^ he scorned, Master Iuel.
Bullenger.
I will also refer the Christian reader to such learned treatises as are
exta^t for this Pandora her box, and descrying the hurtful and unwholesome evils
that lie in the bowels of ye seditious Bull.

And because in this place (before you consider further of this Bull) you take
exceptions against a proposition of mine which you term ridiculous, and to
proceed from deep ignorance and a base breast, I will a little fortify my
saying, and make it apparent to the indifferent reader, either your gross
mistaking, or wilful and malicious perverting of my said speech: as for your
Lucyfer-like pride it is more then apparent already: my words are these,
Whether any man may depose Kings.
As though it were in the power of any one mortal child of man, to dispose of
Kingdoms, to depose Princes, or to dispense with subjects for not, only
disobeying, but rebelling against their lawful Sovereigns, etc. Is this such
a ridiculous proposition (Sir Encounterer) or do these words either make
temporal Kingdoms matters of Godhead and immortality, or necessarily
conclude that wicked Princes, such as Nero and Caligula, must be obeyed in all
things, with which flourishes, and false gloses you seek to discredit my
sayings? Your malice did master your reason, and your will did ouerrun your wit
in this your lewd construction.

That which I said I may lawfully still uphold, that Princes are not
depriuable by any mortal man, neither can any man dispense with subjects for
refusing to yield that obedience which the Lord requires them to yield. The
Prophet Daniel acknowledges that it is God, Dan. 2. and 4.
that has this power to take away Kings, and to set up Kings, and to give the
kingdom to whom he will, and says that the Lord orders the States and
Princes of the world at his pleasure: Marie the blessed Virgin reserueth this
honor wholly to God. Luke 1.
He puts down the mighty from their seat, and exalts the base: read
over the books of Kings, none ever disposed of kingdoms, but the Lord of
Lords; neither were any thrown from their thrones, but by the Lords special
appointment, as in the deiection of Jeroboam, Baasa, Elah, Achab and Ioram is
apparent. 1. King. 14.
There was never any King of Israel or Judah removed from the Crown, by any
Priest or Prophet, though all the Kings of Israel were open Idolaters, 1. King.
19.
as also the most part of the Kings of Judah, even fourteen of them.

But it may be you think, because the Prophets denounced Gods judgments,
anointed some to be Kings, and some others by special commandment and
authority did execute Gods judgments, as Iehu upon Ioram and Achabs children,
that therefore my proposition is infringed; which cannot be (Sir Encounterer)
for it was done by Gods special appointment, as Judge and superior over
Princes, and not by their own motions, or in their own name: No Priest, no
Prophet, no Apostle, no Bishop ever had authority to depose Princes. He that
says, Prou. 8.
By me Kings reign, does challenge this power to himself, and it is plain
blasphemy to give it to any other. Saint Augustine expressly resolves that
Kings need not to fear to lose their Kingdoms, or that their Kingdom shall
be taken from them, as wretched Herod feared, and therefore out of all
question, August. in Psalm. 47.
there is no such authority given to any mortal child of man to depose
Princes.

But although I thus confidently and upon good ground do plead against the
Popes usurped authority, yet I am neither so seruily sottish, or so
superstitiouslie conscienced, as either to adore earthly Princes, or to deny
that any Prince established may be touched or disobeyed in any matter: for as I
have learned to give to Caesar that which is Caesar's, and to God, that which is
Gods, worshipping the Lord only with Religious worship: so I know usurpers may
be suppressed by rightful inheritance, as Athalia by Iehoiada, and in our land
Richard the third, by Henry the seventh: and to our Princes we must yield
such obedience as the Lord allows, obeying them in the Lord, choosing rather
with the Disciples to obey God then man, when man commands wicked and
unlawful things. And so leaving you (Sir Pope-Idolater) to your palpable
flattery, and to please and defend your Nero and Caligula, as a more fit
fellow to flatter seriously, and to adore such saints then my self, I stand
as becomes me in loyalty for my Christian, and religious Sovereign, and so
will do (by Gods grace) whilst I live to my last breath.

Your three points which you would have to be considered upon my speech of the
Bull come next to be handled, by which you would gladly prove, that not the
malignitie of the Pope and Papists against our Prince brought forth this roaring
Bull, but some dealings of ours, and that the Popish Recusants are not to be
accused for it, or enforced by means thereof to change their old belief
about the Popes authority.

1
The first point to be considered, is that the Bull of Pius Quintus cam^ ^^rth
in the thirteenth year of her Majesty's reign and not before, as by our own
Chronicles (you say) appears: Let it be so (Sir N.D.) though the Bull was
set up in the thirteenth year of her Reign, and dated 1567. 5. Calend.
Martij, what conclude you hereupon? Must it therefore needs follow that the
Bull proceeded not from any malignitie of the Pope, and Papists? but of some
other cause, as out of mine own words you would seem to prove. Your argument
is very weak, your conclusion cannot be enforced upon such slender
premises. The malignitie of the Papists is most apparent by their consulting
to excommunicate her Majesty, as before I showed out of Cardinal Allyn, by
Doctor Stories words, by informations given against her, which you confess,
whereupon the Pope in his Bull charge her with many things most untruly and
falselie. The hatred of the Pope is most evident, calling her a pretended
Queen and an usurper, even in the title, and beginning of the Bull. And though
the Bull was not published till the 12. year, being yet concluded upon about
two years before, as the date shows, yet both the Pope and his adherents
might as well fret and storm at her enjoying of the Crown, as at her
Christian and Religious government. Bulls are not hastily procured, your Pope
must be sued unto, and false informations must be given, and it might be as
they had vain hopes for a time to feed themselves with, so (those hopes
failing) the fittest season for publishing of the Bull, was thought to be when
others were prepared to raise rebellion.

The second point is a matter of as deep consideration 2
as the former, wherein he tells us by enumeration of diverse hard vsages
offered by her Majesty and the Protestants, against the Pope and Popish
Catholics, that it must needs be, that not malignitie of the Pope and his
adherents against her, but diverse injuries and cruelties offered, enforced the
publication of the Bull. I will not vouchsafe to make an Apology for defense
of those things, which you (Sir Encounterer) reckon up as wrongs and injuries
offered to your Pope and Pope-worshippers; this only I say for answer, that
as her Majesty has done nothing in the reformation of Religion, in requiring
an oath of her people for acknowledgement of her authority, in enforcing her
Subjects to the true service of God, in punishing offenders, and obstinate
persons, and such like proceedings, but that which God commanded her, and the
godly zealous Princes have done before her: so it does not necessarily
follow, that notwithstanding all those things have been done in godly zeal
and loving care for the salvation of the souls of her people, therefore you
are free from malignitie, your faultines wherein I have evidently proved
before, though in your deep and cunning flattery you would gladly deny it:
you fawn upon her Majesty, and yet accuse her most falselie of breach of
promise in altering Religion: you seem to free her from a desire to publish
Gods Gospel, and yet affirm that your Pope had great cause to proceed
against her. Other Princes as Edward the first, Richard the second, Henry the
fourth, have made laws against the Bishop of Rome, his authority and usurped
jurisdiction, and yet have not tasted so much of his malice, which shows the
malignitie of your Pope and his adherents against her Majesty. As for your
Popery and superstition rooted out of this land, it was not of so long
continuance as you boast, for but little before William the Conqueror, Kings
were Gods Vicars for governing his Church, Ecclesiastical livings were
bestowed by the Princes, they made Ecclesiastical laws, Priests were married,
and your Transubstantiation was not then known: You blasphemouslie scoff at
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and ye glory in the dissension between us
and the Lutherans, but as the Lord is of will and power to mock mockers, so
can he make the infirmity of his servants, work to his glory and their
good. I pass over many things willingly in this your Rhetorical flourishing,
contenting my self to have showed the non sequitur of your allegation.

The third point which you would have considered, is that it was an act of
jurisdiction from an Ecclesiastical superior, as also an ancient kind of
proceeding against Princes in our land, as well as in other places without any
trouble to the people for the same, and therefore you would not have your
Catholics to be charged with it, or troubled for it. For answer thereunto
this I affirm, that as we acknowledge not your Popes superiority, or
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction over us, he playing the usurping Tirant, in
censuring our Prince; so we neither yield that this his proud and malicious
cursing and excommunication of Princes has been of long continuance; or that
those his adherents, who justify his proceedings are to be freed from blame.
We acknowledge that Princes the anointed of the Lord, Romans 13.
are the higher powers ordained to execute Justice, and Judgment over the good
and evil: We know no other Superior in nations and kingdoms, next and
immediately under God, but such as the Apostle Peter wills us to be subject
unto, when he says, Submit your selves unto all manner ordinance of man for
the Lords sake, whether it be unto the King, as to the Superior, etc. he
speaks of one not of many superiors, where a Monarchy is established.

The time was when your Bishop of Rome was far from having a superiority even
in Rome and his dominions; for both Charles the great, and Otho the great, had
right sovereignty, and royalty of the Countries given to your Popes, with
acknowledgement to be their Sovereign Lords, in regard of which they
yielded tributes, and other services unto them: as also in former times, the
Emperors had their Lieutenants and deputies in Rome, Valentinian Theodosius.
even to Gregory the seuenths time; and your Popes obtained not the
Sovereignty which now they challenge, till it was almost 1200. years after
Christ, in the days of Alexander the third, and Innocentius the third, both
Bishops of Rome. Your usual engine of excommunication, and depriving of
Princes of their Crowns, is likewise far short of that antiquity, by which
you would seem to mitigate the rigor and cruelty thereof. For as there was
never any Roman King or Emperor excommunicated and deprived of his kingdom by
any Bishop of Rome before Henry the fourth Emperor of Rome, who was
excommunicated and cursed by Gregory the seventh, the brand of hell, who being a
Necromancer, a perjured person, and a most wicked man, confessed at his death
to a Cardinal that he was set on by the Devil to raise up discord, and wars
in Christendom: so in England from the conquest unto King Henry the eight,
there was no Prince of this land deposed by your pope, but only King John.
Sigebert. in Anno 1088.
It is a novelty (Sir N.D.) and not a matter of antiquity (as Sigebert
tells you,) to teach that people owe no subjection to evil kings, etc. As
for that you say that Subjects heretofore in our land have not been troubled,
or forced to alter their belief concerning the Popes power, notwithstanding
his cursing and depriving of Princes is more then you know, and it makes no
great matter whether it were so or no, seeing that your use of excommunication
has not been so frequent in our land, and your dealings were never so
treacherous and desperate as they have been of late. Our English Nation did
never at any time since the first receiving of the faith unto this day,
acknowledge the usurped power of your Pope to depose Princes, much less has
it been any matter of our faith: your Pope Nicholas, and Boniface the eight,
may put in transubstantiation to be an Article of our belief, and make your
popes supremacy of the necessity of salvation; but we have learned to ground
our faith upon the Scriptures of God, which teaches no such absurd and
devilish points. The laws of our land have heretofore in King Richard the
seconds time, and Edward the thirds time, made it treason to bring in any
excommunication from Rome, to impugn the laws of the Realm for benefices and
patronages, to compass or imagine the death of the King, to levy war
against the Prince, or to be adherent and favorers of the Kings enemies, all
which laws do very nearly concern such amongst you, as vouch the Popes
wicked claim to depose Princes, and are perswaders, aiders, and comforters of
invasion and rebellion: Your affections we deal not with, but with your
confessions, we punish you not, for your faith, but for your works.

What punishment did the laws of our Realm in the first twenty years of her
Majesty's reign inflict upon any Recusant for his recusancie, but either
imprisonment, or amercement? If your adventures had not been most audacious,
and your attempts most dangerous, being as men perplexed and enraged to see her
Majesty live, and govern in so long happiness, you might have been still used
with as much mercy and clemency, as it is possible for a Christian Prince to
offer to unruly, and undutiful subiects^ Princes for their safety, and
repressing of rebellions, may temper their laws with severity, and make that
treason which to some seems a matter of Religion; as we see in Augustines
time, Aug. contraliterai Petil. lib. ^. ca. 92.
it was treason to say that Emperors perished for persecuting, which yet
Petilian and his company thought they might say truly and zealously.

You desire a reconciliation between your Pope and our Prince, longing to see
the day when you might again imbrue your hands in the blood of Gods Saints;
but as we know there can be no agreement between light and darkness, so we
doubt not but the powerful and mighty God will continue our Prince all her
days to be a true defender of the faith; and will preserve his poor flock
from the savage cruelty and bloudines of woluish tirants, and Romish Prelates.
Our sins indeed do hasten upon us the severity of Gods justice; but our
hope is, that the God of heaven will for his mercies sake be favorable unto
his Sion, and continue his truth, and true worship amongst us, wherein stands
our chiefest happiness: Psalm 140.
our prayer shall be to the Lord as David's was. Let not the ungodly have his
desire o Lord, let not his mischievous imaginatio^s prosper, least they be too
proud.

It may be the Lord himself will correct us in mercy, Iere. 10.
as he has done many times already, and not deliver us into the hands of
our enemies to be punished by them. It may be the mother of Sisera shall look
out at the window, and cry out at the casement, Judges. 5.
Why is his Chariot so long in coming? Why tarry the wheels of his Chariot?
So let thine enemies O Lord, and the enemies of thine anointed perish, but let
them that love thee, and thy truth continue as the Sun when he rises in his
might, and as Olive plants in the house of God that flourish for ever. Amen.

The third and last hostility, against which in this Encounter you take
exception, Traterous practices of some Papists.
is the rebellion and traitorous practices of diverse of your Catholics against
our gracious Sovereign, where with I charge them, which though you labor with
all your skill and cunning to excuse, will appear to be no less impious, and
hainons in them, nor less dangerous to Prince and Country, then I have
affirmed. Your colors and cloakes wherewith you would gladly cover and hide,
the rebellious hearts and seditious minds of sundry your Romish Catholics are
specially these: the only actual rising of two Earls, (as you say) the
great pressures wherewith you have been burdened, being the common grief of
all Commonwealths, and cause that they are troubled with commotions, and
rebellions, the admirable patience of Papists and Catholics, the practices of
Protestants at home and abroad, and lastly, the light and small offense of such
as are charged to have been rebels and traitors to her Majesty: all which
being thoroughly considered will appear either most false, ^^ too slender ^o
coue^ such treacherous hearts, and rebellious practices. And to give the reader
a taste thereof (although I will not long insist upon them) has there been but
one actual rising of your Catholics in forty years? and have not the wicked
counsels of Romish traitors burst out more then once into open hostility?
what say you to the rebellion in Ireland under Doctor Saunders their chief
encourager? what of the alienating and moving of the people by your open Masses
in La^kashire and else where? what of your other attempts with arms so near
the quick, procured by your Jesuitical Masses of reconcilement? what of the
canonizing of the Northren Rebels for Martyrs, and proclaiming such wars to
be godly, just and honorable? Lastly, what is to be thought of your resolving,
directing and encouraging Babington, Parrey, Somerfield and sundry others,
that with violent hands sought to abridge our Sovereigns life? Are not these
open hostilities, and open and actual proofs that there is in you a
resolution to do any thing that you can, for the overthrow of the present
State, under which (through Gods mercy) we happily and blessedlie live? That
we had but one commotion in this Realm we may thank our good God, and not you
and your Catholics, who have done your best by procuring invasion from abroad,
and ripening rebellion at home, to multiply that one to many; but that the
mighty hand of God did always disioynt your devises, praised be his name for
it.

Fond amplifications of punishments inflicted on papists.
You complain of the bloody listes of Laws, rigorous execution and incredible
molestations, amplifying the correction which is here laid on you for your
good, with words of the highest, and hotest degree; but look back (Sir
Auditor) to your own accounts, and view with shame enough both your cruel and
bloody persecution with fire and sword, as also the mildnes of her Majesty's
Regiment, whose twenty years together pressed you with no heavier burdens,
then the penalty of a shilling by the week, or some restraint of liberty:
your Marian persecution yielded in four years more effusion of Christian
blood, by hanging, heading burning, and prisoning, then ever was heard of in
any Princes reign in this land before, or I hope will ever hereafter. It is
no new thing with you and your adherents by outcries, tragical exclamations,
and most slanderous untruths, to seek to blemish her Majesty's mild
government, and the just execution of Justice amongst us: there is a God that
knows all, and will judge between us; how light a matter soever you take it
to be, to rail upon his anointed, and to vilify and revile the reverent
Judges and wholesome laws of the land, by the odious names of Atheists and
bloody laws.

The third color wherewith you would dasell our eyes, A vain color.
in beholding your traitorous practices, is no less vain and foolish, then
the other two before are slanderous, and false: for what though it be incident
to all Commonwealths to be troubled with commotions, shall it therefore not
follow that your rebellious, and seditious practices moved only for the
maintenance of the Romish primacie, and says, do manifest the dangerousnes of
your doctrine, and treachery of your hearts against the State of Christian
Princes? you cannot defend your selves by so slight a reason. Those troubles
that were in King Henry and King Edwards reign proceeding chiefly not from
your only suffering with groaning (as you say) but from the treacherous
disloyal hearts of Papists, who were the chiefest actors therein, do convict
you of such crimes as I have charged you with. And even these rebellions so
often attempted in the latter end of King Henry the eight, and the reign of
King Edward the sixth, do testify of your admirable patience and loyalty. I
marvel with what face you can commend your Catholics, and compare them with
Protestants for loyalty, and willing subjection to Princes, when with your
own pen you show your forwardnes in every Princes reign to rebel, and yet
cannot truly charge us with any one rebellious practice in the maintenance of
true Religion.

Protestants not to be compared with Papists in rebellion.
As our doctrine is far different from yours, in the honoring of Magistrates;
so are our behauiours loyal, and obedient: what doctrine did ever attribute so
much to public authority of Magistrates as do the Protestants? or who ever
attributed less to Magistrates, or deposed more Princes, then you Papists? you
may cry with Athalia, treason, treason, but wise men know who be the traitors
indeed. 2 King. 11.
You would feign persuade your reader, that in Queen Mary's time we showed our
disposition and forwardnes to rebel; and to this purpose you compare her short
and bloody reign, with the long and peaceable government of our gracious
Sovereign. But as both Wyat and the rest were carried by other persuasions,
then the maintenance of true religion, to deal so rashly and unsoundly as they
did: so there is no reason that some private actions, and opinions generally
condemned by our doctrine should prejudice all Protestants. You have great
cause to complain of our rebellions, when you can reckon up, but one poor
insurrection, and that upon other grounds then religion, and such a one as was
suppressed without the spoil or hurt of any of the Queens side. But you that
blush not to affirm that our chief Protestants in Queen Mary's time were not
troubled, when our sovereign that now is, was then much vexed; and that none
were then forced to renounce their old Religion, when scarce any suspected of
true Religion could be suffered to live quietly, though they showed publicly
no dislike of Popish Idolatry: no marvel though you slanderously do charge
us with rebellious disposition. As for your commotions and revels you say have
been made in other countries by those of the Religion, I leave both you and
them to their Apologies in print, wherein you shall find, that none of them
did hold, that either Pope or other might depose Princes, or dispense with
Subjects for their obedience to their lawful Sovereigns. And because it
pleases you to disport your self, after your gybing manner with me Sir
Francis, and your not Saint Francis, let me in earnest tell you, that Sir
Francis would not for all his worth, that you could prove him to carry so
turbulent, seditious, and traitorous a mind against Queen and Country, as
this your Ward-word shows you to do; and so well instructed is he in the
doctrine of the Gospel which teaches obedience, as if his dearest friend in
affection, or the nearest of kin to him in blood should lift up an hand of
disloyalty against his Sovereign, they are neither friends, nor kinsfolks to
him, and he professes himself a mortal enemy to them: Lib. conform. in
initio.
And for your blasphemous Saint Francis seeing it delights you to name him;
let me call to your remembrance what you may find in the book of conformities
of him, in which he is made another Jesus, in type and figure, and is matched
with Christ from point to point, and his miracles with Christ's miracles: of
whom it is there also written, that he repented him for devising of his habit,
because God had revealed to him, that out of his order Antichrist and his sect
should come: and so Sir Francis leaves you to honor your Saint Francis at
your pleasure, as a fit Saint for you to adore in your Pope-holie worship.

About the two Earls insurrection.
Your last color and excuse, for defense of your Rebels, and Traitors, is as
simple as the rest; you would gladly persuade us, that the two Earls did but
defend themselves, when there was no force they needed to fear, if they had
feared God, and continued to live like good subjects, and had not disloyallie
intruded themselves, not only to control, but to correct the godly
government of the Queen and State. But they were set on by the Bull of Pius
Quintus, and Doctor Mortons peswasion, seeking by force to set free the
Catholics, and to restore Catholic Religion, Doctor Saunders confesses no
less. They fled presently (you say) without blows, or blood shed, but that
might be thought the badnes of their cause, and the fear that God did strike
into their hearts, at the sight or hearing of the Queens Army, and not for
want of desire to proceed further; but as I lament their fall, so I wish from
my heart they had never been so misled.

As for the two next Traitors by you mentioned, Francis Throgmorton and Charles
Paget.
Francis Throgmorton, and Charles Paget, whom you labor likewise to excuse;
the first received his just censure by the course of Justice, and that is a
just proof to all honest men of his treasons; yet seeing you seek so
shamelessly, and vnhonestlie to extenuate his fault, I heartily pray the
reader to way your own confession against him: You say he had the description
of certain Ports found in his Chamber, that he had some intelligence with
the Queen of Scots, and with Barnardin Mendoza, the King of Spaines
Ambassador. Why (Sir Encounterer) have you forgotten that Mendoza in steed of
performing the honorable parts of a well accepted Ambassador, did most
treacherously seek to betraie both the Queen and State, by practicing all
that he could to set up the Queen of Scots? and do you not remember, that it
was high time to cut off this Scottish Queen, who ceased not daily to
practice the death of our dear Sovereign? and do you think there could be
any good meaning in Throgmorton to collect Plots, and descriptions of our
Ports, having intelligence with the Queen of Scots and Mendoza, and an
Invasion being plotted and purposed against us from Spain? And if nothing else
had been proved against him, can the height of your wit, and judgment in State
matters (whereof you so much glory) clear him from being a Traitor? But it is
well known to the Honorable of our land, and those whom they employed to
examine him, that his own confession conuinceth him of more then it pleases
you to set down: and by this all the world may see and perceive your
disloyal, and dishonest meaning both to Queen and State, in thus coloring
treasons, and defending Traitors. But you will needs free Charles Paget also
another traitor, and whose fault you say was nothing, but that he went beyond
the Seas, for that he could not live with his Couscience at home: But (Sir
Encounterer) you shall find that with more conscience he might have kept home,
for whereas you say he went over to free his Conscience, you shall well
perceive that at his being beyond the Seas, he made shipwreck of Conscience
and common honesty.

Caelum non animum mutant qui trans mare currunt.
They change the air that Seas do pass,
But mind remains the same it was.
I will not stand upon that has been reported of his stealing over hither for
little goodness, changing his name (which is seldom the note of an honest man)
and calling himself Mope: but be it known to you (Sir N.D.) he was at the
consultation when York and Williams had their dispatch to go kill her
Majesty, and again he and Thomas Throgmorton should have furnished Michael
Moodie with money to come over to the same wicked end: This shows a worthy
Conscience, and yet no man knows what conscience means but your self,
although you show very little conscience or none at all in this your traitorous
Apology for them.

The other two Earls you will also defend, About the late Earl of
Northumberland, and the Earl of Arundel.
how just occasion soever they gave of just proceeding against them. You seek
not only cunningly to excuse them (though with slender proof and less
reason) but also maliciously and falsely to lay and leave a suspicion of
cruelty upon the State, for the untimely death of the one, which shows to
be the practice of your Catholics in their cruel murdering of Richard Hun,
and not ours in this or any the like, and injury to the other for being
justly proceeded against, for whom you blush not to affirm, that nothing
could be laid against him but flying for his conscience, and either hearing
or causing a Mass to be said in the Tower: when as hundreths can witness that
(besides diverse other dangerous conferences by letters and speeches) it was
directly proved, that he made a prayer for the prosperous success of the King
of Spain and his forces, being raised against her Majesty, who were thought
to be upon the Sea, coming on to attempt an Invasion, and to conquer our Land,
and tendered the same to be said by other prisoners as well as himself; and
therefore his fault was more then flying for Conscience, or hearing a Mass,
which also has joined to it a reconciliation to the Chruch of Rome: Yet this
in your Romish and traitorous vainglory, you reckon to be a glorious and
holy treason, which is not strange in men of your sect, who often think you
do God good service, when you commit great wickedness and impiety; yet in this
you might have showed your self more wise and honest to suspend your
judgment, when ignorance does conceal from you the faults for which by
course of Law and Justice men are condemned (if you were in deed ignorant of
them) and not to be over hasty to justify the wicked. But you are so forward
to be a patron for such actors, and actions, traitors and treasons, as it is
not unlike you would prove your self a very sound man to Queen and State, if
you were in place to be thoroughly sifted.

The substance of the Encounterers conclusion.
For your conclusion and shutting up of this Encounter, as you would persuade us
that all that can be alleged against your Catholics, are but trifles and
triuiall things, though they be no less then rebellions and treasons; so
(according to your ordinary custom) you strain out Gnats, and swallow down
Camels: you call evil good, and not only break the commandments, but
teach men so, that you may be the least in the Kingdom of Heaven, that is,
none at all: you commend your patience as admirable and worthy to be
canonized, which is the highest honor with Papists. You say that the Realm and
her Majesty are happy to have such subjects: but as you know empty vessels
sound loudest, and the commending of your selves is not seemly; so the often
perils that her Majesty has been in, and the continual troubles which you
have brought upon the Realm, do cry aloude that you gloss and slatter most
lewdly: You would gladly have the leaf turned against us, that we might again
be persecuted with fire and sword, and beaten with the rod of Scorpions: but
our hope is that the God of mercy will not perform the desire of the wicked,
but rather correct us in mercy: If the State were such (as thanks be to God
it is not such) that we were pressed with griefs and afflictions, yet our
doctrine and former example of obedience, do move a far better expectation
then you will conceive of us; but with the Apostle we affirm, We reckon
little to be judged of you, etc. You continue to impute to me to have a
railing and slanderous tongue; but as I have sufficiently cleared my self
from wrongful charging of any, so I had rather in your account to be so deemed
for speaking sharply against Traitors and treason, then out of a disloyal
heart (as you do) to darken and smoothe both the one and the other. And so
neither feeling any of your blows given (whereof you proudelie and vainly
brag) nor regarding your threatened bastinadoes so long as you dare not appear
and show your face I rest assured, that (whatsoever your railing tongue writes
of me, or your malicious heart judges of me) the Honorable and wise of the
Land will judge me to have more truth and Charity, then you loyalty or
common honesty: for it cannot stand with loyalty to smooth the faults of
traitors, or with honesty to rail at any that gives warning to Subjects to
take heed of their treasous.

Resistance to the fourth Encounter, concerning Bishop Gardener, and Cardinal
Allen.
I Have been the longer in my resistance to the three former Encounters,
because they are most material, and of greatest importance: the first
concerning the blessings of almighty God powered upon this land, through the
happy reign of his handmaide and our Sovereign Elizabeth: the second about
the absurd Popish positions which this wrangler says (but says only without
just proof) are falselie imputed to them: the third touching the person of her
Majesty, and her marvelous deliverances from many dangers, both before her
obtaining the Crown, and since her establishment in the same. The rest that
follow in his other Encounters are of smaller moment, and of all that are
indifferent and not partial amongst us, generally known and acknowledged,
and therefore shall need the less my labor and pains to lay them open. But
for orders sake to take a short view of them, as they are by him headed out: In
this Encounter he brings in a yoke of Popish Prelates, Bishop Gardener and
Cardinal Allen, Bishop Gardener and Cardinal Allen compared.
whom he supposes to be greatly wronged, and injured by mee^ upon whom he
looking through the spectacles of a partial and Popish affection, imagines
greater gifts of learning and virtue in them then were in deed, making them a
peereles pair of Prelates, and very sagelie compares their qualities
together, as Plutarch does the most famous worthies of Rome and Greece: which
his comparison I pass over, as nothing concerning any thing said by me in my
former book against them. Only I yield they were birds of a feather, and
therefore fit to sly together, and according to our English proverb, like
will to like, (you know what follows) and in deed milk is not liker milk,
nor one egg another, then were these two stately Prelates, each of them being
brides of the Popes own hatching, and as it is in the Proverb, Mali corui,
malum ouum, and both of them for the Popes sake being false and treacherous
against their Sovereigns. Cardinal Allen against her Majesty (as hereafter
shall be showed) Bishop Gardener against her renowned Father, when he was
Ambassador for the King to the Emperor, having secret intelligence with the
Pope, then the Kings open and professed enemy, in so much that the King in
every general pardon that he granted by Parliament after this practice, he
did still except all treasons committed beyond the Seas: meaning thereby (as it
was supposed) that the Bishop should not take any benefit by any general
pardon, if his Majesty would at any time call him to account: and further
minded (as it seems) to have used extremity of law against him, (if the
Lord had lent his Highness longer life) upon just matter not taken away by any
pardon, commanding thereupon often the Lord Paget (being then his Secretary)
to keep safe certain writings which he had against him. But the parities, or
disparities of your two Prelates by you compared together, I pass over as
matter impertinent, and come to your exceptions against my speeches uttered of
them in particular. And first concerning Bishop Gardener he sets down these
my speeches. Gardener that most proud and bloody monster, left no corner of
his wit unsought, to shorten her Majesty's days, and prevent her by the
bloody slaughter of her sacred person, from being our Queen. And again, The
Recusants of our age cannot profess, nor make greater show of loyalty and
love to our dread Sovereign, neither, etc.

Bishop Gardener.
This my charge against Gardener this sturdie Encounterer seeks to beat
back, first, by commending him for a most tender hearted, and mild man, that
no one great man, in Queen Mary's time, was farther from blood and bloudines
then he; and that any good natured Protestant that lived in that time, and had
wit to judge, and indifferency to speak the truth without passion, would
confess as much. Which because himself cannot but know to be a shameless
untruth, and therefore doubting how the general commendation of his mild
nature would be entertained, he for a particular instance, tells us a long
tale (of like authority) concerning his tender affection toward the Duke of
Northumberland, after he was condemned, etc. which as it nothing concerns
our matter in hand, so having only his bare word to warrant it, the
indifferent reader may credit and regard as he sees cause.

A short view of Gardiners mild nature.
And for the better direction of thy judgment (gentle Reader) and fuller
justifying of my accusation against him, it shall not be amiss to take a short
view of a few particulars, by which the gentleness of this Bishops nature may
appear to all men: I will not here stand upon the secret, intestine, and
deadly hatred which he always bare to the favorers of the Gospel; and how
through his wily craft he so far prevailed with the king to proceed in such
sort against the worthy Martyr of Christ John Lambert as he did: Gardiners hard
dealing with Marbeck.
the only example of Marbecke, for that kings time, shall suffice. Who being
conuented before Gardener, for the concordance in English (now extant,) which
he then had begun, was by all means (by men sent from the B.) sifted to
detect whom he knew to be favorers of the Gospel: with which importunities
the man of God being wearied, he burst forth into these words; O Lord, what
will my Lord do? will his Lordship compel me to accuse men, and wot not
whereof? After this the Bishop himself talks with him, and asks him whether
he will cast away himself? To whom he answering, no my Lord, I trust: yes quoth
the Bishop, thou go about it, for thou will utter nothing. What a devil
made thee meddle with the Scriptures, thy vocation was another way; etc. and
why the devil did thou not hold thee there? Heresy for lay men to meddle
with the Scripture.
And after hard pressing him to detect and accuse some, and his denial to
accuse any for heretics, because he could not justly: the mild Bishop told
him, Since thou art so wilful and stubborn, thou shall go to the devil for
me. And so, whereas Sir Anthony Wingfield Captain of the Guard, had before
sent word to the keeper of the Marshalsey, that it was the Counsels pleasure,
he should entreat Marbecke gently: this charitable and tender hearted Gardener
sent word to the keeper, to lay yrons upon him, to keep him fast shut in a
chamber, alone that (when he came to meat) he should speak to no man, nor no
man to him; and further that he should suffer no manner of person (no not his
own wife) to come to him, or minister any thing to him, and in this straight
and hard sort continued he about three weeks. His wife made often suit to the
Bishop to be permitted to visit her husband, but his bowels wanted compassion,
till at length she meeting him at the Court, was bold to pull him by the Rochet
and said to him: O my Lord these eighteen days I have troubled your Lordship,
now for the love of God, and as ever you came of a woman, put me off no longer,
but let me go to my husband: One of the kings servants, and her next neighbor
standing by, besought him to be good Lord to her; which had her own mother
lying bedredde upon her hands, besides five or six children. I promise you
(quoth the Bishop) her husband is a great heretic, Gardiners argument to prove
an heretic.
and has read more Scripture then any man in the Realm has done, and he
knows a great sort of harlots and will not utter them, but at length gave her
leave to go to her husband, willing her to advise him to utter such naughty
fellows as he knew, etc.

In Queen Mary's time when he was now Lord Chancellor, and ruled the roast, how
far not only from tender pity, but even from civil humanity, he showed
himself to be, the examples are too many, and experiments too plain; and
therefore needless here to be inserted. But a taste must be given to the
Reader, for which this may suffice: when that reverent learned man, (and
afterward a most constant Martyr of Jesus Christ) D. Rowland Tailor, Doctor
Tailor
a Doctor professed in both the laws, and withal a right perfect divine,
appeared before Gardener upon his summons; how ungently did he entreat him? nay
how furiously did he at the very first sight rage against him? Gardiners mild
Rhetorike.
not reasoning with him mildly (as he came a Bishop) but barking at him like a
mad dog, calling him knave, traitor, heretic, villain, varlet,
beetlebrow-foole, etc. and afterward committed him to prison, where he lay a
year and three quarters, till the Papists had gotten certain old tyranous
laws (by King Henry and King Edward before put down) to be revived again;
upon which Gardener cyted him and others ex officio before himself and his
colleagues, and pronounced against him, Master Bradford and Master Saunders,
three worthy learned and painful preachers, the sentence of death.

His dealing with Master Philpot Archdeacon of Winchester, Master Philpot.
a Gentleman of a good house, being a Knights son (though railing Story
cried out against him, he is a vile heretic knave, for an heretic is no
Gentleman) I ask not of what compassion and mercy, but of what equity and
justice, did it savor? when he committed this valiant Soldier of Jesus Christ
prison, and kept him there a year and a half, taking all his living from him,
without all law, only because he spoke his mind freely of the questions
proposed to be disputed of in the Convocation house; whereunto besides the
liberty of the house they had the Queens warrant for their security. But it
booted not to plead privilege of the house, or warrant from the Queen,
tender hearted Gardener of his dissolute (I would say) absolute power kept him
so long in prison, and afterward sent him to his slaughterman Boner to be
branded to the fire: Boner unwilling to meddle with Master Philpot.
In whom this is worthy the noting, that he seemed as if he had been unwilling
to have meddled with Master Philpot, saying, I marvel why other men will
trouble me with their matters, but I must be obedient to my betters, and I wis
men speak otherwise of me then I deserve, (as if he should have said, that the
bloody affection of Gardiners heart must be executed by Boners hands:) And
when in that time of Master Philpots captivity with Boner, Gardener died,
Boners speech concerning Gardiners being dead.
Boner perceiving that Master Philpot would by no means recant, burst forth
into these words, Now ye think because my Lord Chancellor is dead, we will
^^^^e no more. Which words what do they argue else? but that howsoever some
Bishops and other Clergy Masters were the inferior executioners, yet Gardener
the Lord Chancellor was the Arch-Dedalus and chief master of the work, and
he that did blow the bellows to kindle all the fires wherein the bodies of so
many Martyrs were consumed to ashes.

The which will appear more plainly, if we consider a memorable story set
down by Master Fox of him, reported by two credible persons of worship in the
house of a worshipful Citizen bearing then office in the City of London, from
Master Mundaie secretary sometime to the old Lord Thomas Duke of Norffolke;
namely, that the same day Master Ridley and Master Latimer were burnt at
Oxford, the old Duke of Norffolke with this reporter his secretary attending
on him, came to Bishop Gardiners house; the old aged Duke waiting there for
his dinner, the Bishop was not disposed to dine, till at length about four of
the clock comes in his servant in all post haste from Oxford, assuring the
Bishop most certainly that he saw fire put to them. Then comes out Gardener
rejoicing to the Duke, Gardiners joy for Bishop Ridley and master Latimers
death with God his sudden stroke upon him.
and calls for dinner, and began merely to eat; but the bloody Tyrant had
not eaten a few bits, but the sudden stroke of God his terrible hand fell
upon him, in such sort as (to use mine Authors own words) immediately he was
taken from the table, and so brought to his bed, where he continued the space
of fifteen days, during which time he could not avoid by urine or otherwise
any thing that he received, whereby his body being miserably inflamed within
(who had inflamed so many godly Martyrs before) was brought to a wretched end.
And thereof no doubt (as most like it is) came the thrusting out of his tongue
from his mouth, so swollen and black with the inflammation of his body. A
spectacle worthy to be noted and beholden of all such bloody burning
persecutors.

But not to stand upon the devotion of this your mild Bishop, who would not
eat till he were sure of the death of these two worthies (a devotion matchable
with that of the Tyrant Richard the third, then but Protector, who swear by
Saint Paul that he would not dine till the Lord Hastings head were off, and
would needs stay so long for his oaths sake) nor upon the great joy this
Bishop conceived at the certain report of their deaths, as if the shedding of
Christian blood had been to him as the obteyning of great treasures; nor yet
upon the fearful judgment of God, so upon the present, and on the sudden
inflicted upon him: I will remember this one thing, how that the Duchess of
Suffolk espying him in the Tower, (being the prisoner) inking Edwards reign:
said it was merry with the Lambs, now the Wolf was shut up: which speech,
this your gentle natured Bishop, and nothing vindicatiue (as you term him)
well remembered in Queen Mary's time, and therefore in the first lent of her
reign, studied an holy practice of revenge, first by touching this Duchess in
the person of her husband Master Bertye, for whom he sent an attachment to the
Sheriff of Lincolneshire, with a special letter, commanding him most strictly
to attach him, and without Bale to bring him up to him to London, whereas he
had no cause at all to send for him. Afterward examineth him of the Duchess
his wives Religion, whether she was now as ready to set up the Mass,
Gardiners desire of revenge against the Duches of Suffolk.
as before to pull it down, with further objections to the same purpose: by
which Master Berty fully perceived the cruel mind of the Bishop set upon
bloody revenge, and therefore obtained leave of the Queen for his urgent and
important affairs to pass the Seas, secretly appointed how the Duchess
should come after, who with her daughter of a year old, with a few of her
meanest servants, in great danger took barge at Lion Key, in the mistie
morning, choosing rather to commit her self to the wind and waves, then to
your Gardiners gentle, and nothing vindicatiue disposition.

What should I stand upon any further matter to lay open the nature and
disposition of this your mild Prelate? Boner who knew him better then you (Sir
Encounterer) does more then justify me in that large description of Gardiners
nature, and disposition, Boners description of Gardener.
which he wrote to the Lord Cromwell, wherein he terms him to be of an hard
heart, and cankred malicious stomach, that he spoke with a Pilates voice, and
charge him that in talk had with him, he bad turde in Boners teeth again
and again, that the flesh of his cheeks began to swell and tremble, and
that he looked as if he would have run through him, that he behaved himself
bedlemly, that in malice and disdain he might be compared to the devil of
hell, not yielding to him in pride at all: with sundry other notes of such
special commendation, which in that letter of Boners to the Lord Cromwell are
to be found. And this (I hope) is sufficient to clear me from malignitie, and
sycophancie, for calling so unworthy a man a bloody monster.

After this flourish to make show in general of the Bishops mild mature
(whereof by these few) About Gardiners seeking Queen Elizabeth's life.
particulars the reader may more soundly judge) this his Proctor proceeds to
clear him of seeking her Majesty's life in the reign of her sister: but it
seems his conscience gave him a secret check, when he set pen to paper about
this defense. For how weak an Apology does make for so heinous an accusation?
A weak Apology.
the lines are few in which he wrappeth up the handling of this weighty case,
and the reasons as weak as water that he alleges for the Bishops clearing.
It was so far off from Gardiners condition and nature (says this forward
Proctor) that he dares say I do him apparent and wilful wrong. What (Sir) if
for malice he might be compared to the devil, (as Boner witnesses) what could
be more agreeable to his nature, then to seek the blood of so gracious and
innocent a Lady? And seems not (trow ye) his case to be very good which so
wooddie, yea so hot, and fiery a Patron seeks to maintain with so slender
and cold a defense, as I dare say he does him apparunt and wilful wrong? But
he adds, she was an object rather of love and compassion, then of envy, and
hatred: But what love could proceed from him that was of an hard heart, and
cancred malicious stomach? what compassion could he show whose very bowels
were cruel? As for the misterious bracelet of which this brabler talks, in
which all the secrecy of Wyats conspiracy was said to lie hidden, which
Gardener farther pierced then any other, but never used or urged the knowledge
gotten thereof, to the Ladies peril: I answer, that the mystery of this
Shemeis treachery against that innocent Lady, The mystery of his tale of a
misterious bracelet.
and his now Sovereign, may hereby appear to all men; who to grace his client
with the commendation of a deep politic, to pearse further into the mystery
of that conspiracy, then any other, and of a tender hearted man, in not using
nor urging his knowledge gotten thereof to the Ladies peril: lays the
highest disgrace upon his Sovereign that can be imagined; as if she had been
secretly confederate with Wyat in his rebellion against her sister; and that
this Eagle-eyed Bishop had spied so much in a misterious bracelet, but of pure
good will did never urge it to her peril. Whereas for ever finding any
suspicion against her, through so many hard and earnest siftings, his own
mouth is a witness against him, who (kneeling down to her Grace, after long
trial had of her loyalty and integrity,) said, Gardener confesses the wrong
imprisonment of Lady Elizabeth.
Then has your Grace the advantage of me, and other of the Lords, for your
long and wrong Imprisonment. As for his concealing of any thing that he might
find against her, or desire to free her from danger: who knows not how
far both he and the rest of the Clergy were from any such inclination? For
when Wyat at his death cleared the Lady Elizabeth, Doctor Weston cried, D.
Weston.
Believe him not good People, etc. Which being related to Sir Thomas White then
Lord Mayor, he was moved at the bloody humor of this Popish Doctor, and said
of him with indignation, In sooth I never took him but for a knave. But was
your Bishop more mildly affected then the Doctor? Nay he was so unwilling to
have her cleared, as he chafed exceedingly at a poor Apprentise in London,
for saying that Wyat had cleared her, and the Lord Courtney, Gardener unwilling
to have the Lady Elizabeth cleared.
and caused the Lord Mayor to bring this poor youth to the Star Chamber,
where he uttered a speech upon that occasion, and pronounced the innocent
Lady guilty, and commanded the Apprentise should be punished. And if Master
Bridges then Lieutenant of the Tower had not (as is reported) most honestly
adventured to Queen Marie, to inform her of a warrant that was out for the
execution of this her worthy Sister, the innocent Lady had lost her life,
poor England had been deprived of so gracious a Sovereign, and the light of
our Candlestick had been put out. But blessed be the Lord who gave not the
Soul of his Turtle Dove to the beasts, nor his darling to the power of the
dogs.

The bringing in of the Spaniard.
With this, for good fellowship may walk hand in hand, his plea for the Bishops
freedom concerning the bringing in of the Spaniard; of which I affirm, that
Gardener and his accomplices never rested, until they had brought in the
Spaniard, and matched him with Queen Marie: by which they betrayed God, her,
and the whole Realm: from which this Proctor first would clear him, by
imagining in him a partial affection to the Earl of Devonshire, whom he would
have married to the Queen. But it were strange that in a man of Gardiners
place, there should be so great ficklenes and mutabilitie, that in so short a
space, so great love should be turned into such extreme hatred; a little
before in his love he would have made him (as you say) as a King, by matching
him to Queen Marie: within a while after he would have made him worse then a
caitife, and to suffer as a Traitor, accusing him earnestly in the Star
Chamber, when as Wyat had cleared him. Secondly, he demands if this had
been so (as he says it was not) why did they betraie therein both God, their
Queen and their Country? To which his demand I briefly answer. God was
betrayed because his true Religion was exiled, (which Queen Marie, before her
obtaining the Crown, promised to the Suffolk men to maintain,) and in steed
thereof Idolatry was established. The Queen they betrayed, because they
matched her to an vnhusband-like husband, who estranged both his affection and
company from her, which was thought to be a great cause of the shortning of
her days: for when the cause of her often sighing a little before her death
was asked, of her self she confessed this to be one (though not the only)
cause, that she could not enioie the company of her husband. The Realm they
betrayed, because they sought to make it subject to a stranger, though yet
(blessed be God) do all they what they could, or the Queen herself, they
could never set the Crown of England upon King Phillips head: And that the
temporal inconveniences by that match were not more fully felt, God is to be
praised, who gave him here so short an aboade. Further by this match they
bringing in the Pope, and resigning the Supremacy to him, did wrong to the
Crown: for by the Law of God, the King in his own Realm is chief
governor, both in causes Ecclesiastical and Civil; the Pope contrariwise
will not only be above the King in all causes Ecclesiastical, but also in
some Civil, challenging all Bishops and Clergy men for his subjects,
exempting them in things Civil from the Kings authority, whereby he robs
the King of a great part of his Subjects, and in the Realm does gleane out
another Realm to himself: yea challenges to have power to depose the Prince.
Again, the ancient Laws of the Realm were hereby made to stand for ciphers;
the Laws of the Realm will have a Priest for debt to be sued before a
temporal Judge, but the Popes Law comes and cries the contrary: Patrones
by the Laws of the Realm should give Benefices; but the Popes Law sets
them besides. All the dangerous consequences threatened to this Realm by that
match, it is not my purpose to set down: I will only add a few verses made
long since concerning that marriage, by which the Reader may partly see what
is to be judged of it.

Regi, non Regi, nupsit, non nupserat, Angla est,
Non Angla est, grauida est, non grauida est, grauius est.
Parturit atque parit, sic vos voluistis ouantes,
Nil tamen illa parit, sic voluit dominus.
Duxerat ad paucos menses, mox deserit idem,
Sponsa est, mox vidua est, sic voluit Dominus:
Irrita frustrentur semper sic vota malorum,
Perniciem patriae, qui voluere suae.
A King she matched, yet not a King,
scant do her married call;
English she is, not English, yet great;
not with child at all.
She breeds and bears in her womb,
as ye triumph and brave,
Yet brings no child into the world,
even so the Lord would have.
Philip a few months married her,
then leaves her with great speed;
A wife she is, a widow straight,
the Lord had so decreed.
Even so confounded be th'attempts
of wicked Papists all,
Which of their native Country seele
the ruin and the fall.
Now I come to the great fume and chafe of this hot Encounterer, for that I say
the Recusants cannot profess more love and loyalty to the Queen that now is,
then did Gardener, Boner and Tunstal to her noble Father and Brother, which
they did confirm by Printed books: for Gardener in his book de vera
obedientia, etc. where like a grave Statesman, Gardiners book de vera
obedientia, with Boners proface.
and another Nestor, he takes upon him to tax me either with ignorance in
the matters of our own Realm, or with forwardnes to tell untruths. His
allegations are two, the first that Gardiners book de vera obedientia was
written for fear of the Kings violent proceeding, or not being well instructed
perhaps in the controversy of the Supremacy; and that shaken with the
frailty of humane infirmity, he shrunk with Saint Peter: But he may
remember that first Gardener with sundry others, did take a voluntary and
solemn oath against the Pope, as by the copy thereof yet extant may appear,
wherein he swears purely of his own voluntary accord, and absolutely in
the word of a Bishop, etc. Then he stays not hear but writes his book de
vera obedientia, for the Kings, and against the Popes Supremacy: which he
professes to do with long and mature deliberation, and Boner in his preface
before that book, persuades the reader to esteem Gardiners censure and
authority, to be of more weighty credence, in as much as the matter was not
rashly, and at all adventures, but with judgment and wisdom examined, and
discussed, saying, that a man may rightly call him Fabius, that with his
advised taking of leisure restored the matter. The second allegation is, that
for King Edwards Reign it is a flat fable and fiction that I tell of Bishop
Gardiners following the sway also of that time. Gentle (Sir Encounterer) did
not Gardener again in the Reign of King Edward, take a solemn oath against
the Popes usurped authority, and subscribed to the Kings lawful Supremacy,
(...) in causes Ecclesiastical within his own Realm. Yea did he not before
King Edward flatly preach against the Popes Supremacy, as also against
Images, Ceremonies, Munkeries, Chauntries, etc. Therefore do no more
blasphemouslie compare Saint Peter^ fall to Gardiners dissimillation^ Saint
Peter denied upon the sudden^ and within few hours (...): Gardener swear
solemnly, preached publikelie, and wrote upon long and advised (...), and so
continued many years, till (...) authority (...) another course.

Gardiners Sermon in Queen Mary's time upon Romans 13.
Concerning his sermon made at Paul's Cross upon this text, Hora est ^amp^ de
somno surgere^ It is time for us now to arise from (...), I shall need little
to answer, because it (...) concerns my former book: but how fir^^e soever
your wisdom^ thinks, that the time since King Henry shaking of the Popes
tirannie might be compared to a sleep, and the resuming of the Pope withal
his wares to be an awaking; yet what more like might then Popery, and the
living (...) unto a sleepe^^ For as darkness co^ereth all things in the night,
and men cannot walk safely for want of light: so Ignorance prevails in
Pop^^^e, and the people are misled therein, so that they cannot see which way
they ought to walk, because they are not permitted to exercise themselves in
the Word, which is a lantern to our feet, and a light unto our steps: and as
in sleep the hungry man dreameth that he cares, but when he awaketh his
soul is empty; so in Poper^e the people being fed with men's traditions,
think themselves in good plight, but when they are truly wakened (as Jonah)
by Gods spirit, they perceive that they were hunger-starued, for want of the
true food of their soul, the word of God. In stead of all which large
comparison of those times of King Henry and King Edward to a sleep, and
commending the Bishops wisdom for the choice of so fit a text: I will set by
way of opposition, another euigilate (or caveat to awake) made to the Pope and
his Clergy, long before the profounde Sermon of this you^^ Bishop, even in the
time of Henry the fourth, called the A.B.C. The A.B.C. to the Pope and his
Clergy in Hen. 4. time.
AWake ye ghostly persons, awake, awake,
Both Priest, Pope, Bishop, and Cardinal:
Consider wisely what ways that ye take,
Dangerously being like to have a fall:
Every where the mischief of you all,
Far and near breaks out very fast,
God will needs be revenged at the last.
How long have ye the world captiued?
In sore bondage of men's traditions,
Kings and Emperors you have deprived,
Lewdly usurping their chief possessions.
Much misery you make in all Regions,
Now your frauds be almost at the last cast,
Of God sure to be revenged at last.
Poor people to oppress you have no shame,
Quaking for fear of your bloody tyranny,
Rightful Justice you have put out of frame,
Seeking the lust of your God the Belly;
Therefore ^^d^re you holdlie ce^tifie,
Very little though you be thereof aghast,
Yet God will be revenged at the last.
But to look back a little upon this famous Sermon, in the long narratio^
that you set down by occasion of this Sermon, I must examine some few points,
wherein either this Proctor belieth the Bishop, or the Bishop the King. And
first if it be true that he affirms that King Henry the eight appointed
Gardener to be one of the sixteen Counselors in his testament to govern his
Son, and the Realm: how happened it that Sir Anthony Brown was so earnest
and importunate a suitor to the King, to have Gardener put into his Will again
when he was put out? Gardener put out of King Henry's Will.
And why did the King bid him hold his peace, and trouble him therewith no
more? For if he were in, he would trouble them all; and if he moved him any
more for Gardener, he would also put him out. Is not this an argument that the
King reposed great trust in Gardener for the government of his Son and the
Realm? Another thing you say Gardener uttered in his Sermon, that King Henry
in his latter time was inclined to reconcile himself to the Pope. But I would
the Bishop had had more wit to speak truth, and less skill in lying: King
Henry the eight not minded to reconcile himself to the Pope as Gardener
says, but quite contrary.
for it is apparent that not long before the Kings death, he with his own
mouth answered the Ambassador of Frederick Duke of Saxony, that if the
quarrel of the Duke his master were nothing else against the Emperor but for
Religion, he should stand to it strongly, and he would take his part. Nay
more then this (as the worthy Archbishop of Canterbury Doctor Cranmer, a man
far more inward with the King then Gardener was, does testify) the King but
little before his death resolved, talking with the Archbishop, and French
Ambassador, that he and the King of France within one half year, would not
only change the Mass in both the Realms to a Communion, as it is now used,
but utterly to have banished the Bishop of Rome and his usurped authority: Yea
they were so thoroughly and firmly resolved in that behalf, that they minded
also to exhort the Emperor, to do the like in Flaunders and other his
Countries and Seigniories, or else to break off from him.

A third thing in this discourse you allege, that Bishop Gardener was wont to
say of King Henry, that after he left to love that person which by Gods law,
and man's law, he was bound to love above all others (to wit his first wife and
Queen) he never loved any person heartily, and constantly after.

Whereunto I shortly answer, that concerning his often changes of his wives
putting some to death, About King Henry's divorce from his first wife with Guard.
judgment of it.
and others away, I will not take upon me to answer at all. But to Gardiners
report I answer, that this his mutabilitie proceeded not hereof, because he
ceased to love the first, but because he first loved where he should not,
namely his own brothers wife, against the voice of God and nature: as
crouching and glosing Gardener, who flattered with the issue of this unlawful
match, not in word only, but in public writing professed to the whole world,
utterly condemning the former marriage, with his brothers wife, and approving
and justifying the second with Queen Anne. In his book De vera obedientia, he
writes of that point to this purpose. And amongst these, Since there is
commandment that a man shall not marry his brother's wife, what could the
King: excellent Majesty (...) otherwise then he did? by the consent of the
people and judgment of his Church, that is, be divorced from unlawful
marriage, and use lawful and permitted ^^^^^^tion: and obeying (as (...) it
(...)) conformablie (...) commandment, cast off her whom neither law, nor
right permitted him to have, and take him to chaste and lawful marriage?
Wherein although the sentence of Gods word (whereto all things ought ^^s^oupe)
might suffice: yet his Majesty was contented, to have the assisting consents
of the most notable grave men, and the censures of the most famous Universities
of the whole world: and all to the intent, that men should see he did both that
he might, and ought to do uprightly, seeing the best learned, and most worthy
men have subcribed to it, showing therein such obedience, as Gods word
requires of every good and godly man; so as it may be said that both he
obeyed God, and obeyed him truly, etc. Hitherto Gardiners words. Who reading
this discourse of Gardener, concerning the kings first unlawful, and his second
lawful marriage, would ever have suspected such mutability in ye man? so
suddenly to turn the Cat (as the Proverb is) in the pan, approving that
which before he openly condemned, and condemning that which before he
publicly approved? or who noting this his inconstancy, and not this only,
but the other of condemning and abiuring the Popes Supremacy, and earnest
maintaining of it again; will not think him a very Proteus, which can change
himself into all shapes, serve all times, sooth all Princes affections, with,
^it, aio, negat, nego? And so I leave, your wavering Bishop, and come to your
constant Cardinal.

About whom you profess to be very brief; Cardinal Allen.
but if you had not spoken in his defense at all, you had showed yet some love
of truth, and hate of treason: for as wicked Sheba blew the trumpet of sedition
against David; so has this your Cardinal done against her Majesty. In my
former book, I charge him that though he seems to wish that Doctor Saunders,
and Doctor Bristow had spared to speak so much in defense of Puis Quintus his
Bull against her Majesty: yet he both affirms, that these two learned men,
of great zeal, and excellency, had their special reasons to do so. And in
another treatise, Viz. his defense of Sir William Stanlies act in giving over
Deuentre to the King of Spain, he does as fully approve the Bull, as any of
the other: which though I condemn (as good cause I should, being a point of so
high treason, as that the Queen being by the Pope deposed, is no longer Queen
no^ to be obeyed) yet you answer for him smoothly, that he must needs be of
like judgment, with Saunders and the rest: and that he might speak his mind
plainly, (being in the place and dignity that he was) when occasion should be
offered. Allens judgment of Pius Quintus Bull.
Which in other words is as much to say, as your Cardinal must needs be of the
judgment, that the Queen was no longer Queen after the Bull published,
neither might her Subjects obey her: But yet it was good policy to speak
sparingly of that point, and for the Papists to yield for a time outward
obedience, to avoid the danger of the law, till a fit time might come, either
by open force, or secret treason to put the Bull in execution. And so much do
the faculties granted by Gregory the thirteenth to Parsons, and Campion
import: Parsons and Campions faculties.
which is further warranted by Saunders going after into Ireland with Italian
and Spanish forces, Saunders Rebellion in Ireland
to have deprived her Majesty of that kingdom: which fact as you cannot deny,
so will you not show to detest in a subject against his Prince, because it was
for your Pope.

For a further defense yet of your Cardinal, you allege the example of
childrens sorrow, A similitude alleged for Allens defense examined.
to see their parents at jar, that the yonges sort are fitter to weep and
mourn, then to determine the controversies, and that the elder sort may speak
more freely, and interpose their judgments also, (but ever with due reverence
to both parents, etc.) All which by way of similitude you apply to our Queen
as a mother, and your Pope as a father; and to your Saundrs, Allen, Bristow,
Stapleton, etc. as elder brethren, and to the Priests and lay men in England
as younger brethren, etc. which similitude consists of nothing but
dissimilitudes. For first the Pope is no way our father, and therefore our
obedience, reverence, and love, not to be divided betwixt the Queen and him,
The Pope no way our father.
as the childrens betwixt the father and mother: the Queen is our mother, both
nourishing us as a tender parent in things temporal, as also in taking care
for the Church of Christ in this land, in things spiritual, according to the
Lords promise by the Prophet to his Church. Kings shall be thy nursing fathers,
and Queens thy nurses: So did Iehosaphat, Ezechias, Josias, amongst the
Jews; Constantine, Justinian, Charles the great, with other like Princes
amongst the Christians, command and make laws in causes ecclesiastical, and
acknowledged no universal father-hood of your Pope. I wish he did discharge the
duty of a true spiritual father within his own Diocese and Bishopric, but
it is an hard testimony that Laurentius Valla gives him. Papas dici nomine
Patres, re Parricidas, that the Popes are called fathers in name, but in deed
they are Parricides. Your elder brethren yield not due reverence to the Queen
their mother.
Again, if the elder brethren interpose their judgment betwixt their Parents,
by your own confession it must ever be with due reverence to both parts: this
reverence your elder brethren have not showed toward the Queen, (too good a
mother for so ungracious Impes,) whom they not only call heretic, pretended
Queen, usurper, etc. but have by all means sought the murdering of her
sacred person. Thirdly, the younger children (you say) must hold their peace
and mourn for the contentions, but not intermeddle: Your younger brethren are
the elders agents against the Queen.
But (Sir) your elder brethren, (whom you allow to speak) are far enough
from reach, they may safely define what they will against the Queen, and cast
abroad their judgments in railing books to younger brethren, to settle in them
a consent thereto: Which being done, they must yet make show not to intermeddle,
to the end they may the better avoid peril to their persons, and secretly
hearten the people against her Majesty.

Take an instance hereof, from one of your younger brethren, one Pain a Priest:
Pains practice against her Majesty.
who walked no less closely for his safety, then he was directed; nor less
cunningly to corrupt the peoples hearts, then he was commanded: who from his
own mouth discovered to one Eliot, a bloody platform laid to destroy her
iestie, and diverse of her Honorable Council with armed men: the effecting
whereof stayed only the coming over of certain Priests which were expected,
and in the mean time (through Gods goodness) this horrible treason was
discovered, and prevented. And Pain being asked, how they durst practice or
attempt any such mischievous action? his answer was; that to kill the Queen,
or to use any cruelty against her, or any that would take her part, was no
offense to God, and that they might do it as lawfully as to a brute beast; and
to approve himself a fit messenger to be sent on such a bloody errant, he
affirmed that himself would be one of the first that should execute the same:
here is one of your younger brothers, whom all the world must confess to be a
fit son for such a father as your Pope is.

Besides this, your Cardinal Allen, Doctor Worthington and others (as elder
brethren) sent Richard Hesketh a Gentleman of Lancashire and a younger brother,
Heskets treason.
to induce the Lord Strange late Earl of Derbie to make a sudden rebellion
in England, and to take upon him the title of the Crown; assuring him from
them and others, of treasure and foreign forces to maintain the same: which
treason the Honorable Earl dutifully detected, Hesketh himself confessed, and
bitterly cursed his elder brethren, to make him a younger brother, to adventure
the danger of the treason, that they as elder brethren do teach and devise,
far enough from reach. Is this the weeping of your younger brethren without
intermedling? are these the tears? then are they of a right Crocodiles brood,
which seems to weeepe, but it is to this end, that they may sooner kill and
destroy. Nay further then this, these elder brethren commend to their yongers,
treason against her Majesty, for a point of their faith, namely, that if the
Pope say the word, none of the Papists ought to obey her Majesty, nor to
account her Queen of England: Treason against the Queen made a point of the
popish faith and religion.
for in the cases of conscience (as Doctor Bilson now Bishop of Winchester
notes) wherewith the Jesuits that came into England were furnished, to the
55. Article, when they be asked whether the Bull of Pius Quintus, that was
given out, or any Bull that the Bishop of Rome can hereafter give out, all
Catholics be bound to yield obedience, faith, and loyalty, to Queen
Elizabeth, as to their lawful Prince and Sovereign? the resolution is, he
that demands this question, asks (in effect) whether the Pope might do it
or no: to which demand, what a Catholic should answer it is playner then I
need here to explicate. If therefore a Catholic be asked, do you believe that
the Bishop of Rome may deprive Queen Elizabeth of her crown? he must answer
(not regarding any danger of death) I believe he may; for this question is a
point of faith, and requires a confession of (our) faith. Do not these elder
brethren (think you) dutifully put in their judgments between these two
imagined Parents, the Queen and the Pope, when they teach their younger brethren
treason against the Queen, for an article and point of their faith?

To end with this Cardinal, who (thanks be to God) ended his life before he
could attain the expected end of his traitorous dessignments: does he not
persuade that it is not only lawful, but honorable to murder Princes for
Religion? for (says he) There is no war in the world, so just, or
honorable, be it civil, or foreign, as that which is waged for Religion:
Allen persuades it to be honorable to kill the Queen.
Now if it be true that civil war (which is the war of Subjects against
the Prince) be just, and honorable, then is it an honorable act for Subjects
to kill the Prince; for the end proposed in war is victory, and the way to
victory is bloodshed, and slaughter, not so much of the people (who are not
impugned, but for partaking with the Prince) as of the Prince himself, whom
you seek to depose and place an other in his steed. And this doctrine of your
Cardinals, Parrie himself confesses under his own hand writing, did
thoroughly resolve, confirm and strengthen him, in his devilish purpose to
kill the Queen. Doctor Allens book (says he) was sent me out of France, it
redoubled my former conceits, every word in it was a warrant to a prepared
mind: Parrey resolved by Allens book to kill the Queen.
It taught that Kings may be excommunicated, deprived, and violently handled:
It proves that all war civil, or foreign, undertaken for Religion, is
honorable. All which things considered, I appeal to any good natured Papist,
who has in him any spark of loyalty in his heart to his Prince, and love to
his native country, whether this Cardinal not only by secret practices
seeking to stir rebellion against her Majesty, but by public writing earnestly
persuading the same, yea animating, and encouraging her Subjects to lay violent
hands upon her sacred person, were not indeed a cardinal and arch-traitor: and
for this his Proctor I answer him, and conclude almost with the very words
wherewith himself shuts up this his Encounter, let all men judge of this man's
treachery.

Resistance to the fifth Encounter, concerning the Jesuits.
THe sundry occurrents in his last Encounter about Bishop Gardener and
Cardinal Allen, The grouud of this Encounter.
did draw from me more lines, then either at the first entry I purposed, or
these two worthy Prelates were worthy of: Now for the ground and foundation
of his long and tedious prattle in this fifth Encounter, he says he will set
down my accusation in mine own words which are these that ensue. I do not
hear that the Popes holiness is so purged from ambition, or so reconciled to
Religion, as he means not to continue his claim for the Supremacy, or will
cease to settle the dregs of his poysonfull and superstitious doctrine amongst
us. I cannot perceive that the thirst of Parsons and his Pew-fellowes is yet
quenched, for seeking the blood of our dear Sovereign, and in her the
destruction of us all, the cause remaining still, for which heretofore they
have sought it, etc.

And here first like a right Hicke-scorner (as in deed scorning and railing are
the flowers wherewith he does garnish all his speech) he notes the fond and
ridiculous manner of my fantastical writing (as it is his pleasure to censure
it) and because his note, if it were not worth noting, men would think it
worth nothing: therefore he also painteth his margent therewith, that ye might
not fail to remember it, in these words [ Sir Francis ridiculous.] Festus
called Paul a mad man, who yet spoke the words of truth and sobernes, the
madness was in Festus himself: even so (gentle Sir) I doubt not, but to sober
men I shall appear to write soberlie, howsoever you judge me ridiculous, and
the folly shall rest in your own bosom. And therefore I say again, that I
do not hear, (nay more then that, I doubt I shall never hear) that the Popes
holiness is so purged from ambition, The Pope will not disclaim his title of
usurped Supremacy.
or so reconciled to true Religion, etc. or that the thirst of Parsons and his
Pew-fellowes is yet quenched, for seeking the blood of our dear Sovereign,
etc. And in the first you give me a good satisfaction, for you assure me, that
your holy Pope will never leave his claim for Ecclesiastical Supremacy;
because when he does that, he must leave to be Pope. In this I easily believe
you, and for this I will never put you to your oath, for it is hard for the
Pope to cease to usurp other men's rights: but if you should take a solemn
oath upon your holy Mass book, that your Popes Popedom or Supremacy was
ordained by our Savior; I could not believe you. Therefore look not that your
bare word shall go for a current proof with me in this behalf, seeing you
have no one title of the word of God to warrant it, it being manifestly to be
proved thereby, that he is wholly opposite to Christ, both in faith, manners,
and government, which long challenge of his, and lean proof of yours, is
largely confuted, and overthrown by sundry learned.

The Pope will be no Protestant, but may be an heretic.
Neither is it like (you say) that he will be so purged to become a Protestant:
and I confess this is rather to be wished, then hoped for; but if your reason
be, for that the Pope cannot err in doctrine, or become an heretic (such as
you mistake Protestants to be) your error is great in the Popes prerogatiue^
wherein not only your own friends, will be your enemies: but the examples of
sundry Popes which fell into heresy will disprove you. For Marcellinus fell
not only into heresy, Marcellinus.
but into Idolatry, for he sacrificed to Idols: Honorius held and taught the
heresy of the Monothelites, and was therefore accursed by the sixth general
Council, Honorio haeretico Anathema; Cursed be Honorius the heretic: Honorius.
Liberius became an Arrian heretic: Liberius.
Stephen fell into the error of the Donatists: Stephanus.
and to be short, John the 22. Johan. 22.
did so notoriously err about the state of the Souls after death, that his
error was by the Divines of Paris, with sound of Trumpets openly condemned, in
the presence of the King himself, who believed rather the Parisien Divines in
that point, then the Court of Rome. I would they were not so prone to heresy,
nay authors of heresy, but that they would return from whence they are
fallen, that is, to that truth of Christian Religion which we profess, which
also many Bishops of Rome for the space of some hundreths of years after
Christ, religiously professed. But though you think the Jesuits much
honored by me, in that I join them (as you say) in slander and calumniation
with the Pope himself; yet you please not to join them in defense with the
Popes holiness, whom for a prerogative you will handle by himself. And in deed
I mislike not your method, for it were absurd to make the work equal to the
workman, and to join the Creator, and the creature together: for so a learned
man writes of the sect of the Jesuits, that it is Creatura Papae nouissima
and nequissima, The last and worst creature of the Popes making.

The Jesuits.
You therefore enter your plea for the Jesuits, deferring the Popes cause to
the last save one, that he might be accompanied with the King of Spain
following in the last: whom yet you might, if you had followed your Book of
ceremonies, have sent before the Pope to lead his horse by the bridle, that
the Pope in his pontificalibus might have come all behind. But your method be
at your own choice, for defense of your Jesuits you labor and sweat amain,
but it is like Sisyphus toil; Saxum sudans nitendo, neque proficit hilum.
In rouling up the stone he takes great pain:
But all for naught, it tumbles down again.
Your tedious and irksome prolixitie, I will recompense with all convenient
brevity. You run a long course about the contradictors of the Jesuits, which
you acknowledge to be not only those whom you account heretics, but sundry
Pope-Catholikes, and to them you apply the saying of the Jews against the
Christians: That the sect of the Christians was every where spoken against,
with a long idle discourse to the same purpose. But (Sir) all this is besides
the purpose, and it is apparent that all this while you do extra chorum
saltare. If you had first by Scripture proved, and strengthened the original of
your Jesuitical society together with their doctrine and institute of life;
these places might have seemed to serve some turn: but to seek to raise up a
building without a sure and sound foundation, is to climb high for a certain,
and dangerous downfall. Therefore unless you can fetch their foundation from
the word of truth, these places of Scripture shall never be proved to concern
them any thing at all. A worthy sect it must needs be that was so lately
sounded by Ignatius Loiola, a lame Soldier, who when he would trick up
these Nouices (as the Bear licketh her deformed whelps) and send them abroad
into the world, offered by himself and his friends 3000. hoastes or
propitiatory sacrifices to God (so many horrible blasphemies against that
alone true propitiatory sacrifice of Christ Jesus, which was offered once, and
only once for our sins) thereby to obtain grace and favor to his new
erected society.

Concerning the profession of these Jesuits, their doctrine, their life, name,
and conversation, what is to be objected against them, whether they be
seditious troublers of Commonwealths, and seekers of Princes deaths, I need
not say any thing, since they are by so many, so plainly handled, and laid
open, and almost all the Christian world sees, and abhors their
treacheries. The Sorbonists of Paris will tell you, The Sorbonists judgment of
the Jesuits.
that their name is usurped without warrant: for in deed, what presumption is
it, that not being content with the ancient and honorable name of Christians,
which was first given to the saithfull at Antioch, drawn from Christ the name
of our Saviors office, who has made us Kings and Priests to God his father:
they will specially be called Jesuits, of Jesus, which is our Saviors name
of nature, and so (as much as in them is) divide Jesus from Christ, or over
presumptuouslie by a special privilege intrude upon that name: their
profession they show to be different from all others, consisting in practicing
as deep politikes against Princes and States; their doctrine that it is
lawful in some cases for Subjects to kill their Princes, Jesuits practices.
laboring by stirring up seditions, and authorizing treasons, to hold up and
strengthen the tyranny of Spain. This has been by the way proved in part in
my Resistance to the fourth Encounter, by the example of Cardinal Allen, who
publikelie teaches that there is no war, whether foreign or Civil, so
honorable, as that which is undertaken for Religion. By whose persuasions
Parrie confessed that he was animated and encouraged to kill the Queen; as
also by the cases of conscience, which the Jesuits brought with them into
England, in which they teach that it is a point of faith, that if the Pope
depose her Majesty, she is no longer to be obeyed nor acknowledge for our
Queen.

Parrie hartened by Iulio Palmio a Jesuit.
To which may be added, that Parrie was hartened and resolved likewise by Iulio
Palmio a Jesuit, to put in execution his intended treason against her
Majesty. And besides this, Edmund York, and Richard Williams (who being
apprehended confessed the same) were by Iberra the King of Spaines Secretary,
hired to murder the Queen, the assignation for the payment of 40000. Crowns
for the performance of this notable exploite, was delivered (as in deposito) to
one Holte a Jesuit an old English Rebel: York and Williams set on by Holte
a Jesuit.
Many were the conferences held about this villainy, in which Holte the Jesuit
did sit in a sort as a President, or head of all these conspiracies, and did
vehemently persuaded York and Williams to enterprise the matter, not only
receiving of them both an oath to perform it, but also ministering to them the
Sacrament thereupon (himself kissing it) and swearing to them solemnly for the
assurance of their reward; showing also to them the bill of assignation signed
with the King of Spain his Secretaries hand for the more assurance of the
payment. Yea further, that the insatiable thirst in this Jesuit after her
Majesty's blood, may be more manifest; he told York, that seeing the English
had often failed to perform this enterprise, if now it should not be
performed by York and his Company, he would afterward imploie Strangers in
it: Which in deed before this he attempted, by persuading one Patricke Cullin
an Irishman, Patricke Cullen.
and a Pencioner of the King of Spain, to come secretly into England to kill
her Majesty, and being his ghostly Father gave him absolution to this
purpose: which Cullin being at his coming apprehended, and examined, confessed
the whole, and was accordingly condemned and executed. Whether Doctor Guifford
be a Father amongst the Jesuits, Savage persuaded by D. Guifford.
or a simple Priest I cannot affirm; sure it is by Savage his own confession,
that he persuaded this Savage to undertake that most barbarous and savage act
of shedding the innocent blood of our gracious Sovereign. The famous Jesuit
Posseuine exhorts the Soldiers of Pius Quintus, Posseuine.
sent into France against those of the Religion, that it is their duty to kill
all Protestants, otherwise they break their faith, and lose their salvation.

And to leave foreign matters, and to end with our own (because to prosecute
all particulars in this kind were infinite) Wal-poole a Jesuit did by oath
lately bind Squyre, Stanley, Wal-poole.
and others, either by poison or stabbing to kill her Majesty: By which and
sundry other examples it is evident, that this Jesuitical brood is of Caines
humor, who had a bloody heart and hand to shed his brothers blood, and that
they follow, nay run far before Chore in conspiracy: France judged the
Jesuits.
For farther insight into this new foundation, I refer the Reader at his
leisure to the Bishop of Winchesters book before named, to Doctor Humfreyes
Iesuitismus, to Kemnicius, etc. The profession, practice, and virtues of this
sect was so fully sifted, and tried by the Catholics of France (that it may
not be thought to be done by enemies) that the university of Paris wholly
opposed it self against them, and by the mouth of their advocate, pronounced
the^ worthy of Banishment; and after that, upon farther search into them, the
Parliament of Paris by a public decree condemned them and cast them out of the
whole Kingdom of France into perpetual Banishment. A worthy example of the
wise and politic Kingdom of France, to try out their treacheries, which I
wish all Christian Kingdoms would follow, that so all Jesuits might be
perpetually banished, into Terra Virginea, or Terra Florida (with which this
fellow in the entry of his libell disporteth himself) from whence no danger
of them might redound to any Christian Monarch.

The chief vow of Jesuits.
Whereto the consideration of the principal vow of this newfound sect might
serve to persuade. Their principal vow is (as a Catholic Frenchman sets it
down) to obey their general or superior, who is always a Spaniard, or one
of the King of Spaynes Dominions) the words of which vow are set down to be
these. That in him they must acknowledge Christ to be present (as it were,) and
if Jesus Christ should command to go kill, they must do so. In which vow to
omit the intolerable blasphemy, that they make a sinful man equal with God:
for Gods will is the Rule of Justice, and God does not command things, because
in themselves they are good; but they are therefore good and lawful, because
he commands them; so that if God command Abraham to kill his own son, he
must yield simply obedience, and be content to do so: Sacrilege to vow
simple obedience to man.
but it is high sacrilege for any man to usurp this piuiledge of God; all men
may and oftentimes do err. So that we may not think any thing lawful to be
done, because our superiors command it, but we must examine all their
commandments whether they be consonant to the revealed will of God, which is
the Rule to try right and wrong, good and evil. Cicero an heathen man, and
led only by the light of nature, condemns as most wicked the resolution of
Blasius, who professed that he so highly esteemed Gracchus, that he held
himself bound to do whatsoever he badde him, who being asked (as before is
noted) whether if he should bid him set the Capitole on fire? answered he
would never bid me do so, but if he would, I would have done it. But (I say) to
omit this blasphemy, is it obscure by the example set down in this vow, The
scope of their vow.
(if Jesus Christ should command to go kill, they must do so) whereto this
sect tends? If Christ command to kill, we must do so; they must acknowledge
Christ to be present in their superiors, and yield obedience to them as to
Christ: If then the superiors please for the enlarging of the Spaniards
territories, or for other reasons pleasing themselves, to command to kill,
where is the safety of Princes lives? The Jesuits are sworn men to stir
Rebellion, yea and to execute murder upon Princes, if their superiors bid
them: Is not the Princes safety made to hang upon the slender twine-threed of
the favor, and good liking of the superiors of this sect? And do not the
Punies teach to our English Papists for a point of faith, in their cases of
Conscience, that the Queen is no longer to be obeyed as our lawful Sovereign
if the Pope depose her?

The conclusion.
Therefore leaving your Jesuits branded with Cains bloody work, which is
proved (not by my words) but by their own, out of their special vow, and by
their many bloody practices: I wish that as England breeds no Wolves, and
Ireland will bear no Snakes and venomous Serpents; so these two kingdoms may
never harbor, or foster Jesuits: who pretend the sweet name of Jesus, and come
in sheeps clothing; but inwardly are ravening wolves, and as serpents do
hiss into the ears of Subjects sedition and rebellion against their lawful
Sovereigns. As for Parsons, because I objected not against him any special,
or personal matter, but the general imputation of English Jesuits, I will in
that general conclude him, without spending any more words about his person.

Resistance to the sixth Encounter about Recusants.
TRue is the saying of Tully, Qui semel modestiae limits transilijt, etc. He
that has once broken the bounds of modesty, must be lustily and outragiously
impudent: so fares it with this masked and disguised companion (who being
vizoured cannot blush) he has run a strange vein of immodest and impudent
railing in the whole course of his process, Te railing of N.D.
in which praise he passes all that ever I have read; but in this Encounter he
is outrageous, and does here overcome himself: He has left no corner of his
wit unsought, how he might calumniate and slander me, he terms me an
Herodian, without conscience, and ready to pawn my soul for pleasing the
Prince and State. He charge me with a devilish and detestable disposition
against Catholics, that either I have played the part of Judas to betray and
take them, or of Caiphas to condemn and afflict them. And not content herewith
(because happily he knows no step of any bloody action can be showed in me,
that I ever whipped, stocked, fettered, or sought to bring any to death, yea
when one Hanse a Priest was by authority committed to me, it is well known, I
used him withal humanity, and courtesy, letting him fare no worse then my
self, and lodge as might have seemed a better man then himself) he charge
not only my self, but also my honorable brother that dead is, with a
supposall of wishes against her Majesty's safety, having perfectly learned
the old lesson of the schoolmaster of railing, Calumniare audacter, etc.
Rail and slander boldly; for though the wound may be cured, yet a blemish or
scarre will remain. But it is well written of Pliny, that the nature of the
Loadstone is to draw Iron to it, but an Adamant set against it does withstand
it that it cannot draw: so though this intemperate and unbridled tongue, would
draw upon me ignominy, reproach, and hatred; yet against all his calumniations
I will oppose the cleerenes and freedom of a good conscience, and that shall be
as a fenced Tower and wall of Brass, to break and blunt the forces of all the
sharp arrows, that this unruly tongue has or shall shoot against me. And
so bequeathing all his railing in his whole libell to the devil from whence it
proceeded, (as Saint James teaches us, speaking of such a tongue as his,
James. 3.
that it sets on fire the whole course of nature, and is set on fire of
hell) and commending his person to the Lords mercy, if it may please him at
any time to indue him with a better spirit: to the substance and matter of his
exceptions against me, I will shape a short, yet (I hope) a sufficient answer.

The first exception or rather mere cavil is against these my words that I
direct to the common sort. An outward civil conversation.
That though some Papists do show a good outward civil carriage in civil
matters; yet let not that possess you with too great a regard of them,
tearming it afterward a deceitful bayte. Whence you gather, or rather wring
out two things, first that I make little account of good life in Catholics:
secondly, that I leave good-workes to Catholics, and reserve only threed-bare
faith to our selves. But (good Sir) there is no such matter, you miss your
aim very much: as I know and grant that not the hearers of the law but the
doers shall be justified, and that if we be not doers of the word, but hearers
only, we deceive our own selves, having no interest in those three benefits
specified in our Creed by Christ purchased to the faithful, Forgiveness of
sins, Glorious resurrection of our bodies, Eternal life: so I did never so
much as by dream imagine any the least forwardnes to good works in Papists
above us, to whom (God forbid) that herein we should be inferior. It seems
you are possessed with Narcissus folly, to fall in love with your own shadow,
take heed of his end.

But I pray you are not the vulgar and common sort easily deceived by and
outward civil carriage of men? Who when they see a man keep good
hospitality, give alms to the poor, perform his word, and such like; (which
are all commendable virtues) they pronounce such a man, without further
inquiry to be a good Christian, and a religious man: whereas many times they
that do such things, not only are not true Christians, Civil honesty to be
found amongst Infidels and Turks.
but profess no Religion at all: may not these then be truly said to be
deceitful baits in such a man? It is written of Julian the Apostata, that he
caused almes-houses to be erected, in sundry places of his Empire, appointing
that poor Christians as well as others, should be there relieved: yielding this
reason, that since the Christians taught to do good not only to friends, but
to our enemies, it were ashame for them to be inferior to Christians in doing
good. Amongst Turks, Jews, Pagans, many things are done wisely, valiantly,
justly, and according to civil honesty; yet are but deceitful arguments to
persuade to be of their Religion, and (as Chrysostom I trow terms such men's
outward good works) as gaye apparel put upon a dead carcass. I have ascribed
no more to the Papists in this point, then may truly be yielded to the
heathen: and yet the Papists especially of the wealthier sort, when now the
stream and course of the law goes against them, using for policy much
kindness, courtesy, affability, True faith not without good works.
to the inferior and common sort; may by this means wind themselves into
their bosoms; and as a Mirmaiden with her sugared song, and the Scorpion with
his fawning and smiling, mean destruction in the end: fo by this plausible
courtesy they seek to draw and induce to their religion, by which sugared
bait many are ensnared, with the words of our Savior, Beware of false
Prophets, by their fruits ye shall know them, etc. I gladly agree and
subscribe to them, as also to the testimony of Saint James: Thou have faith,
and I have works, show me thy faith without works, and I will show thee my
faith by my works. For as we see not the soul of man (it being a spiritual
substance) yet whom we see to walk, to speak, to have sense and feeling, we
know the soul to be in that man: so faith being an inward quality of the
soul, cannot be seen of any but by effects, namely good works. And as a
painted fire is no fire, because it wants heat, and an Image is not a man,
because it wants sense: so no more is that faith indeed (but only in name)
which does not fructify by good works; as the Church of Sardi had a name that
it lived, but indeed it was dead, it was called spiritual, but was carnal.
The true justifying faith must be accompanied with an holy conversation:
Justification, and sanctification cannot be severed. But being my self in the
rank of learners, I confess it becomes me to refer you, for a full
answer to your blasphemy against our true doctrine of iustifycation to those
that have both learnedlie and diuinelie handled it, to the true comfort of all
Gods children.

Now to bring you out of your wonder, for my speaking so much of deceit and
dissimulation in your Catholics, Dissimulation taught by Papists.
seeing of all other people in the Realm, these men (say you) dissemble least,
etc. I must pray you with patience to peruse some of your Jesuitical
instructions, discovered by one of their own crew, some few years past, in
the Northparts, to a godly learned man, who by authority was employed in the
examination of them, and tell me how you can clear your Recusants, I mean
such of them as have been taught these holy lessons, and apprehended them for
fit to be followed, and follow them (as too many do) from deceit and deep
dissimulation? A seducer being sent over to play his part amongst us, when he
was taken, did reveal (amongst many other things) to his assigned examiner
these three positions following. First, that the Recusants 1
should reserve themselves both in body and goods in plenitudine^ temporis:
secondly, that they should not 2
make doubt to present themselves to our Churches; for it should not only not
be imputed to them for sin, but taken to be as meritorious, as if they did sit
so long in the stocks for Christ his cause: Thirdly, that in all 3
their answers and other behauiours, they should show themselves as dutiful
Subjects, till such time as there were certa spes victoriae: these be brought
with special direction to be taught and persuaded, and how far these lead
wide from deep dissimulation I appeal to the indifferent Reader, but this is
no novelty in Popery, though your dim sight cannot discern it.
Dissimulation of some Papists manifested.
And I pray you (Sir) what meant sundry of your Recusants the last summer (when
all the land was in arms) to sell away their goods, and to slide out of the
way themselves, when order was given to dsarme them? did not this arguea
reserving of themselves in plenitudinem temporis, and that, they had some hope,
that their certa spes victoriae was not far off?

The threefold accusation examined.
You proceed further to my triple accusation (as you term it) against them,
which yet is rather an admonition for due providence, then an accusation to
draw on any heavy punishment. I note three things. First, the harm they
continually do; secondly, the hurt they would do; thirdly, their deep
dissimulation: The hurt Recusants do.
for the first, I only insist in this one hurt, that when the Gentleman
recuseth, and is borne withal, the meaner sort receive infection and draw
back also: Likewise though the husband come to the Church, if the wife refufe,
the danger redoundeth to the whole household, and wives of the meaner sort are
by them likewise infected. Of which you make light, but it ought to be of more
moment to us; and therefore more heedfully to be seen unto, then you desire to
have it. For how shall the child, the servant, the tenant, be forward to know
the truth, when the Parent, the Master, the Landlord refuse knowledge? The
wifes recusancie was not so common, till men infected with popery were
persuaded, that they could not be drawn by law to pay the penalty for the
wives: and the Popes holiness had a dispensation ready for the husband to go
to Church. Now that the meaner and poorer sort of women are infected by these
of the wealthier, and that they when they come home, labor also to pervert
their husbndes, it neither need seem strange to you, and we that live to serve
in the country, find too lamentable experience of it. For commonly and for
the most part, men prove to be such, as are they whose company they frequent:
and daily experience does teach us the tiuth of the old saying: Cum boni, cum
malis conuer santur, etc. When the good converse and keep company with the
evil, sooner are the good by the evil corrupted, then the evil by the good
converted. Heresy is by sundry writers compared to the plague, as for sundry
other respects; so for this, that as the plague does spread it infection to
many, oftentimes infecting the whole house, and reaching the venom thereof to
neighbour-houses, so that it sometimes fills the whole Town or City with
dead corpses: so heresy feeketh to infect many, and to spread the poison of
it from one to another. Now those that are sick of the plague, by a laudable
policy, we seclude from company, that so they may not infect others: greater
care ought (in my opinion) to be taken of heretics, that they may not raunge
whither they will, and keep company with whom they please, for that the danger
is greater of heresy, then of the plague: for the plague kills but the
body, heresy kills the soul; the plague threatens temporal death,
heresy eternal.

But you ask from what these wives, children, servants, tenants, and husbands
do fall? and I answer, as many of them as become Papists, fall from true
Religion, and many of them also from loyalty and sound love to their
country. But you say conscience is cause of this fall, and not evil will or
rebellion? and I answer, it is fancy that leads them rather then
conscience; for conscientia must be cum scientia, conscience must be grounded
upon knowledge, and knowledge is to be fetched not from your traditionall
doctrine of Rome, and unwritten verities, but from the written word of God,
which is able to make a man wise to salvation, through faith which is in Jesus
Christ.

Forcing to do against Conscience.
The long idle discourse that you run, about forcing men to do an act
contrary to their conscience, makes nothing against us, but much against your
selves: for we never taught it, we do not practice it, we subscribe to the
whole discourse of Saint Paul, concerning the meats sacrificed to Idols, as
also to the general proposition; whereupon he groundeth that particular
argument, that what soever is not of faith is sin. Therefore we first tender
instruction to inform the conscience, and if that be obstinately refused and
rejected (as the fashion of the most Recusants is to answer: Moderate
punishment for Religion lawful.
They will not confer with any, they are settled:) then moderate punishment
we hold fit to be inflicted, by the Christian Magistrate, thereby to reclaim
them from their Idolatry, by which God is dishonored, and to bring them to
the true honor and worship of God. Moderate correction of heretics,
accompanied with due instruction, was never accounted consciencelesse, and
unmerciful dealing, but always practiced in the Church. Augustine commends
it by experience, Cum doctrinae vtili, disciplina salutaris adiungitur, etc.
When wholesome discipline, is joined to godly doctrine, that not only the
light of truth, may expel the darkness of error, but the force of fear may
break the bands of evil custom, we rejoice at the conversion of many. This
point the same father in sundry places teaches. But what punishment is laid
upon Recusants, by the rare clemency of her Majesty, any way comparable to
those that Christian Emperors have made against Recusants, or such as refused
to communicate with the Church of Christ? They were discommoned from buying and
selling, from bequeathing their goods or lands to others, or receiving any
Legacies from others, yea they might not enjoy their fathers inheritance, etc.
What like thing is done to English Recusants? Comparison tweene our punishment
of Recusants, and those of former times.
or rather what not unlike? they buy, they sell, they bequeath their goods at
their pleasure, they receive legacies, and enjoy inheritances. The most that
for many years was done to them for their recusancie, was some restraint of
their persons, but with free use of their goods, and open resort of their
wives, and friends: and after the dangerous attempts of many, yet the
greatest increase of penalty is a Multe of money, which also is easily passed
over; for scant the tenth Recusant does either pay the whole penalty of money,
or suffers the restraint of his person, but lives at home, The Papists
hands deep in this transgression.
and at liberty. But (Sir) you that make such a pitiful complaint, or rather
outrageous outcrie, against the gentle and motherlie chasticement wherewith her
Majesty corrects Recusants: what say you to your whipping, and scourging, to
your torturing, and tormenting, to your holy house in Spain, (because I
perceive you are so addicted to Spain?) what to the infinite fires you kindled
in Queen Mary's time, wherein so many hundreds of Gods Saints, young and
old, learned and unlearned, men and women, without respect of age, or sex were
burnt to ashes? what to your sundry massacres? namely of the Albigenses,
Calabrians, Merindolians, etc. May your Prelates whip and scourge those that
refuse to come to your Idolatry, as Boner did diverse with his own hand? May
you torture, and torment men, because they will not believe your unwritten
verities, as Boner burnt Tomkins hand, and Tirrell a Justice of peace did Rose
Allens hand? May you put men to death for refusing to acknowledge a piece of
bread to be their maker? contrary to the judgment of the ancient fathers, as
Augustine testifies: It never pleased any good man in the Catholic Church,
that heretics should be put to death: nay may you kill both young and old
without difference, (as in the former Massacres) without ever persuading them,
or giving them respite to advise upon your doctrine? and may not your selves be
punished? may not moderate corrections be inflicted upon you? shall it be
sacrilege to touch the hemme of your garments? but God give you grace to
repent your own bloody murders, and to take benefit by her Majesty's gentle
correction, who sucketh not your blood, but seeks your benefit and endless
salvation.

Touching the hurt Recusants would do, The hurt Recusants would do.
I say, who doubts but they would have up their Mass again etc. And here he
fares like a mad man, saying: That the Turk, nor any Prince in the world,
urges men upon vain points of inward wishes, and secret cogitations, and that
I, contrary to al reason and humanity, would have it urged upon Catholics in
England; what they wish, and what they desire. But I pray you of what secret
wishes speak I? Do I presume to sit in the consistory of men's hearts, and to
judge their inward thoughts? or rather following the rule of our savior, by
their fruits shall ye know the^, do I only speak of such as are by outward
actions openly discovered? or what urging would I have of these wishes? of
punishment for their smart? or of providence for our own safety? when he has
answered me this, then let him tell me, whether not only Turks, but all
christian Princes in the world, will have an eye to such subjects, as are by
their masters abroad, and by new Inmates and intruding Jesuits at home, taught
yt it is not only lawful, but honorable to rebel against the prince, upon ye
Popes command; and from who^ the foreign enemy and inuador, does openly
profess that he expects aid. This needs no further answer because he has
no further mattter to build his calumnious inuectiue upon. This is a point of
rare and most insolent barbarity, that co^demning my few words of the hurt
Recusants would do (though by open effects bewraied) as more then Turkish, he
does himself (and I am persuaded contrary to his own conscience, only upon an
innate and natural engrafted inclination he has to be mouthed like the
devil) burst forth into such a malignant presumption of inward thoughts,
against my honorable dead brother and my self, as no barbarous Scythian would
ever offer the like. We will examine it in a word. He is not only contented to
hold on his railing fit at me, Barbarous railing against Henry Earl of
Huntingdo^.
but he must step into the grave of a dead man, my honorable dead brother,
and such a dead man, as thousands yet living did know, and will witness him
to have been a most religious man, both in knowledge, and practice, and a most
loyal and dutiful subject and servant to his Sovereign, which he expressed
by his care, diligence, and pains, in all her services, and in sifting out all
perils that might impeach her safety: He was precise and strait in his
government for his Sovereigns good, and in the execution of Justice in his
place, in all causes between party and party, he was of a most upright and
indifferent carriage, and that will many Recusants yet living, witness for
him against this calumniatour: He continued President of York for many years
by her Majesty's commission, who has given many a most gracious testimony in
his life time of his approved fidelity, and her well-liking of his service to
his great comfort and commendation, and since his death in her princely
affection to him, has often bewailed the loss of him; and yet this base
railing companion blusheth not to strike, at this religious honorable
Gentleman, with his malicious pen, by imputing unto him undutiful and
disloyal wishes against her highness; for whom all our English world knows,
he never held his patrimony, nor his life too dear to be spent: As for so
much as expecting what person should succeed her, so delightful a thing it was
to him, to see the end of her days, as he would often very heartily pray,
that he might not live to see her days ended; which his prayer the Lord heard,
in whom he died assuredly, and therefore is blessed for ever. Therefore thou
blasphemous mouth against God and man, cease any more to bark at this blessed
dead man's grave. As for my self, I live to set my foot against any that dare
accuse him or me, of the least disloyal thought; and if thou dare not show
thy face, I neither will offer nor desire any better clearing, then the course
of my dutiful carriage has done, and shall do to my dying day: I will
only add this one sentence, written heretofore by a true hearted Englishman,
wherein I join with him from my heart. I like better the honest wisdom of
those that study how the Queen may stand and not fall, then the reaching
policy of those, that devise how themselves may stand, when the Queen is
fallen: And from such reaching Politicians, God deliver and disburthen her
Majesty, and her kingdom, and increase the number of such religious honest
hearts to her, as will pray daily to God for the prolo^ging of her days,
employ their wits wholly to preserve her person, and put back all perils that
may come toward her, and will not think their lives too dear to stand in the
gappe to withholde danger from her.

The third imputation against the Papists is their dissimulation,
Dissimulation in sundry Papists.
of which somewhat has been already showed: but here you proceed again to
rail, cavil, and misconstrue my words: your railing I still pass over, in
which kind I list not to contend with you: your cauilling and misconstruing
shall briefly be laid open. My words you set down; These civil honest men
that under pretense of Conscience rebel against God in religion, and refuse to
yield a loyal obedience to their Liege-Ladie, seem to carry a most
lamentable resolution lurking in their bosoms against Queen, Country, and us
all, etc. And if this be conscience, I know not what conscience means, and
yet this conscience they fetch from Rome, etc. You begin with the last
words, from which you pike out this conclusion against me, that I know not
what conscience means, either in nature and definition, or in practice and
feeling; the first you say is past my understanding, by reason my bringing up
has hnot been in schools; the other you take upon you to make plain I am
void of, by my manner of writing against Catholics, etc. Surely I willingly
confess my wants in learning to be very great, and do bewail my loss of
time in that behalf, yet this I hope I may say without suspicion of vanity or
ostentation, that I laid the grounds of learning in one of the best schools in
this land, namely Winchester, and added some further building in one of the
best Universities in Christendom, namely Oxford, studying there in Magdaleine
College under that worthy Doctor Humfrey, where besides my private study, I
wanted not such furtherance, as the conference with sundry of the best learned
in the University could afford me; and since I left the University, I have
not spent so much time in hunting and hawking, as you presume, although I hold
them for lawful recreations moderately used in the fear of God. And
therefore I did long since know (I praise God) that Conscience is a part of our
understanding, determining of our particular actions, either with them or
against them: I know also that of this Conscience God only is Lord, and his
words and laws, do only bind the same properly; and from hence must we
fetch the direction and warrant of our practice of Conscience which will not
admit us to depose, and set up, and to obey and disobey Sovereigns at our
pleasures, yea and to kill Princes (as your Pope gives warrant to do) and
then to say we do it of Conscience, but will give me a sufficient warrantise,
to condemn all such Schoolemasters and Scholars; and so Sir (not as a teacher
in our Israel, but as a Scholar) I have told you what Conscience is, and by
that touch I have given of the practice and feeling of Conscience (which must
be warranted by the word of God, and not by men's dreams, and traditions) I
have cancelled the warrant you would take to your selves, to disobey and resist
the authority, given to her Majesty from God.

The rest that you snarle at in these words, or in those that follow,
concerning my speeches against Recusants, or any thing material thereto
belonging, I will briefly answer: First my terms of falsehoode;
disloyalty, wicked treasons, and lurking resolutions against Queen and
Country, calling them the Catilines of our time, etc. This does move your
patience much, and for this I must undergo the bitter biting of your venomous
and slanderous tongue, and be called a monstrous liar, and calumniatour,
which by a brick wall will hazard to light upon your self. For why should I
be blamed to charge them with falsehoode, disloyalty, treason, and lurking
resolutions against Queen and Country, and to be the very Catilines of our
age, when your Popes doctrine teaches nothing else, and they frame themselves
in all things to obey him? When Rebellions have been raised within our own
bowels? When her Majesty's life has so many times been shot at, and her
Kingdom attempted to be invaded? And in the first two, sundry of your
Recusants false fingers have been set on work, and in the third the Inuaders
have promised to themselves (and so published) great assistance from them, and
both for Invasion, Rebellion, and taking away of her Highness life; who have
been the very Catilines of our Country, but they? Does not your Captain and
Cardinal Allen, Cardinal Allen inciteth to Rebellion.
openly blow the trumpet of sedition against her Majesty, teaching all
English Papists this Catholic doctrine, that, since her excommunication, and
deposition by the Pope, she has no just title or interest to her Crown and
Kingdom; and that no Act done by her authority, since the publishing of that
excommunication and deposition, has been or can be lawful, by the law of
God, or man? and therefore that no man may lawfully serve her in any action,
be it otherwise never so just? If Catiline himself were alive, could he more
pestilentlie persuade to sedition then does this Cardinal? And are not they
Catilines mates, so many as yield to the persuasion of this Catilinarian
Cardinal? And what does the dispensation granted to Parsons and Campion teach
our Papists? Does it not teach them to dissemble? Consider the words of the
dispensation: Dispensation of Gregory 13 to Parsons and Campion.
where in the Bull of Pius Quintus all her Subjects are commanded not to obey
her, and she being excommunicate and deposed, all that do obey her, are
likewise innodate and accursed (which point is perilous to the Catholics, for
if they obey her, they are in the Popes curse, and if they disobey, they are in
the Queens danger) therefore the present Pope to relieve them has altered
that part of the Bull, and dispensed with them to obey and serve her, without
peril of excommunication, which dispensation is to endure, but till that it
please the Pope otherwise to determine. First, they teach generally that all
which obey the Prince, by the Pope deposed; are accursed, which if it be not a
seditious and Catilinarian Doctrine, let the Reader judge. Secondly, Papists
are dispensed with, that with^out danger of the Popes curse, they may obey the
Queen; but is it, that the Queen may be safe? N^^ care of their own safety
procured this dispensatio^ or are they taught to obey of Conscience, and from
the heart? Nay, flatly for fear, because (says the ^^^pensation) if they
disobey they are in the Queen^^ danger: and this is contrary to S. Paul's
Doctrine who teaches to obey the Magistrate not only for wrath, that is
fear of punishment, but also for Conscience sake. Lastly, how long are they
permitted to obey in this sort? No longer then the Pope please otherwise 3
to appoint: if the Pope send in secretly some Jesuits, to whispher in their
ears, that he has cancelled this dispensation, or otherwise publikelie
signify it; then by your doctrine, they must disobey, and rebel, or else they
are accursed.

All Recusants not charged with dissimulatio^ or rebellious minds.
And yet your corrupt construction cannot hereby hold against me, that I accuse
all Papists to be guilt, of these crimes, I never said it, I never thought it:
for though it be evident, yt your Popes doctrine does teach it generally to
all men, yet I assure my self we have many of that profession in recusancy,
who are in simplicity led by the line of their superstiiton very far, which yet
will not shake hands with them in their treasons, either against her Majesty,
or their country, to please Pope, or any foreign Potentate whatsoever. For
that some Papists are not so persuaded of the Popes power, that he has
authority to depose Princes we have examples: ^^e Papists (...) ^at the (...)
de(...)
Heart plainly writes (as before was touched) that the opinion of them who
hold the Pope to be a temporal Lord over Kings and Princes ^s unreasonable and
improbable altogether, and that ^e has not to meddle with them and theirs
ciuillie, ^^ch less to depose them, or give away their king^^mes, that is no
part of his commission. Yea fur^^^r he confesses that we give no more to the
^^eene, by the title of Supremacy, then Augustine ^^th give to all kings, and
to this Supremacy of her ^aiestie he subscribed. Besides this, there is a
book written by one John Bishop a Recusant Papist, proving that the Pope
cannot depose her Majesty, or release her subjects of their allegiance to
her: In which 1
he handles these six propositions. 1. That the Pope and all the Bishops and
Priests are subject by the law of God to the temporal Magistrate, in whose 2
Realm and Dominion they do dwell. 2. That they cannot deprive christian
princes of their principalities. 3
3. That the Pope cannot loose subjects of their natural faith and obedience
to their Prince. 4. That it 4
is no determination of faith, that the Pope may depose Princes. 5. That the
Canon made at the Council 5
of Lateran, touching the deposing of Princes (the which has bred the greatest
scruple in our English Roman Catholics) neither is, nor ever was of force
within this land. 6. That the sentence pronounced 6
against her Majesty, was neither lawfully, nor orderly done, according to
the Laterane Canon. Therefore I am far from imputing the crime of sedition to
all Recusantes, and as I do not accuse all, so can no man truly excuse all;
for it cannot be denied, but that very many have been overtaken with this
humor, by the persuasions of Jesuits and Seminaries, as has been proved
before; and from hence you may pike out your hard and heathenish hearts, whereof
you make mention: As for the bare sense of an English heart, which you snatch
out of my words, it is such an heart, as having only the light of nature
(without any knowledge of the true God at all) would not so brutishly seek
the life of their lawful Sovereign, to the betraying of their country into
the hands of strangers, and such an honest heart, I wish you at the least.

After this iangling railer has vngorged his malicious stomach against me,
The truth of my position justified.
for this my triple accusation (as he will have it) he proceeds, and that
with the gal of bitterness (for the Ethiopian cannot change his blacknes) to
inuey against me, for setting down a position, which both religion and nature
it self does teach us; the position is this, That every Christian man ought
to strive to keep these three things sound within his breast, his conscience
before God, his loyalty to his Prince, and his love to his country: Which
after he has frowardly and peruersely wrested to his own fantastical sense,
he breaks forth into this exclamation, what Atheist would ever say so? and I
say, who but a wretched wrangler would ever cavil so? for may not men be
loyal to their Princes, except they obey all their commandments? Or can they
not be loving to their country, except they obey all the laws thereof? Inward
loyalty differs from outward obedience, the first we owe always, the second
in all things we may not yield. I hope (Sir) you will not accuse the Apostles
of disloyalty, who yet obeyed not all the commandments of their Princes? nor
of want of love to their country, though they yielded not to all the laws
thereof? Rebellion cunningly broached.
But you will prove by sundry examples, and that of the Scripture, that we are
not bound always to love our country, as by the examples of Abraham and Lot,
Abraham and Lot.
yea that we may rebel against Prince and Country by the example of Jeremy,
Jeremy.
Jeroboam and Iehu. Did Abraham or Lot cease to love their country, because at
Gods special commandment they left it? or did not the Prophet Jeremy love
his country, Iere 9.
because by special Revelation, and appointment from God, he persuaded the
people to deliver up Jerusalem into their enemies hands? for whose destruction
foreseen, and by God revealed unto him, he breaks forth into that
patheticall exclamatio^: Oh that my head were full of water, and mine eyes a
fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the
daughter of my people! For who^e deliverance he so often and so heartily
prayed, and was forbidden by the Lord to pray any more for them: whose
destruction, after it happened, he bitterly bewailed in his mournful
lamentations? do these things prove he loved not his country? Or because the
Lord himself did rent the kingdom out of the hands of Solomon, and gave ten
Tribes to Jeroboam from Rheboam Salomons son? Jeroboam.
And because he also expreslie commanded Iehu, Iehu.
to destroy the whole house of Ahab his master, does it hence follow that
subjects may be disloiall, and rebel against their Princes? who but a Popish
Parasite would make such conclusions? The general proposition (I trow) holds
true, that no man may commit murder, though Abraham, by Gods commandment,
special and extraordinary, might lawfully have slain his own son: and
that no private man may usurp the sword, though Phinehes extraordinarily
moved, did execution upon Zimri and Cozbie. A privilege is no law. In sum,
God might command Jeremy to will the Jews to yield to the Chaldeans, and
Jeroboam to take ten tribes from Rehoboam, and Iehu the kingdom from Ioram,
because he alone bears rule in the kingdoms of the earth, and he may give
them to whom he will, he may set up one, and pull down another; but this
proves not, that at the Popes bidding, any may play the lusty swash buckler,
and pull the Princes by force from the Throne, which your defender of
Catholics labors strongly to prove. Therefore this position is not (for
ought this wrangler can allege) to be controlled, that every Christian ought
to strive to keep these three sound within his breast, his conscience before
God, his loyalty to his Prince, and his love to his country. And that his
own example of Athanasius will verify, who was far from disloyalty to his
Prince, or want of love to his country, for to show his loyalty to his
Prince, he departed at his Princes commandment, from his country, which he
ceased not to love, though for a time he did leave it: Athanasius.
I never resisted the commandments of your highness (says he) no, no, God
forbid I should.

Obedience in temporal Princes.
But will you yet further see the lively picture of an impudent cauiller?
because I say, that all obedience is due to the Sovereign Magistrate,
alleging the words of the Apostle; That we must subject our selves to all
manner ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the King, as to
the superior, etc. And first he exclaimeth, all obedience is due to Princes,
yea all obedience, etc. crying out of the conscience of an Atheist, or of a
servile mind, etc. If I had said we must obey our Princes in all things, I had
used the Apostles phrase, concerning the obedience of children toward their
parents, Children obey your parents in all things: shall any Atheist then
cry out against the Apostle; Children must obey their parents in all things,
yea in all things; a conscience of an Atheist, a servile mind? etc. But as the
Apostle by all things, means all such things as are not contrary to Gods
commandment, as he elsewhere expounds himself: Children obey your parents
in the Lord: so is my meaning as clear as the light, that we must obey Princes
in all things, that imply not disobedience to God: general and unlimited
obedience, we teach not to vow and perform to any man, it being due only to
God, who cannot err in the things he commands. We never held our selves in
that sort bound to any King or Emperor, though your Jesuits vow such
obedience to their Superiors. The very Poet may teach, that Omne sub Regno
grauiore Regnum est,
Each kingdom here, a greater has above.
Therefore since earthly King, are under the King of Kings, we must so obey
the inferior, as we disobey not the Superior. The highest King has set
down his law to earthly Kings, as well as others, in the two tables: if they
presume to make a law, contrary to this law, therein we are not to obey. It
was not disloyalty in the Egyptian Midwiues, in forbearing to murder the
male-children of the Israelites at Pharaohs commandment; nor in Obadiah in
hiding the Lords Prophets, contrary to Achabs will; neither in the Apostles
in not forbearing to preach in the name of Jesus, at the Rulers commandment;
they did (as they ought) prefer obedience to God, before obedience to man,
when they cannot both stand together. By all obedience then, it is plain that
I meant, true and sincere obedience from the heart, not dissembling obedience
only for fear; as the Apostle when he persuades the Philippians to walk
worthy of the vocation whereunto they are called, with all humblenes of mind,
means by all humblenes, true, sincere, inward humility, not counterfeite,
and hypocritical. And if malice had not here lost both her eyes, and her
wits, this scoulding cauiller might have seen that in the very entry to this
point of obedience, I do manifestly affirm it; for I say these three things
every man ought to keep sound within his breast, first, his Conscience before
God; secondly, his Loyalty to his Prince; thirdly, his Love to his Country:
Now how is it possible a man should keep sound his Conscience before God,
which I set in the first place, if he obey his Prince in things against God?
nay, that I place first, because it must be the director of us in our Love and
Loyalty both to Prince and Country. If the Laws of the Prince or Country
command any thing contrary to it, we ought in such things not to obey our
Prince, and for such things we may fly our Country; but yet not rebel or
fight against them, as you seek to persuade, saying that Christ allows
greatly of them that despise Father, Mother, Country and Kindred, yea they are
willed to hate them and make war against them, for his sake; and
consequently also the like is willed against Princes in the same cause, This
is N.D. his spiritual conceit as you may read in his book page 83.
and this out of your conscienceles heart, made fit for Rebellion, you falselie
and impudentlie affirm: but we say, we must hate Father and Mother as we must
our life for Christ, not to do violence to our selves, or to make war upon
them, nor to do any thing against either, but in comparison of Christ, and for
his sake, not to regard the loss of either; and therefore that which you add
of warring against our Country and Prince for Religion, as it is not in any
text of holy Writ, so do you plainly discover your traitorous mind,
against Queen and Country, and what was the mark you aim at, in all this
wrangling against the point of obedience.

The translation of S. Peter's words freed from corruption
His frivolous exception against my translating Saint Peter's words, which I
allege to prove, That all obedience is due to Civil Magistrates for the Lords
sake, is not worth the answering: he cauilleth first because I translate to
every ordinance of man, where he would have it, to every humane creature,
which I think would affoorde but a cold sense: But he says I translate it to
every ordinance of man, because it served more to my purpose: what purpose?
forsooth a purpose that I detest more then himself, and those of his sect,
that we should obey every decree of man. Master Beza translateth it
Ordinationi, that is, ordinance, showing that by humane ordinance is meant that
form of policy and government which is in every Commonwealth: and that this
policy or form of a Commonwealth is called an humane ordinance, not because
it was invented by men (for it is the gift of God) but because it is proper and
peculiar unto men, to live under Magistrates and Laws. The next exception has
less color, that I transtate to the King as to the superior, and leave out,
or unto governors, as unto them that are sent of him, etc. by calling the King
the Superior, he dreameth that I mean the King to be absolute, and all
obedience due to Superiors, which I have already answered. But (Sir) if Saint
Peter do add (in the leaving out of which words you suppose a mystery) or
unto Captains, and under Magistrates sent from him (as you translate) is not
the King rightly termed Superior, in regard of the Inferior, and under
Magistrates sent by him? I suppose that Saint Peter does first set down a
general proposition, to live obedientlie to that policy under which we are,
whether in Monarchy, Aristocracy, etc. and then comes to the special form
under which the Jews did then live, under the Roman Emperors, and their
deputies. Therefore I refer to the indifferent reader to judge either of the
falsehoode and treachery (he says) I have used in corrupting and translating
this little piece of Scripture, or else of his intemperate humor of railing
and cauilling; his long digression about Spiritual Magistrates, and formal
speeches to Catholic Recusants, I let pass. But if you please to resolve all
Recusants, that they are bound in conscience to yield all civil obedience to
her Majesty as to their lawful Sovereign, though the Pope send forth never
so many Bulls to depose her; you shall deserve thanks of them, in teaching them
so godly a lesson, and free your self from no small suspicion given, that you
are of a flat contrary mind, which will stick nearer your conscience (if you
continue that mind) then any profane flattery (wrongfullie urged by you
against me) shall ever do to mine; for God be blessed the truth of his Gospel
has taught me a far better lesson, then to flatter with any.

Resistance to the seventh Encounter, about the Pope.
Frederick the good Duke of Saxony, requested earnestly that great learned
Clarke Erasmus, that he would plainly and truly tell him what he thought
of Luther and his writings; to whose request Erasmus answering, and that
sincerely, and with great judgment, yet began his answer merrily, saying,
that in Luther were two great faults, the one that he spoke against the Monks
fat panches; the other, that he presumed to touch the Popes triple Crown. The
Popes Crown may not be touched.
But though each of these is a sore that may not be touched, and an evil
against which no man may presume to speak, amongst the Papists; yet the least
word uttered against the Popes extrauagant and usurped authority, is deemed an
offense almost inexpiable: for father Bellarmine himself does teach us, that
to call the Popes Crown in question, is to take the foundation from the
building, the shepherd from the flock, the General from the army, the Sun
from the firmament, and the head from the body. This conceit has so far
prevailed with this libeller, that he reuelleth and raileth against me, for a
few words upon most just occasion spoken against the Pope, namely, that I call
him the proud Priest, and Archprelate of Rome, bloody monster, Antichrist, the
man of sin, etc. that thereupon he outrageth, crying that these are but
rauings of a lunaticke brain, and belchings of a burdened stomach with the
surfeit of heresy: and charging me with audacitie (or impudency rather) that I
presume to use opprobrious speeches against the sacred honors of anointed
Princes, and the greatest Monarchs of Christendom, etc. And here he imagines
(as imagination is strong) that he has gotten a marvelous advantage against
me, and therefore proclaims, that I have herein done contrary to the law both
of nature and nations, and am to be checked and restrained, even for the very
honor of England it self and our Nation.

Yet all this wind shakes no corn. I doubt not but the wise and discreet
reader will follow the counsel of Pythagoras who ^^ght that the Muses were to
be preferred before the Sirens or Mirmaids, comparing falsehood, varnished to
the show with a gay flourish of words, to the Syrenes; and the plain and naked
narration of truth, to the Muses: which bare narration I will in very few
words here set down, and oppose it against all his Rhetorical amplifications,
furious exclamations, and railing calumniations, which is the Iu^e bush he
hangs forth to make his wine seem worthy the uttering.

Archprelate.
To come then to a brief declaration of these points, I call the Pope proud
Priest and Archprelate of Rome: whereto he answers, that the words Priest and
Prelate, are names of his dignity, as they were in Christ and the Apostles
themselves, How Christ and his Apostles were Priests and Archprelates.
who were both Priests and Prelates; and Archprelates also, in that they were
more principal then others. That Christ was, and is an high Priest, for ever,
after the order of Melchisedech, is by us confessed; and by you his priesthood
by a consequent disanulled, in that you have ordained another Priesthood to
offer propitiatory sacrifices to God: that the Apostles were massing or
sacrificing Priests, all the Priests in Rome and Rhemes shall never be able
to prove: that they might be called Archprelates, in that they were more
principal then others, being sent with joint and equal commission over all
the world, and others by them ordained over particular congregations, we
gladly yield; but then were they all Archprelates in comparison of those whose
calling was not Apostolik, but Pastorlike, and limited to a certain
congregation. Peter only was not (as ye would have him) an Archprelate over
the rest of the Apostles, but they all were equal with him, which thing Saint
Ciprian plainly testifies. Hoc vtique erant and coeteri Apostoli quod erat
Petrus, pari consortio praediti and honoris, and potestatis: the rest of the
Apostles (out of doubt) were the same that Peter was, endewed with the same
fellowship both of honor and power.

But (Sir) why seek you to shrowde your Popes Archprelacie under that of the
Apostles? Christ gave no Superiority to Peter.
for it is manifest that Christ gave no such supremacy to any one Apostle
above the rest, nay he forbad it saying: That the Kings of the Gentiles reign
over them, etc. but ye shall not be so. Luke. 22.
And whereas the promise of this Universal jurisdiction, seems to be made to
Peter in these words: To thee will I give the Keys of the kingdom of heaven,
etc. it is plain, that where this promise is performed John 20. Peter has no
more authority given him, then the rest of the Apostles, and the keys to open
and shut heaven, to loose, and bind sins, is a like given to them all:
neither did that most humble servant of Christ, the blessed Apostle, ever
challenge any such preemine^t authority; Peter never challenged any such.
for as he entituleth himself an elder, which is a title of dignity, so he
calls himself a fellow elder, which imports an equality with, and not a
superiority above the rest. And when they of the circumcision contended with
Peter about his preaching to the Gentiles, using (as it might seem) rough
terms, Thou wentest into men uncircumcised and have eaten with them: he
answered not as his intruding successor, that he is to judge all men, and to be
judged of no man, but made a just Apology for himself, and yielded a
sufficient reason for his fact. Act. 15.
As for that council spoken of in the Acts: the primacie of place, to be as
it were moderator, seems to be given at that time, not to Peter, but to
James, as one of your own side confesses: The Apostles acknowledge no
superiority in Peter.
Postquam Pe^rus dixisse^, etc. After that Peter had spoken, James by his
Bishoplike authority gave the definitive sentence. The rest of the Apostles
did not acknowledge in him any such preeminence of jurisdiction, they showed
themselves to have power to dispose of Peter, as of any other, for the good of
the Church; and therefore when they heard that Samaria had received the word of
God, they sent unto them Peter and John: Yea one Apostle Saint Paul,
publikelie reproved and withstood Peter to his face, because he was to be
blamed: and to take away all occasion of stumbling from those that do not
wilfully blind their eyes, the same Apostle without tainte of pride, says of
himself, that he was nothing inferior to the chiefest amongst the Apostles.
If then neither Christ granted, nor Peter challenged, nor the rest of the
Apostles acknowledged any singular Primacie of authority in Peter above them,
we may safely subscribe to Cyprians conclusion before alleged, and the Popes
usurped Archprelacie shall remain (as it is indeed) not a title of dignity,
but a touch of intolerable insolency.

The Popes spiritual supremacy without good warrant.
The spiritual supremacy, wherewith you infeofe your Archprelat, as it is not
grounded on Saint Peter, who had no such (and if he had it, yet the Pope shall
never be able to prove himself Peter's heir more then all other Bishops) so
began it long after Christ to be challenged, and wants the testimony of
antiquity. The Council of Nice, which not the Bishop of Rome, but the
Emperor Constantine assembled, in which himself was present, and at his right
hand sat the Bishop of Antioch, which is called the chief or president of
that Council, mentions four Patriarchs; of Alexandria, of Rome, of
Antioche, of Jerusalem, and appoynteth equal privileges to each of them: Now
where there is an equality of four, there is not an universality of one
above all. The Council of Chalcedon stands for the dignity of the Bishop of
Constantinople, and (because that was now the Emperors seat, and was called
new Rome) defined that it should have equal privileges with old Rome, and in
Ecclesiastical matters be of equal power with it. By which it is apparent,
that to Rome, and afterward to Constantinople, some respect of honor was
given in regard of the Emperors seat, but neither had primacie of power over
all: John Bishop of Constantinople, first challenged this universal spiritual
Supremacy, about 600. years after Christ; against whom Gregory of Rome did
mightily oppose himself, expostulating with him in an epistle, Quid tu
Christo, etc. What answer will thou make to Christ the head of the universal
Church in the account of the last judgment, that thus go about by the name
of universal Bishop, to make all his members subject to thee? But that which
Constantinople sought, Rome shortly after obtained; and whereas Constantinople
in seeking it, did show himself to be the forerunner of Antichrist, (as
Gregory of Rome then professed) Rome in getting and maintaining it, shows
that Antichrist has there settled his seat.

The Popes temporal Supremacy.
But this is not the highest Arch, to which this your Archprelate of Rome
mounteth, he claims a civil Monarchy and authority over all Kings and
Kingdoms, under this title of Supremacy, saying, that Princes hold not their
Crowns immediately of God, but of him; and that he has power to set up and
pull down Princes, and to give away their Kingdoms at his pleasure: So one of
his Chaplains says, that the authority of Christ is principally in the
Pope, and that the Pope does call the Emperor to be coadiutor to him in
temporal things. By which we may see, that unless it had pleased the Pope,
there should have been no King nor Emperor; yea of that counterfeit Donation
of Constantine, they say (imagining it to be true) that he gave therein
nothing to the Pope, but restored his own, since the Pope is Christ's Vicar,
whose is the earth and the fulness thereof. And Boniface the viij. in the year
1300. one day came forth arraied in his pontificalibus like a Pope, the next
day in Imperial Robes with a naked sword carried before him, causing it to be
proclaimed that he was both Pope and Emperor, and had the Empire both of
heaven and earth.

We have only taken a short scantling of the Popes Archprelacie, which is so
far from being grounded upon Peter, that his spiritual Supremacy, was not
known till above 600. years after Christ, and his temporal over Kings, and
Kingdoms to depose and alter them, has not been acknowledged of any
Christian Prince to this day. His temporal Supremacy never acknowledged.
Philip King of France writes to the same Boniface the viij. claiming both
spiritual and temporal Supremacy (as it may seem) with small reverence,
Philip by the grace of God etc. To Boniface bearing himself for chief Bishop,
little health or none at all: Let thy foolishnes know, that in temporal things
we are subject to no man, and that the gifts of Prebends and Benefices, made,
and to be made by us, were and shall be good both in time past, and to come: And
that we will defend manfully the possessours of the said Benefices, and we
think them that believe or think otherwise to be fools or madmen. Charles
the 5. Father to King Philip of Spain, for a less matter then withdrawing his
subjects from loyalty, or attempting to depose him and make him no King, rang
an hot Alarm at Rome gates by his Soldiers, and did take the Pope himself
prisoner. And for all his claim of Monarchy, let him offer to thrust the King
of Spain from his throane, and see if (as Catholic as he is,) he will
acknowledge this his Supremacy, or rather will not seek by all means to
bridle his fury. Therefore (gentle Sir) I must make bold to return your
imputation of lunacy upon your self and your colleagues. Thrasilaus a
frenticke person, who (poor man) was not in any proportion worth one ship,
yet thought all the ships that arrived in the haven of Athens to be his, he
would tell them, survey them, and set down accounts of them: In like sort a
melancholic impression has so deeply settled it self in these men's brains,
that though indeed they be destitute of the testimony of Antiquity, yet they
boast that the fathers make with them, and that all antiquity is on their
side, forsooth, even as all the ships of Athens belonged to poor Thrasilaus.

The Popes intolerable pride.
From his Archprelacie, let us briefly come to his pride, which we shall not
need to seek in his inward disposition (as this Popeling imagines) it shows
it self apparantlie in outward actions. Neither in judging by the external
show, may I as well condemn all other Princes and great men in the world, for
admitting honor according to their degrees (as he would persuade) there being
great difference betwixt the outward honor due to Priests, and that which
appertains to Princes, and this Luciferian Priest challenging such honor as
no prince or monarch the like. The Pope will have the Emperor to hold his
stirrope, whilst he mounteth on horseback, and Pope Adrian was angry with
the Emperor Frederike for holding his stirrope on the wrong side, when he is
mounted: the Emperor must lead his horse by the bridle, and Kings walk along
before; yea when he is carried on men's shoulders, the Emperor (they say) must
help to carry him for a space. Pope Caelestine the 4. Crowned Henry the 6.
Emperor lying prostrate before him, with his feet. Gregory the 7. made Henry
the 4. Emperor with his wife and young child to wait at his gate three diaes,
bare foot and barelegd to sue for absolution, and at the length made him to
surrender his Crown into his hands. Franciscus Dandalus the Ambassador of the
Noble State of Venice, was feign with a chain about his neck to lie under the
Popes table like a Dog, to pacify his indignation conceived against the
Venetians. What should I speak of his blessed feet, which he makes Kings
and Emperors to kiss? What speak I of kissing his feet? (which barbarous
pride yet scarce any heathen Emperor is read to have showed toward inferior
persons, but toward Kings I think none) Alexander the third did tread on the
neck of Frederick Barbarossa the Emperor, and caused that verse of the
Psalm to be song, Thou shall walk upon the Adder and Cockatrice, and shall
tread the Lion and Dragon under thy feet. These (I take it) are sufficient
evidences of Pride intolerable, and more then heathenish.

Leaving to set down further proofs of his pride, The Pope a bloody monster.
we will now show how justly he is termed a bloody Monster. Cyrus, whose
head Queen Tomyris cut off, and cast into a bole of blood with this reproach,
Satia te sanguine quem sitijsti, i. Glut thy self with blood after which thou
have thirsted; was but a milk soppe to the blood sucker of Rome. Valla
professes of the Popes in his time that they were called Fathers in name, but
in deed were murderers, that the Pope makes war upon people that lived in
peace, and sows discord amongst Christian Princes. Julius the second played
the gallant warrior in his own person, and casting aside Peter's keys, did
betake himself to Paul's sword. Sundry Popes have sent their Cardinals to be
general of their Armies, and to shed Christian blood: Pope Adrian set Pipine
and Charles Kings of France against them of Lombardie: Boniface sets the
King of England against the French King, and another time they have set the
French against the English. The examples of this bloody humor in sowing
dissension betwixt Kingdoms are so many, that the Popes own Secretary
Platina confesses, Pontifices Romanos inimicitias non secus ac saeuissimos
Tirannos exercuisse. i. That the Popes of Rome did exercise hostility and
hatred no less then the most cruel Tirants? What should I speak of his
bloody trecheries? The Emperor Frederick being in war against the Turk,
the Pope did take from him his lands in Apulia, and Lombardie, persuades the
Turk by letters not to yield up the holy land to him, but to kill him, gave a
pardon to whosoever would fight against him. The Hospitalers and Templaries by
letters showed the Turk how Frederick might be betrayed; which treason the
natural honest Turk detested (in this point honester then the Pope) sent the
letters to the Emperor, and said in contempt of Christ and Religion,
Eccefidelitas Christianorum. i. Behold the fidelity of Christians. Gregory
the seventh, how many ways sought he to destroy Henry the fourth Emperor,
and namely once when the Emperor was at his Prayers at Saint Mary's Church in
Rome, he appointed by a Nouice hired to that purpose, to have the Emperor
murdered, by throwing down a great stone upon him? Henry the sixth Emperor
was, by a Friar hired thereto, poisoned in the Sacrament; how barbarously
Stephanus dealt with his predecessor Formosus after his death; how many Popes
Gregory the seventh poisoned to get the Popedom; how Urban the sixth sowed
diverse Cardinals in sackes, and drowned them in the Sea; generally of how many
massacres the Popes have been authors, and how they have rejoiced at the
effussion of Christian blood; these things to set down, were either to write
Iliades after Homer, or at the least chiliades after Erasmus. In a word,
Alexander the sixth, the Papists themselves condemn for a bloody monster, of
whom after his death these verses were publicly scattered.

Mirum cur vomuit nigrum post fata cruorem
Borgia? quem biberat, concoquere haud poterat.
Borgia dead much blood did vomit from his breast,
What marvel that? the store he drank, could not digest.
But these happily were the faults of old times, The Popes bloody humor
against the Queen.
the World is now amended at Rome? even as sower Alemendeth in summer: view
the dealings of our modern Popes, and those only which concern our own
State. First, the Pope most injuriously deposed her Majesty from her Royal
Crown, dismissed her Subjects from their obedience due to her, yea cursed as
many as did obey her: further he sends Murton into England to stir up
Rebellion against her, and consequently (as much as in him lay) to fill the
land with dead corpses, and to make our floods run dyed with English blood:
when this succeeded not, he sent Saunders with sundry forces to invade
Ireland, not only to increase Rebellion there, but to win it quite from her
Majesty if he might. The blood by this occasion shed in Ireland, could not
yield his holiness an hearty draught, and therefore he sets on and
abetteth the Spanish King in the year 1588. to make Invasion for a full
Conquest; and to the end he might thoroughly speed and not fail, he lends
him all the help he could, but especially, (as he that writes the
Canonization of Didacus affirms) because by divine help he thought this
Conquest might quickelie be achieved, Sixtus Quintus then Pope, in that
fittest opportunity of time did Canonize Didacus a Spaniard, and placed him in
the number of Saints, in whose merits the Spanish King did so greatly trust.
And that no property of a bloody monster might be wanting in him, he
suborned Parrey, and armed him with full remission of all his sins, besides
other promises, murtherouslie to kill her Majesty and to shed her guiltles
blood. If these evidences cannot make this popish Sycophant to see and abhor
the Popes bloody humor: I can yield no other reason in his excuse, but that
which a Poet of their own sets down; AEthiopes vna quoniam nigredine
sordent,
Ille color nulli vitio datur, omnibus idem
Vultus, and alterius si quis reprehenderet ora,
Et sua damnaret, etc. i.
Blacknes for that it dies each AEthiops face,
Blacknes with them, is held for no disgrace:
All are like faced, who so does others blame,
His proper visage he perforce must shame.
If this fellow were not an horseleach, that is, bloody minded himself, he
would easily acknowledge the bloody humor of the Pope.

What judgment is to be had of this Encounterer.
To shut up this point, whereas he says that for my speech against the Pope
(which is both just and true) I am to be restrained and checked, even for the
very honor of England it self, and our nation; I refer it to the honorable
judgment of the higher authority, what check and restraint is fit for this
fellow, who so stiffly stands for her Majesty's professed enemy, and will not
endure to have him accused of a bloody humor, who has pronounced her no
Queen, stirred rebellions in her Realm against her, sent an Inuadour to
conquer her, and authorized bloody traitors secretly to kill her; and that for
the honor of England it self, that it may be freed from the ignominy of
breeding such vipers, and of our Nation, that the people of our Nation may not
be so enchanted by the poisoned cup of this Cyrce, as to degenerate from
Christian loyalty to Antichristian treachery, whereto the Antichrist of Rome
this Encounterers half God does call them.

Whether the Pope be that special Antichrist, Whether the Pope be Antichrist
whereof Daniel, our Savior Christ, and his Apostles do speak, I will not
stand here to dispute, specially because all the notes set down in the
Scripture of Antichrist, are by sundry learned men fully proved to concur
in the Pope, and in none other; and that by Babylon in the Revelation is meant
Rome, not only as it was when the heathen Emperors held it, (as the Papists
say) but as now it is, the Pope reigning in it. The ten reasons (silly ones
as they be) which you allege to prove the contrary, with three times ten
more set down by your Captain Saunders, are by Doctor Whitakers thoroughly
sifted, and refelled: as also whatsoever the great Jesuit Bellarmine could say
for his master to free him from this imputation, is by diverse notably learned
fully examined and confuted, whose books, with others of the same argument in
English, because they are extant, and almost in every man's hand, I refer the
reader to them, contenting my self with a co^petencie of knowledge for the
instruction of mine own conscience, and not presuming to take upon me to be a
teacher of others.

How far England stands beholding to Rome.
To conclude, whereas this Roman advocate says, that this land ought to bear
more reverence to the sea of Rome then other Nations, for that it has received
more singular benefits from thence, namely that it was converted from Paganism
to Christian Religion, by the special diligence, labor, and industry 1
of the same Sea. I answer, first that it is apparent by sundry testimonies,
that this land was converted to the faith long before the time by you
specified, and not by the Bishop of Rome: Guildas testifies that Britanie
received the Gospel in the time of Tiberius the Emperor, and that Joseph of
Arimathia was sent by Philip the Apostle from France hither, where he remained
till his death. And Beda (our countriman likewise) does testify that in his
time this land kept Easter after the manner of the East Church: by which may be
gathered: that the first preachers came hither from the East parts of the
world, and not from Rome: more proofs might be set down, but I spare 2
them. Secondly, though it be granted, that Elutherius sending hither preachers
from Rome in king Lucius his time, did first convert this land to the Christian
faith; I say there is not now the same faith in Rome, that was then: there was
then no Masses said, the parts of it were not then found out, no
transubstantiation, no setting up of Images in Churches, the communion was then
in both kinds administered to the lay people, no universal Pope, etc.
Elutherius writes thus to King Lucius: Ye have received of late through Gods
mercy in the Realm of Britanie, the law and faith of Christ; ye have with you
within the Realm both the parts of the Scriptures, Elutherius acknowledge the
Kings Gods Vicar in his own kingdom.
out of them by Gods grace with the counsel of your Realm, take ye a law,
and by that law (through Gods sufferance) rule your kingdom of Britanie, for
you be Gods Vicar in your kingdom, according to the saying of the Prophet,
etc. Thirdly, 3
the latter Popes have been more beholding to this land for our money, then the
land for any good received from them: our kings have often complained that the
dropsy thirst of these late Romanists cannot be quenched: The Priour of
Winchester one Andrew being expulsed, was feign to give to the Pope 365. marks
yearly, to be restored again to his place; this and many such like were but
slender gleanings, in comparison of the mighty harvest that from this land
they yeerelie gathered. In a word, 1. These. 1.
the Apostle says of the Thessalonians, that they were examples to all that
believe in Macedonia and Achaia, and that from them sounded out the word of
God, not to Macedonia and Achaia only, but that their faith was spread abroad
in all quarters. Thessalonica was, but is not: and those quarters of the world,
that received the faith from thence, must not follow Thessalonica as it is now.
And this I leave to the godly and faithful Reader to determine and judge of,
whether (because we have received Christianity, and benignity from Rome in
ancient times) we ought to embrace the heresy that in these latter times Rome
teaches, and submit our necks to that yoke or tyranny, which it now
practices.

Resistance to the eight Encounter, touching the Spanish Nation, and the King.
CHrist Jesus our supreme Sovereign and Lord, that has the Key of David
which opens and no man shuts, shuts and no man opens, has made the
Ward of his truth so strong, as neither papisticall nor satanicall force can
prevail against it; so that your counterfaite Ward is too weak to keep in
safety, and strength your Romish Babell or the Bishops thereof, being not
only shaken by the wisdom of our watchman, who keeping our Israel, does
neither slumber nor sleep, but beaten down by the power of his might:
Therefore you vaunt before the conquest, and triumph before the victory. As
for the bickering you begin now about your Spanish King (placed as your second
great Monarch before spoken of) it consists rather of the ordinary blows of
your biting and railing tongue, then of any sound matter of defense for your
Kings clearing, which your foul mouthed Rhetoric I have spared hitherto to
encounter, and so will I still, carrying the same mind that Cato senior did,
who being abused by one of a like intemperate spirit with slanderous and
reprochful terms, made this answer: Impar mihi tecu^ est certandi co^ditio,
nam vt male audire, and male dicere tibi facillimu^ simul and promptissimu^
est; sic and mihi male dicere and insuaue est, and insuetum: i. My encountering
with you is not on even ground, for as to you it is very facile and prompt
both to be evil spoken of, and to speak evil: so to me to speak evil, is
both unpleasing and unusual.

This second Monarch of yours I acknowledge of far more regard in his place
then your former without comparison, The cause of liberty of speech used
against Spain.
and of such persons bearing the just titles of Monarchs, I desire in mine
own disposition, to speak and write with all reverence; but when I found how
Rome had incited this Monarch to take hold of Ambition, and upon this humor
to seek the ruin of our Sovereign and Country, and that he bent himself
accordingly to give his attempts daily to that end, both by fraud and force:
and when I saw how dangerously their practices and platformes had prevailed in
the hearts of many simple superstitious Subjects, I thought it high time to
possess my Countriemen with a true taste of her Majesty's worthy parts, of
the many blessings we had from God by her, and of the infinite wrongs done to
her, both in person, profession, and government; as also to collect somewhat
for their warning, of the nature of the Spanish Nation, whenever and
wheresoever they attained the Sovereignty to command; that both the
profession, person, and government of our liege Lady, might be embraced,
honored, and obeyed; and the peoples hearts might be held free from forsaking
their loyalty to a lawful Queen, and betraying the liberty of their native
Country to the making way for an usurping stranger, and the bringing of this
our noble nation into perpetual thraldom. And if by this occasion I have been
drawn to lay this Monarchs parts more plainly and sharply open, then is
either your desire to hear, or my delight to utter: yet my hope is, that the
wisdom of every true English heart, will either wholly clear me, or else
censure my fault venial and pardonable; seeing the just defense of my
Sovereign did perforce draw me to tax this potent enemy with unjust dealing
toward her, and the tender care of my Countries good, enforced me to put our
men in mind of the Spaniards humors, that they might be armed against the
plots and persuasions of Jesuits sent to seduce them, which being hearkened
unto and obeyed, might lead them to expose themselves to a most certain and
irrecouerable misery. It is not unknown that the Jesuits generally are
agents for the King of Spain, and their arrants commonly tend to the raising
of sedition and treason, (as their practices have showed many ways amongst us)
to the hazard of our Prince and danger of our state; and to this end has he
called into his Seminaries too many of our English youths qualified with fine
natural wits, to their lamentable downfall.

Notwithstanding this just and important occasion drew me to set down that
short admonition or cautele of the Spaniards nature, and Spanish Kings
intention: this Encounterer (whom all men may see to carry a Spanish heart in
an English body) not only seeks to hold the Spaniards credit upright, The
Encounterers injurious railing.
among the simpler sort of our Country men, (whose further fetch therein, the
godly, wise, and politic of our Land will I doubt not more easily find out
then I can conceive,) but belcheth out against me from his malignant stomach,
all manner of spiteful and injurious opprobries, thinking thereby to lay a
blot of disgrace upon me. But welfare the Poet whose old verse is verified in
this new Rayler.

Non semper feriet quodcunque minabitur arcus.
The mark forsooth whereat your aiming is,
You hit not still, but shoot full often and miss.
And therefore whereas the wiser sort of our nation have learned by the laws
of moral civility, that a man must speak moderately of his enemy (a lesson
which Papists have not learned, no though it be their natural Prince whom
they account their enemy) yet he that speaks truly, speaks moderately,
especially where the enemies carriage is so immoderate and outrageous, as if a
man had an hundredth tongues, he were never able sufficiently to set it sorth.
That this moderation I have kept in speaking truly that I have said, and saying
far less then the enemy deserved, I will show with all convenient brevity:
first in the Spanish Nation generally; then particularly in the Spanish King
himself.

It needs not to be so strange to you, to have your Spanish nation noted to
be proud, Of the Spanish Nation.
ambitious, bloody, tyrannical, ravening, and voluptuouslie given, all which
properties are imputed to them by sundry imprinted books: and yet that
concerns not every particular person in that nation, Not all Spaniards
charged.
to be infected withal and every of those faults, (as you absurdlie collect)
for in it (I rest assured) God has his remnant reserved to himself, as in
other nations; but that these humors are in the generality of them: France,
Italy, Germany, the Low Countries, Portugale, England, and the very Indiaes
are by experience witness; and of this many proofs might be yielded, but for a
taste (so as it may not offend your taste) take these few.

Experiments of the Spaniards pride, cruelty, etc.
You shall find in a Catholic Frenchman entitled the Anti-Spaniard, that the
pride of these Spaniards was great, when they durst presume to take a prisoner
violently from the Parliament Sergeant of Paris, who was convicted and
condemned of murder, making him to pass through the chief Chamber of that
high and honorable Court: add unto that a villainous attempt offered by them
(recorded in the same book) to ravish a young damsel left worth an hundredth
thousand crowns, the stopping whereof (some think) did hasten the Countes
Edmond and Horn to their deaths, who would not endure such a villainy to be
committed. Read you also the estate of English Fugitives, and there you shall
find how kind (or rather how cruel) they are to those, that have adventured
their lives (and more then their lives) with them and for them: for when they
had discontented Rowland Yor^e, (who betrayed the Sconce of Zutphen to them) by
putting him besides the government of Deuenter, doubting what might ensue
thereof, by reason of his great stomach, they found the means at a dinner to
requite him for all his services with a Spanish fig, killed his Lieutenant,
and ransacked all that they had: when the poor Soldiers had their Captain
and Lieutenant murdered, and had no means of relief, they made an humble
suite to Verdugo and humbly besought his help, who for a gentle reward
charitablie cashiered them all, not giving them one penny. You shall also read
there, that when there had been a great slaughter of the English at Rosendale
without pity, or mercy (which was more then enough) they did deal most
barbarously with the English that were prisoners to the Italians and
Burgognians, who being led quietly by those that had taken them, toward their
quarter, the Spaniardes spying them cried kill, kill, and drawing their
Rapiers, ran furiously upon these naked poor souls, and killed them every
man. Further it is worth the noting that which is written of the west Indian
people (though not without remorse, and grief) who by the fawning and
flattering of the Spaniard were drawn to accept his government, and for a time
(the poor souls) did honor them like Gods, but when they had tasted of their
insolent customs, humors, and cruelties, they did so deeply and despairefully
detest them, as men might see the poor wretches go by companies together up
to the rocks, and throw themselves down into the sea.

Now (Sir) I pray you tell me, whether this will not satisfy you for
sufficient instances to prove your Spaniards proud, ambitious, bloody,
tyrannical, ravening, and voluptuous? if not, then call to mind one example
more of their barbarous cruelty executed by Don John, after the battle of
Ieblours, where having taken near 2000. Wallons, he caused them to be tied by
two and two, and to be tumbled headlong over the bridge of Namures into the
river of Mewse. If neither this do suffice you, (for to a party so partial
what proof can seem sufficient) for the satisfying of the indifferent Reader,
I will only add the testimony of Paulus Iouius both a Papist, and there,
fore one that will not slander them, especially when he compares them with
Protestants, and who was an eye witness of the thing he writes, and therefore
could not be deceived through other men's information. He writing of the taking
of Rome, by the army of Charles the 5. (consisting of Spaniards and Italians,
Papists, and the Germane Protestants) says, that the Germans after the
slaughter of their armed enemies at the first Encounter, laid aside their
swords, with so calm a carriage, that they set their prisoners at liberty
for a very small ransom: their rage they turned against the Churches and
Images, defacing them because they were Protestants; and did deride the Popes
laws: then speaking of the Spaniards he adds; Hispani autem astuta and
implacabili crudelitate acerbiores, vt abdita arcanaque familiarium eruerent,
tormentis atque supplicijs in nobilissima corpor a graffabantur, tanta auri
cupiditate vt Iulij Pontificis Cadauer, multa exesum carry, eruere, and anulo
spoliare non dubitarent: But the Spaniardes being more bitter with a subtle
and implacable cruelty, did assail the bodies of honorable personages with
tortures and torments, to get their secret and hidden treasures, though they
had been before that, their familiars, with so great desire of gold, that they
doubted not to dig up the body of Pope Julius almost consumed with rottennes,
and to spoil it of his ring. Is this the dealing of Spaniardes with men of
their own Religion? and that in the seat of the holy father himself, whom
they profess so highly to reverence? Then (Sir) though you wash them with
nitre, and take to you much soape, yet their cruelty is marked, and their
bloody stain will not be done away.

But, what a bad bird is this that so defiles his own nest where he was
hatched and bred? N.D. maliciously slaundereth his native country:
a few words, and such as all the world knows to be true, spoken of the
Spaniardes, even then when they seek the conquest of our land, do mightily
offend him, and drive him into marvelous passions: but what slander does not
he heap up on his own country? The English (says he) did abuse themselves
intollerablit in offering most inhumane and barbarous injuries to the
Spaniardes, whiles they were here in Queen Mary's time, villainous words were
ordinary Salutations both in streets and Churches, our victuals we sold to
them at a double price; their water they did drink, we did not only make them
buy, but diverse wels we poisoned of malice to destroy the Spaniardes: that our
men sent their wives and daughters of purpose to allure them by that means to
spoil them of their money; and a number of such other heroical acts and
honorable histories, which (he says) Spaniards and others do recount of our
ciuility, etc. If the Spaniardes speak so evil of our Nation, No cause to
except against our free speech of Spaniards.
as it would make modest Englishmen ashamed, and their ears to burn, in
respect of the dishonor of our country, (as this good fellow reports) why
should this fellow be so enraged? or can any Spaniard be in reason offended,
that we use the like liberty of speech concerning them? Lex talionis lex
aequa, and like shall have like, why should they complain, if the measure they
have met to others, the same be remeasured to them again? And yet it is not
altogether the same measure: they speak of our land untruly, and we of them
report nothing but known truth. And if affection to Spain prevailed not more
with you then truth, you might remember and report, that many outrages were by
the Spaniardes at that time committed against our countriemen; as namely, that
great tumult at Westminster betwixt our men and the Spaniards, whereof great
mischief was like to have ensued. What was the ground of it? in whom was the
fault? was it not about two harlots? and was not the fault wholly in the
Spaniardes? for whiles some Spaniardes committed wickedness with those
strumpets, others with dags and other weapons kept the entry of the
cloistures; some of the Deanes men came in the mean space into the cloister,
at whom the Spaniardes discharged their dagges and hurt some of them, whereof
great business was like to follow: But you show your self worse then one of the
brood of Cham, who was cursed for uncovering his fathers shame, for you seek
to lay shame upon your mother England before she deserve it, to please a
forreiner, and a sworn enemy to her. Now let all men of conscience, yea of
common reason judge, whether of us two has the malignant spirit by you named,
I in discovering the dangerous humors of the Spaniardes for my countries
good, or you in not only concealing them, but seeking to clear them, for your
countries harm, and hazard of ruin, yea in laboring in your censure to lay
so odious a blot of disgrace upon your native country?

Concerning their late King, and that before alleged and proved by me in my
former book against him out of the letter of discovery which I cited, this
Encounterer promises himself great advantage against me, the vanity of whose
conceit shall appear by that which follows for all his great pains taken,
and his leaving no stone unmoved whereby he might discredit either me in
cyting such a letter, or the discouerer in writing it, or both. Sometimes he
seems to doubt whether there were any such letter of discovery sent, or
whether the tale be not wholly forged by my self; nay he persuades himself
to discover both treacherous cogging, and shameless forgery in my heart and
hand. Concerning which objection of forgerie, I doubt not but to all men
indifferent it might be sufficient for me to answer, as one AEmilius Scaurus
did, who being by one Varius accused of treason, made this short and plain
answer, Varius dicit, Scaurus negat; vtri creditis? Varius says it, Scaurus
denies it, whether do you believe? In like sort if I should answer
concerning this odious crime of forging and inuenting this letter, N.D. a
Jesuitical scholar and sworn Spanish obiecteth it, Francis Hostings a
Christian and true hearted Englishman denies it; whether do you credit? The
judgments of as many as were not more then half Spanish would acquit me.
But yet for further evidence I add, that this discovery was written in nature
of a letter from a true hearted Englishman, dwelling at that time with a great
man in Spain, the name of the writer was one John Bradford (not Bradford whom
Boner put to death, but Bradford a Papist;) the Nobles to whom this letter was
directed, were the Earls of Arundel, Shrewsbury, Pembroke with other Nobles,
and these named I trust you will clear them from being infected with the
humor you imagine to be fed by him.

Having little hope to persuade the indifferent reader that I forged this
letter of mine own head, he proceeds to seek to discredit the certificate
in it self. For short answer whereto, there be two things material of which
I must say somewhat, the marriage it self of this King to Queen Marie, with
the conditions thereof insisted upon by this English Spaniard, and made a
special color to crush the credit of Bradfords advertisement, and the secret
intent of the King by this letter discovered. By the first, viz. the conditions
of the marriage together with the Kings usage, toward the English for a space,
he would overthrow the second, namely the certificate of the Kings secret
meaning. But (Sir) your inference hereupon is very feeble and weak, in taking
upon you hereby to control the advertisement of John Bradford to be false.
The world has not found it strange for some politic men to make semblance of
love when they mean nothing less; I will not hunt far for proof touching the
argument in hand, or for disproofe of this Encounterers wrongful exception
against me: Let the Anti-Spaniard and Mercurius Gallo-Belgicus both Papists,
and Emanuel Lewis a Portugal, in his open confession at the Guild Hall, and
sundry others suffice for my clearing, not to have written that I did without
ground of proof in my former book. It were not amiss to remember and
consider, what moved your Popish Prelates and others to be so busy in hand to
have Lady Elizabeth, now our most worthy and happy Queen, married to some
Spaniard, and to be posted over with her portion much about the time, that it
was said, Queen Marie was with child, and when your Catholic King was
concluded to be Protector and governor to the issue hoped for. I dare not say
(for offending your Worship) that I fear it should have been the best of our
sweet Queens fortune, (if that match had gone forward) to have lived with her
husband in Spain, whilst your King Catholic enjoyed by usurpation the
possession and government of her Kingdom in England, to the killing of all
true English hearts: but I dare boldly say that many thousands in England do
praise God from their hearts, that she so happily escaped so dangerous and
base a match, and that we so happily enjoy so worthy and blessed a Queen.

The conditions of the Marriage and usage of the King for a space being too
weak an inference to disprove the certificate concerning his secret meaning,
The person of the discouerer considered.
let us in few words consider somewhat both of the person of the Discouerer,
and the substance of the discovery: I pray you (Sir) what should move Bradford
to write this; but that an honest true Englishmans heart incited him thereunto?
he was by profession a Papist, by habitation a Spaniard, for his Master on whom
he attended was one, and being amongst them his peril was great in writing
this; for if he had been discovered, his life must have paid for it: he did it
not then for hatred to Popery, as you would surmise, nor for malice to his
Master with whom it appeared he was in good account, nor for any hope of
reward being far enough off from receiving any, but near unto danger it is
plain he was, only when he heard of such a perilous plot to the utter rooting
out of his Country men, and overthrow of his flourishing Country, he was
forced out of the remorse of a true English man's heart to expose himself to
the hazard of his life, by his setting down, and sending this advertisement to
these Lords.

But to fill up the discredit you desire to lay upon Bradford for this his
advertisement so honestly given to the Nobles of England, you ask How he
could in Spain discover so great a secret that lay in the Kings breast in
England? For answer I must tell you, that I hope it is not unknown that there
was some intermission of time between the Kings marrying of Queen Mary and
her death; besides that, when the King was in England I trust he had not all
his Nobles and Counselors with him: if this were consulted on, and concluded
before the marriage, he might then get notice of it; if it were concluded on
after the marriage, why might not this be brought to his Master and others into
Spain, by letters from some of the Nobles that were with the King here? So
that this is but a poor shift to discredit Bradfords advertisement, and the
circumstances considered that I did set down before of his being a Papist in
profession, in dwelling a Spaniard, and in place not to write this without
peril, I doubt not but to every one in whom reason rules and not passion, it
will prove probable enough that there might be a just cause of such an
advertisement.

When Lewis the French King his son was by our nobles called into England,
and set up for their King against King John, the Vicount Melun (falling deadly
sick) upon remorse of conscience, secretly confessed to diverse of the Barons,
what was the purpose of Lewis to do when he had once obtained the Crown,
namely that Lewis with sixteen of his Counselors (whereof this Vicount was
one,) had compacted after possession of the Crown obtained to deprive our
chief Nobles of their lands and possessions, and drive them into perpetual
exile. And so farther proceeding, and with many tears pitying the extreme
misery this land was like to come unto, he brake out into these words: My
friends, I counsel you earnestly to look to your selves, and to provide the
remedy in time, least it come upon you unawares; your King for a season has
kept you under, but if Lodowicke prevail he will put you from all. etc. Had
Lodowicke so treacherous an intent when our Nobles so highly favored him, and
shall it seem strange that King Philip should have such a secret meaning? did a
Frenchman and an enemy upon very remorse of conscience bewray this secret? and
might not Bradford an Englishman (though a Papist) hazard his life to discover
King Philips dangerous plot against his country? Or may our Chronicles
record this purpose of Lodowicke and publish it to posterity? and may it not
be lawful for me to set down the discovery of your Catholic Kings secret
determination, to admonish my country men, to take heed how they lend aid to
bring in a foreign ruler into the Realm, least perhaps it follow that they be
displaced themselves, and be made strangers in their own land? The Taxes.
But the taxes set down by me as intended to be brought upon this land you
call childish toys, such as one would not imagine that a man of Sir Francis
name, house, and calling, would ever publish: But such childish toies they are,
as every sound and true Englishma^, hearing of the servile gonernment of
Spain, and feeling the freedom we live withal in England, will from his
heart praise God for the blessed freedom we live under, and pray to God for
ever to deliver us from Spaines bondage, and this do many other Nations
besides us, whereof some have been so miserably taxed, that they have been
forced (as one does credibly report) to sell their beds they lie upon to pay
taxations imposed upon them.

In the cloze of this, when I set down what you say of your kings
determination concerning the Lady Elizabeth, as well as the rest after, you
have referred us to that you have set down before of his kindness to her, when
she was prisoner (to which I have made you already a full answer:) you run
into your common place of railing again, and add; That no modest man can
cease to wonder how so infamous a libell could be suffered to pass to the
print, especially containing diverse personal, reprochful, conte^ptuous
calumniations against so great and potent a Prince. etc. I like you well (sir)
you are fast to your friends, I wish I could find you as faithful to your
Sovereign; then should I find you as hot (if not more hot) in raging against
those of your side that have most wretchedlie railed against her Majesty your
rightful Sovereign, Papists the only contemners of princes
(if you prove worthy to be her Subject) wherein they have sought to impugn
her right, to defame her faith, to discredit her government, to touch her
honor, to violate and abate the Majesty of her place, etc. But as Athalia
fled into the Temple and cried out, treason, treason, whereas her self indeed
was the traitor, and Hercules furens in the tragedy raged, and threatened to
be revenged of those that had slain his children, himself indeed having
slain them, in his mad mood: so these good fellows cry out against those
that utter opprobrious speeches against Princes, whereas themselves are the
peerles and matchles men of all Christendom, in whom the saying of Saint Jude
is verified: Which despise government and speak evil of them which are in
authority. I protest I am abashed and my pen trembles to set down those
intolerable calumniations that not only forreiners, but home-borne Papists
have uttered against her Majesty. I know not how to compare them herein, but
to the devil the father of all slander and calumniation, for as it is written
in the Revelation, Revel. 52.
That the Serpent did cast out of his mouth water against the women like a
flood, that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood: so have these
hell hounds spued forth whole floods of reproachful and calumnious slanders,
thereby to darken and drown the honor of her Majesty if they could possibly.
Remember (Sir) in what sort Bartholomaeus de miranda master of the Popes
Palace, behaueth himself toward your Sovereign, and with how villainous
reproaches he does load her in his admonition set before the Epistle of Osorius
directed to her. Remember how he raileth at her that wrote the cononization of
Didacus, who being a Spaniard, was of special purpose sainted by the Pope to
further the King of Spain in his intended conquest of England. And though the
wiser sort of our Nation have learned even by the laws of moral civility
(as your self confess) that a man must speak moderately also of his enemy,
yet the learned of our English Papists have not learned to speak
moderately of their Soueraign, whom they ought not to reckon their enemy: you
know how immoderatly and immodestly Station, Saunders, and Rishton (to omit
others) do rail against her, as against the Turk himself they could not do
worse. Now (Sir) how should that which upon urgent occasion (if to invade, and
seek to conquer the land, and to make way thereunto by seeking the shortning
of my Sovereigns life through treasons may be reckoned an urgent occasion) I
say how should that I have set down against your Catholic King, anger you, if
so many opprobrious and contumelious reproaches (as you know) uttered against
your Sovereign; and that not alone by forrainers, but by such as should be
subjects, do not move you? I write against a stranger, truly; these against
their Soueraign, falsely: I, to confirm subjects hearts, in loyalty and
obedience to their lawful Sovereign; they, to corrupt Subjects hearts, and
to make them disloyal and disobedient to their Sovereign: I, to free my
country from all usurpers, they, to fill their country with foreign
government: I, to preserve unto us the sincere truth of Gods Gospel; they, to
thrust upon us a false worship by Popery and superstition. And this shall
suffice to shield and deliver me from being harmed, or grieved by your
slanders, and for all your malice to me, I am sorry you should carry so vilde
and villainous a mind, as not to be vexed to see your Soueraign so dispitefully
and disloyally dealt withal. But I have now so good cause to guess the
unsoundness of your heart to my Sovereign, by this your wrangling, and wicked
Ward-word, as I cannot expect or hope for any good fruit of a loyal heart
toward her Majesty from you.

And to confirm me and all true Subjects in this opinion, About Lopus.
you close up this your last Encounter with a doubt, whether Lopus ever meant to
kill our dear Soraigne; and why you should doubt I see not, but because it was
not done, and with a denial that your Catholic King should be privy
thereunto, (and yet all the Agents in it do plainly confess so) by the first
whereof, you lewdlie labor to tax the seat of our Sovereigns Justice; and by
the second you abuse her Majesty and her people: and by both you offer to
discredit the honorable testimony in print, of the proofs and proceedings,
by examinations before the Lords of her Majesty's Council. In which you may
find, how Lopus was first solicited by Andrada from Mendoza the King of
Spaines Ambassador in France, to poison her Majesty: Secondly, by the same
Andrada, he was solicited by a token from Christophero de Moro (one of the
Kings privy Council,) Thirdly by one Roderoquo Marquis a Portugale, unto whom
Lopus did undertake to do the abominable fact, for which he was proffered and
promised fifty thousands crowns (which I hope cannot be taken to be the gift
of any Subject:) fourthly for this purpose, Lopus sent Andrada over to Callis
to confer with Count Fuentes about this practice; and caused Stephano
Ferrera de Gomo another Portugale to write letters to Stephano Iberra the Kings
Secretary at Bruxels, to assure him and Fuentes, that the detestable fact
should be performed if the 50000. crowns were paid, which letter Lopus
himself sent by one Gomes Dauila a Portugale. But Andrada not being thought
fit to follow so great a cause, Ferrera was chosen to manage it, by whom the
Doctor did again assure the performance of this villainy; and then there were
bills of exchange for the money delivered by the Count Fuentes, the one from
Gonzalo Gomez to Pedro de Carreras, the other from Gomez to John Pallacios: And
if (through the merciful providence of almighty God) these had not been
lingered, and that in the mean time by the diligence and carefulnes of one of
the Lords of her Majesty's privy Council the matter had not been discovered,
the villainy had been attempted and acted, and so brought out of doubt (as this
Espaniolized champio^ seems to have wished) to the unavoidable hazard of
ruin in man's judgment to our Country and State. So have you here upon
honorable credence plainly proved, that Lopus should have been the Actor of
this villainy, that Andrada, Ferrera Gomez Dauila, and Manuell Jews (all
Portugales) were Agents and Messengers to him about it; that Mendoza your Kings
Ambassador in France, Christofero de Moro, Count Fuentes, and Secretary Iberra
(all Counselors to your King) were Directors to these Agents and Messengers,
and how far your King himself did direct herein, let the book tell you: And
therefore have you no cause to doubt of Lopus his bloody meaning in this
bloody business.

To return to your self (Sir) I make no doubt but you desire to be believed
in all that you have scattered in your Libell, and not least in this last part;
for if you could creep into the secret bosoms of our English Nation, and
win credit to be believed, that all that you say is Gospel, you might then
hope of some likelihood to prevail in your shameless suit for toleration, His
suit to the Lords.
or alteration in Religion tendered to the Lords in your Remission immediately
following. But as it is well known to them all, that we have been much blessed
of God by her Majesty's government (although you inuert all out of your popish
and traitorous affection into cursings) so I doubt not, but they all see and
will acknowledge, that the true worship of God erected and established amongst
us by her Majesty, is the very assured and principal groundwork of all our
blessings: Religion and piety must be our safety, and so long as we keep
God by embracing his truth without halting; so long shall God keep this land
safe from all malice of all our enemies whatsoever. Therefore far shall it be
from them, so much as to lend an ear to so impudent and evil affected a
Suitor, as you show your self to be, in daring with shameless face to slander
and scorn our Religion, to deprave our seat of Justice, to harten
disobedience, to excuse traitors, to darken and sometimes to defend ye malice
of your two Monarchs of Rome and Spain against our Sovereign and Queen;
contrariwise when her just commendation was set out, for being God his good
instrument of many great blessings brought unto us, you maliciously turn them
(as I said before) into cursings: when to the praise of almighty God mention
is made of her wonderful and happy deliverances, both in the time of Queen
Marie, and in her own time, you do in derision call the first a miracle of
Milne-wheeles, and the second you shamelessly seem to persuade, they were
things rather feared by us, then intended to her. When I urge Stories
traitorous and bloody words against her, you cunningly seek to turn his
meaning to other persons and purposes. When I condemn Cardinal Allin and
Bishop Gardiners proud and pernicious dealing toward her, you fall into
extraordinary high commendations of them, as if the trumpet of their praises
for so dealing had been worthy to be blown over all the world: when I say,
that we should keep these three things safe in our breast; first our
Conscience to God; secondly, our Love to our Country; thirdly, our Loyalty to
our Prince, you earnestly labor to prove that we are not bound always to
love our Country, and to bear Loyalty to our Prince, but that for Religions
sake, we must hate them and war against them: and when I lay down the many,
and manifold wrongs most vnchristianlie and unkindly offered to her Majesty by
Rome and Spain, you bend your whole force to cover all, and to prove wrongs
offered by her Majesty and our Nation to them, such is your special love to
these your two Monarchs, and to all treasons, and Traitors plotted and
encouraged by them; and so little and key-colde is your love and duty to her
Majesty, to whom you owe all love and obedience. But this is the fruit of
Pius Quintus his Bull, the peril of which curse you will not incur; and such
is the force of your Catholic Religion and Spanish Crowns, as you will rather
worship Dagon, then serve the living God, and give your faith to an usurping
stranger, then keep yours given, and due to your lawful Sovereign. Yet for
all this you doubt not to tender a remission of your whole answer to the
judgment of the Lords of her Majesty's Council, by which your answer, and
remission (if it be well scanned in matter and manner) you will be found
justly to deserve all the titles contained in this one verse, Vafer,
detractor, mendax, elatus, iniquus.
A subtle, railing, lying, proud, and treacherous man.
And thus much have I adventured to offer to the view of my Christian
Countrymen in defense of my former Watchword, collected by me out of my
Christian affection to them for their benefit, that they may know I stand
still constant, and confident to defend the truth of my God, against Popery
and all other heresies, to perform my Loialtie to my Sovereign against all
Popish Espaniolized Traitors, and treason, and to stand for the liberty of my
Country against Rome and Spain, and all foreign Potentates whatsoever; as
also that my silence should not cause them to conceive, that this masked
Champions railing tongue has any way distempered me, or his threatening
brauadoes any whit dismayed me, the first whereof I pass over, with little
regard, according to the Counsel of wise Solomon: It is the glory of a man to
pass by offenses: the second I scorn, being sent out by a cowardly Companion
that speaks big, and dares not show his face.

To conclude, The conclusion.
I delight not in war and hostility between Princes, I wish peace in all
States and Commonwealths, from my heart, so far forth as may stand with the
glory of almighty God, who is the supreme author of all authority and
government, and is only to be served both by Prince and people, as his word
prescribes. For I confess, Dulce est nomen pacis; res vero ipsa, tum iucunda,
tum salutaris. And yet can I not subscribe to this blind Peacemakers desire,
that longs for a Peace to the dishonor of God, and labors by a Peace to
bring in his Idol worship again amongst us: but I heartelie pray to my God,
to preserve us from such a Peace, and with Erasmus I affirm, Melior est talis
pugna, quae Deo proximum facit, quam pux illa quae a Deo separat. But if such a
Peace may be had, as may not prejudice a good Conscience in the truth of
Religion we now hold, nor impeach the safety of our dear Queen, nor hazard
bondage to our Country, by the government of forrainers and strangers; blessed
be that Peacemaker, and God almighty grant us such a Peace all our days.
And this have I presumed to say in answer to this Champions Peace prayed for
in the Conclusion of these his Encounters, with a mind rather to raise up the
power and pride of Rome and Spain, then for any good mind or meaning he has
to our Queen Elizabeth or England.

And now to knit up this my Resistance to every of your railing Encounters,
(Sir N.D.) I assure my self you shall find all the Protestants and Professors
of Gods truth in England, as also many of those that are infected with the
Romish Religion, so well resolved from your own pen of your want of civility
in railing beyond measure, and your want of a found heart to your Sovereign
and Country, in so highly extolling your two greatest Monarchs of Rome and
Spain, to the prejudice and touch both of Queen and Country (so far forth
as the power of your wicked wit and words can devise, and persuade) as your
glosing shall gain little credit to work my condemnation in any of their
judgments, either for any thing that was in my former book, or for any thing
contained in this latter: For I mean none other in all that is said, but a
desire of confirmation to the one in a holy profession, and a reformation to
the other of their being any longer seduced, and misled by Romes enchantments,
and a care in both to stand firmly and faithfully to defend their Sovereign
and Country, against foreign malice and home Treason; whereunto if way should
be given, God should be dishonored, our Queen endaungered, our Country
deprived of it ancient and most comfortable liberties, and then what can
either one or other look for but misery, and desolation. For what befell both
to Guelphes and Gibellines when the Gibellines brought in a friend of theirs
called Facinus Canis, who was to have the goods of the Guelphes for his pay?
He was no sooner gotten in, but that without sparing of either, both sides were
spoiled; whereof when the Gibellines complained, saying that their goods were
spoiled contrary to agreement, this their friend by them brought in answered,
That themselves were Gibellines, and they should be safe; but their goods were
Guelphes and they must pay for it: Your selves can make the application; and so
to your wisdoms I leave it, beseeching God to continue his wonted mercy
toward our Queen and land, and to give to this my adversary and all of his
faction a better mind, if it stand with his good will and pleasure. Amen.

FINIS.

