PETER'S ENLARGEMENT UPON THE PRAYERS OF THE CHVRCH.

BY Master HARRIS.

Psalm. 34.17. The Righteous cry and the Lord hears and delivers them out of
all their troubles.

LONDON. Printed by I. D. for John Bartlett, and are to be sold at the golden
Cup in the Goldsmiths Row in Cheapside. 1624.

To the Reader.
THis Sermon (thus made up with mine own and others notes) I now submit to
Authority and Censure, for substance, I yield here is no more then what was
delivered, whether no less I have not now to say, for circumstance (I yield to
the allegation) I acknowledge it seasonable. The times shall ever be cleared
by prayer whenever they look sadly upon us. Our Brethren abroad cry still in
the Churches words. Ier. 8.20.
The harvest is past, and the Summer is ended, and we are not helped, and we
(methinks) should add with Jeremy verse 21. I am sore vexed for the hurt of
the daughter of my people, I am heavy, astonishment has taken me; Is there no
balm at Gilead etc, At home, howsoever the Lord has been gracious to us in
the scarcity, yet we may in most places, Hag. 2.20.
take up the Prophets words in another sense, Is the seed yet in the Barn? as
yet the Trees have not been delivered of their burden? Look into the 65
Psalm, Psalm. 65.9. 10.11.
and thou shall find that it is the Lord that finds both ground and seed, that
gives both growth and ripening to the Corn, and therefore we should wait
upon him with our presents of praise and prayer, this were enough to make us
pray, but this is the least of many motives, for Reader thou see the times,
the World is now all ear and tongue, the most given with the Athenians to
little else then to hear and tell news, (uncertain news, Demonol. l. 3 c. 1.
ad finem.
the Author of all lies as his Majesty has told us) the rest are willing
also to hear, and to hear Gods Truth, not Fables, and therein they do but as
S. James would have them, so as they would add doing to hearing as he
commands. But alas, whilst we only profess and discourse of Religion, we
drive the practice of Religion out of the world, as one too justly complains.
Sir W. Ral. preface
It is lamentable to consider the little use that is made of Gods Ordinances in
most places; Preachers too often (I tremble to speak it) be used like post
horses, spurd on till they be spent, and then a fresh is called for, in the
mean the world sits still and thinks to be saved for hearing. Reader, Mourn
for this, weep for this, for this boades a Judgment, the Lord will reckon for
the blood of his Prophets spent as well as shed. To these reasons, it will not
be hard for thee to add more, look within thee, and round about thee, and so
stir up thy self to this exercise of Prayer, an exercise (I can assure thee)
of unspeakable strength and comfort, an exercise without which thou can not
live, and by which thou may live in the mouth of death. Believe it, were
thou in an estate, more desperate then death, in a place worse then hell, yet
if there thou could pray truly, thou should find comfort and strength
beyond hope, for Prayer is better then our hopes, and yet God is better to us
then our prayer. First, for that which is public, follow him who was no
time-server, make no small account of public prayers. Secondly, for private,
pause before thou speak, remember who spoke it, if a man would not deliver an
Oration to a Prince extempore and so dainely, it will not become us to open our
mouths rashly before our maker, secondly, keep touch with God: first, for
extraordinary and incidental occasions, be sure to keep thy self in such a
state and condition of soul, as that ever thou can recollect thy self, and
call in all the powers of soul for this business upon a short warning:
secondly, for ordinary times, so near as may be, fail not of thine hour,
when the Clock strikes the Scholar runs to his book, thou must to God
leaving al, there tender thy self, though not always alike fit, and so be in
the way and place of preferment, if words will not come, sigh, God hears the
sighing of his prisoners, if thou can not sigh, breath, God has an ear for
that, Lam 3.56. However, there be, there stand, and the child that stands
before his father and appears in his place at supper time with his trencher in
his hand, speaks with his countenance, and speeds accordingly: he was wise who
said, M. Gr.
they pray not altogether of fashion, who see their infirmity in praying and
are grieved for it, the worst prayers that we make(to our own sense I mean)
speed ever best, and then we pray most happily, when we arise most humbled.

Thirdly, when thou have prayed, do not as children, who never look after
their arrow; but as Daniell cap. 9.1. take notice of thine enlargements in
prayer and of thy success after, write down time and place as the Prophet
does, and so help thy self in future times by former experiments, I see this
Porch grows wide, and therefore I will conclude, if thou be acquainted with
prayer, thou know there is more in it then can be expressed, if thou be not
acquainted, grow acquainted, and thou shall find me true, if thou want
furthest motives and directions, I commend (in this have) to thee who art but a
poor English private man. First, for the promises (whereof the heart must chew
before prayer) the Treatise of faith. secondly, for motives, the Epistle to the
key Heaven. thirdly, for cases of Conscience and directions after prayer, 2.
Treatises on Ephe 6. viz. the spiritual Armor, and now after directions and
exhortations, what remains but practice, in stead of others prailing and enter
dealing in State-busines, do thou pray, pray for thy Sovereign, for his seed,
for the Churches, for thy self, for thy charge, and use no more words against
men's sins, then thou will make prayers for their souls in secret, if thou will have comfort in thy words: Thus much of this, Now Reader to thee, if
these plain notes pass the Press, know that I neither did ente^d their
publishing before I preached them, nor can intend notwithstanding their
refining since; if the world may be bettered by them, or by any thing I can
do, I have enough, only I desire mercy and equity from my friends, those
notes of mine which they have, I will my self (after my public Ministry)
now shortly revise, let no man do so ill an office as to thrust out other men's
notes without their privitie, especially his, who can do nothing worthy this
Age.

TO: HARRIS.

PETER'S ENLARGEMENT.
Acts 12.6.7. And when Herod would have brought him forth, the same night Peter
was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains; and the Keepers
before the door, kept the prison.

And behold the Angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in the
prison: and he smote Peter on the side, and raised him up, saying; Arise up
quickly, And his chains fell off from his hands, etc.


HERE is a story of Peter's, 1. Imprisonment. 2. Enlargement: With the cause of
the one, and means of the other. Herod having vexed some, slain a second, now
commits the third; and all this to gratify the Jews. Peter thus committed, is
bailed by the Church, or rather remooved and freed by petition; they pray
heartily for him, in the 5. verse, and they speed as happily, whilst they are
praying, God gives in the prisoner amongst them. The manner of his delivery is
here reported, and that was very strange, beyond Herod's purpose, the prisoners
expectation, the Keepers meaning, all men's hopes: Herod held his purpose he had
begun, and the next morning he meant an end of him, Peter had made his
conclusion to morrow (thinks he) (for messages past between him and the
Church, which spent this night in Prayer for him, and therefore knew the
danger) I must be put to it, therefore I will strengthen my self to night: The
Keepers stood upon their guard, and resolved that no Peter should pass them:
yet is Peter delivered, and how I pray you? God remoues all impediments, for
nothing was in readiness.

First, for man, entrance was there none, therefore God sends an Angel, and
there was no stop against him.

Next, in the dark, it was hard to find which was which; God directs an Angel
to him, and he comes upon him, and misses not the man, though bound to the
same chain with two others, as in strict imprisonments they used to do.

Thirdly, they were in the dark, and that was ill for noise; The Angel brings
his dark lantern with him, and shines to Peter and none else.

Fourthly, the prisoner can do little for himself, he is asleep, the Angel
wakes him; he is laid, the Angel raises him; he is amazed, the Angel directs
him; he is bound, the Angel unties him; he knows not where he is, the Angel
guides him; he is to pass through sundry difficulties, the Angel conducts
him through them all, and so dismisses him.

We will use no more words about a plain Story, but acquaint you with our
meditations: they contain the success of the Churches prayers; they prayed
for Peter, the Angel thereupon is sent to Peter: where see; 1. How the Angel
finds him: 2. How the Angel delivers him.

For the first, he finds him sleeping, in the midst of fears and foes: From
whence was this sleep, was it worldly sorrow that caused it, or was it carnal
security?

Answ. In doubtful things charity supposes the best; so should we, worldly
sorrow causes sleep, but how? when it is not extreme, and that sleep is
joined with starting: carnal security will cause sleep, but why should we
charge Peter with that at this time; his sleep came from a better cause, he
was at peace with God, he had the Churches prayers for him, the cause for him,
his conscience for him, God and his Angels for him; he could die but once, and
for one death he was prepared: hence his boldness before, Chapters 4. and 5.
hence his confidence, here he resolved with David, I will lay me down and
sleep, and withal, God gave rest to his beloved, as it is in the Psalms,
rest more then ordinary to his mind, to his body: hence the Angel can hardly
awake him, and being awaked, he is not terrified, as a guilty person would
have been in this case: do then but consider, 1. The man. 2. His behavior in
like cases. 3. The time and circumstances. 4. The exercises of the Church for
him. 5. The messenger, and message sent to him. 6. The manner of his behavior
when he is awaked, and you will see that his sleep grew not from distemper,
but from strength of faith and comfort.

Now to the Points.

Where first from the order, Esaias 55.
so the word that goes to heaven, the prayers of the Church sirike up to God,
there they lie at his gates, and never will away without their errand, and when
they are answered, then they come down with authority, and reign over all
impediments below, witness this Story: Peter is committed, the persecuters are
resolute, the foes many, the friends few, means none but God, to God the
Church goes; the enemies plotte, the Church prays; they shut the prison
doors, the Church opens heavens doors; so there is old tugging for the
prisoner, but the Church winnes him. God, to let them see what prayers be,
sends him to them while they are praying; there, says God (if you will rake no
denial) there he is; thereby pointing us to the means of his deliverance: we
need not many words for proof of this, James says, The prayer of one
righteous man prevails much; James 5.
if of one, what of twenty! what of an hundred! and he instances in Elijah,
He alone could open and shut heaven, then well may many open and shut prisons
on earth: nay add further, the joint prayers of unbelievers and hypocrites
have done much: when heathenish Niniuie fasted and prayed, God heard; Jonah 3.
when false Rehoboam humbled himself and his people, 2 Chronicles. 12.
God was entreated; how much more shall the faithful prayers of the Church
prevail, prevail (I say) both for the preventing and removing evils, and
obtaining and keeping of good things: What shall we instance the life of Asa,
Iehosaphat, Hezekiah, when was it otherwise, when did the Church of God ever
join in a common petition to God but they sped? no instance to the contrary.

No marvel, James 5.
1. Pray for one another; call upon me. 2. The warrant of a promise, Psalm. 50.
I will deliver thee. 3. The warrant of experience, never any yet used it but
they prevailed.


Prayers are presents very welcome to God, Cant. 2.14.
It Is his music and perfume. Rev. 5.8.

3. The parties are very dear who tender them, Let me see thy face, its
comely; Cant. 2.14.
Esther never pleased Ahasuerosh so well, as the Church pleases Christ.

4. The parties from and through whom they are presented, Romans 8.
Romans 8. tendered by Christ Jesus, and shall these be denied? add to this:

5. The party to whom they are directed, to God, who is all truth, mercy,
grace, wisdom, power, and shall not these prevail? Prayers set God on work,
and all in God, his wisdom, his power, his Angels, and what then can hinder?

Look backward, Peter has been in prison, and prayers were not made by the
Church; many a member sick, and prayers were not made by the Elders; yea many
a Church distressed, Bohemia afflicted, the Palatinate and Valtoline
distressed, yet we did not pray; the enemy could curse, but we did not pray,
and therefore how justly might God distress and leave us destitute of his
help, and the Churches prayers?

2. Look forward, and preserve and improve this your interest in God, let no
Peter, no Preacher, no Christian, no neighbor lie in the chains by you
(whether in the chains of sickness, or poverty, or debt, or pain, or sin,
or temptation) but do you repriue him: you have a key that will open any
lock, a medicine that will heal any wound, a weapon that will prevail in any
place; draw this weapon, use this medicine: if men be sick, pray them whole,
if poor, pray them rich; if sad, pray them merry.

But is this so easily done? yes verily by the whole Church; as it is for the
outward estate when one is very poor, it is hard for two or three to set him
up again, but nothing for a thousand; and when one is in a pit, it is much for
one, but not for many to pull him out: see here, it is long of us that men lie
so long under their burdens, would we jointly commend them to God, our prayers
would take, men's chains would off, James, let the prayers of the Church heal
the sick; says not the story, the prayers of the Church procured Peter's
liberty? But say they be not always delivered?

Here is comfort and encouragement, comfort for our selves, if members of the
Church, if we bleed with her, if we pray for her, if we say, If I forget
thee, O Jerusalem, then let my right hand forget her cunning: the comfort is
great, we have that which Saint Paul thirsted for, the prayers of the Church;
and this is a privilege worth ten worlds, and a comfort beyond all
apprehension, when a man looks round about him and can say, there is a town,
I have some prayers there, there is another, I have stock going there, nay in
every shire, every nation, some that be enlarged when I am barren, some
quickened when I am dull, and I am an adventurer in the Churches ship, I have
a stock in her treasure, and an interest in her prayers; this keeps the head
above water, and preserues from sinking.

4. For encouragement, to pray for the Church, would Gods people enter into a
holy league, and tie themselves in their several closets, to spend so much
time weekly, or daily in prayer, for some particular person, or place, Church,
or Nation; I wonder how they should miss; tell me where ever the Churches
joint prayers did ever mis-carry, or prove abortiue? in what place, in what
case, for what people? prayers have been made for men out of the Church, and
have sped, witness Ninivie; for men in the Church (good men, bad men) and have
sped; prayers have been made by Land, and have prevailed; on the Seas by
Ianah, and have sped, they have prevailed under the earth, in dens, and
dungeons, and caves; prayers have been made for sick men and have help them,
for dying men, for poor men, for captives, for prisoners, and have helped; for
men against persecution, against temptation, against sorrow, against beasts,
against men, against devils: prayers have been omnipotent heretofore, why not
now?

Ob. Why now,

Ans. Why therefore set against those sins by prayer, cast out your own, cry
down other men's,

Ob. Oh but they cry loud.

Ans. Yet prayer has the stronger voice, Sodom yield ten holy men, Genesis 18.
James 5. Amos 7.1.2.
and she shall be spared, let one Elijah stand up for stiff-necked Israel,
and one Amos plead for rebellious Judah, and God will show mercy.

Ob. True indeed, if we had such as they,

Ans. 1. They were men subject to like passions. Iam. 5.16.17.
3. These here mentioned were new converts, yet prevailed with God for Peter.

Ob. Oh but here the whole Church joined: Israel might meet from Dan to
Beersheba, there might be some hope.

Ans. We may, and do more then these might; Hesters time in their several
families, and the whole State was then against the truth, and against the
Scriptures, and all religion was disgraced; yet then they prevailed, much more
we now.

Ob. But now it is too late,

Ans. Whilst God calls in his word, late, God is used to see men sinking before
he sets in, their extremity is his opportunity; when Peter is within one
night of the sword, then is his time.

Ob.

Answ. Peter this week, the next, and the next, the doors be still shut, the
chains be still on; well now they have but one night more to wait, Genesis 22.
they wait that, but ere morning all is won: If then we have but one day,
one night, one hour to spend; hope, pray, wait, that day, that night, that
hour, God will be seen in the mount: deliverance shall come if prayer go on
the errand; it ever was so, ever shall be so, dispute not but believe; there is
who prays and speaks not, and there is too that speaks, who prays not; if
thou will pray, thou must open thy needs to God, as thy Father, through Christ,
God-man as thy Mediator, from God the holy Ghost, as the inditer of thy
prayers: if thou will pray, thy heart must be 1. Psalm. 66.18.
emptied of purposes of sin: 2. broken: 3. purged from guile by faith; which
faith must then work, before thou beginnest; Psalm. 86.7. And the 56.9.
say with David, I will call, and God will answer me; and when thou have done,
conclude, I have spoken, and shall in due time and manner be answered; thus
do, and be sure that thou neither begin nor end a lawful petition (of such
only we speak) before thou art aware, let faith enter thy suit, and end, and
subscribe it, and thou prevailest.

Now to particulars.

How finds the Angel Peter? Sure he cannot sleep this night, being upon his
life to morrow, and in all likelihood knowing of it by the Church, howsoever,
not sure of life one day to an end, but like enough to be sent for at an hours
warning, as John Baptists head was. Notwithstanding all this, Peter sleeps as
soundly as ever in his life, and wakes without terror; whence was this, from
corruption? no; from natural courage? no, when Peter was younger, and
therefore naturally bolder, he was a distard: whence then? consider the reasons
before, and it will be found, that it was from special comfort and confidence
in God, which comfort most attends prisons and persecutions: here see the
strength of spiritual peace and comfort.

The Lord has comforts for his children, The joy of the Lord is strong, Nehe.
8.
says Nehemiah, strong indeed that will carry a man over all: Peter had a
strong heart, that can thus sleep, thus wake, that can look upon Chains,
upon Prisons, upon Tyrants, upon Torments, upon Angels; (good and bad) and
never break his sleep for the matter. Paul's joys were strong, Act. 15
that made him sing in the stocks: David's says strong, that made him say, I
will lie down and sleep, Psalm. 3.
I will not fear though ten thousand rise up against me: those were strong and
strange joys that supported David in all his fears, and made him say, In the
multitude of my thoughts, Psalm. 94.1^.
thy comforts glad my soul: Those strong that triumphed over, rackings,
mockings, scourgings, etc. as in the eleventh to the Hebrews.

Quest. But whence comes their strength? 1. Q Whence these comforts.


Because they be Gods joys, the joys of the Spirit, derived immediately from
the fountain;

2. Because spiritual, for as spirits are more actine and powerful then
bodies, so spiritual things then bodily and natural.

3. These joys are most certain and durable, these overcome and out-liue all
crosses, and all other comforts.

4. They are all-sufficient, and borrow no help from creatures: Nature and Art
work with instruments, and by means, they cannot support without meat,
strengthen without sleep, give sleep without warmth, nor warmth without a
bed, etc. But God can beyond means, without means, work comfort, make one see
in the dark, live in death.

Quest. But what be these comforts of God? 2. Q. What.


Ans. Precious promises applied by God in due season, Peter now: He thinks,
has not God said; that the fighing of prisoners comes to him, that he bottles
up all our tears, that we should cast our care upon him, and he will care for
us, that in six and seven troubles, they shall not come near me, that in fire
and water he will he with me, and did not I hear my Savior say, Blessed are
they that are per secuted for righteousness sake; read not I how David said,
I will lie down and steep, and therefore I will do so too.

2. Strengthening graces, God poures the spirit of faith, patience, power,
courage, into his, in due time; and they raise the heart, as wine the fainting
spirits; every saving grace is healing, is strengthening.

3. Hourly experience of Gods care and providence; dence; and a child never
sees the love of his mother so much as when he is sick, so Gods children, etc.

Now that makes them pluck up their feet with Jacob, and say with Paul, I
know whom I have trusted; and with the Church, Thou will guide us to death; and
after (as David adds) receive to glory.

4. Special peace of conscience, and joy of the holy Ghost, by new expressions
of Gods favor, and ravishments of heaven: then God opens heaven, and they see
their life and crown, and so are carried over all.

Quest. When does God thus comfort his? 3. Q. When


Ans. When they most need it, as then the mother brings out her preserues, when
the child is sick: first, when they be most humbled and empty of themselves;
therefore after greatest humiliations come greatest consolations, as David,
Abraham, and others ever found.

2. But specially in the day of trial and persecution, the more the Devil
bestirres him, the more God bestirres him: thus the sweetest nights that ever
Jacob spent were in the field, and so for Peter; Gen 28. and 32. chap. Psalm.
219.
and when had David those large affections to rise at midnight, when was the
Word so swcete, but when his troubles were bitter?

The Use is double, aqua vitae ready against qualmes; Bezoar-stone, and
cordials against fits: but the cordials that help all, is the holy Ghost, the
Comforter; Art is blind, and often posed; Nature weak, and often foiled; (like
a bow that must not be drawn beyond compass) only grace and spiritual
comfort is invincible: get this, and you may sleep in a dungeon, live in the
dark, want all, and yet have all; want these, and a flea may break your
sleep; Dan. 5.
and a handwriting dash your mirth in the midst of all friends.

2. Let such as have spiritual hearts thus affected, stay themselves here;
fear not poverty, there be comforts beyond the pain of famine; fear not
sickness, there be comforts beyond all fits of sickness: fear not death,
fear not chains, fear not any thing that you can or shall suffer: Not any
thing? Rev. 2.10.
Why, a man is subject to racking, to burning, etc. yet fear not, and why? the
Lord has comfort in all, and above all tribulations: when he calls a Saul to a
crown, 1 Cor. 1.
he makes him another man: so when he calls a man to a chain, Peter is not the
man in prison he was out of prison; at the first he was fearful of a wenches
word, after he was willing, yet flesh hung back, John the last Chapter, verse.
Act. 5.29.4.13.
18. But when put upon it, hear his voice, see his face, he can be as quiet,
as comfortable, as well in prison as ever.

Ob. Oh but I find my self afraid of words?

Ans. So was Peter at first.

Ob. Oh but,

Ans. No man so malicious as God is merciful, where we should lie in cold
irons, in the dark, be half pined, starved; who can bear these? Peter can,
any can, when God calls them to it.

O but say we were put to the fiery trial, flames are intolerable and
merciless. O but flames are in Gods hands, Daniel 3. Chapter: again, Martyrs
have had more comfort there, then in all their lives before. Oh but some of
them have cried out of pains: And do not men so who die in their beds too?
but God has borne them through these, and made them amends.

O get then inward strength, and that will overcome all fears, all torments;
conclude we with that good Martyr, if God call ever any of his to any such
sufferings, he will either weaken the flame or strengthen their faith; he
has promised (that, which let us live and die in; to wit) that he will not
tempt beyond strength: And he is able to do exceeding abundantly above all
that we can speak or think. 2 Cor. 10.


Assure your selves, the scare of persecution is more then persecution it
selse; therefore I speak to your fears, for there is none (through Gods
mercy) with us I am sure to be felt (I think) to be feared.

The same night, etc. Abraham, he gave him a son, but he held him off to
the last hour; he kept touch with his posterity, brought them out of Egypt,
but he deferred it till the last day; his bond was almost forfeited, yet he
paid it before the Sunset, Exodus 12.17.41. Thus Joseph was long in prison, yet
at the appointed time brought forth; Nal. 105.19.
and Israel long in captivity, prayers were made, and yet Daniel could hear no
answer till night was upon him; Dan. 9.
Jacob wrestles till day, etc. so also the woman of Canaan, Matt. 15, and the
Church here: in all which places we see, that God is mindful of his day. 2.
That he deferres sometime till the last hour be running.

The reason of this delay is manifold. 1. God would turn our eyes backward,

2. God hereby would sharpen our prayers for the present, therefore he seems
deaf, because we should speak out; therefore slow, because we should be
earnest; thus Daniel interprets it: God deferres him, this is (says he) but
to try me, therefore he spits upon his hands, and takes better hold; O Lord
forgive, says he, O Lord hear, O Lord open, and poures so many petitions,
and arguments upon God, that there is no resistance; thus Jacob, he sees the
day coming upon him, and he had made nothing of it all night, and therefore
now he sets to it, Go, says he, I will not let thee go without a blessing.

3. Hereby he prepares us for the future receiving of his comforts; thus he
humbles us, thus he enlarges us, thus fits us for thankfulness, the more
blessings cost us, the better we will prise them, and praise God for them: add
to this, that these repulses drive us to further searches, Ios. 7. Judge. 20.
as the Israelites at Ai, and Gibeah.

Does the Lord thus long defer sometime his intended comforts and answers?

Ob. Oh but I have prayed exceeding long.

Ans. How long? Isaac prayed twenty years for a child, before he sped,
Abraham thirty; before he sped; Abraham's posterity were four hundred years
in captivity, before they were delivered; the Church thirsted for Christ, one
thousand, two thousand, three thousand years, before they had him: How many
thousands, hundreds, scores of years, have thou waited?

Ob. O but I have tried all my friends,

Ans. And might not Peter say as much?

Ob. O but matters with me are worse and worse,

Ans. Is not this as we said, Abraham and Sarah, the longer they prayed the
elder they waxed, and so unfitter for issue.

Ob. O but my sins grow stronger by prayer.

Ans. Not so,

Ob. O but now your comforts come too late,

Ans. Why? Jeremy, has he stopped thy mouth? so long as God says, pray; so
long as the spirit within thee says, pray; so long as Gods people have hearts
to pray; never say it is too late to pray: if Peter be out by midnight, or by
day-breake, it is as well as if he had been out a month before.

Ob. O but delays breaks the heart.

Ans. But note the end of delays, Elijah, 1 Kin. 18.43.
he prayed for rain, having prayed looks about him, nothing comes; he prayed
again, nothing comes; he prayed again, nothing comes; at length, O Master
(says his servant) I see a cloud, but it is but little; Is it a cloud? then
once more to it, and by and by the heavens were masked with clouds: learn of
these men, Peter sticks in the dungeon, one lifts, he cannot stir him; try
you (says he) to a second, to a third, try a fourth, a fist; at length heaven
stirs, the chains stir, and Peter comes in amongst them: learn of Christ
himself; the widow dealt with a Judge, not a Father; Luke 18.
a bad Judge, she was alone, a simple Orator, yet she prevails: learn of
beggars, they have no command, no promise, no acquaintance, no Art; and yet
will stand it out; the master chides, the beggar stands it out; the dame
chides, he stands still; the servants come, and say they dare not serve him;
the children say we must not, and yet he will not away. O Lord, help our
faith, how weak be we, if having precept, promise, kindred, Gods servants,
Gods Son on our sides, we will be put off with a delay: well (as I said) so
long as a night, an hour, a minute, is left, pray; one night may compass that
which an hundred before could not.

It follows, An Angel, etc.

The Lord has ever means at hand for his servants, Peter say, 2 Pet. 2.
The Lord knows how to deliver his, etc. He is never at a stand, if they know
how to pray, he knows how to comfort.

In himself he is all-sufficient, Esa. 4.5.
to create more.

2. He is the Lord of Hoasts, the Lord of every creature; if our work lie in
the Seas, he is Lord of the Seas; if on the Land, he is Lord there, if in
Prison he bears the keys of every Jail; if heavens can help us, he
commands them; if winds, if beafts, if friends, if strangers, if foes, if
Angels; the Lord has the command of all persons, things, and places.

For comfort, Psalm. 37.
cast it upon him, and he will help it; is it sin, fear, sorrow, whatsoever
it be, he can bear it, and discharge thee?

Oh but I see no means, This Sermon was made in the depth of the dearth.
I owe so much; so many in my family, and no means.

This is as if they should have said, If we had a friend in the Court, to move
Herod; if a friend in the Watch, to bribe him; if in the prison, to see him;
then something might be done, but now all means fail us. No, no: God has
means beyond our sight, if men cannot do it, Angels can and shall: and if no
man will pay the Widows debt, God will: if no body else will feed Eliah, 2
King 4.
the Ravens shall: what do we talk of means? all means are shut up in God.

Ob. O but my case is desperate,

Ans. Now we shall have a tale of impossibilities:

Ob. O but there be an hundred blocks in my way.

Ans. But what is in his way, Esa. 43.16.
go to the prison, there is a block, a guard; pass that guard, there is a
block, a door; pass the door, there is another, a chain; pass the chain,
there is another, an iron gate. O but what of this, if they can break through
all hindrances of unbelief, discouragements to prayer: God will break through
these and a thousand more, to their comfort. O but God works no wonders now.
Mark our Saviors callection from Manna to bread. Mat. 4. Deuteronomy. 8.3. Esa. 9.6.
No? his Name is wonderful still; his power as great as ever, his wisdom as
deep as ever, his promises as good, his love as much to his as ever, our need
as much, our interest as good, our Savior as good; all things stand as before:
if we can use former means, we shall find former success, and God will do
abundantly above all that we can speak or think: we have the Lords promise
for this, Ephesians 3.20. and Esaias 42.16. I will make dark light, and
crookedness straight: we have had our own experience, let any man that has
had any acquaintance with God and this holy duty, tell me when prayers were
not succes-full; when did thou ever speak to thy heavenly Father, but he did
answer thee with some ease, some comfort? When did thou ever pray, but thy
heart was thereby somewhat lightened? and if thou can not but say with David,
Psalm. 139.3.
in the same day I asked, I was thus far answered, That my heart was
strengthened, Ps. 139.3. do not fail to conclude with David, Though I walk
in the midst of troubles, yet (upon prayer) I shall be revived, 7. and God will
perfect his mercies in me for ever, 8.

Thus we have dispatched some meditations: more we have, but they must be only
named; as 1. Herod would, but could not bring forth Peter, to trial and
execution: men be but men, and must do as they may; for what they would do
against the Church, nor they, nor all the Devils in hell can do. 2. The Lord
can give sleep and peace in any place, at any time, in any company. 3. Gods
best servants and messengers, are sometimes yoaked with vilest offenders, etc.
4. Gods best creatures are the Churches servants: Angels. 5. Lastly, the Lord
can quickly shake his out of their chains, rags, fears, fetters, etc. But
what do I mean thus to exceed: Brethren I would feign have you more thirsty
of your time, do you not waste it (as others do) in idle impertinencies, much
less in surveying States and Kingdoms; It is not for us to sit upon Crowns
and thrones, and to turn Statesmen; it is for us to be thankful where God
blesses, and to be prayerfull when the Church labors; to this end I have said
thus much; to persuade you to the practice of what you know, now your turn
follows, lets see what will be done, and how well you will improve time, in
speaking to God; rather then to, or of men. ()


FINIS.

