A DISCOVRSE CONCERNING THE Soul and Spirit of Man. Wherein is described the
essence and dignity thereof, the gifts and graces wherewith God has endued it,
and the estate thereof, as well present as future.

And thereunto is annexed in the end a bipartite instruction, or exhortation,
concerning the duties of our thankfulness toward God.

Written by SIMON HARVVARD.

LONDON Imprinted by JOHN WINDET. 1604.

ILLVSTRISSIMO omnique virtute ornatissimo Domino Georgio Moore, Equiti aurato
bonarum literarum Mecanati benignissimo, prospera omnia and foelicia precatur.
QVemadmodum apud priscos Philosophos (vir amplissime) quamplurimae de anima
humana disputationes sunt literis mandatae, a nonnullis quidem in dialogis (vt
a Platone,) ab aliis in tractatu continuato (vtab Aristotele,) A quibusdam
sermon soluto, ab aliis oratione numeris constricta, ab his fusius, ab illis
magis succincte, ab his ornatius, ab illis stilo magis humili, magisque crassa
(quod aiunt) Minerua: Sic hodierno tempore non (vti spero) videbitur a ratione
alienum, si pro ingeniorum varietate eodem pergatur cursu, vt quam multiplices
sunt animae dotes, tam variae etiam sint illorum librorum formae quibus natura
and vi^es animae describantur. Sicut enim non omnes pisces vna capiuntur esca,
nec vno vultu omnes prori, ita nec omnium hominum corda eodem scribendi genere
alliciuntur, necomnium aures eadem loquendi phrasi delectantur. Si qui sint,
qui politiora scripta expetant, ea velim perlegant, quae de cognitione dei in
libro non ita pridem praelo commisso acute admodum et copiose Ampl. tua
demonstrauerit. Est enim Dei agnitio tam essentiae, quam virium animae plane
certissimum argumen tum. Quod si qui peomata magis euoluere percupia^t,
Dauyesum Orphea Anglum audiant de noticia animae suauiter modulantem. Hoc sum
ego tantummodo in codicillo meo conatus, vt quae ab antiquis and optimis ta^
theologis quam Philo sophis in aliis linguis pertractata viderim, ea (vt
possem) in exiguum reducerem compendium, and (vt bonu^ esset, quo communius, eo
melius) in idioma nostrum vernaculum illa traducerem. Visum autem est mihi (vir
clarissime) hoc meum qualecunque scriptum tuae potissimum Ampl. consecrare,
quia apud omnes satis constat, eiusmodi esse tuum in his arduis quaestiunculis
iudicium, vt si tractatus hic meus (licet im politus) sub nominis tui
patrocinio in lucem prodeat, non est quod verear alicuius Momilinguam
virule^tam, nec est quod de bonorum omnium approbatione quicquam omnino
dubitem. Conciones duas a menuper Camerwellae praedicatas in operis exitu
adieci, partim, quia a disputatione de diuinis animae dotibus non multum
viderentur dissentire: (Nullo enim modo se satis nouit anima, nisi se suo
creatori sum deuinctam gratissime agnoscat;) and partim, quia erant coram
illo habitae, quem omnibus palam innotescit, te non vulgari amplecti amore, and
cui non possum non acceptum refer, quod mihi tui fauoris spes certissima
affulgeat; quodque patronum adeo praestantem hoc exiguum sit nactum opusculum.
Deus Opt. Max. te multis verbi diuini ministris solatium, atheis obstaculum,
Suriaeque non mediocre decus, sanum, laetum, honoratum quam, diutissime viuum
conseruet, vitaque defuncto caelestes tibi seeds largiatur iustoru^ animis in
aeternum repositas. Tanridgiae vltimo Decembris, Anno 1603.

Ampl. tuae deuotissimus, SIMON HARWARD.

The Contents of the BOOK.
The Arguments or brief Sum of the twelve Chapters following.
1 THe first Chapter shows, that the words soul and spirit are so generally
synonima, that in all principal uses concerning man, the one is promiscue
taken for the other. 2 The second, what the soul of man is, and how the soul
of man does differ from that anima, which is in other living creatures. 3 The
third, whether anima vegetatiua, sensitiua, and rationalis, the vegetative,
sensitive, and rational souls be three several forms or substances of
souls, or but diverse faculties of one soul. 4 The fourth, whether anima the
soul, be a medium, a mean or middle substance betwixt the spirit and the
body. 5 The fifth, in what part of the body the soul does possess her seat.
6 The sixth, whether the soul do come ex traduce by propagation from the
parents, or us. 7 The seventh, that the soul is an immortal essence, and that
according to the opinion of heathenish Philosophers. 8 The eight, how in the
soul the image of God may and ought to be renewed. 9 The ninth, what we may
conceive of the soul of man, by the conscience of man, and how the conscience
is either a heaven or hell to the soul in this life. 10 The tenth, of the
estate and condition of the soul after this life, against the heresy of the
Catabaptists. 11 The eleventh, of the future estate of the soul being separated
from the body, against the Romanists. 12 The twelfth, the conclusion
concerning the twofolde estate of souls once loosed from their bodies.
Errata.
Folio 8. (b) for feat, sent twice, fol. 20. (a) who by, wholly fol. 21. (a)
one, our. fol. 21. (a) geneally, generally. fol. 30. (b) (...) fol. 32 (a)
(...) fol. 58. (a) often given fol. 74 (a) and did not possess fol. 99 (b) if
we cast of, if we taste of, Fol. 48. Decius

A DISCOVRSE concerning the Soul and Spirit of MAN.
CHAP. I. How many ways the words Soul and Spirit are synonima, and the one
promiscue taken for the other.
THe words anima, and animus, in their original etymology, are thought of
many to be derived of the Greek word (...) ^ignifying a blast, or Spirit,
Arist. de mundo.
according to that of Aristotle, (...), Anemos, is nothing but much air
flowing hard together which is also called a Spirit. The hebrew word nephesh
for the soul, (...)
and ruach for the spirit, are accounted in their original sense, to signify
also one thing, to wit, a breath, or blast. The Greek word for the soul,
(...) is derived of (...) refrigero, because breath is let in to cool things
naturally hot, and is therefore the same in meaning with (...) spiritus, of
(...) spiro. The like is in the Latin tongue, wherein as the word spiritus is
taken often for wind, and breath, Virg. Aenead.
as in the Poet, Boreae cum spiritus alto insonat Aegeo. And of the Queen of
the South, when she came to Solomon, and suddenly saw his exceeding glory and
Majesty, it is said of her being amazed, 1. Reg. 10.5.
non erat amplius in ea spiritus, there was no more breach in her. So usually
in the best approved Latin Authors, the word anima is also taken for wind,
Cicero de V. muersit.
and breath. Tully says, inter igne^ et terram Deus aquam animamque posuit,
Betwixt the element of fire, and the earth, God has placed the water and the
air. Geta in Terence, tells Antopho, how by hearkening and listening,
Terent. in Phorm.
he had found out the parents of Phanium; accessi, astiti, animam compressi,
aurem admoui: I came near, stood close, held in my breath, and listened. And
in Plautus, the fault of the breath is called faetor animae. Plautus in
Asinaria.
Philenium said to Demaenetus, dic amabo, anfaetet anima vxoris tuae? As in the
three chiefest languages the etymology of the words, used for soul and
spirit, do import one force and nature, so in the three principal
significations, and purposes, whereunto they are most commonly applied, in the
description of the parts, and faculties of man, they have as large a
privilege, the one as the other. For, first they are taken generally, for the
spirit of life in every living creature: As in Genesis it is said, Genesis 7.15.
Venerunt ad Noachum bina ex omni carne in qua erat spiritus vitae. There came
2. and 2. of al to Noah, Tulli. de senec tute
in who^ was the spirit of life, Tul. extolleth those old men, quorum ad
extremum spiritum prouecta est prudentia, whose wisdom increases, even unto
the end of their life. Aenaeas promises to be mindful of Dido, Vir. Aeneid. 4
-- dum spiritus hos regit artus, while life does last.

This bodily life is called often in the Scripture, by the word of anima:
Reuben said to his brethren concerning Joseph: Genesis 37.21.
Non percutiamus eum in anima: Let us not strike him in soul, that is, Exodus
21.23.
let us not kill him. The law of retribution is, eye for eye, tooth for tooth,
hand for hand, animam pro anima, life for life. Psalm. 59.4.
David prays to be delivered from those bloud-thirstie men, which laid wait
for his soul. Our Savior commands us not to be solliciti pro anima, Math.
6.25.
careful for the life, what we shall eat or drink, nor for the body, what
raiment we shall put on. The Angel bad Joseph to take the babe and his mother,
and to return out of Egypt into Jury, because they were dead, qui petebant
animam pueruli, Math. 2.20.
which sought the childs life. Qui vult animam suam seruare (says our
Savior) he which will save his life, Luke 9.2^.
shall loose it, and he which will loose his life for my sake, shall find it.
Ioh. 10.11
A good sheapherd lays down his soul for his sheep, that is, his life:
Ioh. 3.16.
as he laid down his soul for us, so should we lay down our souls for our
brethren, that is, our lives. The Poet Iuuenal, reproving the greedy
covetousness of marcha^ts, says I nunc, et ventis animam commit dolate
Confisus ligno, digitis a morte remotus
Quatuor aut Septem.


Secondly the word spirit, and soul, are in an equal degree taken usually for
the affections of man, either good or evil. Gal. 6.1. 1. Cor. 4. v. vlt.
The Apostle does exhort us to instruct one another with the spirit of
mildness. Psalm. 51.10.
The Psalmist prays God, to renew a right spirit within him, that is, holy
motions of the mind. Esaias. 29.10
The Prophet Esaias tells the stiff-necked people, that God had cast upon
them, a spirit of slumber. Greg. in mor. spiritus carnalis mollia, spiritus
mundi vana, spiritus malitiae se^per amara loquitur. Psalm. 27.12.
So may proud and covetous affections be called the spirit of pride, and the
spirit of covetousness. So is the word soul often used for the affections of
the heart. The Prophet David sath, ne tradas me animae hostium meorum, deliver
me not to the soul, that is, the wicked desire of my enemies, for false
witnesses are risen up against me. Anima Sichem ad haesit Dinae filie Iacobi,
Genesis 34.8.
the soul of Sichem, that is, the affection of his heart did cleave unto Dina,
the daughter of Jacob. The Lord says by Ezekiel, that he had given up the
Israelites animae odio habentium eos, Ezech. 16.27
to the soul, that is, the will and affections of them that hated them. So of
good and loving affections, it is said in the Acts of those first conuerts, in
the primitive Church, Act. 4.32.
there was amongst them cor vnum et anima vna, one heart, and one soul, that
is, their counsels did all agree, and their wills and affections were
faithfully joined. Ephesians. 4.3.
The like does the Apostle Paul exhort us to, when he bids us hold the
unity of the spirit, in the bond of peace. When the affections of our Savior
Christ are expressed, they are set out, sometimes by the word spirit, and
sometimes by the word soul. Ioh. 13.21
Saint John says, turbatus est spiritus, his spirit was troubled, when he
said, one of you shall betray me: Luke 10:21.
and as it is in Saint Luke, exhitauit Jesus spiritu, Jesus rejoiced in spirit;
when he said, I thank thee O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have
hid these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them to babes, even
so was thy good pleasure. In Saint Mark he said, Mark. 14.34
tristis est anima vsque ad mortem, my soul is sorrowful unto death, tarry here
and watch. And in Saint John, anima mea turbata est, Ioh. 12.27
my soul is troubled, and what shall I say, Father save me from this hour.
Aug. in Ioh
S. Augustine does expound these places to signify his infinite love toward
mankind, and says, caput nostrum suscepit membrorum suorum affectum: Our head
vouchsafed to take upon himself the affections of his mystical body.

Thirdly, the word soul and spirit, do in as full manner, the one as the other,
point out unto us the principal part of man, that rational soul and
understanding spirit, which being part of man's substance here, does remain
still immortal, when the body is extinguished. Of that is meant that speech
of the wise man, Eccles. 12.7
when earth goes to earth, the spirit goes to God which gave it. That did the
first Martyr Saint Stephen yield up into the hands of Christ, Act. 7.59
when he said, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Of that speaks the Apostle to the
Hebrews, Hebr. 12:9
if we have reverenced the Fathers of our flesh, when they have corrected us,
much more shall we be subject to the Father of our spirits and live. Of that
does our Savior speak, in the yielding up of his soul, Luke 23.46
Father into thy hands I commend my spirit: For as he took truly man's flesh,
so took he also a humane soul, and was perfect man, Hebr. 4, 15
like unto us in all things, sin only excepted. Saint Peter says, ye were
all as sheep going astray, 1, Pet. 2, 25
but ye are returned to the sheapheard and Bishop of your souls: Ver, 11.
And in the same Chapter again, abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight
against the soul.

He calls by the name (...) anima, Iam, 1.21
the spirit and principal part of man. So does Saint James, when he wills us
to receive with meeknes the word of God, which is able to save your souls, so
does our Savior Christ when he bids us not to fear them which kill the
body, Mat 10.28
and have no power to kill the soul, but to fear him that has power to kill
both body and soul, and to cast both into hell fire. Mat. 11.28. Heb. 13.17 1.
Pet. 1.9. 1. Pet. 4.39.
And in the Chapter following, learn of me that I am meek and lowly in
heart, and you shall find rest unto your souls: Hieron. aduer. Iouinian. lib. 2
of this speaks S. Hierom, Anima in aurigae modum retinet fraena sensuum
currentium, The soul as a Wagoner does hold and govern the bridle of the
running senses. Aug. quaest. super Numer. lib. 4. cap. 18.
And Augustine, Humana natura constat corpore and spiritu, quem etiam animam
dicunt, The nature of man does consist of a body and a spirit, which spirit is
called also the soul. And Bernard, Bernard, super cant. se. m 59.
gemit anima deuota Christi absentiam: A devout soul does groan and sigh,
when it feels Christ absent, or longs for the coming of Christ. The other
significations of the words soul and spirit, as when soul is taken, Genesis
14.21. Romans 13.1.
either for the whole person of man, yet living, Numb. 21, 1 Numb. 6.6.
or for the body of man being dead, and the spirit taken for a Phantasma, or
Ghost appearing in some visible shape, as Theophilact does expound that place
in S. Luke, Luk, 24.37*
where it is said, that the Apostles, when our Savior appeared to them, did
think that they had seen a spirit, and were afraid, but our Savior did cheer
the^ up, why are ye troubled? touch me and behold, for a spirit has not flesh
and bones as ye see me have. These and sundry other acceptations of the words
soul and spirit I omit as impertinent to the question now in hand, and do
think it more fit (the aequiualency of the words being thus briefly laid open)
to pass unto that which in order ought next to follow, to wit, the definition
of anima, what it is first generally in all living creatures, and then more
particularly what is the soul of man.

CHAP. II. What is the soul or anima, and how the soul in man does differ
from anima in other creatures.
WHat that anima is, that is the life of all animalia, of all living creatures,
it is a question much disputed amongst ancient Philosophers. Some do make it
a bodily thing, some a nature incorporeal, and some only the temperature of
the body. The Stoickes taught, See these opinions more at large in the
beginning of the 7. chapter
ammam esse vitales spiritus in sanguine, that the soul was only the vital
spirits in blood. If it be a corporal thing, then must it needs be like
either the aeriall or the fiery element. The signification of the word does
import rather an aerial nature: but Democritus called it, Igneam naturam of a
fiery nature: some called it a harmony, or (as Empedocles) a friendship of the
elements and humors: Heraclitus accounted in a certain force, flowing from
the celestial bodies into the terrestrial, unto which opinion the Poet seems
to allude, Virg.
Igneus est illis vigor and caelestis origo Aristotle defines it to be (...),
Tully Tusc. 1
the continued motion (as Tully does interpret it) of a natural organicall
body, having life in power: some do reprehend that interpretation of Tully,
and do think that it should be expounded rather perfection, because (...)
signifies perfect. Plato de leg. Arist. 3, Physic. and in lib. de gener. anim.
at, l. 2, de any. ait, inima est principium, quo vluimus, sentimus and mouemur.
But Plato uses the word (...), for iugiter and continue, and certain it is,
that Aristotle does use often promiscue, the words (...), and (...), for an
efficiency and working motion: many hold it to be all one with (...), a
continual agitation, as in the Proverb, (...), a drippe always dropping,
does harden the hard rock, and the Wiseman says (...), Eccl. 30.1.
He that loves his son, does continually add correction to him. When anima
is called a continued agitation, we must not understand an accidental motion,
but a substantial and habitual agitation, stirring up actions. Hippocrates
names it (...), the natural heat, or the spirit in blood, and he adds,
Cum haec anima inflammatur, pereunt and corpus and anima, because when the heat
and spirits do not keep a just proportion, the^ all living creatures are
thereby extinguished. In the holy scriptures, the word anima is given to the
blood, Carnem cum sanguine ipsius, qui anima ipsius est ne comedite, Genesis 9.4.
Eat not the flesh with the blood of it, which is his life, tantummodo non
comedas vllum sanguinem, Deuteronomy. 12.^3
quia sanguis cuiusque est eius anima, ideo non com ede vllius animam cum
ipsius carne, Eat no blood, for the blood of every thing is the life,
therefore eat not the life together with the flesh. Hereupon is the word anima
also given to every living creature, Quaecunque anima viuebat in mari, mortua
est, Apoc. 16.3.
Every soul that lived in the sea, that is every living creature. Adam called
by name, omnem animam viuentem, Genesis 2, 20.
every living soul, that is every living creature, omnis anima viuens quae
repit, every creeping soul, Ezech. 47.9
that is, creeping creature. In most authors, the word blood is taken for
life, because of the spirits of life proceeding of the blood* when the Poet
describes a man slain, he uses this phrase, Purpuream vomit ille animam, He
cast out his purple-red soul, Virg. Aenead.
that is his life together with his blood: Gal. de vsu partium lib. 6 cap. 17.
Galen defines animalem spiritum esse exhalationem quandam sanguinis benigni,
the animal spirit to be a certain exhalation of the best part of blood. Ibid,
lib. 9. c. 4
And afterward shows how this animal spirit is engendered of the vital: the
thinnest and purest portion of the vital spirits engendered in the heart, and
arteries, is carried up to the ventricles of the brain, and there wrought into
an animal spirit, and from thence by the sinews, does exercise his force in
every part of the body: Gal. de placitis ^^p, and Plat. l. 7. c. 8.
the brain does purge superfluous vapors, but this animal spirit it does
retain as familiar unto it self: and although naturally all spirits do
ascend, and not descend, yet these animal spirits being governed of the
soul, are carried down even into the feet, and to every part of the body, for
this difference do the Galenistes make betwixt anima and spiritus: Spiritus
ita se habet ad animam, vt ad ignem scintilla, The spirit is in respect of the
soul, Galen de placitis. Hipp. and Plat. lib, 7
as the sparkle in respect of the sire, or (as in some places Galen does
speak) the anima or soul dwells in the body of the brain, as the workman,
primu^ autem eius organum tu^ ad vniuersos sensus tum ad motus voluntarios esse
animalem spiritum, and that her chiefest instrument both for all senses, and
for all voluntary motions, is the animal spirits. What the substance of anima
is, Gal. lib. de faetus format. and lib de anim. and corp. tempe rame^torum
mutua consequutione.
he confesses often, that he is ignorant of it He enclineth sometimes to the
opinion of them, which make anima to be (...), a temperature of the elements,
especially of the fiery and aeriall. But most usually for the special kinds
and powers of it, he follows very often the division of Plato, who makes
three animae specu^ in man, Gal. ibid, and in lib. 9. de placit. Hippo. and
Plat.
the first, he calls, (...), or (...), the principal governor or rational
soul, having the sent in the brain, and working by senses, voluntary motions,
imaginations, memory, understanding and judgment. The second, (...), the
irascible soul, having seat in the heart, and working by vital power by
affections and perturbations.

The third (...), the appetitory or co^cupiscible souls, having sent in the
liver, and working by nourishing, increasing procreation, and what soever
operations of nature.

The faculties of the first are called Animal, the second vital, the third
natural: to the first, do serve the sinews; to the second, the arteries; and
to the third, Gal. de nature. facult. l. 1. c. 1.
the veins, the vegetative life in plants is called by Galen rather natura
then anima, the natural force of increasing and propagating. The anima
sensitiua, or sensible soul giving sense and moving, is common to man with
brute creatures: but the rational soul which Plato thought to proceed from
God, Gal, lib. 9. de placicis Hip. ^ and Platonis.
and Aristotle accounted not to come by the generation of man, but (...)
ourwardly by the gift of God, Arist, lib, 2, de gener, animal cap, 3.
and Hippocrates acknowledged not to be nourished with meats and drinks,
Hipp. lib. 1, d^ victus ratione
and (...), not able to be altered by them, and therefore immortal, that is
indeed the essential difference of man, whereby he is distinguished from
other creatures void of reason. It was thus defined by Alcmaeon Cratoniades
one of the scholars of Pythagoras, Plato in Phaedro:
(as Plato shows) anima est substantia, similis aeternis essentiis, semper
mobilis motu illo, qui conuenit naturis caelestibus, The soul is a substance,
like to the eternal essences, always moveable with that motion, which agrees
to heavenly natures. Augustine says, August, in lib, de definitione anim.
Anima est substantia creata inuisibilis, incorporea, immortalis, Deo
simillima, imaginem habens creatoris sui. The soul is a substance created,
invisible, in corporeal, immortal, most like unto GOD, and bearing the image
of her Creator.

Melancth. de^^ anima, page, 19
Melancthon defines the soul to be an intelligent spirit, the second part
of man's substance, and yet so, that being separated from the body, it remains
still immortal.

Athanas. tom. 4. in tractatu de definitionibus ecclesiasticis.
Athanasius, although he account the essence of the Soul to be such as that
it cannot be known of man: for the says, Tria sunt, quae secundum essentiam
hominibus sunt incognita, Deus, Angelus, and anima, quae soli Deo secundum
essentiam cognita sunt, yet afterward in the same place, he endeavors by a
comparison to resemble the same unto us. As the Sun beams (says he) do
enter into the house, and possess one place, and yet do lighten the whole
house, even so the soul, though it have a seat in the heart, and also in other
principal parts of the head and body, yet does it further distribute her
vital power to every part of the body. This similitude was used before by the
ancient Philosophers. Curaeus in Physic.
Plato and Aristotle speaking of that principal part of man, called (...), or
(...), the one does compare it to the Sun: and the other to the light,
because sundry beams are spread from it unto all such parts of the body, as
are capable thereof: The lowest beam is called of Aristotle, (...), radius
animae passiuus, vel patibilis, This suffering beam is spread into all the
powers of the sensitive soul, and even into the faculties of the outward
senses, and is joined with them, and does furnish them with that power, that
they may be able to be converted and reflected into themselves, otherwise
they should be like unto bees, making curious works, and yet not judging of
that which they have made. But in man by the communicating of the rational
soul, the senses do reflect and comprehe^d themselves. There is an other
beam of the rational soul, called (...), intellectus, radius agens, the
active or working beam, which does discourse of matters, and sometimes does
use the help of the inferior powers, the imagination, and the senses and
sometimes, does return into his own essence. Above both these beams there is
men's pura and (...), the mind pure and without passion, not mingled with the
bodily powers, nor using them for her knowledge, but plainly inorganical. It
has a respect and consideration of the body, but it does therewith return
into her self and regard her own chief pattern. Andreas Laurent. lib. de
Melanch. Hypochondr.
A famous Physician of our age, to shadow out the soul of man, does use an
other similitude, drawn from the form of a judicial court: he calls
imagination the preferrer of the bills or promoter: reason the examiner and
judge: and memory the Custos rotuloru^, or Register. First, imagination, by the
common sense, and by the outward senses (which she does use as spies) does
take hold of many matters, and exhibit them to the understanding. And as many
times captains being drawn on by the error of their spies, do attempt some
exploits, which redound to their great harm: so reason being beguiled with the
error of imagination, does fall into folly and rashness. The Greek
Philosophers do err about the imagination of man, some of them do make it to
be all one with the common sense, and some make the imagination in man, and in
brute beasts to be both alike: but both the assertions are erroneous, for the
common sense or inward sense, does in the same moment of time together with
the outward senses, perceive those things which do fall under sense, and when
the object is removed, the actio^ of the common sense does vterly cease, but
the imagination, although the bodies be taken away, yet it does retain the
forms, and of diverse things can make one, as of a mountain and gold can make
a golden mountain. Again the common or inward sense does only perceive those
things which are brought unto it by the benefit of the outward senses, but
imagination goes further, and does put forth her power in high and lofty
matters. At the first sight of a wolf the sheep does fly away, and yet
cannot that sagacity be attributed to the outward senses, neither can we say,
that the imagination in brute beasts is the same that it is in man: for in
beasts it is occupied wholly in appetites, in seeking those things wherewith
it is delighted, and in flying from those things which they imagine will bring
harm. But man's imagination does behold many things very far removed from
affections and appetites, and when imagination has conceived many things, and
by the exhibiting of the^ as it were, rowsed reason out of sleep, then does
reason ponder and discourse of the matters, proceeding to and fro from the
effects* to the cause, and does thereupon infer conclusions, and determine
upon resolutions. Calvin Instit. l. ^. cap. 15.
The common sense is as it were a receptacle, into the which by the outward
senses, (as by instruments) all manner of obiectes are infused. Fantasy does
judge of those things which be apprehended by common sense; Reason has an
universal judgment, far beyond those things which do fall under sense.
And above them all that which is called Men's the mind, does with a quiet and
fixed contemplation behold those things whereof reason has discoursed. The
three faculties called cognitiuae the cognitiue or knowing faculties of the
soul, Calvin ibid.
have other three appetitiue faculties, answering unto them. Voluntas the will,
does properly desire that which the mind and reason do propound. Vis irascendi
the courage, does catch at those things which are reached out by reason and
fantasy. And vis concupiscendi the concupiscence, does desire and apprehend
such things as are objected by fantasy and sense. How all these should be
rightly used, it is thus defined by an ancient Father, Gregor. Mag, in Prologo,
in 7. Psalm. poenitent.
Caro quatuor constat elementis: anima tribus vegetatur naturis: est enim
rationalis ad disceraendum; concupiscibilis ad virtutes appetendum; irascibilis
ad vitia aduersandum, The flesh consists of four elements, and the soul is
quickened in three natures: for it is either rational to discern; or
concupiscible to desire virtue; or irascible to abhor sin. Some do make in
the soul three beginnings of actions, Calu. Instit. l. 2 cap. 15.
sense, understanding and appetite. Some do more briefly bring it into a
Dichotomy, making only two parts of the soul, to wit understanding and
will: under understanding* they do comprehend sense, and in will they include
appetite: understanding does discern and decree, and the will does make choice
of that which reason has prescribed, and refuse what she has disalowed. The
appetite if it do obey reason, and natural instinct, it is called (...) an
earnest desire, but if it do shake off the yoke of reason, it is (...) a sudden
and rash perturbatio^, which is rather a corruption and infirmity, the^ a
natural faculty of the soul. The Orator (or tather in that book the
Philosopher) does the^ account the apetite to be a right force of the soul
when it obeys reason, Duplex est vis animorum, Tul. lib. 1. off.
vna pars in appetitu posita, altera in ratione, quae docet and explanat quid
faciendum, fugiendumque sit, ita vt ra^io praesit. But our Christian faith
geeth further, and does teach us, that all our reason, our thoughts, Romans 8.7:
2, Cor, 3, 5. 1, Cor, 2, 14. Gen, 8, 21. Phil, 2.13, Ephesians, 4, 23. Ioh. 1, 9, 2,
Peter, 1, 19 2, Cor, 4.4. 1, Tim, 5, 6. Greg. in Ezech hom, 17,
our knowledge, our appetites, our will, our wisdom, and the very spirits of
our mind, are blind, dark, and even dead, unless they be lightened by the
beams of Gods word, and quickened by his sanctifying Spirit. It was well said
of Gregory, Anima in corpore vita est carnis, Deus autem qui viuificat omnia,
vita est animarum. The soul in the body, is the life of the flesh; but God,
which quickens all things, is the life of our souls. And of Augustine, Aug.
de verbis dom. in Math: Cap. 8
sicut expirat corpus cum animam emittit, ita expirat anima cum Deum amittit:
Deus amissus mors animae, anima emissa mors corporis, As the body dies, when
it sends out the soul, so does the soul dye, when it loses God: the
separation from God, is the death of the soul, even as the parting of the
soul, is the death of the body. This is opus animae, regere inferiorem, et
regia superiore, August, lib, 6, mu^i. cap, 5,
the proper office of the soul is, to govern man, and to be governed it self
of God.

CHAP. III. Whether anima vegetatiua, sensitiua, et rationalis, the vegetative,
sensitive, and rational souls be three several forms of souls, or but
diverse faculties of one soul.
WHen the vegetative force, the sensitive life, and the rational soul, are
considered in themselves, and in their own nature, they must needs be
accounted three distinct kinds: because the first is in plants, and all things
growing on the earth: The second is common both to bruit beast and man: And the
third is proper to man only. But when they are all joined together in man,
then the question is, whether they are to be reckoned three sorts of animae,
or but only three distinct powers of one soul. Galen does in diverse of his
books, follow still the positions of Plato, and as there are three principal
parts of man, the heart, the brain, and the liver, so he teaches expressly,
that their several sorts of anima, tres animae sunt species, Gal. lib. de
animi et corporis temperament mutua consequutione.

G^l. de placit Hipp. et Plat. lib. 9.


says he, there are three kinds, or sorts of souls, and adds presently the
partition of Plato. And again, plures sunt animae species, et triplici sede
collocatae, there are three manners and forms of the soul, and placed in three
several seats: he cites again, the division made by Plato. Aristotle, Vide
Peucer. Page 601.
although in some places he makes but one (...), governing all, yet when he
gives to the vegetative, sensitive, and rational soul, three several times
of beginning, and several efficient and material causes, and several manners
of working, Arist. de generat animal. lib 2. Cap. 3.
he seems very evidently to make three distinct sorts of animae. For he
teaches plainly those anima, or souls, whose actions are corporal, do not
come from outward, but do grow in, and with the body, Nec simul fieri
animatum et faetum: It has a vegetative force to grow in the womb, even
before it is endued with sense. Ibid.
But of the mind he adds (...) (...), Only the mind does come from out
ward, and is only divine. For the powers and opeations of the body, do not
communicate with the operations thereof.

Melanch de anima page 21
Melanchthon does not condemn the arguments of Occam, wherein he endeavored
to demonstrate, that the rational and sensitive soul, are distinct things in
man: His reasons are, because the rational and sensitive appetites are
contrary one to another, and it is impossible that in the self same
indivisible nature, there should be at the same time contrary appetites.
Again, if man beget man, it must needs be with life and sense. It seems a
gross thing to imagine that other baser creatures should naturally procreate
and bring forth issue of their own kind, with life and sense, and that man
being so far a more excellent creature, should not in procreation yield so
much as sense and life. The reasons of the^ which defend three several kinds
of souls in man.
Howsoever the rational soul, the understanding and mind, comes not ex
tr^duce from the seed of the parents, but is inspired and given of God, yet the
vegetative and sensitive power (as he says) cannot but come by natural
propagation, if in brute beasts, much more in man, the more noble creature.
Moreover, after their opinion, the rational soul differs from the other in
continuance and eternity: For whereas she is immortal and perpetual, the
others, to wit, the vegetative and the sensitive, as they have their beginning
with the body, so have they their end also. For their actions are wholly
organical, neither have they any power or being, when the bodily instruments
do fail. The sensitive power is corporal, and diuisible, but the mind or
soul, is a spirit incorporall, and therefore indivisible, and is indeed the
only essential difference betwixt man and brutish creatures. Whiles she is
united with the body, she governs all the powers of the body, and imparteth
her efficacy, to every part of it, according as it is, found capable thereof.
As the Sun in the great world, does come to some parts with his beams, and
to other parts only with his efficacy, even so in this microcosmus the little
world man, the divine spirit, the soul, does on some parts cast the beams of
her light, and impart unto other, the power of her quickening spirit, and is
indeed both the fountain of life in this world, to the body being made capable
by the vegetative and sensitive faculties, the good temperatures of the first
qualities: and after this life, when the vegetative and natural forces shall
cease, the body being by glorification, made eternally capable, it shall
minister to it a life that never shall have end. A man does sustain no
journey, if at the same time wherein he expects the payment of a debt,
(though the debt be not paid) yet his coming for it, does by occasion suddenly
yield him such preferment, as whereby he shall never stand in need of that
debt so expected. And even so it is no abasing unto man, not to have that debt
of nature, sensitive life (which all living creatures have) when at the same
time, in stead of that which should have come from parents God does inspire a
far better, even a living soul, performing al, and a thousand times more then
the other could have done. I therefore hold their opinion to be soundest,
Peucer. de diuinat cap de physiog.
which do attribute unto man but one soul, comprehending and governing all the
powers in man. The vegetative and sensitive faculties, are but bodily
temperatures, or corporal agitations, having their motions according to the
good disposition of the instruments, and also their continuance according to
their continuance. But the moving spirit which moves all, and rules all, and
quickens all, is that one soul of man, Chrysostom. ad populum Antioch. hom. 19
of which Chrysostom speaks, omnia duplicia naturae nostrae dedit Deus,
binos oculos, binas aures, binas manus, binos pedes, animam autem vnam, quam si
perdiderimus, quid superest quorum in vita maneamus: God has given all other
things double unto us, that if one be hurt, the other may stand us instead,
eyes, ears, hands and feet double* But he has given us but one soul, which
if we destroy, what is there in the world, whereby we may hope for any life?
Isidor, in etymolog.
And Isidore, anima dum viuificat corpus, anima est; dum vult animus est; dum
scit men's est; dum recolit memoria est; dum rectum indicat ratio est; dum
spirat spiritus est; dum aliquid sentit sensus est. The soul is one, but is
called by several names, according to her several and manifold operations:
Vide Curaei Physic.
Some holding the opinion of Plato, that there be three distinct souls in
man, do conclude that to be the cause of apparitions of ghostes, because Plato
taught that the sensitive soul does remain a while after death, as a garment
and covering to the rational. But I omit that as a plain dream. Johannes
Philoponus, Philopon, Grammat.
a Grecian Philosopher, and yet a christian, said that he could not conceive
how the wicked should be punished after this life, unless the sensitive soul
do continue. No doubt as the souls of them which dying in the Lord, are
already blessed and with Christ in Paridise, beholding the Lamb, Apoc. 22, 5.
howsoever they want the bodily eye, and have no light of the Sun, but the Lord
God is their light for ever: so the rich glutton his soul, Luk, 1^
and the souls of as many, as are already damned with him, do endure the
torments prepared for the devil and his angels. Howsoever the bodies being not
yet raised up, they cannot be said to have their corporal senses. The manner of
the ioies and punishments after this life (for the arm of Gods mercy, and the
arm of his justice are both of one length) is incomprehensible and
unspeakable, such as no eye can see, 1. Cor, 2.^
no ear can hear, neither can it enter into the heart of man. But it is many
ways apparent, that howsoever in the day of judgment the body shall be joined
to the soul, as in society of either bliss or torment, yet is that immortal
and invisible creature of it self inorganical, sufficiently able for all her
actions, motions, and operations, without the bodily instruments, humors,
qualities, powers, agitations, temperaments, or any corporal faculties
whatsoever.

CHAP. IIII. Whether anima the soul be a medium, a mean or middle thing
betwixt the spirit and the body.
Diverse late writers set it down for a firm position, Dorn, in claue page 138,
and 142:
anima est medium inter spiritum et corpus: The body and spirit are so
contrary one to another, that they cannot be joined together, but by a middle
or mean: now the mean to join them is the soul, and one expounds what
that soul is, anima est corporis motrix, Ibid page 136 Fol 141
it is the mouer of the body, and after he says, anima duobus constat, motu
scilicet et sensu, the soul does consist of two things, to wit, moving and
sense. And afteward he adds a third thing, to wit appetites, Fol 145:
odit animam in corpore qui fraenat appetitus, he hates his soul in his body,
which does bridle his appetites. And in another place defines it to be the
life, Fol 137
anima est vita corporis, et substantia media inter animam, et corpus
participans de animo, et corpore, the word anima signifies the life of the
body, and is a middle substance betwixt the mind and the body, and takes
part of both. By which places his meaning seems to be, that the word anima
should comprehend whatsoever is betwixt the principal part of man's soul, and
the grossness of the bodily substance, and that the immortal invisible
substance, is by it, as by a second middle substance, united to the body. In
these his assertions he is first injurious to the word anima, which (as I
have showed already) has as large a signification, as has the word spirit,
for the immortal soul of man, and has been always so used in all ages
amongst Philosophers, and approved Latin Authors, and especially amongst the
most religious Fathers of the Church, in all their sermons, and discourses: and
further in as many as have translated the holy Scriptures unto us. As it is
taken sometimes for the inferior faculties, so is also the word spirit, and
therefore there is no reason, why the one should be restrained strictly to an
inferior baser substance, more then the other.

Marsil, Ficin. de vita caeli^us comparada lib, 3, cap, 3
The excellent interpreter of Plato, Marsilius Ficinus, makes spiritus to be
the medium betwixt corpus and anima. His words are, inter animam et corpus in
nobis spiritus necessario requiritur tanquam medium, quo anima diuina et adsit
corpori crassiori, et vitam eidem penitus largiatur, Betwixt the soul and the
body a spirit is of necessity required in us, as it were a middle or mean
whereby the soul being divine, may be present to the body, being more gross,
and thoroughly bestow life upon it. And a little after, Scimus viuentia omnia tam
plantas quam animalia per quendam spiritum viuere et generare sui simile:
lapides sui similes non generant, quia spiritus iniis crassiori materia
cohibetur: We know that all living things, as well plants as sensible
creatures, do live by a certain spirit, and thereby get their like: But stones
do not bring forth their like, because the spirit in them is holden back by
the grossness of their matter.

The meaning of Ficinus, does not much differ from Dorne, but that which the
one calls anima, the other calls spirit, because indeed the words are
aequivalent, and both of them equivocal: And therefore to take away
ambiguitie, the best had been for either of them to have added to the word
the difference, as to have said that the vegetative and sensitive soul, is the
middle betwixt the rational soul and the body, or that the spirit of life is
the middle betwixt the understanding spirit of man and the body. But Dorne in
calling that vegetative and sensitive faculty, a third substance does seem to
have drawn his position out of Origin, Origin super Leuit. Hom, 2.
who does directly set it down, that anima is in such sort a medium betwixt
the spirit and the body, that the soul may be damned, and yet the spirit
saved, and one of his proofs is, Origin in Mathaeum hom. 30, Fol, 96.
because it is said in the Gospel, that God can cast both body and soul into
hell fire, ex eo quod nihil de spiritu dixit, euidenter oftenditur, quod
spiritus cum anima peccatrice non simul punitur: qui enim peccauit, diuiditur,
et pars quidem eius cum infidelibus punitur, quod autem non cius, reuertitur ad
Deum qui dedit eum, Seeing he speaks nothing of casting the spirit into
hell, it is evidently showed that the spirit is not punished together with the
sinful soul: The person that sinned, is divided, and part is punished with
the Infidels, and that which is not his, but Gods that gave it, must return to
God that gave it.

A very gross error is this, as are likewise many other opinions, which the
said Origin does hold, as concerning the soul: as the omnes animae erant in
initio simul creatae, all souls were created in the beginning all together:
which heresy of his, is at large confuted by Aquinas: Tho, Aquinas, 1. part
su^mae theologiae
and animam saluatoris fuisse antequam nasceretur a Virgin, et in restitutione
omnium animas Christianorum Iudaeorum et Gentilium vnius conditionis fore, et
ex Angelis fieri animas, et rursus ex animis Angelos, That the soul of our
Savior Christ was before he was conceived of the Virgin, and that in the
restoring of all things, the souls of Christians, Jews, and Gentiles, shall
be all of one estate and condition, and that of Angels are made souls, and
again of souls Angels. All which absurd opinions of Origin are condemned by
Saint Hierom. Whatsoever therefore may be gathered (as is by some) out of
Origin, Hierom. in Apologi^ aduersus Ruffinum.
to prove anima to be a third substance in man, we see by these his
assertions, what little account may justly be made thereof. But say they,
there are many places in the holy Scriptures, wherein the word soul and
spirit are both joined together in such sort, that they seem apparently not to
signify one thing. Indeed when they are joined both together, all the Fathers
of the Church, generally do make a difference betwixt them, but not such a
difference as they do imagine: as when the Apostle says, 1, These, ^, 23
the God of peace sanctify you, who by that your spirit being perfect, and
your soul and body may be kept vnblamably until the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ: the meaning is not that there should be a perfect coniunctio^ of
the Spirit to the body by the soul as a mean or middle, that so the spirit
and the body might the better continue long together, but the prayer of the
Apostle is, that the spirit of the Thessalonians, that is, their reason and
understanding, and their soul, that is their will and affections: and thirdly
their body should be kept vnblamably until the coming of Christ. These
significations of the words I have proved at large in my first Cha. And although
they being named here together have several significations, Pe^a piscater.
I^wellus and alii in hunc locum:
yet can we not thereupon conclude, that they are several substa^ces. But as
the body and flesh are but one body, so the spirit and soul are but one soul.
Aqui. says upon tht place, ad peccatu^ tria concurru^t, ratio, se^sualitas, et
exi equutio corporis, Aquinas in 1 Thessalonians, 5, 23:
optat vt in nullo horu^ sit peccatu^. Three things in man may offend, reason,
sensuality and the body: he prays that none of these maybe defiled with
sin. The ancient Fathers Augustine and Hierom do expound this place in an
other sense, Folio 21.
and yet nothing favoring the opinion of Dorne: v. 19.
for by the spirit they understand the graces of Gods spirit, and so to be all
one with that which goes a little before, Spiritum ne extinguite, Quench not
the spirit: they make the meaning to be that both one soul, and the gifts
and graces of Gods spirit bestowed upon it, Hieron, epist. 150. ad 12. quest.
Hedibiae.
might be kept perfect until the coming of Christ. Alii ex hoc loco triplice^
affirmare volunt substantiam spiritus, quo sentimus animae qua vinimus, and
corporis quo incedimus, Some (says S. Hierom) would out of this place to the
Thessalonians, prove a threefolde substance in man, etc. Nos autem accipimus
gratias donationesque spiritus sancti, But we by the first, by the word spirit
do understand the graces and gifts of the holy spirit. The like affirms S.
Augustine: Aug. de ecclesiast. dogmat. cap. 20. tom. ^
Non est tertius in substantia hominis spirities sicut Didimus contendit, sed
spiritus ipsi est anima, quae prospirituali natura, vel pro eo quod spiret in
corpore, spiritus appellatur; anima vero ex eo vocatur, quod ad viuendu^ and
viuificandum aenimet corpus, Tertinm autem, cum anima and corpore coniunctum
spiritum, gratiam spiritus sancti esse intelliga mus, quam orat Apostolus, vt
integra perseueret in nobis, The spirit is not a third substance in man (as
Didimus would have it,) but man's spirit is his soul, which for the spiritual
nature, or because it breaths in the body, is called a spirit, and it is
called Anima, because it quickneth the body, and gives unto it a quickening
force: but the spirit which is in this place joined by the Apostle with the
soul and body, we must understand it to be the grace of the holy Ghost,
which the Apostle does pray, that it may persevere and continue in us.

The late Writers Beza, Piscator and others, do in the sense of this place
differ from the Fathers, but all do geneally conspire against a third
substance to be framed out of it. Aquinas holds two Axioms very strongly,
first, Aquinas in 1. part suae sum. Theol. quest. 76, and 3, lib. sen^^^^.
distinct. 1.
that Forma substantialis vnitur immediate materiae, the substantial form of
a thing is immediately, or without any medium united with the matter: Aquinas
in 1. part suae sum. Theol. quest. 70. and sentent. lib. 2, did. 12.
and the second, that non est possibile plures formas substantiales simul esse
in eodem corpore, It is not possible that two substantial forms should be at
one time in the self same body. Writing also upon that place of S. Paul, 1*
Cor. 15.44
Est corpus animale, and est corpus spirituale, there is a natural body, and
there is a spiritual body: where the Apostle seems to give the word body
both to anima and spiritus, Aquinas in 1. Cor. 15.
he expounds the natural body corpus animale to be that which in this world
is troubled with natural functions, for feeding, increase, generation and such
like; and the spiritual body to be that which absque aliquo impedimento and
fatigatione incessanter seruiet animae ad spirituales operationes eius, and hoc
per Christum spiritum, id est, non solum animam viuentem vt Adam, sed viuentem
and viuificantem, without all impediment and wearines continually serve the
soul for her spiritual operations, and that by the power of Christ, being a
spirit, not only a living spirit as Adam, but a living and also a quickening
spirit. And that this is the very sense of the place, it is most evident by
the words last going before, and by that which immediately follows, for in
the verse before, he compares our body in this life with our body that shall
be in the resurrection: It is sown in weakness, it does rise again in power,
it is sown Copus animale, it shall rise again corpus spirituale. And when he
has said there is an animal body, and there is a spiritual: he adds, as
it is written, the first man Adam was made a living soul, and the second Adam,
that is Christ Jesus, was made a quickening spirit. The Animal body is that
which the posterity of Adam have in this life, Romans 8. v. 11
and the spiritual body is that which shall be raised with the quickening spirit
of Christ in the resurrection.

Aug. de Ciuitate Dei, lib. 13. cap. 20.
Augustine says, that that is called a spiritual body, which Spiritui summa
and mirabile facilitate subdetur, omni molestia sensu, omni corruptibilitate
and tarditate detracta, shall obey the spirit with admirable facility, all
sense of trouble being taken away, and all corruption and slownesse removed.
And in an other place, Aug. de fide, and symbolo, cap. 6. tom. ^
Spirituale corpus intelligitur omnifragilitate and labe terrena in coelestem
puritatem and stabilitatem mutata and conuersa, That is understood to be a
spiritual body, wherein all frailty and earthly pollution is converted and
changed into heavenly purity and stedfastnes: Anselmus, Anselm. in 1. Cor. 15
Titleman in 1. Cor. 15
and after him Titleman, and other schoolmen do interpret that to be an
animal body, which has need of meats, drinks, and other cherishing, and that
to be a spiritual body, which shall not need any of these, but live for ever
by the quickening spirit of Christ. To call a body spiritual, and to say that
the spirit is a body, are speeches very much different. Col. 2. v. ^
S. Paul says that the fulness of the Godhead does dwell in Christ bodily,
but we can not thereupon infer that the Godheade is a body. Romans 7.14.
The law is called spiritual, the law (says the Apostle) is spiritual, and I
am sold under sin, who will thereupon infer that the law is a spirit? Romans
8.7.
It is said, the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God: is the flesh
therefore a thing rational? Paul will have the body of sin destroyed, Romans
6. v. 6
is therefore sin a thing corporeal? 2* Cor. 4.16
He says, though the outward man do perish, the inward man is renewed daily,
is therefore the soul of it self a person? Aquinas writing upon that place,
Aquinas in 2. Cor. 4.
conde^neth an heresy of Tertullian, Hic Tertulliani error da^natur etiam ab
Augustino Epist, 157
who taught, that because S. Paul does call the Soul an inward man, therefore
the Soul no doubt had a bodily shape, but he frames him this answer:
Vnumquodque dicitur illud esse, quod est in eo principalius, Any thing may
bear the name of that which is most principal in him: secundum veritatem and
iudicium principalius in homine est men's, sed secundum apparentiam principalius
est corpus exterius cum sensibus suis, According to true judgment the
principal part of man is the mind, but according to the outward appeara^ce,
the principal part is the body and the se^ses thereof, therefore it is, that the
one is called the outward man, and the other the inward. S. Hierom shows,
that some in his time to prove that the spirit and soul are several
substa^ces, Hierom. epist, 150. ad 12. quaest. Hedibiae.

In adiectione ad Dan. v. 86.


did allege that in the song of the three children, O ye Spirits and Souls
of just men praise the Lord. But he puts it down as an usual answer, that
that chapter is of the Apocrypha, and he adds, Non vtique sunt tot
substantiae, quot nomina, We must still imagine so many substances, as we find
names. The Apostle to the Hebrews, Heb. 4. v. 12.
calls the word of God such a two edged sword as does enter to the dividing
of the soul and spirit, we may not conclude thereby two several substances,
but by the soul is meant (as most do expound it) the affections, and by the
spirit the reason an understanding. Aquinas in Heb. 4.
Aquinas says, spiritus est illud per quod communicamus cum essentiis
spiritualibus; anima est illud per quod communicamus cum brutis; anima operatur
cum corpore; sciritus sine corpore, That part of the soul which does
communicate with spiritual substances is called a spirit; but that faculty
which is common to brute beasts, is called anima, the one works with the
body, and the other without the body. Others make, that to the soul do
appertain those things which are agreeable to nature: and to the spirit,
those things that are above nature, but still meaning the faculties of one
soul, and not several substances. It is no abasing of the soul of man, to
have some things common with brute beasts, as it is no disgrace to the
mightiest prince in the world, to have some things common with the vilest and
basest subject of his kingdom, to wit, eating, drinking, sleeping and such
other natural functions. All Creatures have their several degrees of this
anima, some have only the natural degree, as have trees and herbs, some have
further a vital degree, as have worms, some besides the vital, have also a
sensual degree with some feeling of fear and joy, as have brute heastes, and
some besides the natural, vital and sensual, have also an intellectual, as
has man to discourse, ponder and judge, and still the higher includes his
inferior, and the highest and most soueraign comprehe^deth all in one. Some to
derogate from the word anima, do allege that speech of Athan. Athanasius tom.
4. in tractatu de definitionibus ecclesiasticis
Nemo existimet quod ille spiritus, que^ in homine^ inflauit factus sit anima,
absit, Let no man think that the spirit which God did breath into man, was made
a soul, God forbid we should think so: whereupon they conclude that in Athan.
his judgment, the spirit and the soul are two distinct substa^ces: most
certain it is, that Athanasius in that place, does not speak of spirit, as
of any essential part of man, but of that Spirit, wherewith God created all
things of which it is said in Genesis, Spiritus Dei incubabat superficiei
aqua rum, The spirit of God did hatch upon the waters, and in the Psalms, by
the word of the Lord the heavens were made, and all the army of them, Gen 1, 2,
Psalm. 33.6.
Spiritu oris eius, by the breath of his mouth. This working and creating
spirit did God breath into man, ^en, 2.7,
and by it man was made a living soul without any elementary matter: now that
efficient and al-creating spirit which God did breath into man, let no man
think (says Athana,) that it self was made a soul, God forbid: for then anima
esset nimiru^ de Dei essentia, Our soul should be of the very essence of God.
Sed spiritus ille perficit anima^, But that spirit which is of Gods essence,
does make the soul of man, and all the powers thereof: by which words
following, Athanasius does so plainly expound his own meaning, that no doubt
can be left thereof: I conclude therefore, that the soundest course is, (when we
take upon us to determine what anima is) to give it the same properties and the
same signification, as has been ever given to it by the holy Scriptures, by
the ancient Fathers, by the wisest of the Philosophers, and by all the best
approved authors that ever have written, and if in any place, either in the
book of God, or in the writings of learned Divines, if be joined together
with the word spirit, the^ to give it no other sense the^ is the scope and
drift of the places. In all the places which are alleged, the purpose of the
original text is not to show how the soul should be united to the body, but
how all the powers of the soul should be joined unto God.

CHAP. V. In what place of the body the Soul does possess his seat.
THe vulgar and common axiom that anima rationalis est tota in toto, and tota
in qualibet part, The rational soul of man is whole in whole, and whole in
every part (which some do attribute to Augustine, and some to other late
schoolmen, but in Melancthon his judgment, it is no speech of Plato,
Melancth. de anima, page, 34
Aristotle, or of any ancient Philosopher) may best be expounded of the power
and efficacy of the soul: for the soul being a spiritual essence, as it is
indeuisible, so is it local and finite, it does choose a certain place to it
self (or rather has a place allotted unto it of God) and does work so far,
and with such distance, as is appointed unto it. There is a great controversy
betwixt the Greek and Arabian Physicians, Andr. Laure^t. tract. de Melancth.
Hypochondi.
in what part of the head the soul of man is situated: for whether it be in
the head or no, they make no question. The Grecians do think that it does
possess the whole brain without any distinction of places, and they do so
join imagination and memory with reason, that they do think them not
possible to be divided by distance of place, nor yet scarsely so much as in
thought. As in the similar parts of the body, they make in every part the
four natural faculties, the attractiue, the retentiue, the digestive, and the
expulsive, not to be distinguished in place, but to possess the whole part, as
above, or such like: so they make the imagination, the memory, and the reason
to be in the same order in the whole brain. But the Arabian Phisicians do
attribute to every one of these three faculties a proper and peculiar seat.
First because nature has made nothing in vain, therefore seeing there are
three several ventricles of the brain, Rations 5. Arabum, citat. a Laurentio.
it is most likely that they do serve for several seats, for the three chief
faculties of the soul, the first to be the seat of imagination, the second of
reason, Rati 1. a to^^ perieventriculorum.
and the third of memory. They ascribe the former ventricle to imagination,
because being in the foreparte, it is most fit to receive obiectes, and
therefore they say, it is softer then the rest, as most fit to receive
impressions, and memory to the hinder part as an inward chamber or closet,
somewhat dryer and more firm the^ the ventricle before. And the midst being
most temperate, they account the fittest seat for reason. Secondly they endeavor
to prove it by Physiognomy, because they whose head is made high up behind,
have commonly good memories, and they which have high foreheads, have ready
imagination and capacity. Thirdly they aledge that problem of Aristotle that
when we would deeply consider of a matter, we do commonly draw together the
brows and (the foreheade being co^tracted) we do lift up our countenance, but
when we have forgotten a thing, we do commonly rub the hinder part of the head.
Fourthly they rest upon experience, because they say it often falls out that
upon a wou^d received in the hinder part of the head, the memory is wholly
destroyed. And also it is often seen, that the one faculty being depraved, the
other may remain sound. Phrentike and Melancholic persons, may have their
imagination become vain and erroneous, and yet in some matters dispute with
good reason: and many that are forgetful of things past, will yet conceive
very well things present. And last of al, they think that the fittest place for
the reason and the mind, being the principal part of the soul, is the middle
ventricle of the brain, from which she may both easily receive all forms of
objects, from the former ventricle, and also readily require and exact of
memory those things which she has almost forgotten. These arguments though
they are somewhat probable and have indeed allured many men to give assent unto
them, yet because they are but only probabilities, gesses, and conjectures,
and no certain demo^strations, Vide Andr. Laurentii tract de melanchol.
it is accounted by many, more safe to rest upon the sincere ground, laid down
before of the Grecia^s. Gal. lib, 2 de motu musculorum,
Galen shows that the imaginary faculty of the soul does also remember: for
when the impressions are deeply conceived in the imagination, he calls that
memory, and when the imagination does receive the impressions but lightly and
superficially and not often enough conceive them more deeply, he names that
forgetfulness, he places principatu^ anime, Gal. de pl. ci^is Hipp. and Plat.
lib. 8. cap. 1.
the chief part of the soul to be where is the beginning of sinews, and that
he makes to be generally in the brain, and he will have the animal spirits,
which are the first instruments of the soul to be contained not only in the
three ventricles, Gal de vsu parti^m lib. 8.
but also in the whole body of the brain, because for the governing of the
whole body, there has need to be multus animalis spiritus, great plenty of
animal spirits. Many Philosophers have determined the seat of the rational
soul and understanding to be in the heart of man, of which opinion were Zeno
the Babilonian, Diogenes, and Chrysippus. Gal. lib. 2. de placitis Hipp. and
Plat.
Galen declares that their chiefest proof was this, Sermo est mentis nuntius,
The speech of man is the messe^ger of the mind, and therefore from what part of
the body the speech comes, there lies the understanding: now the speech
comes not from the brain, but out of the breast by the aspera arteria, the
winde-pipe, and therefore in the breast, and about the heart, is the seat of
the mind. To which he answers, that the mind does in a moment move all the
instruments of the body, be they never so far off, if they be capable of
motion, Nihil impedimenti ad celeritatem ex interuallo recipit, It receives no
impediment to hinder speediness by any distance of place: for as when a part
of man's body is wounded, there is no sensible time, betwixt the wound beig
given, and the smart received thereby. So there is no apparent distance betwixt
our will of breathing and speaking, and the very action it self, which
depends upon the wiill: howsoever therefore the voice does proceed out of the
winde-pipe, yet that does nothing hinder, but that in the brain may be the
cause which moves that artery. The speech does proceed from the mind, not as
from a place, but as from a moving and ruling cause, commanding and governing
all those instruments about the throat, whereby the voice is framed. Galen
proves this by a forcible argument, there are (says he) three things passing
betwixt the heart and the brain, and as it were knitting the one to the other,
to wit, sinews, arteries, and veins, If about the outward part of the neck,
the sinews only be cut, straight way does the party become dumb, al other
actions being left unhurt. If only the arteries thereabouts be cut, or tied
hard with a band, (being first with an instrument plucked outward) the party
does not become dumb, but all the parts above the band or wound do loose the
use of the pulses, and the parts downwards toward the heart, do yet
afterward retain the pulses, but upon the cutting or intercepting of the
veins, there is none of the said functions abolished. Whereby it appears,
that neither the heart has need of the brain to the beating of the pulses,
nor yet the brain has need of the heart, that it may rule senses and motions,
according to the command of reason and will. Again daily experience does show
unto us, that in learning and studying about matters, there is no apparent
motion in the heart, but in the head: as on the other side in all perturbations
the motion is in the heart, and not in the head, the heart pants and is
troubled, but the head is not grieved, unless by a sympathy. Hereof Galen
concludes that the rational faculty of the soul, Ibid. lib, ^. de Plaut,
(...)
has seat in the brain, and irrational in the heart. Auerrhoes obiecteth
against Calen, that worms have a voluntary motion, and yet not by sinews
moving the muskles, for they want them, and therefore voluntary motions may be
without any such sinews and muskles. But he should have considered, that
worms are insecta, et imperfecta animalia, vnpecfect craatures, as are flies,
gnats, and such like, and therefore there is no argument to be drawn from
them, to more perfect creatures, that because they do rear up and stand
without bones, purge melancholy without spleen, and move voluntary without
sinews and muskles, therefore more perfect creatures, as beasts and fowls,
must do all these things by the same means that they do it. Neither does it
follow, because brute beasts have their motions by anima sensitiua, the
sensitive soul, that therefore man (being so much more excellent then they,
and many degrees more, they are better then vermin) should of necessity have
the same fountain of motions, that is in those brutish, creatures. Another
reason has Auerrhoes, when we breath in sleep, the letting in, and sending
out of the breath, is by the help of the muscles and sinews. And yet at that
time there is no will nor power of the rational soul to govern it, therefore
the fountain of motion is from the heart. But there is in man a twofolde will,
the one (...), ab electione, by election, and the other, (...), ab instinctu,
by instinct of nature. In the time of sleep, there is the later, though not
the former. There are also such passages, bands, and mutual helps betwixt the
brain and the heart, that Hippocrates does not stick sometimes to make the
heart the dwelling place of understanding, Hipp. in libello de cord
his words are, (...), Man's rational soul is in the least ventricle of the
heart, it is not nourished with meats and drinks, but with the pure and clear
abundance arising out o^ the seuering of the blood. Some co^menting upon that
place, say that he speaks after the vulgar opinion, others think that by
the soul he means that calidum, that natural heat, Laurent. in Anat.
which is the instrument of the soul.

The vital spirit (which Hippocrates and Galen do often leave at our liberty,
Gal. lib. 5. de placit. Hipp. et Plat. et in a Aph. 14. et in libro contra
Lyrum.
whether we will call it calidum or by the name of spiritus) though it be
placed in the heart, yet is it also from it by the arteries communicated to all
the body. And the blood, whereof the spirits do come, Gal. in. lib. do vsu et
vtil. respirationis.
and which is the same to the spirits, as in the lamp the oil is to the
flame: although the natural faculty of the working of it be placed cheifely
in the liver, Hippo. lib. de alimento.
yet is it also in the veins, which have their beginning of radication and
distribution from the liver. Atha. in initio tractatus de definitionibus
ecclesiasticis.
Hereupo^ comes that speech of Atha. habet anima sua sedem in cord, in
posteriori part capitis quae caua vocatur, et in basilicis venis. In istis
tribus partibus amma sedem habens, in totum copus vitalem suam potentiam
distribuit, The soul has her seat in the heart, in the hinder hollow part of
the head, and in the basilicall veins. And having her abode in these three
places, she does distribute her vital power into all the body. The Prophet
David says, Psalm. 7.10.
thou Lord art the searcher of the heart and reins. The best interpreters do
by the heart expound cogitations and thoughts, and by the reins our
affections. He says further, Psalm. 16.7.
my reins do instruct me in the night season, that is, my will and my studies
being guided by the spirit of God, for in the same verse he gives to God
humble praise, as to the author of that Instruction. In sundry places of the
Scriptures, Exodus 12.11, Leuit. 3.4. Hieron. super Nahum. 2. Greg. 11. mor. 9.

Aug. super. Psalm. 72. Tremel. in Psa 139.13.


the word reins is expounded by the Fathers to signify lust, as being
instruments serving to lust. But the Psalmist does apply it generally to all
the inward faculties, as when he says, Thou Lord do possess my reins,
that is, as the best do interpret it, quicquid in me latet, whatsoever lies
hid within me. The reins are placed by Physicians in the middle proportion of
heat, as are likewise the liver and veins, and all those chief inward
receptacles of heat, blood and spirits, by means of veins and arteries
passing through them, have a mutual society one with another. And if of humors
and gross things, that be true which Hippocrates writes (...) for as et intro
est spirabile totum corpus, Hipp. epid. 6 These. 6. Aph. 1
all the body has passages breathing out and inspired from one part to
another, Gal. lib. 3. de natural. facult
and that which Galen says, (...), every part does draw out of every part,
and send again into every part, and there is one confluxe and conspiration of
al parts: Then much more may this be said of spirits, which are far more
subtle and more fit for passage. And if experience do teach that either a
vein or an artery being opened, may thoroughly euacuate both the one and the
other, Hipp. in Coacis praenotionibus.

Laurent. in Anatom.


and that there is such a (...) (as the Physicians do call it) such a
transition of humors from the veins to the sinews, and from the sinews to
the veins, that a disease in one may be dissolved and avoided by the other, as
Hippocrat. shows, (...) a crampe or convulsion of sinews coming within the
first three days, does often dissolve a fever, why should not then the
faculties and powers, to wit, the animal in the brain, and the vital in the
heart, and the natural in the liver, be thought mutually to conspire and
work together, to uphold the whole body, and every part and portion thereof.
I conclude therefore, that howsoever the anima or soul is said in respect of
her chief animal faculty, to have seat in the brain, and by her vital
faculty, to have place in the heart, and by her natural faculty to possess
the liver: yet the first by sinews, and the second by arteries, and the third
by veins, do with such society, harmony, and near conjunction, work
continually together in all the body, that the soul it self (which rules
and governs them al) may be said in, and by them, to be present in all the
body, although in her own essence and substance, she has her proper place
appointed by God, and being the chiefest part of man, it is most likely that
she has it in that part which is the chiefest beauty, and as it were the very
majesty of this earthly creature.

CHAP. VI. Whether the soul do come ex traduce by generation and conception
from the parents, as does the body.
WHether the soul of man be created of God or no, it is a matter that was
never called in question in the Church of God, for all the faithful have ever
acknowledged, that as the body is created of God, so also the soul. But
sundry doubts have been often made by many, in what sort and manner the soul
is created. Some have thought it to be a corporal thing, and to come by
propagation from the bodies of the parents: others have on the other side, so
much extolled it, as that they would have it to be created of the very substance
of God. A third sort there have bin, which have defended the soul to be a
spiritual substance, but yet to come by propagation, the soul from the soul,
as the body from the body. Origin his opinion of all souls created together
at the creation of the world, is touched Chap. 4. August. Epist. 157. tom. 2.
Others will have it to be created of nothing: others that it is created, but
yet of the substance of that immortal soul which was given unto Adam. S.
Augustine says, that if we keep our selves from the two first gross
heresies, then Origo animae sine periculo latet, it is no danger to us, to be
ignorant how the soul has her beginning. The first assertion, which was the
error of Tertullian is at large confuted in that Epistle of Augustine. The two
chiefest reasons of Tertullian are these, Genesis 46.26.
first because it is said in Genesis that there came three score and six souls
out of the loins of Jacob, and secondly because, when God made Adam, Genesis 2.7.
it is said that God did breath into him, and he was made a living soul, but
when Eve was made, there is no mention made of any soul inspired into her, and
therefore she had hers from Adam. To the first it is answered that the word
soul signifies some times the person, Genesis 14.21.
as Genesis 14. give me the souls, take thou the goods, when the king of Sodom
desired to have his people again: and S. Paul bids every soul be subject to
higher powers, that is, every person, and sometimes it is taken only for the
body, Aug. epist 157 tom. 2.
as S. Aug. shows in that Epistle, and as I have laid open here in my first
Chap. As for the ensample of Eve, it was sufficient to have the inspiring of
the soul once named, but no doubt she had also her soul given her of God, as
Ada^ did acknowledge when he said, this is now flesh of my flesh, Genesis 2, 23.
and bone of my bone, he did not say soul of my soul, and therefore did
confess it to be given of God. The second opinion which was of the Manichees,
and renewed of late time by Seruetus, that because the Apostle says, Act:
17.28.
In God we live and move, and have our being (meaning indeed of the qualities
gifts and graces, which God has bestowed on us) therefore our soul is made of
the very essence of the Godhead, it is so gross a collection, that it needs
no co^futing. It is most absurd and impious once to think that the soul of man
being so many ways stamed and polluted, and so full of inconstancies, and
vain imaginations, should be in substance a portion of the most pure and
sacred God head. As for them which think that it comes of the essence of
man's soul, some do hold that in procreation it flows out cum semine. Aug.
epist. 15^
But Aug. does think that to be incredible, because multa fluunvirrita sine
conceptibus semina, and if the semen animae be mortal, how should then the
soul it self be immortal? Others are of opinion that no part of the soul
issues out with the seed, but as one candle does light another and lose no
part of it self thereby, so the soul of the parents does give a soul to the
natural heat, and good temperature of that which is conceived, and yet not
diminish thereby any portion of it self. But the most general opinion now
holde^ in the church, is that the souls are created of God, and from outwardly
by his divine power inspired into man at the time of giving life. Whether
created of the soul of Ada^ (as some in times past have thought) or created of
nothing, as in the first creation, I account it a question needless, seeing
the word of God has revealed no determining thereof, but that it is created of
God, and also created in another manner then is the body, that seems to be
appara^tly declared in the holy scriptures. The Apostle says to the Hebrews,
if we have had fathers of our flesh to correct us, Heb. 12.9.
and we have reverenced the^, how much more shall we be in subjection to the
father of our spirits and live? What can be more apparent to show that the
body and the soul do not come both unto us after one manner? God is our creator
in respect of our bodies, but he has made them by means, by the parents of
our flesh, but he is called the father of our souls, (...) by a certain
excellency and peculiar prehemine^ce, because he has made them himself alone,
and in the creation of our spirits has gone beyond the course and help of
natural means. The like speech we have in the Preacher, Eccl. 12.7.
when earth (says he) goes to earth, the spirit goes to God which gave it.
No doubt God gives also the body (as the Psalmist confesses, Psalm. 139.13
thou Lord have covered me in my mothers womb, I will praise thee, for that I
am wonderfully made) but he is by a singular and proper prerogative, called the
giver of spirits, because they come not as the body by means, but immediately
from himself. Hereunto has S. Peter respect, 1. Pet. 4.39.
when he wills us to commit our souls unto God, as a faithful creator: and
David, when he says the Lord does fashion the hearts of me^. Psalm. 33.15.
Hereupon is it, that the Lord himself says by the Prophet Esaias, that he has
made the souls: Esaias. 57.16.
and to this work may well be applied the speech of our savior, Ioh. 5.17.
pater operatur, et ego operor, my Father works still, and I work. The
incorporall and immortal spirit, the soul of man is of greater dignity and
worth, the^ that it may be said to be produced out of the faculty or power of
any material thing. It is also inorganicall, howsoever for a time it do
govern the Instruments of the body, yet does it often reflect into it self,
and without all help of bodily instruments, it does discourse, number, gather
principles, understand things, both particular and universal; and therefore it
is not likely that an essence so spiritual, and inorganical should have her
beginning only by an instrume^tall manner and means. Further it is evident,
that incorporal and spiritual substances are not diuisible. If the soul should
be traducted from the soul of the parents, then must it needs be, that either
the whole soul of the parents is traducted, or some part and portion: if the
whole, the^ must it needs bring the death and destruction of the parents, if
but a part, the^ must it needs follow that simple and spiritual esse^ces are
partible, and diuisible, and that it may receive a compositio^ of parts, as
part from the soul of the father, and part from the mothers: which conseque^ces
do seem absurd and contrary to the grounds of reason. Genesis 2.
Some object that which is said in Genesis that God in the seventh day did rest
from the creation of al his works, and therefore God does not as yet still
create new souls. S. Augustine answers, Aug. de Genesis ad literam lib. 4.
cap. 10. tom. 3.
that God did cease a condendis generibus creaturae, from making new kinds of
creatures, but for continuing those kinds which he has at the first created,
that does still take place, Aug. Epist. 28 Ioh. 5.17.
which is said in the Gospel Pater meus vsque nunc operatur. And in another
place, the same Augustine says very well, that God does work now, non
instituendo quod non erat, sed multiplicando quod erat, not in creating that
which has never been, but in multiplying that which has been. Some object
that it is not likely that God would give a less privilege unto man then he
has given unto bruit beasts. If they beget issue wholly like unto them selves,
why should not the same be performed in man? I answer that those arguments
often do not follow, which be drawn from the more imperfect creatures, to
the^ that are more perfect. If I should reason thus, because worms do rear up
without bones, they purge melancholy humor without a splean, they are moved
volu^tary without muscles: therefore an injury is done unto man, that he cannot
also do the like: or because the black flies, called Beetles, and other vermin
do breed of dung, without any help of male or female, therefore an injury is
done to birds and beasts, that they cannot also do the like, who would account
these arguments to be of any force? The more perfect that any creature is, in
the more noble manner is the form given unto it. If in steed of a poor
privilege a far greater, and indeed a very royal priuildge be granted, then
must it not be accouted an injury, but rather great favor, mercy, and bounty,
as I have showed more at large in the third Chapter. Some affirm, that one
soul does bring forth another, as one seed of wheat does bring forth
another, because every seed has in it quiddam aeternum, some thing eternal
and perpetual. Saint Augustine does answer this argument, Aug. epist. 157.
tales animas non spiritus sed corpora esse contendunt, such men do make the
souls not to be spiritual, but bodily essences, quo peruersius quid dici
potest? then which opinion what can be counted more absurd? In corporal
things the corruption of one is the generation of another: That which thou
sowest (says S. Paul) is not quickened, 1. Cor. 15.36
except it dye first: but who will imagine such corruption in spiritual
essences? Corporal things do grow and increase, but these incorporall and
spiritual essences have at the first their perfection, and do not grow in
respect of quantity or substance, only they have need of Gods grace to renew
their decayed qualities, and of fit instruments for them, that they may put
forth their power and strength: but (say they) if the soul be created of God,
and given from heaven, not produced from the parents, how is it then guilty of
original sin? or how can we be accounted by nature, to be the children of
wrath? Ephesians. 2.3.
This objection has bred sundry errors amongst many. Some have affirmed, that
the souls are indeed created of God pure, but that they are polluted at the
very first when they come to man by the act of generation. These are
sufficiently confuted by the Apostle to the Hebrews, pronouncing marriage to
be honorable, Hebr. 13.4.
and the bed therein to be unpolluted and undefiled. And again, if original
sin should come that way, then should we by nature have only the sin of
lust, but we have naturally all other sorts of sin, Envy, wrath, pride, and
what not: others have taught, that God indeed does create the soul, but that
he has therefore created it with these spots, that it might be a fit soul for
man, as he has given to other creatures a life fit for them; to an Ass, a
life fit for an Ass; and to a dog a life fit for a dog: so to man he has
given a soul fit for him (that is) to a damned man, a damned soul. This is a
wicked and damnable opinion, to make God the author of evil, who is wholly good
and perfectly good, and so good, that there is no end of his goodness: who is
(as the Psalmist says, Psalm 5.4.
Deus non volens iniquitatem, A God that wills no iniquity. But for the
coming of original sin. I take their assertion to be best and soundest,
which as they acknowledge the soul to be created of God pure and holy (as all
his works are good) so they do also affirm that it is not created with that
strength of persisting in good, Genesis 1.32.
and resisting evil, and many such excellent graces which it should have had,
if Adam had not transgressed the commandment of God. Having therefore in it
self, though a purity, yet also a weakness and imbecility, it is no sooner
joined to the body of man, but it is presently infected with the pollution
thereof, even as the purest spirit of wine or best quintessence that can be
made in the world, if it be powered into a filthy poisoned and unsavory vessel,
it does in a moment become partaker of the corruptions thereof: yet we must not
imagine the souls to have for some time a being before they be united with
the bodies, for at one and the self same time, the souls are both created and
also united to the bodies as it is said, Genesis 2.7.
He breathed in his face the spirit of life. Neither must we think, that
they have only imbecility and weakness in resisting corruptions; but that they
have also many other defects of mind and will, they are destitute of spiritual
light, and are therefore blind, and not inclined to such desires and actions,
as the law of God requires. God bestowed his gifts and graces upon Adam on
this condition, that he would give them also to his posterity, if he himself
would by obedience keep them, but would not give them to his seed, if he by
his unthankfulness should cast them away. Now Adam having by disobedience lost
them God in justice (as a just punishment inflicted upon Adams sin) does
bereave his posterity of them.

Now these defects and the inclinations corrupted by these defectes, are sins,
as they are drawn by men sinning, upon themselves and their posterity, and as
they have from them and their seed their beginning, and as they are causes
also, that man neither is, nor can be conformable to the law of God. It is not
a doctrine so strange (as some would make it) that the soul being created
pure, should be polluted by the body, seeing that the souls of our first
parents were created most pure, and yet afterward depraved, and though the
bodies of their posterity be of themselves senseless, yet that does not
prove, but that (upon the curse laid on our first parents) they may be prone
to ill, and no fit instruments for any goodness: neither is it against the
goodness of God so to join his pure creature to the body, that it must needs
be polluted thereby, seeing that as he has therein showed his justice in
punishing sin, so he does thereby set forth his infinite mercy, ordaining
for it a remedy by the redemption of Christ Jesus. God could have made the
souls of our first parents in such manner that they could not possibly fall
away, but it was not expedient that they should be so made, because then the
obedience of man should have been as it were forced, and therefore not so
acceptable unto God. So God could have made the souls of his posterity with
such strength and steadfastness, that they could not possibly be polluted, but
it was more expedient that they should be so made, that it might be known,
both what we are by nature, and what we are by grace. The goodness and mercy
of God does more shine by the redemption of Christ Jesus, then it should have
done, if man had never fallen into miseries, and although in the just judgment
of God, the soul be made in such sort as it must of necessity be polluted by
the uniting of it with the body, yet is it not thereby to be excused from the
guilt of sin, for though it be of necessity, yet is it not of any
compulsio^. A stone let down into the water, goes down of necessity, yet not
with compulsion: bodies deprived of food do faint of necessity, and flesh does
in time putrify of necessity, yet neither does the one faint, nor the other
putrify by any compulsion. God of necessity is good, and the Devil of
necessity evil, yet cannot we say, that either goodness in God, or iniquity in
the Devil do proceed of compulsion. The soul being joined to the body is of
necessity sinful, yet not by compulsion, but willingly and of her own
accord. But some may say, the faithful are regenerate, and born a new, and are
in Christ become a holy people, 2. Pet. 2, 9.
how can it then be that their seed should not be sanctified? or how can their
posterity be originally sinful either in body or in soul? To that it is
annswered, that man can give nothing to his posterity, but what he has by
nature, for that which comes to him by grace, must come to his posterity by
grace also. Our new birth comes not by any natural means, we are borne (as
it is in the Evangelist) not of blood, Ioh. 1.13.
nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of the will of God.
If we winnow wheat never so perfectly and purge it thoroughly from the ears,
Comparatio Petri Mart. ex Aug.
chafe and dross, yet if that wheat be sown again, it will not bring forth
winnowed or cleansed wheat, but together with the stalk, husks and such other
things as must afterward be separated from it. It can give nothing to the corn
that must grow of it, but what it had by nature, what it had by art and
industry, that must the grain next growing have by the same means again:
Even so the faithful, though they be washed, justified, and sanctified, yet
they cannot give to their children these gifts which they have received of
Gods grace, they can give to their children no more then what they have had by
nature, and by nature they have nothing else but to be children of wrath. Ephesians.
2.3.


Here now arises another doubt, if from our parents we be Children of wrath,
it should seem that the children are punished for the parents trespass, how
can this agree with the justice of God, Ezech. 18.26.
to afflict one for, the fault of another? This doubt is easily resolved, if
these four positions be duly considered. First, that the most excellent
graces which were at the first bestowed on man, were given on this condition,
that if he did loose them, he should loose the^ both from himself, and from
his posterity. Secondly, that children do proceed out of the mass or
substance of their parents, and therefore must needs be accounted as a part of
their parents according to that in the epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 7.10
The Tribe of Leui (being four generations after Abraham) was yet in the
loins of Abraham, if then the whole nature of man be corrupted, then must
needs every portion be guilty of the same corruption, until by some singular
grace and favor, it do obtain remission. Romans 5.12.
Thirdly, that seeing the body proceeding from sinful parents, is one part of
man, and found guilty in and by the parents, it standteh well with the justice
of God to be offended with whole man, and thereupon so to withdraw his graces
from the other part, that both together may fall into malediction. Fourthly
that though God do thus punish sin with sin, yet he does it in that
manner, that he is no way the author of sin, Aug. de gratia, and lib, arbit.
cap. 21
as Saint Augustine says, Deus operatur in cordibus hominum ad inclinandum
voluntates eorum quocunque vult, sieve ad bona prosua misericordia, sieve ad mala
pro ipsorum meritis, iudicio vtique suo aliquando aperto, aliquando occulto
semper iusto, GOD does work in the hearts of men, to incline their wills
which way soever his pleasure is, either to good things according to his
mercy, or to ill according to their own desert, and that by his judgment
sometimes manifest, sometimes secret, but always just. A weak house must
needs incline, and also fall, when the vnderproppers are removed, darkness
must needs ensue, when the Sun is departed away: Those bright beams of all
light, which were given to our first parents are removed, and other gifts and
excellent graces of God, are in his just judgment so long withholden from our
souls, until by his holy spirit, Act. 26.18. Ephesians. 1.18. Act. 5 10 Heb. 13.21.
as the worker, and by his holy word, as the instrument, God in his good time
do lighten the eyes of our hearts, purify them by faith, and confirm and
strengthen us to every good work.

CHAP. VII. Of the immortality of the Soul.
Marsil. Ficinu^m Theol. Platonis page 361.
MArsilius Ficinus shows five sundry opinions of the Philosophers concerning
the soul of man, but of Christians, which truly hope for immortality* he
wishes the four first assertions to be utterly rejected, and the first only
fit to be received and embraced. The first sort of Philosophers were they which
made the soul to be a certain thin body infused into a thicker, a more
subtle bodily substance infused into a grosser. And of these some made it to
be fiery, as Democritus, Leucippus and Hipparchus. Some to be an air or an
aeriall body, as Anaximenes, Diogenes and Critias: some to be a watery
substance, as Hippias, some earthly as Hesiodus, some of fire and air as
Epicurus, and some of water and earth as Xenophantes. The second sort of
Philosophers, was of them which thought the soul to be no bodily substance,
but some quality thereof dispersed through the body, to wit, either a heat, or
a complexion, as was defended by Zeno, Cleanthes, Antipater, and Possidonius.

A third sort judged the soul to be no whole quality, but some bright point of
quality remaining in some beter part of the body, and qualities, to wit, in
the brain or heart, and from thence governing the body, their authors
especially were Chrysippus, Archelaus and Heraclides. The fourth sect were they
which taught the soul to be a certain point or prick, or indivisible thing,
not fastened to any part, but secluded from all set place, and wholly present to
every part of the body, but yet such as it depends of the body, either
because the complexion of the body did beget it, or because it came of seed,
or of some proportion of matter, and addicted to the matter, as to her natural
birthplace, the chief broachers of this opinion were Xenophanes, Colophonius,
Asclepiades, Aristoxenus and Critolaus: To some of them, the soul was nothing
but a nimble force of moving: to others, a harmony of corporal parts. Others
thought it a perfection of the senses; others a conspiring of the Elements,
others a swarm of atoms. The first and best sort of Philosophers, Ficinus
makes to be those which defend the soul to be a certain divine and
indeuisible essence, wholly ruling every part of the body, produced of an
incorporeal author, and depending wholly on the virtue and power of the worker,
and not upon the beginning or capacity, or virtue of any material thing. Thus
thought Zoroaster, Mercurius, Pythagoras, Plato, and amongst these also he
numbreth Aristotle. It was a thing that mightily persuaded Plato that the
souls both came from God, and were also immortal, when he considered that her
functions did not depend so upon bodily instruments, but she could perform all
her chiefest actions without the^, and as he says in Phaedo, Ratiocinatur
optime qua^do nihil ea^perturbat, Plato in Phaedone.
neque auditus neque visus, neque dolor, neque voluptas, she does reason and
discourse best when neither hearing, nor sight, nor grief, nor pleasure do
hinder her. In age, when the body grows weak, yet is often her judgment
ripest, and though many sicknesses do bereave the body of strength, yet the
vigor of the soul is not thereby diminished, she flies beyond all the powers
of the se^ses more swift then the lightning from the east to the west: she can
pass the seas (as Plato says in Axiochus) in a moment, Sort. in Axiocho
Platouis.
she can calculate the course of Sun, moon and stars, she can discourse of
things past, and foresee things to come, in ambiguous matters she can first
doubt, and then choose, and all these without the help of any bodily
instrume^nts, in knowledge she does not only pass through human arts by
defining, dividing, dissoluing, co^pounding, but she does eue^ pierce the
skies; she co^prehendeth the knowledge of God, she conceiueth God and his
Angels to be essences immortal: if brute beasts should conceive reason, they
should be then accounted reasonable. Calu. Instit. lib. 1. cap. 15. sect. 2.
This conceiving of immortality, and having recourse to the fount aine of life,
is an evident argument that the soul is not a vanishing vapor, but a divine
essence. How chearefully went Socrates to his death, Platonis Apolog.
when in his conscience he was persuaded, that death was nothing else but (as he
said) a flitting unto another place, where he should enjoy the company of the
Gods, and where undoubtedly, the dead were in better estate then the living.
Plato in Axiocho.
He made this to be the definition of the death of the^ that lived well,
Discessus e vita est mali cuiusda^ in bonu^ co^mutatio, the departure out of
this life is nothing else but the cha^ging of ill into good. To the wicked he
confessed it to be an entrance into some kinds of torments, but to the wise
and virtuous he thought it to be nothing but a cha^ging of sorrows into all joy
and happiness, what they were, he could not define, but of this he made no
question, Plato in Phaedone. Socrates to Simmias.
(...), To good souls it was surely better, and to ill souls worse. Philo.
Iudacus It em Bruson. lib. 4. cap. 10.
When Crito one of Socrates his friends asked him at the time of his death, in
what manner he would be buried, he cried out, O my friends, I have spent a great
deal of labor in vain, I have not yet persuaded Crito, that I shall fly
away, and lean no part behind, but Crito (said he) if thou can overtake me,
bury me how thou will: his meaning was, that the mind or soul is the man, and
that the body was but an instrument or cotage, or prison. Anaxurchus the
Philosopher when being taken by Nicocreon tyrant of Cypres, Idem lib. 2. cap.
1. ex Plutarcho.
he was knocked with iron hammers, he said, Tunde, tunde probe Anaxarchi,
carnes and ossa, tunde Anaxarchi folle^, Anaxarchu^ nequaquam laedes, knock,
knock hardly, the flesh and bones of Anaxarchus, knock his bellows the
instrument of his wind, but Anaxarchus himself thou can not hurt. Ibid.
Theodorus the Macedonian philosopher, when Lysimachus threatened to hang him,
answered, haec aulicis tuis minitare, mea enim non refert humine an in cruce
putrescam, threaten these things to thine own Courtiers, as for me it is all
one with me, whether I do putrify on the ground, or on the gibbet.
Theramenes the Lacedemonian, Plut. in Nicia Val. Max. lib 3 cap. 2.
when being condemned by the Ephores, he was going to execution, he laughed and
carried in his countenance all signs of joy, one of them therefore said unto
him, what do thou contemn the laws of Lycurgus our lawgiver? He answered
no, but I give them thanks, that they do appoint me such a punishment, as I
may pay without borrowing on interest. Infinite such examples have been in all
ages, of many valiant hearts, despising death, as well in war, as in peace, and
this courageous contempt of death, is a very evident token that is in the
heart, some expectation of another life, when this former is well ended. Tully
says, Tul. lib. 1. Tulc.
that it is impossible to find the original of the soul in earth, nihil est
in animis mistum aut concretum, aut humidum, aut flabile, aut igneum, there is
no mingled nor compound thing in the soul, no moist thing nor windy, nor
fiery, for none of these things can understand, remember, or by things past
collect things future. These things must needs be acknowledged divine. And
although the soul be not of these mixed things, yet does she hold all these
contrarieties in peace and union, which is also a plain proof of the divine
power of the soul, that she holds all contraries, heat, cold, moisture,
and drought, in mutual amity and concord, Seneca being fallen into the
consideration of that desire which man has naturally to know some God (for
there is no country so barbarous, which does not in heart confess that there
is a God) says, quemadmodum radii solis contingunt quidem terram, Seneca lib.
ad Gallione de breuitate vitae. ad Lucilium.
sed ibi sunt vnde mittuntur, ita animus magnus, et sacer conuersatur quidem
nobiscum, sed haeret origini suae, As the Sun beams do come to the earth,
but they are there from whence they are sent: even so a great and holy mind is
conversant with us, but it does cleave and stick there where it has the first
beginning. Mors quam pertimescimus, intermittit vita^ non eripu, veniet iterum
qui nos in lucemreponet dies, but that he speaks chiefly upon some hope of
resurrection.

Alphonsus the King of Arragon accounted this as a great strengthening of his
faith touching the immortality of the soul, Panormitan. lib. 4. de rebus
pestis Alphonsi.
because he saw daily the elder that men grew in years, and the more that the
strength did decrease, the more they excelled in wisdom, and the more did the
powers of their mind increase. Strength is an effect of youth, if the soul in
the midst of bodily weakness, or worldly trouble, do gather strength, as
Chrysostom says, anima reiuuenescit inter angustias, Chrysostom. de resurr.
sermon. 1.
the soul by troubles does wax more youthful then must it needs follow, that
it is of it self an essence immortal. But some do say, the simplicity of
children, and the do^age of many old men, do show that the mind is like
affected with the body, and therefore the body wholly failing, the mind must
needs fail also. I must needs confess, that when the senses and forms of
things are altogether disturbed (as in a frenzy) or when there is a great
distemperature in the brain (as in children by too much moisture, and in
crooked old age by too much dryness) then for want of good tools the
worke-man is as it were idle, and for want of fit windows the ghest that is
within us, does not take so good a view of matters, as otherwise she would.
But it does not thereby follow, but that she shall fully exercise her
operations again when she is delivered both of window and closet, and has no
other functions to execute, but what she can perfectly perform without any
help of instruments. The clouds shadow the light of the Sun from us, but
the brightness of the Sun it self is nothing thereby diminished. As the
Sun of the little world, man's soul has several faculties, so has she
several times when she does in highest degree exercise and use them.

The vegetative power has his mightiest force in the womb, the sensitive has
his chiefest time in the course of this life, and the intellectual does
flourish most after this life. The prodigious dreams which have been in all
ages, Calu. Iustit. lib. 1. cap. 15. Sect. 2.
do plainly convince and prove what agility and vigor may be in the mind,
when the senses are all bound. In the war with the Latins the two Roman
Consuls, at that time Generals in the field, did in one night dream one, and
the self same dream, a ghost appeared unto them, and told that it was agreed
by the gods, that on the one side the General should dye, and on the other
side the whose army: The two Generals, to wit, Derius, and Manlius Torquatus,
when they had compared their dreams together, did resolve like valiant
commanders, that they should rather one of them yield up their lives as a
sacrifice, then that the whole army should perish. The agreement was made,
that whether soever of them had his wing or troops first beginning to fail,
the General of that part of the army, should presently cast himself into the
thickest of his enemies, and sell his life as dear as he could. It fell to
Derius his lot, his wing began first to shrink, and thereupon he being
gallantly mounted, did presently make a breach upon the army of the enemy,
fought fiercely, slew many, and although he was at the last slain himself,
yet he brought thereby happy deliverance unto his country.

Sophocles the Tragedian, Peucerus de diuinatione page 456.
when on a certain night a robbery was even then in committing at Athens, did
the very same time dream so often and so apparently of it, that he arose and
went to the officers, the Areopagites declaing his dream unto the^, and the
manner of the manifest appearing thereof. The Areopagites thereby found out the
fact, and inflicted upon the offenders condign punishment. Infinite such like
ensamples have been, which do abundantly declare unto us, that when the
senses and bodily powers are cast asleep, the minds have been far sharper
and seen much more then any way they could have seen by the instruments of
the bodily senses. Further, if the soul were not a distinct essence from the
body, why should the holy Scripture use so often these and such like kinds of
phrases, that we dwell in houses of clay, Job. 4.19.
that our body is as a house and tabernacle to the soul, 2. Cor. 5. V. 1.2.6.
that while we live here, we are at home in the body, but absent from the
Lord? These do instruct the same to us, which the Philosopher saw by the
light of reason, Tul. Tusc. 5.
that corpus est quasi vas anim and quoddam receptaculum, the body is but as
it were, a vessel for the soul* and a receptacle for a time. Again, if the
soul were not a substance of it self, why should the Apostle saint Peter call
the end of our faith the salvation of our souls, 1. Pet. 1.9.
1. Pet. 2.11.
or bid us abstain from lusts, which fight against our souls. Or the Apostle
to the Hebrews, Heb. 1^.17.
call the labor of Ministers a watching ever souls, as they which must give
an account of them: with sundry other such exhortations, as are set down here
in my first chapter. Heb. 10.17.
Or how could there be a terror and trembling of conscience in the wicked,
when by the guiltiness of their sin, they find in themselves a fearful
looking for of judgment, and violent fire to consume the adversary? It is not
a motion, but an essence which does pierce up to the tribunal seat of God,
and from thence strike terror into it self. This sting of conscience, as it
is a spiritual punishment, and not corporal, so it falls not upon the body,
but upon the soul. For the immortality of this spiritual essence, what is
revealed by the holy scriptures, I shall have occasion to declare more at large
in my four last chapters: only my chief drift has been here to show what the
wise Philosophers of the world have conceived thereof, by the light of natural
reason, and to let us see what a shame it is for us, not to make so much use of
deep meditations as they did. When Socrates did but consider, that the mind
does the^ discourse best, when nothing does trouble it, neither hearing, nor
seeing, nor grief, nor pleasure (as we see when the senses are stopped, the
understanding does most deeply meditate) he could gather thereby an argument
of immortality. Seneca epist. 111.
When Seneca saw that the greater and more heroical mind was in man, the more
it did despise these base worldly things, and the less it feared to depart out
of the body, he would say straight, maximum est argumentum animi ab alitiori
venientis sede, It is the greatest argument that can be of a mind coming from
heaven, and therefore of a heavenly and eternal nature. To conclude, even the
Poets when they considered the divine gifts bestowed on the soul of man,
Phoeylides.
could not but confess that, (...), The immortal soul still young, lasts for
aye.

And Pythagoras a Poet, but much more a Philosopher.

(...), Pythag. in aureis carmini.

(...)
(...),
If soul and mind as wagoners rule all,
Then when thou leaving body come to skies,
With God thou shall be ever immortal,
And taste no more of death nor miseries.
CHAP. VIII. How in the soul the image of God shall be renewed.
OF those words in Genesis, Genesis 1.27.
that God made man after his own image and likeness, there have been amongst
many, sundry applicatio^s, and sundry opinions, some plainly heretical, and
others more tolerable. The heresy of the Anthopomorphitae is damnable, which
makes God to be a bodily substance like unto man: for the scriptures do show
us abundantly, Ioh. 4.24. 2. Cor. 3.17.
that God is a spirit invisible, and incomprehensible, he appeared sometime
visibly to the Patriarchs, Exodus 33.20. Ioh. 6.46. Genesis 16.10. Exodus 2.2. Esaias.
6.1.
and his holy servants, but that was not according to his essence, (which is
infinite) but according to certain representments, or (as Athanasius speaks)
majesty's, far inferior to that which he is of himself, and applied to the
capacity of man. And certain it is, that in Genesis that image of God, which
is said to be in man, was not in respect of the body, which was made of the
slime of the earth: but in respect of the spirit, which was given unto man,
Genesis 2.7.
when God did breath into him, and he was made a living soul. Osiander made
the image of God to signify Christ, which in the preordina^ce of God was for
to come, and to take man's nature upon him: and he taught that then does the
soul bear the image of God, when it has the very righteousness of Christ
Jesus as an inherent quality. He had it from the Manichees, and grounded his
opinion especially upon that place of the Apostle, 2. Cor. 3.18.
we all with open face beholding the glory of God as in a glass, are
tra^sformed into the same image from glory to glory, as by the spirit of God.
Those words are spoken especially of the Apostles and Ministers (of whom
Saint Paul does in that place entreat) and do import thus much, that they in
the glass of Gods word beholding the glory of God are transformed into the
same image, to be lights unto others (as our Savior said, Math. 5.14.
ye are the lights of the world) and to light them, not only in doctrine, but
in going before them in sanctification of life. The righteousness of Jesus
Christ, is imputed to us (as the Apostle does often declare) when we put on
Christ by faith, Romans 4.9.10. Romans 4.22. Gal. 3.27. 1. Cor. 1.30. Phil. 3.9,
and are clothed with the righteousness of Christ. But that perfect
righteousness it self, such as is able to stand before the judgment of God,
neither is, nor ever was an inherent quality, reside^t in any but only in the
manhood of Christ Jesus. It may and ought to suffice us, to receive of the
fruit, and to let the tree and root remain where it should. 2. Cor, 5.21,
The Apostle shows that in the same manner as Christ was made sin for us,
so we are made the righteousness of God in him. Now he was made sin by
imputation, when all our sins were laid upon him, Pet, 2, 24,
and as Saint Peter says, he bare our sins in his body on the tree, so
likewise his righteousness (as of one that has vouchsafed to become our head)
is imputed to all the true members of his mystical body, for as Ada^ was as no
private man, but the fountain and welspring of mankind, and therefore most
justly, Rom, 5, 12,
as in him we all sinned, so in him we all died. So the second Ada^, our Lord
Jesus, is not to be considered as a private man, but as the head of the church,
and what was wrought by him, is wholly benificial to all the faithful. If by the
husband, as being the head, a debt be answered, how justly the^ is the wife
discharged? The church is called the spouse of Christ, Ephesians. 5, 27.
and although it be said to be without spot, or wrinckle, yet must it not be
understood, that it is void of all sin (for why should it then be taught by our
Savior to pray continually, for forgiveness of trespasses?) but we are said to
be without spot or wrinckle, as we are clothed with the justice of Christ, and
as the Lord does behold us not in our selves, but in, and and through his son
Christ Jesus, Math. 3, 17,
in whom only he is well pleased. How the righteousness that is in the faithful
and such as are sanctified, is called the image of God, shall be showed
hereafter: Let this suffice here to condemn that dream of the Manichees, and
Osiander, who by the image of God in man, did imagine a perfect uprightness,
righteousness, and holiness, inherent in the powers of man, making him in
this life void of all blemish or imperfection, either in body or soul. A
third opinion, or rather an application by the way, how the soul is the image
of God, is that of Saint Augustine, making our soul to be an image of the
blesied Trinity. In the soul there is, memoria intellectus, voluntas, haec
tria potes numerare, non potes separare, Aug. de verbis domini. Sermon. 63.
Memory, understanding, and will, you may number these three, but you cannot
separate them: So the three persons in the Trinity, you may number them, but
you cannot divide them, as the one is but one soul, so the other but one
Godhead. Yet in another place he corrects himself, and says, Aug, epist.
102.
that this is similitudo dissimilis, an unlike similitude, because the memory,
the understanding, and the will, are in the soul; but we cannot say that
every one of them is the soul, but the Trinity it self is God, and every
person God.

Fourthly, the making of man after Gods image, has been expounded by some to
signify the sovereignty which God gave unto him over al his earthly
creatures, to be a similitude of his heavenly providence, governing all
things: and therefore when it is said, that God made man after his own image,
there follows in the next verse, the commandment of God, Genesis 1, 27, ver.
28,
giving Adam power to rule over all beasts, and fishes, and fowls.

This is the interpretation of Chrysostom, and although it be condemned by
some, Calu. in Psycopan.
yet I do not see but it may stand very well to be a part of the image of
God, seeing the Apostle speaks directly (speaking of pre-eminence in
government. 1. Cor. 11.7
) The man ought not to cover his head, for as much as he is the image of God,
but the wowan ought, because she is the image of the husband. But this is not
the image of God which we are in this place to seek out: we must find such
an image as shall be common to both sexes, for as the Apostle says, Gal. 3.28.
In Jesus Christ there is neither Jew nor Gentile, bond nor free, male nor
female, but all is one.

A fifth description of the image of GOD, Calu. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 12. sect. 6.
is of them which make it to be that high perfection, which God gave first to
Adam, to converse with God, and to be joined unto GOD, which perfect integrity
was also given to the Angels, being therefore called the sons of God: for to
behold the countenance of God, requires a similitude with God, and it is
said, Mat. 22.30
that the glorified in the life to come shall be like the Angels of God. This
Angelical perfection was given to our first parents, but for their disobediance
and unthankfulness both they and we were justly deprived of it: for man has
received naturally four wounds, whereby this image of God is defaced in him.
The first is a judicial wound, Heb. 7.10.
whereby man being shut up in the loins of Adam, and therefore sinning in Adam,
is justly condemned as guilty of the same trespass with him, and stands by
nature as a man before a judge condemned, and for a time repriued. This
confessed the kingly Prophet, when he said, psalm. 51.5.
In sin was I born, and in iniquity my mother conceived me.

The second wound is called privative, to wit, a depriving of all those
excellent gifts, which were at the first bestowed on Adam* when in a
corporation, the liberties are shamefully abused, or when Subjects do rebel
against their Sovereign, it is accounted justice to deprive the posterity of
the one of their privileges, and the whole of spring of the other of their
inheritance: much more when the heavenly graces of God are rebelliously cast
off, they are in right and equity most justly plucked away from the generation
ensuing. Man is therefore naturally deprived, first of al power of doing good,
so that none can come to Christ, Ioh. 6, 44.
unless the heavenly Father draw him, Luke 15.5,
none can truly come home unless (as the lost sheep) he be laid upon the
shoulder of the merciful shepherd, to wit our Savior, and be brought home to
repentance. We are therefore accounted naturally as dead. The Apostle says,
Rom 6.13.
Give your selves unto God, as they which of dead are alive, you which were
dead has he quickened again, Col. 2.13.
forgiving you all your sins. Secondly, we are deprived not only of power,
but also of will, Phil. 2, 13 Aug. in Enchirid. ad Laurentium.
as Augustine observes well, Libero arbitrio male vtens homo, and se perdidit
and ipsum, Man by abusing free will, lost both himself and it. As (says he) a
man that wilfully murdereth himself, has neither life nor power to raise up
him self again: so when free will was abused unto sin, and overcome by
sin, it lost his freedom and fell into slavery and dondage: we are further
deprived of all ability of thinking well, 2, Cor, 3, 5
so that of our selves we cannot think a good thought, every framing or
cogitation of the heart of man, Genes. 6, 5.
is only ill continually: moreover our knowledge is gone, 1, Cor. 2.14,
natural man cannot conceive the things of God. Act. 16, 14
Lydia cannot so much as mark the words of Paul, until God do open her eyes:
we are nothing of our selves in respect of spiritual knowledge, Ephesians. 5, 8
Ephesians. 4, 18
but mere darkness and blindness, yea those things which are thought most
excellent of us, have need to be removed: the very wisdom of the flesh is
enmity against God, Romans 8, 7. Ephesians, 4, 23,
and the Apostle requires, that we be renewed even in the spirit of our
minds. psalm. 51, 10.
David prays God to create in him a new heart, and a new spirit, and being
created to guide the^ still with his grace, not to take his holy spirit from
him, or else he well perceived there was no power in himself to yield
obedience to the will and commandment of God.

The third wound is caled Positive, whereby we are by nature inclined unto all
evil, as by the former we are deprived of all powers, and faculties of doing
good, so by this we are naturally prone to ungodliness, and iniquity. The
Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.3.
we be natura filii irae, by nature the children of wrath. The Pelagians, and
of late the Anabaptists say, that we are sinful from our parents, but they
say, it is by imitation or by imputation, but the Apostle makes no such
begininges of sin: he pronounces flatly the unregenerate to be by nature
children of wrath: Job says, Job. 11.1^
that a newborn babe is as an untamed and unbroken Colt, apt by nature to all
untowardness: Infantes have the seeds of anger, way wardenesse, pride and
vanity, howsoever (as the serpent sometimes is so frozen in winter, that it may
be handled without danger, not because it has no poison, but because it has
no power to put it out: so little children do for a time not show forth
manifest effects of these sins, not because they have not the venom, but
because they are not able to send it forth. If a whole vessel be poisoned, how
can any drop thereof be sound or wholesome? the whole stock of mankind is
poisoned with the sin of Adam. Gen* 5, 3,
It is said Adam begat issue after his own likeness, as Adam was sinful,
lustful, unthankful, disobedient, so the branches be of the same nature with
the stock and root.

The fourth wound is called transitiue, whereby, as by a wound, which is deeper
grown and of long continuance comes at the last a Fistula, yielding most
filthy matter, so of these former wounds do proceed actual sins, and
custom of sinning, whereby all actions and operations both of body and soul
are repugnant to the will of God. And those things which by nature we should
have done without sin (had Adam not offended) those things we perform now
with a thousand imperfections: for as a man that has the palsy, has a moving
of head and hands, as he had before, and as we see also other men have, but
his mouinges are now altogether irregular, and full of infirmities: so all
those affections of mind, love, desire, rejoicing, and all natural functions,
eating, drinking, sleeping, and such like, which we should have performed
without sin, if Adam had not transgressed, are now become plainly irregular,
and full of infinite blemishes and corruptions. Thus many ways by nature is
the image of God blotted out in the unregenerate, but in them which are born
anew by the grace and spirit of God, and do by a true and sound faith take
hold of the merits and satisfaction of Christ, 1, pet. 2.21
by whose stripes we are healed, and are lively members of that Chruch, Esaias
30.26,
unto which the Redeemer was promised to bind up their breaches, and to heal
the stroke of their wounds: Ezech. 3^.16,
In them all these sores and hereditary diseases aforenamed, are so far
cured, Luke 10.19
that nothing shall be able to do them harm, their powers are so far
strengthened, as that by the help of the grace of our Lord Jesus, and by the
merit of his passion they do perform those things which are acceptable unto
God. phil. 4, 13.
I can do all things (says the Apostle) in him that does strengthen me.
phil. 2, 13
God does work in us both to will and to perform: so likewise for the
thoughts, the heart is purified by faith, Act. 15, 9.
for the knowledge, 1, Cor. 2, 14 Ephesians, 5, 8
the spiritual man discerns all things, ye were once darkness, but now ye
are all light in the Lord, James 1, 5
for wisdom, he gives it to the askers that vpraideth no man, and for the
spirit of the mind, that is performed in them, which the Apostle names to the
Thessalonia^s, 1. These. 5, 21.
even the God of Peace does sanctify them, throughout, that their perfect
spirit and soul and body, shall be blameles, phil. 3, 12,
until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. That spirit is accounted perfect,
which does aim still at perfection, and labor continually more and more to
attain unto it, Phil. 3, 14. 2. Chron. 15.17.
going on in singleness and soundness of heart without hypocrisy,
endeavoring by all means to be the same before God, as it would seem to be
before men, Psalm. 119.6.
and having respect as much as may be to all the commandementes of God, and
yet seeking especially that perfect blessedness, Psalm. 32.^
which does consist in the covering of imperfections.

That happy covering of sins, (spoken of by the Prophet David) is atributed
by Saint Paul to justification by faith, Romans 4.5.7.
taking hold of the righteousness and satisfaction of Jesus Christ: if these
things be performed with devout and holy zeal, then does the soul and
spirit in some measure put on again the image of God. Aug. de Genesis ad literam
l. 6. cap. 1
S. Augustine shows that it is the soul and mind of man, where the image of
God is to be sought: when God first created him, and made him after his
likeness, it was non secundum corpus, sed secundum intellectum, not in respect
of the body, but in respect of the understanding: Quanquam in corpore habeat
quandam proprietatem quae hoc indicet, quod erecta statura factus sit, vt
admoneretur sibi non esse terrena spectanda, Although he has also in body a
certain property, which shows the very same, to wit, his stature with the
face lifted up, that he might be admonished not to set his mind on earthly
things.

There be five especial things required to the renewing of the image of God
in us. The first is knowledge of divine mysteries, as the Apostle says, Col.
3.10.
Put on the new man renewed unto knowledge, according to the image of the
Creator. The Psalmist does pronounce him blessed which does meditate and po^der
day and night in the law of GOD. Psalm. 1.2.


The second thing is righteousness, as the Apostle exhorts, Put on the new
man, Ephesians. 4.2 4
which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness. David says,
psalm. 145.17.
God is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works. To put on Gods
image in righteousness, is not only to abstain from injuries, unjust dealing
and oppression, but to be good unto all men to the uttermost of our power: for
those who did feed the hungry, give drink to the thirsty, and visit them
which were sick or in prison, are called just: the other to wit, they on the
left hand shall go into everlasting pain, but these righteous into life
eternal.

The third, true holiness: Mat. 25.40 Leuit. 19.2 1. Pet. 16. Ephesians. 4.24*
The commandment is often give, be holy as I am holy. The Apostle to the
Ephesians, does as by righteousness point out all duties toward our neighbor,
so by holiness he does signify especially our duties toward God, that we
carry our selves religiously in the service of God, that our prayers be no
matters of custom, psalm. 25.1
but liftings up of our souls unto God, psalm. 63.5.
that our souls be filled with marrow and fatnes, when we praise God with
joyful lips, psalm. 69.9
that the zeal of the Lords house do eat us up, Deuteronomy. 28.58
that we fear God, and dread his glorious and fearful name, the Lord our
God, and that we love the Lord with all the powers of heart, mind, soul and
strength.

The fourth thing required for the image of God, to be renewed in us, is truth,
not only true devotion in the service of God (which the Apostle calls true
holiness) but as he adds in the verse following, Ephesians. 4.24.25
to speak every man the truth one to an other, for we are members one of
another. The nearer man approaches unto truth, the more does he put on the
image of him, Tit. 1.2
that is truth it self, and is called a God that cannot lie, and the more that
man is given to falshoode and deceit, the more does he cast off the image of
God, and put upon himself the vizard of Satan, who is the Father of lies, John
8.4
and was a liar from the beginning.

The fifth necessary part of the repairing Gods image in us, is that all our
affections which by nature were corrupted, be sanctified and governed by the
grace atd power of Gods spirit: as the Apostle does in the next verse give an
instance of anger, Ephesians. 3.2 6,
Be angry (says he) and sin not. It is not required that affections should
be clean rooted out: for affections were even in our Savior Christ, It is said
in S. Mark, Mar. 3.5.
that when he looked upon the Pharisees, he did with anger grieve that their
heart was so hardened. John 11, 35
And in S. John, that when they wept for Lazarus, Jesus wept also. The Apostle
bids us covet to prophecy, 1. Cor. 14.39,
and in an other place rejoice with them that rejoice, Romans 12.15.
and weep with them that weep. The prophet David says, Psalm. 139.2^
Do not I hate the^ O Lord that hate thee? yea I hate them with a perfect
hatred. There is a very good use of affections in man: anger adds a spur to
fortitude, hatred of sin adds a spur to justice, grief adds a spur to
mercy. If the heart should be without affections, then should the soul be
like to a ship be calmed in the Sea, when she has no wind, she can make no
way, neither can the soul govern well the matters of this life without
affections: only it is required, that they be sanctified by Gods grace and
made more and more comfortable to the will of God. If thus the image of God be
daily more and more renewed in us, then does our estate receive a most
comfortable alteration: Rom, 5, 1 Ephesians. 2.3, Romans 6.20. Romans 7, 14
for whereas by nature we were enemies to God, children of wrath slaves of
sin, carnal, and sold under sin, Ezech. 16, 6
filthy and wallowing in our own blood, Ephesians. 2.19.
and strangers from the common wealth of Israel, we are now by grace made the
friends of God, John 3.29
John 15.14
the Spouse of Jesus Christ, the children of Abraham, sons and heirs of God,
Ephesians. ^ 32
a chosen generation, a ^oyall priesthood, Romans 4.16.
a holy nation, a peculiar people, Romans 8.16.
washed in Christ his blood, 1. Pet 2.9
and made kings and priests to God our father. Apoc. 1.6


CHAP. IX. What we may conceive of the soul by the conscience of man, and how
the conscience is a heaven or hell to the soul in this life.
THere are very well made of S. Bernard, four several kinds of consciences:
whereof only one does stand against the immortality of the soul, there is
Quieta mala, and quieta bona, Power sundry kinds of consciences.
turbata mala, and turbata bona, A quiet ill conscience, and a quiet good, A
troubled il, and a troubled good: A quiet ill conscience is when man sleeps
securely in sin, Ephesians. 4, 19, Romans 5, 1.
and has no sense nor feeling of sin: A quiet good is, Act. 1, 18
when being justified by faith, he is at peace with God, a troubled ill, when
a man is swallowed up in the gulf of despair, and a troubled good, Mat.
11.28,
when laboring and groaning under the burden of sin, he desires to be
eased and refreshed by Jesus Christ. The first conceiueth little of
immortality, because indeed man continuing in it, is transformed as it were
into a brute beast: for as a troubled good conscience, is sit for men of
infirmities, and a troubled ill makes them like to the devils, so a quiet good
does make them after a sort angels, and a quiet ill does reduce them to the
estate of brute beasts, and deprive them of understanding and reason. The
Apostle caleth the Cretia^, slow bellies, evil beasts. Tit. 1, 1,
David says of the^ that are drowned in worldly honor, psalm. 49, 20
man being in honor has no understanding, but is like to the beasts that
perish: and in an other place bids us not to be like horse and mule in whom
there is no understanding. psalm, 32, 9
Of the Philosophers, such as only delighted to wallow in pleasures, were
called Epicuri de grege porci, hogs of the heard of Epicure, Horat. lib. 1
Epist. 2
Fruges consumere nati, only born to devour the fruits of the earth. The
prophet Hosea says, Hos. 4.11
Whoredom and drunkenness do take away the heart of man, that is, they make
him to have no sense nor feeling of sins, but to rejoice in that which indeed
he should lament, and to be, though alive in the body, yet dead in the soul,
as says Bernard, Bern. lib. 1. de considerat.
quis magis mortuus eo qui portat ignem in sinu, peccatum in conscientia
sentit, nec excutit, nec expauescit? Who is more dead then he which carries
fire in his bosom, sin in his conscience, and does neither feel it, nor
shake it out, nor tremble at it? The cause of this quietness is, because Satan
has gotten a peaceable possession. Our Savior says, when a strong man does
possess all, then all is quiet. Diabolus eos pulsare negligit, Greg. 14.
moral. 12.
quos quieto iure possidere se sentit, The devil is careless of assaulting
them, of whom he has justly gotten a quiet possession. Of this quietness
Bernard speaks, writing upon that place of Ezekiel, Ezech. 16.42.
my wrath and zeal is departed from thee, Bern, super Cantica. sermon, 42.
Vides quod tunc magis irascitur Deus cum non irascitur, hanc misericor diam
ego nolo, supra omnem iram est miseratio ista, you may see that God is then
most angry, when he is not angry. The quiet joy that wicked men have, seems
to come of mercy, but I would wish none of that mercy: that mercy is above all the wrath that can be.

Howsoever brutish man has no hope of immortality, nor fear of Gods
judgments, yet is his case thereby no whit the better, but rather much more
grievous: he is even as the stall-fed Ox, who still feeding to the full, and
never conceiving any foresight of his death, is yet never the better for it: A
sudden death will bring the greater fear. Nay, he is infinite thousand times
worse, for the beast is fed but to perish temporally, and he is fed to perish
eternally.

The second kind of ill conscience called turbata mala, a troubled ill
conscience, though it have no apprehension of Gods mercy, yet does it conceive
it self to be a spiritual essence, endangered to the judgment of eternal
punishment. This sting of corrupt conscience, is called often in the
Scriptures, Esaias. 66.24. Mark. 9.44. 1. Tim. 4.2. Esaias. 57.20. Heb. 10.27.
a worm that never dies: It is named a searing with a hot iron, a sea that
always rages, a terrible looking for of judgment, and violent fire to devour
the adversary. Esaias. 48.22.
When the wicked feel no peace in themselves, but that in the midst of all
their joys and pleasures, Eccl. 41.5.
they have often a bitter remembrance of death and condemnation, so that as the
wise man says, even in the laughing, Prou. 14.13
the heart is sorrowful, and the mirth does end in heaviness: What does this
argue, but that the soul is a spiritual substance, such as can fly up to the
tribunal seat of God, and there both accuse her self, and also plead guilty
for her self? In judicial handling of matters before men, there are sundry
persons to perform several functions, some do accuse, others witness, others
condemn, others torment: but an evil conscience is of it self all in one. It
is to bad men (as the scriptures show) both their accuser and witness, and
judge, and tormentor. Their accuser (as says the Apostle) their own conscience
accusing, or excusing. Romans 2.15.
Where Saint John declares, that at the time of Gods judgments, Apoc. 20.12
the books shall be opened. Chrysostom shows what those bills are,
conscientia est codex in quo quotidiana peccata scribuntur. The conscience of
man, is the book wherein his daily sins are written. Secondly it is the
witness, according to that of Paul, Rom, 2, 15.
their own thoughts bearing witness: Wis, 17, 10,
And of the wisema^, it is a fearful thing when malice is condemned by her
own testimony, and a conscience that is touched, does ever forecast cruel
things. For fear (says he) is nothing else, but a beatraying of the succors
which reason offers, this saw the heathen wisema^. Thales Miles,
Turpe quid ausurus te sine test time, If thou attempt any filthy thing, fear
thy self, without any further witness: And the Orator, Quint, decl, 9
conscientia mill testes, the conscience is as good as a thousand witnesses,
So Pythagoras. (...), Of all men in the world stand most in awe of thy self.
^, Ioh, 3, 20,
Thirdly it is the judge as Saint John says, if our heart condemn us, God is
above the heart. And Saint Paul, speaking of the heretic that sins against
his own conscience says, that he sins damned of himself. Se ipsum
vnusquisque, Ambro. epist. ad Constant.
et animum suum seuerum iudicem sui vltorem criminis habet. Every man has in
himself and his own heart, a severe judge and revenger of his wickedness.
Fourthly it is also the tormenter, 1. Tim. 4.2. Esaias. 66.24, Heb. 10.27. 1,
Tim, 6, 10,
in which respect it is called a burning with a hot iron, a worm gnawing
still upon the heart, a violent fire, consuming Gods enemies, and such as
pierces man through with many sorrows. The heathen Orator could say,
conscientia grave pondus, a man's conscience, Tul, ^. de natura deorum
if it be ill, is a heavy burden. It will make him to grieve at the loss of
that which he never loved, for virtue has this triumph over vice, that they
which hate her most shall be grieved at her absence. Vertulem vi videant
intabescantque relicta, That though they love not virtue, yet they shall see
it, and pine away with the loss of it. Luke, 16, 23
When it is said that the damned rich man did see Lazarus in Abraham's bosom,
no doubt it is signified to us, that this does, and ever shall greatly augment
the punishments of the wicked, to perceive and see from how blessed an estate
they are fallen.

These effects in the consciences of the ungodly, do evidently declare the
soul to be a spiritual essence, and apprehending much more then those things
which concern this life. When Kaine said, Gen, 4, ^,
my sin is more then can be forgiven, I shall be a vagabond and a runnagate,
Genesis 27, 38. Genesis 9, 27.
when Esau wept for the loss of his birthright: When Pharao seeing Gods
fearful judgment, cried out God is just, and I and my people are wicked:
When Ecebolius the Philosopher of Constantinople (because in the time of Julian
the Apostata he had as a time seruer denied his faith in Christ) threw
himself down before the Church, Socr, lib, 3. cap, 11,
and said calcate me salem insipidum, tread upon me unsavory salt. When
Francis Spaera for the like fault said to the Bishop Vergerius that he could
wish to lie ten thousand years in hell, so that once he could hope of
remission and delivery from eternal punishment, what was this but that their
own consciences did both accuse them, and also condemn and torment them! This
testimony of conscience made Iosephes brethren to shake with fear, Gen, 50, 15.
when they remembered their cruelty against their young brother, it made Adam to
creep into the thickets, Genesis 3, 10,
when he heard the voice of him whom he had unthankfully despised. This made
Faelix to tremble, when he heard Paul preach of righteousness and temperance,
Act. 24, 2^,
and of the judgment to come. This made Caligula, that wicked Emperor in
times of thunder and lightning, to creep under the beds, and into corners.
This made that famous, or rather infamous Medea, sitting at sessio^s within her
self, her own heart being the foreman to accuse her self, and condemn her
self; Video meliora proboque,
Deteriora sequor,
I see and like well what is right,
But follow wrong with all my might.


Yet such is the force of a corrupted and confounded conscience, that it makes
the dead to see me alive again. Herod when he heard of the fame and miracles of
our Savior Christ, Mark. 6, 14
said surely, this is that John Baptist whom I have beheaded, he is risen from
death to life again: John was dead and buried, he was dead to other men, but
he was alive to Herod. As it is recorded by a certain Pythagorean Philosopher,
that when he came to a house to pay a little debt, ^ra^m. lib. 6, apoph.
and at the very same time his creditor was new dead, and he perceived (by
hearing the will read) that there was no mention made of that debt, he rejoiced
and went away carrying his money back again: But when he saw that it was a
daily sting to his conscience, and that he could never be in quiet for it (for
an evil conscience is like unto a strait bed, where man can take no rest) he
brought the money back again to his creditors house, and threw it to his
Executours, speaking these words unto him self, tibi viuit, aliis mortuus est,
he is alive unto thee, although he be dead unto others.

The two other kinds of consciences, to wit, turbata bona, and quieta bona, a
troubled good conscience, and a quiet good conscience, I make no other
difference of them, but the one to be as it were the beginning and entrance
into the other: for none can truly attain unto a heavenly joy in his
conscience, unless he have first been brought down to hell by the
consideration of his sins. None can be truly refreshed in Christ, unless
he have first with grief and sighing, Man,
felt the burden of his sins. Saint Augustine acknowledges, that a man non
potest coronari nisi vicerit, Aug. in Psalm. 60,
nec potest vincere nisi certauerit, nec potest certare nisi inimicum, et
tentationes habeat, He cannot be crowned unless he overcome, neither can he
overcome unless he strive, neither can he strive unless he have an enemy and
temptations. But when these temptations are so overcome that sin shall not
reign in our mortal body, Romans 6.12.
then comes in the sweetest comfort that ever can come to the soul of man in
this like: the^ as the Apostle speaks our conversation is in heaven, Phil.
3.20.
then do we feel in our hearts that peace of God which passes all
understanding, Phil. 4.7.
then are our souls possessed with unspeakable joy, according to that of
Solomon, Prou. 15.14
A good conscience is a continual feast. For as there is no greater worldly
joy to a man, that has traveled a long journey abroad, then when he comes
home, to find his wife, children and whole family in good health and quiet: so
there cannot be a more excellent spiritual joy in this life, then when a man
does descend into the home of his own conscience, that he do find there all
so reconciled unto God, that al be in good peace and quietness, Esaias. 59.2.
and to perceive that the thraldom of sin (which makes division and
separation betwixt the soul and God) is abrogated or subdued. This does the
Apostle call his chiefest rejoicing: Our rejoicing is the testimony of our
conscience, 2. Cor. 1.12.
that we have had our conversation in simplicity and godly pureness. This has
vpholden the hearts of so many thousand blessed Martyrs, and made them to
rejoice in the midst of al their torments, because they had a testimony
within themselves, 1. Pet. 2.19
that for their conscience toward God, they suffered grief undeserved. This
has made so many Saints of God, to depart so cherefully out of this world as
Hierom writes of the death of Nepotia^, Intelligeres eum non mori sed migrare,
Hierom ad Heliodor. 3.
you might well perceive that his death was no death, but a flitting to a better
place. And this has brought comfort, not only to the faithful, Heb. 10.22.
whose hearts are by the blood of Christ sprinkled from an evil conscience, and
purged from dead works to serve the living Lord. Heb. 9.14.
But even the heathen men also by following and obeying the law of nature, did
in the testimony of their conscience receive exceeding joy: as the Orator
said, writing of the comforts of old age, conscientia been actae vitae, Tul.
in Catone may.
et multorum benefactorum recordatio iucundissima, A conscience of a life well
led, and a remembrance of deeds well done, are the most pleasant things that
can be. Periander being asked what was the best liberty, Scob. sermon. 22.
answered, a good conscience: Greg. epist. 9.
unto which I think Gregory does allude, when he says, liber est quem
conscientia non accusat. Bias being asked what thing in the world is most free
from fear, answered a good conscience. This is taught by the heavenly
wisdom: Prou. 28.1.
The wicked (as Solomon says) does fly, no man pursuing him, but the just is
confident as a Lion. The Orator accounted this a most principal comfort in
all distresses and calamities. Tul, ad To^q, fam, lib. 6.
Conscientia rectae voluntatis maxima consolatio est rerum incommodarum, A
conscience of a man's heart well inclined, is the chiefest consolation in all
adversities. And in another place, nullum theatrum virtuti conscientia maius,
Tul, lib, 2, Tusc.
There is no theater that virtue does more desire then a man's own conscience:
Whereby he meant, that good and virtuous men did not so much in their actions
respect the sight of men, or desire the praise of man, as they sought to keep
that conscience sound, which they were persuaded they had received from heaven,
Cicero pro Cluentio.
as he affirms elsewhere, Conscientiam a diis immortalibus accepimus quae a
nobis diuelli non potest, We have received a conscience from the immortal
gods, which cannot be plucked away, but does always attend and wait upon
man. Epictetus.
And another said well, that as parents do commit children to be governed and
kept in awe by tutors, so God does commit men to be ruled and ordered by their
conscience, which more vigilant then any tutor does continually attend on man,
Isid, in syn.
according to that of Isidore, omnia fugere poterit homo praeter cor suum, A
man may fly from any thing better then he can fly from his own heart.

The heathen men did not know aright that God, which is the Judge of the
conscience, Psalm, 7, 10.
and the searcher of the hearts and reins: But never was there any Nation so
barbarous, never any Country so wild and savage, Tul, de not. Deorum.
but that it had this fastened and settled in the hearts of the people, that
there is a God, and that he is a protector of the good, and a revenger of them
that do ill, which made honest minded men to come forth boldly, and the wicked
to fear even their own shadow, Seen. epist, 98
as Seneca said, bona conscientia prodire vult et conspici, ipsas nequitia
tenebras timet, A good conscience appears boldly in the sight of men, but
naughtiness does fear the darkness it self, Seen, epist: 43,
etiam in solitudine est anxia et sollicita, and even in solitariness, being
alone, it is fearful and pensive.

CHAP. X. Of the estate and condition of the Soul after this life, against the
Catabaptists.
THe joy of the elect of God is called such a joy, John, 16, 22,
as shall never be taken from them, it is an endless and perpetual joy. It
does not only uphold their hearts in all the troubles and miseries of this
world, making light to shine in the midst of darkness, Psalm, 112, 4, Ioh.
16, 20.
and turning all their pensiveness into gladness, but it conceiueth an
assured hope of a better, to wit, an everlasting life in the joys of heaven,
and that so soon as the soul is delivered from the body. The Apostle Paul
did account his loosing from this prison to be a present being with Christ: I
desire (says he) to be dissolved and to be with Christ, Phil. 1.23.
he was assured that his removing from this tabernacle, should be a present
dwelling with the Lord, as he said, we had rather remove out of the body,
2. Cor. 5.8.
and dwell with the Lord. Stephen prayed in faith and assurance, that his soul
should presently be received into the hands of God, Lord Jesus receive my
spirit. Act, 7.59,
In the Revelation of Saint John, Aopc. 14.13
such a blessing and such a rest is promised to them that dye in the Lord,
August, in Psa 102.
that their good works may follow after them, that is, that God may crown
his gifts in them. Our Savior says to the repentant thief upon the Cross,
Luke 23.43,
This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. The soul of Lazarus being
departed, Luke 16.22.
was carried by Angels into Abraham his bosom. Polycarpus that holy Disciple
of the Apostles, amongst many excellent speeches, at the time of his martyrdom
added this, Eccl. hist. lib. 4 cap. 13.
Hodie representabor coram Deo in spiritu, This day I shall be in soul
represented before the Lord. The Wise man says of the death of all the
faithful, When earth goes to earth, Eccl, 12.7,
the spirit goes to God which gave it. When the Prophet David says, Psalm. 16,
10.
that God will not leave his soul in hell, nor suffer his holy one to see
corruption: No doubt he prophesies of the resurrection, as it is expounded by
Saint Peter, Act. 2.29.
but he includes in that resurrection of Christ, the life also of his own
soul, he called Christ his soul. I live (says the Apostle) and yet not I,
Gal. 2.20.
but Christ lives in me, and especially in the resurrection of Christ, our
life is hid with Christ, Col. 3, 2,
therefore David believes that seeing his soul, Vido Genesis 42 38. and Job,
14.13. de significatione inferni. Psalm. 16.11
and the life of his soul Christ Jesus shall not be left in the grave, he
shall undoubtedly be brought to the presence of God, which he calls in the
next verse, a fullness of joy and pleasures for evermore.

The hope of the Apostle Paul is to be made conformable to the death of Christ,
Phil. 3.10
until he come to the resurrection of the dead: now as his death was no
extinguishing of the human soul, Ion. 2.3. Mat, 12.39
but like the being ^f Jonas in the Whales belly, his soul being still safe,
and yielded up into the hands of God, as he said, Father into thy hands I
commend my spirit, Luke 23.46
and like the sacrificing of Isaac, wherein the soul remained untouched, so
also by his quickening power, John 4.17.
he gives to all his elect, that well of water that springs up to eternal
life. The Ram which was offered in steed of Isaac, may well signify our body,
and our irrational part that dies, but the soul though it be a while bound
to the body (as Isaac was bound) yet as soon as the bands are loosed, it
mounteth up to the place of al bliss and perpetual blessedness. Our Savior
says, Quia ego viuo, vos viuetis, Because I live, John 14.19 John 6.56
you shall live: I live by the father, and he that feeds on me shall live by
me: John 5.24.
He that hears my words, has life eternal, and shall not come into
condemnation, but has passed from death to life. Eccle. hist. lib, 6. cap. 26.
Aug. lib de here is. c. 83 In decret. distinct, 2. de Iohanne. Vide Gerson, in
sermon paschali.
Hereby are condemned two gross heresies, the one devised first by the
Arabians, and after renewed by John Bishop of Rome, and of late defended by
certain Anabaptists, to wit, that the soul does sleep or dye with the body,
and that both are raised up again together in the last day. And the other of
the Romish Catholics, confessing indeed that the soul lives after death, but
yet that the souls of the children of God, Their usual bulls and indulgences
go for thousa^ds of years,
do and must remain so many years, or so many thousand years in Purgatory,
before they can be admitted to the joys of heaven. For the former, to wit,
such as defend both body and soul to dye together, and both at the last day to
be raised together, they are condemned (as you have heard) by the manifest
testimonies of the holy Scriptures: you may add if you please those words of
our Savior: Fear not them which kill the body, Luke 12.5
and have no power to kill the soul: if the Soul dye as well as the body, and
together with the body, how can it be said, that tyrants do kill the one and
not the other? 2. Cor 5.1, 4
How can the Apostle Paul desire no longer to be a Pilgrim from the Lord, by
remaining here in the body, but rather to be absent from the body, and to be
present with the Lord, unless the soul remain after death? with what is God
said to be present, if both soul and body be overcome with death? v. 1
or how can the Apostle say in the same place, that when this earthly
tabernacle is destroyed, we have a building or house, not made with hands, but
everlasting in heaven, unless the soul do continue to possess that heavenly
habitation? Our Savior Christ does promise eternal life and resurrection, as
two distinct things, and the one taking place before the other. Ioh. 6.39.40.
This (says he) is the will of the Father, that whosoever believes in the
son, should not perish but have everlasting life, and I will raise him up in
the last day. John 6.54.
And again, he that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has everlasting
life, and I will raise him up in the last day. And afterward, John 11.2.
I am the resurrection and the life, whosoever believes in me, though he were
dead, yet he shall live, and he adds, he that lives and believes in me,
shall not dye for ever.

The Saduces denied not only the resurrection, but also the immortality of the
soul: Our Savior does by one argument confute both their heresies, Mat. 22,
32 Exodus 3.6.
God is the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, God is not
a God of the dead, but of the living, therefore Abraham, Isaac and Jacob do
now live, Rom, 14.8.9,
and all the Saints shall live for ever. S. Paul says, whether we live, we
live unto the Lord, or whether we dye, we we dye unto the Lord, whether we
live therefore or dye, we are the Lords: for Christ therefore dyed and rose
again, and revived, that he might be the Lord both of the dead, and of the
quick. How can our savior be said, to be the Lord and governor of the dead,
unless some part of them do remain alive to be subject to his dominion.
Government and rule, do of necessity import, that there be also some to yield
obedience and submission. The Apostle shows, Heb. 12.22.23
who be the subjects of that heavenly king, to wit, the angels and the
spirits of just and perfect men, and he shows there the great dignity of a
Christian, who is joined as it were to the Angels and spirits of just men,
when he embraces that religion which they do continually reverence. But (say
they) if the soul do already enjoy eternal bliss in heaven, what needs
then a day of judgment? If it be judged already, to what purpose should there
be any further sentence? The day of judgment is ordained of God for the
uniting together both of body and soul, that as the elect have served God both
in body and soul, so they may receive everlasting joy and bliss both in body
and soul, and as the wicked have served the Devil both in body and soul, so
they receive eternal torments both in body and soul. And for this cause we
are taught to believe as an article of our faith, the resurrection of the body,
we do not say the resurrection of the soul, (for the soul does not dye) but
the resurrection of the flesh, or the resurrection of the body. The souls of
the^ which have dyed in the Lord, August. in John tract. 49.
do already enjoy perfect and happy rest. Nothing is wanting to the perfection
of their joys, but only the company of their bodies, and the company of their
brethren: for this cause (as some expound it) the souls of the Martyrs
attired with white robes, Apoc. 6.10. Anselmus in Apoc. Calu. in psychopanychia
do cry out in the Revelation, How long Lord, holy and true? as thirsting and
longing for the coming of Christ, to their full accomplishment. If in this
world a glorious sight do delight us never so much, yet is our joy increased
when our friend does behold the same together with us. And no doubt this is as
it were an accomplishing of the joys of the souls, already received into the
presence of Christ in the celestial paradise, when they shall receive the
company of their bodies, and the society of their fellow-brethren. An other
argument do the Anabaptists make, Genesis 2.17 Romans 6.23. Ezec. 18, 4 20.
drawn from the reward of sin. The stipend of sin is death, therefore (say
they) seeing the soul has sinned, the soul must needs dye: but death is in
the scripture taken sundry ways, sometimes for the separation of the soul
from the body: sometimes for the separation of God from the soul, 1. Tim 5.6.
as when the Apostle calls the widow living in wanton delights dead, though
she live that is alive in the body, but dead in the soul, sometime for the
horror of condemnation, as the Devil did receive the reward of sin, and yet
was not so extinguished, but that he does watch and go about continually, 1.
Pet. 5.^.
seeking whom to devour. In respect of the Saints of God, death is said to
have lost her sting, and to become as a drone be, as the Apostle speaks, 1.
Cor. 15, 56
O death where is thy sting? It was prophesied of our Savior Christ by the
Prophets, Praecipitabit mortem in aeternum, Esaias 25.8
He shall throw death headlong for ever. O Death I will be thy death, O hell I
will be thy destruction. They object further, that the death of the saints is
called a sleep. Act. 7, 60 Ioh. 11.11 2. These. 4.13
Stephen when he dyed fell a sleep. Lazarus being dead, was said to sleep: the
Apostle bids not to mourn for them that sleep, that is, be dead. If death
be a sleep, the^ can there not be in the soul any conceiving of joys,
until that sleep be awakened by the resurrection. It is very apparent, that
in that Phrase by a Synechdoche, that is given to the whole, which agrees but
to one part: when Job says, Ecce nunc in puluere dormio, Job 7.21
Behold I shall sleep now in the dust, and if you seek me in the morning I
shall have no being: did Job think that when he dyed, his soul should lie in
the dust? that were too gross to be once imagined. It is very apparent then,
that he means only that his body shall sleep in the dust, and that
figuratively, he does attribute that to the whole, which agrees but to a
part. That which they allege out of Solomon, that man and beast have both one
end, Eccl. 3.21:
who knows whether the spirit of man shall ascend upward, or the spirit of
beast descend down into the earth? is answered by those words which Solomon
does so often repeat in that book; Eccl. 1.2 Eccl. 2.11.
Vanity of vanities, and all is but vanity: he shows often in that Book,
what are the speeches of vain men, Eccl. 9.4
as after when he says: Better is a living dog then a dead Lion, for the
living know that they shall dye, but the dead know nothing at all: we must not
think that Solomon speaks this as of himself, but to show the affections of
worldlinges, who are led by vanity of vanities, and by nothing but vanity.
Tertul. lib, de resurr. carnis. Irenaeus lib. 9 aduersus haeresi

Chrysostom. hom, 28. in ^1. ad Hebr. August. lib, 12 de Ciuit. Dei, cap. 9


When the Fathers do sometimes affirm, that the souls are not crowned until
the day of resurrection, they mean of the perfect triumph, they deny not but
that the souls of the Saints are in peace and happy rest, but the perfect
triumph and crown of glory they made to be then, when the bodies being again
united to the souls, death should be utterly swallowed up in victory. The
argument which some do allege out of the Apostle, that because he says, If
the dead rise not again, 1. Cor. 15.19
we are of all men most miserable, v. 32
therefore before the resurrection, there is no joy, nor felicity is of no
force at all: for he says after, what will it profit me to fight with the
beasts at Ephesus, if the dead be not raised up? the bodies of the Saints
in this life suffer many injuries, reproaches, and often martyrdomes. Now
unless these bodies be hereafter to be advanced to glory, we are of all me^
most miserable, and again: although the soul do enjoy blessed rest, yet a
great part of the happiness does consist in the assurance of the expected
resurrection. Calvin in Phychopanychia, haec tractat, 1, vberrime.
It is further objected by them out of the Apostle to the Hebrews, all these
dyed not receiving the promises, but saluted the^ a far off. The Apostle
speaks there of the posterity of Abraham, Heb, 11.13
who lived a long time as Pilgrims in strange countries and did receive and
possess that land flowing with milk and honey, promised unto Abraham, that
they might be thereby taught to seek a better country in heaven, and although
they had the types and figures of Christ, v. 40
yet they had not Christ in their time exhibited in the flesh, because (as he
says after) God had provided a better thing for us, that they without us should
not be made perfect, if they had had the flourishing land of Canaan, and Christ
also in their time come in the flesh, then should they have seemed to be made
perfect without us. But God did provide better for us: as he gave unto them
that glorious figure of our rest in Christ: so in our time in this last age of
the world, he did exhibit the truth, even the coming of Christ himself to
perform the work of our redemption. They say further, that if the souls of
the departed be in heaven, Act. 9.36.40
then S. Peter should seem to do wrong to that good and charitable Tabitha,
to raise her up again from death, and so to bring her from a blessed life with
God, into a sea of all mischiefs: but it is evident that the mercy of God is
showed not only in time of glorification, Phil. 2.25
but also in time of sanctification. S. Paul accounts that Epaphroditus did
obtain mercy, when being sick, he was recovered again. And of himself he
says, that life was to him a loss, Phil. 1*22. and ^.21.
and death an advantage, yet is he content to remain longer in this life, so
that Christ may be magnified in his body. In that raising up of Tabitha, God
was glorified in the miracle, the poor were benefited by the preserving of so
charitable a woman full of alms and good works, and Tabitha her self had a
larger time in this life to set forth the paise of God, which was a thing that
the saints of God have sought for with earnest prayer* Psalm, 6.4, psalm. 30.9.
Esaias 38.18 psalm. 88.11. psalm. 115.17.
when the saints of God do pray in the scriptures for the le^gthning of their
days in this world; and do give this the reason of their petition, because the
dead cannot praise God, nor magnify his name, we must not imagine that they
thought that their souls in death should perish, or have no power to praise
God, but their meaning was, that the dead could not in this world by their
good example draw others to magnify God, and that public glorifying of God to
the edifying of their brethren was the thing which in desiring long life they
principally respected: but David (say they) does plainly affirm, psalm. 146.4.
that when ma^s breath goes out and he returns to the earth, then all his
thoughts perish: by those thougetes he means such imaginations* and devises
as they practiced in this life, and in an other place he says, The desires of
the ungodly shall perish, and Esaias, Esaias 33.
the Lord does scatter the counsels of the Gentiles. The Prophet David when he
has showed the judgments of God upon the wicked, Psalm. 49.14
that they lie in the grave, death gnaweth upon them, he adds in the next
verse, v. 15.
but God shall deliver my soul from the power of the grave, for he shall
receive me. And let this suffice against the opinion of the Catabaptists.

CHAP. XI. Of the future aestate of the soul against the Romanistes.
THe Church of Rome is an other way injurious to the souls of the departed,
they acknowledge that they live after death, but yet that there is no passage
for them into joy and rest, until such pains have been suffered, as their
Purgatory does require. This assertion is so plentifully confuted by so many
evident and plain testimonies of the scripture, set down in the beginning of
the tenth chapter, that I hope I shall not need to stand long upon it. There is
none unless he be wilfully obstinate) but he must needs acknowledge, that it
is a doctrine wholly injurious and repugnant to the mercy and justice of God,
and does blasphemously derogate from the merit of Christ his passion. It
stands best with the infinite mercy of God to grant a sound and perfect
benefit, as to forgive the guilt of our sins, so also to remit the
punishment. It can in no wise agree with the justice of God to forgive our
debts in Christ, and yet to exact the penalties thereof. And what is there,
that can more obscure and annihilate the most noble price of our redemption,
then to make it a ransom from the fault or blame, and no ransom from
punishment, That which Christ bare upon the Cross is taken away from us. Now
he bare the punishment of our sins as S. Peter says. 1. Pet. 2.24
He bare our sins in his body upon the tree, and by his stripes we are healed.
It is therefore the stripe and plague due for sin, that is, removed from us, and
the pains and griefs which depend upon sin, for a wound is not healed, until
the grief thereof be mittigated or abolished, Aug. de verbis domini super
Lucam. sermon 37.
very well says S. August. Christus suscipiendo poena^ and non suscipiendo
culpa^, and culpa^ deleuit and poenam, Christ by taking upon him our
punishment, and not taking upon him our fault, has taken away both fault and
punishment: when sins are forgiven, there may yet some afflictions remain to
the children of God, as there did to Adam and David, 2. Sam. 12.14.
and do daily to Gods elect, but those afflictions are fatherly instructions,
corrections, and trials of their faith, they are (...), such as proceed from
the love of God, Ephesians. 1.7.
they are not (...), punishments of vengeance, nor (...), punishments of
ransom. Al those tribulations which we suffer after remission of sin, are
like Cicatrices, signa vulneris curati non curandi, they are as scarres rather
signs of a wound cured, then of a wound to be cured, they differ as far from
punishments of vengeance as love does differ from hatred, (for they proceed of
love, Heb. 12.6
who^ the Lord loves he does correct) and they differ as far from
punishments of ransom, as East is from the West. There is no ransom able to
satisfy the justice of God against sin, but only the death and passion of
Jesus Christ: If any thing in man could have satisfied for sin, the Son of
God had not dyed.

The punishment of corrections and instructions, have their place then only
when there is time of repentance, and that is only in this life, as Saint
Hierom notes upon these words of Esaias, seek the Lord while he may be
found, call upon him while he is night, that is, says he, Dum estis in
corpore, Hierom. in Esaias. 55. V. 6.
dum datur locus paenite^tiae, et quaerite non loco sed fide, while ye be in
the body, and while place is granted for repentance, and seek him not in
place but in faith.

The ransom of Christ is so sufficient to all those which with true faith take
hold of it, that, as the Scriptures do show us plainly, Psalm. 32.2. Romans
8.33. Romans 8, ^. Esaias, 4^. 25. Micha
there is no imputation of sin, no accusation, no condemnation, and no
remembrance, and therefore (as upon these four benefits does necessarily
follow) they have a perfect deliverance both from fault and punishment. The
faith of David was, Psalm. 51.7.
that when he is washed of the Lord, he is become whiter then snow: And Saint
John appoints this only purgrtorie for the Church of God, 1, Ioh, 1, 1,
the blood of Jesus Christ to purge us from all sin, If their purgatory fire
should appertain to the Church, it must needs be either to the Church
militant, or to the Church triumphant (for there are but these two parts of the
Church, as the Apostle says, Col, 1, 20,
that Christ has reconciled and set at peace by the blood of his Cross, both
the things in earth, and the things in heaven) but it appertains not to the
Church militant (for then it should be on earth) nor to the Church triumphant
(for then it should be in heaven) therefore indeed it appertains to no part
of the Church of God.

There are but two kinds of joys and torments, the one temporal, the other
eternal: the temperall are al of this life, the eternal are those which
follow after this life, 2. Cor, 4, 18,
as the Apostle says, the things which are seen are temporal, the things
which are not seen are eternal.

The ordaining of a temperall joy, or a temporal punishment, after this life,
is a thing that the Scriptures do no where acknowledge. Our Savior Christ,
and likewise John the Baptist, Luke, 24, 47 Mark, 1, 4,
did preach repentance for forgiveness of sins, whereby they plainly
showed, that where there is no place for repentance, there is rhere no place
for forgiveness of sins: Math, 25, 10, 1, Cor, 9, 14,
but after this life there is no place of repentance, for then the gate is
shut, and the race of this life is already run, Cyp. says, qua^do istinc
excessus fuerit nullus paenitentiae totus, Cyprian co^tra Demetri.
etc. When man is departed out of this life, there is then no place of
repentance: therefore to them which dye without repentance, there is after this
life no hope of forgiveness of sins. Be faithful (says Christ) unto
death, Apoc. 2.10.
and I will give to thee the crown of life. Romans 10, 14,
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word preached: where there is no
place of hearing, there can there not be any place of increase of faith. Aug.
in Psalm, 3
It was well advised by Saint Augustine, tuus certe vltimus dies long abesse
non potest, ad hunc te praepara, qualis enim exieris ex hac vita, talis
redderis illi vitae, thy last day cannot be far off, prepare thy self unto
it, for in what manner thou shall depart out of this life, in the same estate
thou shall be restored to the life to come, Aug, ad, Hesy, 1 p^t, 80.
Qualis in die isto moritur, talis in die illo indicabitur, as man dies in
this world, so shall he be judged in the world to come.

They object that which is said of Saint Peter, that Christ going did preach
unto the Spirits which were in prison, once disobedient when the mercy of God
did wait in the days of Noah. 1, Pet. 3, 12,
The purpose of the Apostle is there to show that Christ did always in all
ages show his divine power, as namely when by Noah he preached to those
disobedient spirits, which are now in prison, that is in hell, as likewise in
Saint John, Apoc. 2, ^.7
the word prison is taken for hell: and if they take it for purgatory, they
are two ways condemned by their own doctrine: for first they confess that
not purgatory but hell, is the place for such as are infidels and rebellious,
and no members of the true Church. Now Saint Peter shows, that not the
family of Noah (which did represent the Church of God) but the other
disobedient and unfaithful people, were cast into this prison, and therefore
by the prison must needs be meant that place which appertains not to the
Church of God.

Secondly some of them seem to teach, that the Fathers in the old Testament
were in a Limbo patrum, but in no purgatory, and that purgatory only took
place after the coming of Christ. If that be their meaning, little reason then
have they to draw unto purgatory those things which are spoken of the people
in the old Testament, and much less to make such contrary manners of the
remitting of sin. The Apostle shows evidently, 1. These. 4.17
that in the end of the world, at the second coming of Christ, they which
shall be then found alive, shall be suddenly catched up to meet the Lord, and
remain ever with the Lord. The tenor of Gods justice is always one, and the
same against sin, and therefore it is no ways likely, that in so many
several ages of the world, there should be such far differing estates of
souls departed. They allege the fact of Judah, 2. Match. 12.14
who (when some of his me^ being slain in the battle, were found to have
under their garments, little relics of Idolatry) did send two thousand
groates to Jerusalem to offer for them, and this act is called a holy and
godly cogitatio^, because he made an expiation for the dead, that they might
be loosed from their sins. This may be answered with the same answer which
Saint Augustine makes against the Donatists, who urged out of the Machabees,
that it is lawful for a man to kill himself, because when Rhasis killed
himself, Match. 14.2 42, 43.
he is there twice commended to dot it generose or viriliter, nobly and
manfully. Saint Augustine tells them that that is a Scripture recepta ab
ccclesia non inutiliter si sobrie legatur, Aug. contra. 2. Gaudentii epist,
cap, 23, ^
received of the Church not unprofitably, if it be soberly read: It is then
soberly read, when no new doctrine is collected out of it, against the law
and the Prophets. The law appointed no such use of offerings to offer for them
which perished in Idolatry: how damnable the sin was, it may well appear by
the grievous punishment of Achan. Joshua. 7.24.
But we may answer rather with the judgment of that ancient expositio
symbols, attributed to Cyprian, that those books of the Machabees, are no
Canonical scripture. The words of the Author of those books do plainly
declare it, 2. Match. 15.39
If I have done well (says he) it is as I would, but if I have done slenderly
and barely, it is as I could: What more apparent proof can we desire, to
show that those books were not penned by the spirit of God? They seek some
defense by the words of of our Savior, that he which sins against the holy
Ghost, Math. 12.32. Luke 11.10.
shall neither be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come, therefore
(say they) there is some place of forgiveness to some sins after this life. But
our Savior speaks there of the fault or blame, and not of the punishment,
and his meaning is, that it shall never be remitted, neither in this life, which
is granted to sinners for repentance, nor in the world to come, when God shall
by his Angels separate the sheep from the goats. They rest further upon
that precept, Math. 5.25.
Agree with thy adversary quickly, whilst thou art in the way with him, least
the adversary give thee to the Judge, and the Judge to the Sergeant, and the
Sergeant cast thee into prison, verily I say unto thee, thou shall not come
our, until thou have paid the uttermost farthing. Sic exponit Chrysostom. de
vsitato circere magistratu.
The meaning of the place is, that we must in time cut off all occasions of
suites and contentions, But they wresting it to an allegory, make the prison to
be purgatory, the Judge to be God, the Sergeant to be his angels, and the
adversary to be the devil. This cannot possible be the true interpretation of
the place: for then must the words, agree with the adversary, be expounded,
agree with the Devil: and the paying the uttermost farthing in the prison, must
erect such a Purgatory, as leaves nothing at al to be performed by our
Savior Christ. Besides it can make nothing for them, for they teach
satisfaction to be made unto God, but in that text satisfaction is not required
to the Judge: again who sees not that lying in prison is not a satisfying of
the debt?

So likewise they wrest that place of Saint Paul, The fire shall try every
man's work, of what sort it is, 1, Cor, 3, 13.
some (as he has said before) do build upon the foundation gold, silver,
precious stones, timber, hay, or stubble, but every man's work shall be
manifest, for the day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by the
fire, and the fire shall try every man's work. The meaning of the Apostle is,
that God in his due time, by the examination of his word and spirit, shall try
the doctrines of all that do build any thing upon the foundation, some build
sound doctrine, signified by the gold, silver, and precious stones: others
build curious and frivolous matters, signified by the word hay and stubble, God
will by his word and spirit make manifest, and confirm the good and sound,
but the more vain he will consume and burn, and yet so, that the unskillful
builder shall be saved, but as by fire. This makes nothing for the
confirmation of their purgatory: For first the Apostle speaks of matter to
be tried in the fire, and not the persons, he says, that which the builders
have builded shall be tried. Secondly he says, that every man's work shall
be tried in that fire, even the gold and precious stones, the doctrines of the
Apostles themselves, and therefore cannot be meant of their purgatory, which
they themselves do make not to be a place for the perfecter sort. Thirdly the
Apostle speaks of a trying fire, and not of a purging fire. We read of a
trying fire, as the Wise man says, the fining pot is for silver, and the
furnace for gold, Prou. 17.3.
but the Lord tries the hearts. We read also of a fire to consume vices in
man, as the Lord says by the Prophet, what is chafe to wheat? Ierem. 23.29.
Is not my word as fire, and like the hammer that breaks the stone? And so
afflictions are an instrument whereby God does mortify sin in us, and as
with fire consume it. David says, Psalm. 66.12.
he passed through fire and water, meaning the afflictions of this life: But
of a purging fire, and that after this life, there is none such mentioned in
the holy Scriptures. Fourthly, it is most certain, that whether the fire be of
trial or purging, it is meant in that place of a fire in this life, because
the Apostle says, is shall reveal and make manifest every man's work: He
speaks no^ of a purgatory in some far removed center, but of such a place
where every man's work shall be made manifest. Fifthly, when at the last he
comes to the persons, he says, that the builders which builded hay and
stubble, yet because they held the foundation, they shall be saved, but as by
fire, he says, not by fire, but tanquam per ignem, as it were by fire, because
they shall not only be examined by the examination of the holy spirit (often
compared to fire) but shall suffer the loss and consuming of their vain
doctrines, and therefore be saved as by fire. Ambr. in Psalm 118. sermon. 20 Aug.
de ciuit. dei lib. 10. cap 25.
I deny not but some of the ancient Fathers have expounded this fire, to be
meant of a purging fire in the life to come, but they have named it to be only
that fire which shall be at the end of the world: They taught that by it God
would make a consummation of all things, to burn the dross, and to make the
pure more perfect, they thought it to be such a fire, Ambr. in Psalm 118.
as oportet omnes transire, sieve sit ille Johannes Euangelista, sieve Petrus,
all men must pass through it, whether it be that John the Evangelist, or
Peter. This opinion of the Fathers does nothing favor the Romish Catholics.

The like may be said of that prophecy of Malachie, who may endure when he
shall appear, Malach. 3, v, 2
for he shali be like a purging fire, and like fullers soap, he shall try the
silver, and fine the sons of Leui, and purify them as gold, that they may
bring offerings to the Lord in righteousness. The prophesiyng in the next
verse before of the coming of Christ, and of his messenger John the Baptist,
and the naming of the end of this purging fire, to be, that the people should
bring acceptable offerings unto God, as their faithful predecessors had done,
do plainly show that the Prophet does in that place speak of the power of
Christ at his first coming, when he shall baptize with his spirit, Math. 3.11.
having his fan in his hand, and purging his floor, gathering the wheat
into his barn, but burning the chafe with unquenchable fire.

Augustine does expound it of the general fire, Aug. de ciuita te dei. lib.
20. cap. 25,
at the second coming of Christ, but does never apply it to any purging fire,
taking place betwixt the departure of the soul out of this life, and that
final day of judgment.

Similitudes (as you see) are easily drawn into sundry expositions. But it
was well said of Aquinas, Aquin. opusculo septuagesimo sieve super Roetiu^ de
trinitate.
though in words somewhat barbarous, symbolica theologica non est
argumentatiua, when for points in Divinity there are no other proofs but
similitudes and metaphors, they rest upon slender arguments. Another such
figurative speech, they allege out of the Apostle that at the name of Jesus
every knee must bow, Phil. 2.10,
both of things in heaven, and of things in earth, and of things under the
earth: there by the things under the earth, they understand the souls in
purgatory. But the Apostle there sets down a general doctrine, that all
creatures whatsouer, are subject unto Christ, the good to be governed by his
spirit, and the bad to be bridled by his power. The bowing of the knee in Esaias,
Esaias, 45.23.
signifies the worshipping of God, and the bowing of the knee in the Epistle
to the Romans, Romans 14.10,
is taken for the appearing of all before the tribunal seat of Christ, where
shall also be judged even the devils, Jude. V. 6.
who (as Saint Jude says) are reserved in everlasting chains under
darkness, unto the judgment of the great day.

The like manner of speech we have in the Revelation, where it is said, that
every creature in heaven, and in earth, Apoc. 5.13.
and under the earth, and in the sea, did ascribe honor, and glory, and power
to him that sat upon the throne, and unto the Lamb, that is, so submit
themselves to God, that either his mercy or justice might be glorified in
them. So to the Philippians, the Apostle speaks of the sovereign power of
Christ over both elect and reprobate, as it was foreshadowed in the kingdom of
Solomon, whereof the Prophet says, Psalm. 72.9.
his enemies shall lick the dust.

CHAP. XII. The Conclusion concerning the twofold estate of souls once loosed
from their bodies.
WHen the soul is by death separated from the body, it is either received into
eternal happiness, as was the soul of Lazarus, Luke 16.22.
or else it enters into eternal torments, as did the soul of the unmerciful
rich glutton. Saint Augustine, although in some places he call the bosom of
Abraham only secretum quietis eius, Aug. de genes, ad liter, lib, 12, cap, 23,
the secret of his rest, into which the Fathers were gathered (for as in the
new Testament, Saints departing are said to be gathered to their head
Christ: so in the former times they were said to be gathered to Abraham the
Father of the faithful) yet elsewhere does Augustine at large define what this
bosom is, Aug, quest. Euang, lib. 2. cap, 38, tom, 4
sinus Abrahae est requies beatorum pauperum, quorum est regnum caelorum, in
quo post hanc vitam recipiuntur,

The bosom of Abraham is the rest of those blessed poor in spirit, Mar. 5.3,
to whom is promised the kingdom of heaven, into which kingdom they are
received when this life is ended: but the hell, which was possessed by the rich
glutton, he says is that Paenarum profunditas, quae superbos and
immisericordes post hanc vitam vorat, That very depth of all punishments, which
does swallow up the proud and unmerciful after this life. Gregory affirms
the very same, Gregor. in Euangel. homil. 40.
Quid Abrahae sinus nisi secretam requiem significat patrum: de qua veritas
dixit, multi venient ab orient and occidente, etc. What does the bosom of
Abraham signify, but that secret rest of the fathers, of which our Savior
speaks, Mat. 8.11.
Many shall come from the east and from the west, and shall sit down with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven. They do both interpret
the bosom to be the kingdom of heaven, and both also consent in this that
there are but two ways for the soul after this life, Augustine says, Aug.
de verbi* Apost. sermon. 18
Duae quippe habitationes sunt, vna in igne aeterno, altera in regno aeterno,
There are but two habitations, one in an everlasting fire, Aug. lib. 5.
Hypognost.
and the other in an eternal kingdom: and again, Primum fides catholica
diuina authoritate regnum esse credit coelorum secundum gehennam, tertium
ignoramus: imo nec esse in scripturis sanctis inuenimus: First the catholic
faith by the authority of Gods word believes, that there is a kingdom of
heaven, and secondly, a hell, Greg. in 7 cap. Job. lib. 8. cap. 8.
a third place we know not, neither do we find in the holy scriptures, that
there is any. Hereto agrees Gregory, Cum humani casus tempore, sieve sanctus,
sieve malignus spiritus egredientem animam claustro carnis acceperit, in
aeternum se cum sine vlla permutatione retinebit, vt nec exaltata ad supplicium
proruat, nec mersa aeternis suppliciis vltra ad remedium ereptionis ascendat:
when in the time of man's fall or death, either a good Angel or an evil Angel
shall receive his soul going out of the prison of his body, it does hold it
for ever (as it is holden it self) without any change, so that if it be
exalted, it cannot fall into punishment, neither can it ascend unto any remedy
of deliverance, if it be once drowned in eternal punishments. Mat 12.32
The scripture makes mention of two worlds, this world and the world to come,
Damascene shows, what is that world to come, Aeterna vita, Damascene de fide
Orthodoxa, lib. 2. cap. 1
aeternu^ supplicium seculum futurum, The world to come is either everlasting
life, or everlasting punishment.

Bernard likewise acknowledges but two places, Bernard. in sentent. cap. 9
when the soul has left the earth: Tria sunt loca, coelum, terra, infernus,
coelu^ habet solos bonos, terra mixtos infernus solos malos, There are three
places, heaven, earth and hell; heaven contains only the good, the earth
has good and bad mingled together, and hell has only the bad. Aug. de vera
religione, cap 38.
Augustine says, Omnia temporalia transeuntia mundus iste concludit, This
world is the place that contains all temporal and transitory things, the
things of the life to come, 2 Cor. 4.18
whether joys or pains, are not temporal but eternal. But some may say, how
comes it then to pass, that Augustine prayed for his mother Monica being
departed, and Ambrose prayed for Theodosius, and diverse others of the ancient
Fathers made rehearsal of the dead in their prayers and supplications: if
either the departed be in torments unrecoverable, or in bliss immutable, what
need there any prayers to be made to God for them.

Those ancient fathers did pray for the departed, not as having any conceit of
Purgatory or temporal punishments, endured by the souls departed, but as
having an eye to the resurrection, which was yet to ensue, and neither to be
hastened, nor to be deferred by any prayers, and yet they prayed to testify
their hope, as S. Paul prayed for Onesiphorus, 2. Tim. 1.18
that the Lord would grant unto him, that he may find mercy with the Lord in
that day, meaning (as some expound it) the day of resurrection, he had a
further respect in his prayer, then either to his life, or to his death, and so
had the fathers a further respect, then to the present estate of the souls:
for as for their present estate, they did not doubt of their happy rest.
Augustine, when he prayed for his mother said, Credo quodiam feceris quod te
rogo, Aug. confess. lib. 9 cap. 12
sed voluntaria oris mei approbo Domine, non respondebit, illa se nihil delere,
sed respondebit demissa debita sua ab eo, cui nemo reddet, quod pro nobis no
debens reddidit, I believe that thou have already granted what I request, but
good Lord accept the voluntary words of my mouth, she shall not say that she
owes nothing, but she will answer that her debtes are forgiven of him, to
whom no man can recompense that which he has freely done for us. And so
likewise although Ambrose prayed for Theodosius, yet he doubted not but that
he was in eternal glory, Ambros. de obitu Theod.
for so he affirmed Absolutus crimine fruitur nunc Theodosius luce perpetua
tranquilitate diuturna, sanctorumque caetibus gloriatur, Theodosius having his
sin remitted, does even now enjoy perpetual light, and a lasting rest, and
does triumph in the company of the saints: by the name of prayers were often
signified thanksgiuings, 2. Tim. 2.22 psalm. 14.4
as indeed calling upon the name of God, is taken often in the scriptures for
the whole service of God. They had their commemoration of the dead, especially
at the ministration of the Lords supper, which they took to be Eucharistia, a
sacrament of thanksgiving, and as Chrysostom notes, what was done for the
dead, was done most in Hymns, do testify their joy and thankfulness, Quid
sibi volunt Hymni? nonne glorificamus Deum, Chrysostom, ad popul. Antioch. hom. 70
and gratias illi agimus, quia iam defunctum coronauit? haec omnia sunt
gaudentium? What means Hymns or songs? do we not glorify God and give
thanks unto him, that he has already crowned a soul departed? Al these are
effects of hearts rejoicing. And further in the commemoration of the dead,
there was especially a rehearsing of the resurrection of our Savior by
himself, and all the Saints by him, to show that that was the time which they
most respected, and if they prayed for forgiveness of the sins of the
departed, the meaning of their petition was, that their sins should not be
imputed unto them in the resurrection. Vide August. in Io. tract. 49
How lawfully they might make that prayer. I will not now dispute. It suffices
here to have showed that they did not acknowledge any temporal torments after
this life, appertaining to such as have ended their days in the faith of
Christ, and that the secret rest which they placed in Abraham's bosom, did not
signify unto them a sleep or idle rest, but a place of joy and happiness,
Ioh, 8, 56
that as it was Abraham his joy in this world to see the days of Christ, so it
is a far more infinite felicity to him and his faithful seed, this
transitory life being ended, to behold and fully to enjoy the presence of our
Redeemer in the eternal kingdom of heaven. S. Augustine says, that he does
fully believe that his sweet friend Nebridius is in Abraham's bosom, Aug.
confess, lib. 9.
he shows presently what that is, Pomt spirituale os adfontem tuum, and
bibit quantum potest sapientiam pro auiditate sua sine fine foelix, He sets
his spiritual mouth to thy fountain O Lord, and drinks wisdom to the full,
according to his chiefest desire, being happy without end.

This happy estate of the souls of Gods saints is at large laid open by the
manifold testimonies of the holy scriptures in the beginning of my tenth
Chapter, as likewise in the whole course of that and the chapter following. By
the word of God, as by the touchstone of all truth, the ancient fathers do
desire that their writings should be examined, what is agreeable thereto, to
be received, and what not, to be rejected. Augustine says, Aug. in psalm. 57.
Auferantur e medio chartae nostrae, prodeat in medium codex Dei, Let our
writings be laid aside, and let place be given to the book of God. He also
names the old and new Testament, Duo vbera Ecclesiae, The two breasts of the
Church, out of which all sound and perfect truth must be drawn and derived
unto us. In them we find but only these two places or habitation, for the
souls once separated from the bodies, to wit, for them which dye in carnal
security (as did the rich glutton) hell torments, those which are spoken of in
Deuteronomie, fire is kindled in my wrath, Deuteronomy. 32.24.
and my wrath does burn to the bottom of hell: those which are called by
Solomon, the Chambers of death, and by Esaias a tophet prepared deep and large,
Esaias 30.33
the burning whereof is fire and much wood, and the breath of the Lord a fire
of brimstome to kindle it, and by our Savior unquenchable fire, where the
worm never dies, Mar. 9.44
and the flame never goes out, And in the Revelation. A lake burning with fire
and brimstone, which is the second death of those torments: Apoc. 21.^.
Abraham said to the rich man, Luke 16.
(...), There is such a gulf and distance placed betwixt them, and the joys
of the godly, that there is no hope of passage from one to an other, whereby is
signified, that the pains are unrecoverable, easelesse, endless, and
hopeless. But for them which close up their eyes in a true faith, and
unfeigned repentance, John 16.22.
there are prepared eternal joys in the kingdom of heaven, where the
knowledge, will, integrity, and all the powers of the soul, Luke 20.36
shall have such a correspondencie and conformity to the will of God that they
shall be equal with the blessed Angels, and where we shall have the fruition
of Gods presence, wherein does consist the fullness of joy. For as the Apostle
does make this as greatly to augment the vengeance that is showed on them,
which shall be punished with everlasting perdition, 2. These. 1.9
because it shall be from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his
power, so on the other side, this is named as a high degree in our heavenly
felicity, that as here we see in a glass, 1. Cor. 13, 12.
so there we shall see face to face, and as here we know in part, so there we
shall know even as we are known. It was well said of an ancient Father, In
hac vita multa videmus quae non habemus, Greg. 1 9. moral. 2.
in alia idem est videre quod habere, In this life we see many things which
we have not in possession, but in the life to come, to see and to possess are
both one. Aug. in psalm. 26,
Augustine says. Quicquid praeter Deum est, dulce non est, quicquid mihi vult
dare Dominus meus, auferat totum, and se mihi det, Whatsoever is besides God,
that cannot be pleasant, whatsoever God would bestow on me, let him take it
away all, and give himself unto me. In that enjoying the presence of God in
the life to come, there is all sufficiency of delights, as is taught in the
Revelation of S. John, Revel. 21.22.
That City has no need of the Sun, nor Moon to shine in it, for the glory
of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. And there is also
all continuance and eternity, Revel. 21.4
as is said in the same Prophecy, There shall be no more death, nor sorrow,
nor pain, but the Lord shall wipe away all tears from our eyes, unto the which
glorious and eternal rest, 1. Pet. 2.24.
the Lord Jesus (who bare our sins in his body on the tree, and is the
shepherd and Bishop of our Souls) bring both our bodies and souls happily
and speedily, Apoc. 22, 20,
even so come Lord Jesus. Now unto the king everlasting, immortal, invisible,
1. Tim. 1.17.
unto God only wise, be honor and glory for ever and ever.

FINIS.
TWO SERMONS OF THE DVties of our thankefulnes toward GOD: Preached at
Camerwell in Surrey, the xxii. of May, 1603. BY SIMON HARVVARD. And now by him
published, as not unfit for this time, wherein GOD has so graciously visited
us, and so plentifully powered down his blessings upon us.

LONDON Imprinted by John Winds 1604

TO THE RIGHT worshipful, Sir Edmond Bowyer Knight, one of the King his
Majesty's Justices of Peace, in the County of Surrey, and to the virtuous Lady,
the Lady Katherine Bowyer, his loving wife many joyful and happy years.
ALthough (Right worshipful) at my last being with you, the principal cause,
why I chose that text of thanksgiving (being a part of the Psalm which was read
in the church that Sabbath) was to stir up our minds to render hearty praise
unto God, as well for the peaceable, happy, and joyful entrance of our most
Gracious Sovereign Lord the King his Majesty into the possession of these his
Realms and dominions, as also for the assured hope which we may every way
conceive of having the truth of the Gospel of Christ, by his Graces religious
care, to be most firmly established amongst us, and likewise to declare by
that text, what duties we owe unto the Almighty, for these and all other his
inestimable benefits: yet seeing I do now commit to Press a little Treatise
concerning the Soul and Spirit of Man, and that it is for the gifts and
graces of the soul, for which we are bound especially to render praises unto
God, I have therefore thought it not impertinent to add to the end of my
Description of the Soul those two Sermons, which I lately preached at
Camerwell, as a fit conclusion of the Discourse before penned. In setting them
down in writing, I have (as near as I could) delivered the very same which
then I spoke. Only I have thought it best for the ease of the reader, to place
in the margent the places and verses of the textes and authorities, which in
the uttering of them, I did think it more convenient usually to name, that
such as were present and stored with the Scriptures might the better make some
profitable use thereof. In the publishing of these Sermons I have endeavored
(according to the talent granted to me) generally to benefit my Country. In
consecrating them particularly as a small token of my dutiful affection
toward your Worships, my purpose only is to show some thankful remembrance
of your late savor and kindness, in affoording me your good assistance
concerning a motion made by my best wel-willers for the benefit of me and mine.
The praises and thanksgiuings which are due unto God, do nothing disanull that
tha^kfulnes which we owe unto men, as instruments appointed of God for our
good. Nay, rather by a humane gratitude as by a hand God does lead us to the
performance of that which is due to his divine Majesty. For very well may be
framed of it, the self same argument which the Apostle does make concerning
love: 1. Ioh. 4.20.
He which is not thankful to man whom he sees, how can he be thankful to God
whom he has not seen? It is recorded of Thales the Miletian, one of the seven
wise men of Greece, Stob. Sermon. 78
that when studying Astronomy, and looking up toward the stars, by for
getting himself, he fell into a ditch, a foolish and simple maid could tell
him, that it was a just reward for such a one as would so contemplate upon the
heavens, that he should in the mean time forget his own feet. To avoid the
danger of this reproof, in the midst of these my meditations of our heavenly
and spiritual thankfulness toward God, I have endeavored somewhat to keep my
self from falling into the pit of humane ingratitude, and to present unto you
this little pledge of my dutiful remembrance, which although being two
Sermons, they might well have borne to either of you a several Dedicatory, yet
for as much as they were both made at one time, when I came to congratulate
your worships for the late favors worthily bestowed upon your deserts, and do
both of them contain one matter, being parts one of another, and as it were,
not two, but one body; I do here present them jointly unto you, nothing
doubting but that you will yield the same approbation to them being Printed, as
you vouchsafed to give unto them when they were first before you uttered, or as
you have usually affoorded to such other Treatises as I have heretofore
published under your names. God grant your Worships long to remain either a
happy comfort to the other in this life; and in the end accomplish your long
felicity with an eternal bliss in his kingdom.

From Tanridge this 31. of December. 1603. Your Worships to be commanded,
SIMON HARWARD.

THE FIRST SERMON of Thanksgiving.
PSALM. 107. V. 21. Let them celebrate before the Lord, his goodness, and his
wonderful works before the children of men. Ver. 22. And sacrificing the
sacrifice of praise, let them tell forth his doings with gladness.


THis most Divine Psalm (Right Worshipful and beloved) does very notably
describe unto us the providence of God, in the government of the world, and
does on the other side put us in mind what thankfulness is required in man,
for whose benefit and comfort, the works and affairs of this world are in
such wonderful manner managed and ordered. The Psalmist delivers five
especial examples of Gods providence. V. 4.
First of exiles and pilgrims, when as they do wander in deserts, and are in
most extremities, hungry, and thirsty, and their souls fainting in them, the
Lord does often hear them when they cry unto him, and bring the^ to a city
where they may dwell. The second example is of captives, who when for their
sins, V. 10.
they lie fast bound in miseries and irons: if they earnestly call for Gods
merciful aid, the Lord does bring them out of darkness and the shadow of death,
and break their bands asunder. V. 17.
The third proof of Gods provident mercy is, when foolish men are by some
sickness plagued for their iniquities, when their soul does refuse all food and
sustenance, and that they are now at deaths door, if in their misery they
cry unto the Lord, the Lord does send forth his word and heal the^, and
deliver them from the pit of corruption. The fourth spectacle of Gods goodness
is in ship-men, V. 23.
who go down into the Seas, and occupy their business in great waters, when
they are in most peril, mounting up to heaven, and falling down again to
hell, when they stagger, and be at their wits end, if then they cry unto the
Lord in their troubles, then sends he a gracious calm, and brings them to
the haue^ where they would be. The fifth, as it were a theater of Gods
providence, is in the altering and changing, not only of dumb creatures,
bringing some times rivers into dry deserts, V. 33.
and sometime, dry grounds into springes or ponds of water: sometimes making
a fruitful land barren, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein: and
sometimes so blessing the land, V. 40.
that men may sow and plant to yield the^ fruits of increase: but also in
altering the estates of men: sometimes pouring out contempt upon princes, and
sometimes lifting up the poor out of his misery, and making him households like
a flock of sheep. The Verse which now I have chosen to entreat of, is called
versus amaebaeus, a verse that does answer by turns, because in the end of
the four first histories, it is added still as a conclusion of the history,
to show unto us what use we must make of Gods gracious deliverances, not to
pass by them as it were with closed eyes, but to stir up both our selves and
others to magnify the name of God, for these his unspeakable mercies. The
Psalmist may seem to direct this his Psalm, only to a thankfulness for
corporal benefits, but no doubt in the same, he does include also the
spiritual blessings of God. When he speaks of the miseries of man, he
shows the causes to be their sins, as speaking of captives lying in misery
and iron: V. 11.
he says, it was because they rebelled against the word of the Lord, and
lightly regarded the counsel of the most high. And after of sickness, foolish
men are plagued (says he) for their wickedness and iniquities. V. 17.
And after of barrennes of soil, A fruitful la^d (says he) he makes barre^,
V. 34.
for the wickedness of them that dwell theerin. As then he notes the cause of
all calamities to be sin: So when he celebrateth God his gracious
deliverance, he does undoubtedly include the removing of the cause as well as
the effect, and does exhort us to praise God for the remission of our
transgressions. If the Israelites were bound to praise God for their
deliverance from the thraldom of Egypt, and generally all others, which are
the redeemed of the Lord, as it is here said in the second verse, whom he has
redeemed from the hands of the oppressors, how much more ought they to be
thankful, which are delivered from the tyranny of the devil, Romans 16, 2^
when the God of glory and peace does tread down Satan under our feet? If
they did owe thanks, which from wandering in the wilderness were brought to this
happiness, to have at the last cities to dwell in, what thanks is required of us,
who from wandering in the by-pathes of sin and error, are by our heavenly Joshua
Christ Jesus brought home to be citizens with the Saints, Ephe. 2.19.
and of the household of God in this life, and heirs by hope of the celestial
Jerusalem in the world to come? Apoc. 21.2.
If prisoners give al humble praise, when they are delivered from their
darkness, misery and irons, how much more then ought we to be thankful, when
by the glorious triu^ph of our Savior Christ, Osea. 13.14. 1. Cor. 15.55
we are delivered from the dungeon of the grave, hell, death, and damnation? If
they have great cause of tha^kfulnes, which have escaped the dangers of sickness
and infirmities, then much more are they to be grateful, who by the heavenly
Physician our Lord Jesus, are cleansed and cured of their sins, which are
indeed the original causes of their diseases and maladies. For this
deliverance does the kingly Prophet David, Psalm. 103.3.
first and principally praise Gods holy name, because he forgave all his sins,
and healed all his infirmities. By temporal benefits the weakness of our nature
is taught to rise up to the consideration of spiritual blessings, and (if we
be not wilfully blind) we may easily and plainly conceive, that if corporal
gifts are to be acknowledged to be the free blessings of God, as we are taught
to pray, give us our daily bread, then much more must we confess all
spiritual benefits to be the free gifts of God, bestowed upon us by the mercy
of God, in, and through his son Christ Jesus. If we cannot merit things
needful for the body, much less can we merit the ransoming of the soul. If
we are bound to praise God for deliverances appertaining to the body, then by
good reason, as much as the soul is more precious then the body, so much more
ought we to be thankful for the soul then the body. The Psalmist in this
Amaebaean verse so often repeated in this Psalm, does upon every particular
deliverance from either banishment, or prison, or sickness, or tempest, still
exhort the party delivered, that he will thereby rise up to a general
consideration of the goodness of God, and of all his wonderful works, which
he has wrought for mankind. In these two verses which I have red unto you,
there are two especial things offered to our consideration. The division of
the text.
First for what we are to celebrate and magnify the name of God, to wit, for
his goodness, and for his wonderful works. Secondly how we must show our
thankfulness, to wit, first both before the Lord, and before the children of
men: and secondly by offering the sacrifice of tha^ksgiuing, and telling forth
his works with gladness.

The goodness of God (as is taught by our Savior) is the first fountain of our
salvation. Ioh. 3.16.
So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son. In the causes of
our rede^ptio^, we must not begin at our selves, or at our own merits, nay, we
may not begin at the death and passion of Christ Jesus, but we must begin at
the eternal love of God, who sent his only begotten Son, and therefore
bless that good God, Ephe. 1.4.
which has chosen us to be saved before the foundation of the world was laid.
The goodness of God in our redemption appeared to be greater toward mankind,
then it was to the very Angels. When the Angels fell from God, they were never
restored, but (as S. Jude says) they are reserved in everlasting chains under
darkness to the judgment of the great day: but when man was fallen, Jude. v.
6.
the Lord of his goodness gave a comfortable promise of the seed of the woman,
Genesis 3 15
which should bruise the power of Satan. The Angels which continued steadfast, do
continually praise God, and are ready to execute his will, Psalm. 103.21
but of Gods goodness, they are yet ministering spirits to serve for their use,
that shall be heirs of salvation. Heb. 1.14.
And therefore David, Psalm. 34.7.
when he has said, that the Angels of the Lord do pitch round about the^
that fear him, he adds in the next verse, O taste and see how good the Lord
is, blessed is the man that puts his trust in him. A blessing it is to be
guarded by me^, a greater blessing to be guarded by Princes, but what
exceeding favor is this, when God does vouchsafe to guard us with his holy and
blessed Angels? Though in some respects David does acknowledge man to be
somewhat inferior to the Angels, yet in this he says, Psalm. ^.5
that God has crowned man with glory and worship, in that he has made him an
Emperor over all his works, and put all things in subjection under his feet,
not only the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, and whatsoever
walks through the paths of the seas, but as he says before in the same
Psalm, even the heavenly Creatures: when I consider the heavens, v. 3.
the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars which thou have ordained,
the^ say I, O Lord, what is man that thou art so mindful of him, or the son of
man, that thou so regardest him? This use we must make of all Gods Creatures,
so to behold in the^ the goodness of God toward mankind that we be thereby
stirred up to praise Gods holy name. The horse and mule can behold the heavens
to be high, bright and lightsome. The hog sees the earth to be a place to
walk upon, the so to feed upon. The Peacocke conceiueth a glorious show in
his variable colored feathers: many dumb Creatures do exceed man in the
sharpenes of smelling, when we behold either the glistering azured sky, or
the beautiful flowers and fruits of the earth, if we go no further then
seeing, smelling and tasting, the^ are we no better then the brute and
unreasonable creatures: but we must in all those things go further: we must
behold therein the mighty power of God, that we may be stirred up to fear
him, and the infinite goodness of God, that we may learn to love him, and then
are we endued with true spiritual wisdom, as David concludes in the end of
this psalm: Psalm. 107.43
Who so is wise will consider and ponder these things, and he shall understand
the loving kindness of the Lord. The goodness of God does many ways shine out in
the creation of man. He made him (as Zorastes said) Pulcherrimum naturae
spectaculum, the most beautiful spectacle of nature, not going groue-long
toward the earth, but with his face lifted up to heaven, to signify that his
mind should always be on heavenly things: He gave unto him a soul endued
with understanding, and made after his own image: He framed him to be as it
were a little world, and an abridgement of all his creatures, whereupon some
have given him the name of Microcosmus, some of Omnigena Creatura, because he
takes part of al, and contains the principal parts of all: He has
substance, as have stones, life as have plants, sense as have beasts, and
understanding as have angels. When the Roman Pollio would have drowned one of
his slaves in a fury, because he had broken a fair Crystal glass, Augustus
did well forbid him, and said, Homo cuiusuis conditionis, si nulla alia
ratione, nisi quia est homo, totius mundi vitris preciosior, A man of any poor
estate whatsoever, if it be for no other cause, but only because he is a man,
is far more precious then all the glasses of the whole world: but especially
the goodness of God did appear in the renewing of our hearts, by his grace
and holy word. 1. Pet. 1.3
That does S. Peter call the abundant mercy of God: Blessed be God the father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abou^dant mercy, has begotten
us again to a lively hope, by the resurrection of Christ Jesus.

That does S. Bernard call a greater work then the Creation of us, Bernard in
Cantic.
or of the whole world. When God made the world only, he spoke the word, and
it was done. Let there be a light, Genesis 1.3.9.
and there was light; let the waters be gathered into one heap, and they were
gathered, whereby was made the sea, and the dry land was called earth: Let
there be two great lights in the firmament, and there was straightway a Sun
to rule the night. Bern.
But quam multa dixit? quam multa fecit? quam multa perp^ssus est? How many
things has God spoken? how many things has God done? how many things has he
suffered to renew the heart of man? If we should receive the creatures ordained
for the sustenance of our bodies, and not be renewed and fed inwardly in our
souls, our estate were infinite thousand times worse then the estate of brute
beasts: For they are fed to perish temporally, but we should be fed to perish
eternally. The seed of our new birth, 1. Pet. 1.23.
to wit, the word of God is by an earnest acclamatio^, pronounced by the
Psalmist, to be one of the greatest tokens of Gods favor and goodness toward
his elect. For when he has declared that God gave his word unto Jacob, Psalm.
147.20.
his statutes and ordinances unto Israel, he cries out; He has not dealt so
with every nation, neither have other people the knowledge of his laws. There
are two especial properties which do greatly extol and magnify the goodness
of God. First, that it is free, not in respect of our deserts: but in respect
of Gods abundant mercy. Secondly, that it is endless and perpetual. Esaias.
43.25.
The freeness thereof is set out by the Prophet. I, even I, am he that puts
away thine iniquities for mine own sake, and will remember thy sins no more.
And again a little after: Esaias. 48.9. V. 11.
For mine own sake I will be gracious, and for mine own glory, I will refrain
mine anger, and will not destroy thee. Propter me, propter me faciam; It is for
my self, and mine own sake that I will do this for thee. There was no cause
in the Jews, that God should choose them as elect vessels, to carry the treasure
of his word, and to pass by so many other nations more rich, and more
populous. Neither is there any cause in us, that we should have the Gospel in
peace and quietness preached unto us, which blessing is denied to many mighty
nations about us. The cause is only in the free goodness of God, wherewith he
embraces his elect and chosen: and therefore we may well say of our nations,
as Esaias said of the Jews of his time; Isai. 1^.
If the Lord had not left unto us a remnant, we had been as Sodom and
Gomorrha. Such is our unthankfulness for Gods manifold blessings, such is our
carelessness and dullness in prayer, such is our disobedience, and contempt of
God his holy word, that unless there were a remnant of God his elect people
amongst us, it could not have been but long before this time, we should have
had the judgment of Sodom, and the cities adjoining, in full measure powered
upon us. But God has a remnant of his elect amongst us, and in respect of his
free love toward them, he does still continue his goodness toward us. God be
eternally praised for that remnant of his elect, God grant us to be of that
number, God increase them daily, God so continue and multiply them, that the
truth of his holy Gospel may still remain to us, and to our posterity for
ever. A good hope we have in the second property of Gods goodness, to wit, in
the continuance and perpetuity thereof. Saint James does teach us, Iam. 1.13.
that with the Lord there is no change nor shadow of change. If we cast off the
kindness of men, we can yet have no full assurance of the continuance of their
benefits, because the hearts of men are variable. Math. 21.8.
They which this day do cut down bows to strew in the way, may to morrow cry,
away with him, and crucify him. But with God, (with whom there is no change,
nor shadow of mutability) every experience of Gods goodness, is a sufficient
argument of the perpetuity thereof, as the king and Prophet says, Psalm. 61.3.
Thou Lord have been my refuge and strong tower against the enemy, therefore I
will dwell in thy tabernacle for ever, and seek my succor under the shadow of
thy wings. Whom God does love, John. 13.2. Romans 11.27.
he does love to the end, and the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance. It is his own voice by the Prophet. Isay. 54.8.
In a moment of time have I hid my face from thee, but in mine everlasting
mercy will I gather thee again, says the Lord thy redeemer. When David does
in thankfulness of mind, extol the goodness of God, Psalm. 136.
he does principally praise and magnify the perpetuity thereof. And therefore
in his Psalm of thanksgiving, as never sufficiently satisfied with the
consideration thereof, he does still in every verse repeat, the mercy of God
endures for ever. Many causes we give for the abbridging and withholding
thereof: but the Lord being patient long suffering, Esaias. 30.18.
does still wait for our repentance. Why will ye die, O ye house of Israel?
Thus says the Lord, I will not the death of a sinner, Ezech. 18.31.
but if he repent he shall live: We have many ways offended, but God his
goodness does yet still enlarge it self toward us: We are all as dry
stubble, yet the Lord does not burn us up: we are barren trees, yet the Lord
does not cut us down: we are all unfruitful ground: yet the Lord does make
his Sun to shine, and rain to fall upon us. We have often deserved Gods
loving countenance to be turned from us, but we may thankfully say with the
Prophet: Misericordia est Domini, Ier^m. Iam. 3.22.
quod non consumimur: It is the mercy of the Lord, that we are not consumed.
This perpetuity of God his goodness, is our chiefest comfort in all
afflictions and distresses. For thereby though we be killed all the day long,
yet with the Apostle, we are assured, that neither life, nor death, nor
principality, nor power, Romans 8.38.
nor any other thing shall separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus.
Though God punish us, yet we do chearefully with Job bless the name of God,
assuring our selves, that whom the Lord does love, he does correct, Hebr. 12.^.
and scourges every son whom he does receive. If we be thankful only in
prosperity, we love not God, but we love the prosperity: but herein appears
the trial of our love, when we say with Job, Job. 1^.15.
Although God kill me, I will put my trust in him: And do with the Apostles,
rejoice that we be accounted worthy to suffer any rebuke for the name of
Christ Jesus. Act. 5.41.
It is good for me (said David) that I have been afflicted, that I might learn
thy statutes. Before I was afflicted, Psalm. 119.71. and 67.
I went astray, but now, O Lod, I learn thy commandments. Psalm. 112.4.
Unto the godly (says David) there does arise up light in darkness. In the
midst of all troubles they have a sweet feeling of Gods goodness. If
sickness or any grievous calamity do happen unto the wicked, all their joy
and comfort is utterly driven away. The candle of the wicked (as Solomon does
call it) is soon put out. Prou. 24.20.
But the godly and faithful, though they be often ouer-whelmed with darkness
and misery: yet their light does still arise, Ioh. 16.22.
the sweet feeling of the mercy of God in Christ, does never depart from
them. They are assured that all things will work for the best to them that
love God, Romans 8.28,
they acknowledge that all their sorrows and sicknesses are nothing so great as
their manifold follies and trespasses have deserved, and as the palm tree, the
more weight is hanged upon it, the better it is said to prosper, so the
greater calamities they endure, the more their faith does flourish, and the
more zealous they are in prayer: as the Psalmist here affirms: Psalm. 107. Ve.
19.
They cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he delivers them out of their
distress. O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and
declare his wonderful works before the children of men. The second thing for
which the Prophet does here exhort us to praise God, is the effect of his
goodness, to wit, his wonderful deliverances in the midst of all distresses.
Ve. 20.
He says in the verse going before, that God sends forth his word and
heals them, and delivers them from all their corruptions. That word
(whereof he speaks) is the providence of God, wherewith God does command the
creatures to be good unto us. For it is not the meat that nourishes, nor the
clothes that give warmth, nor the plants and herbs that give health: but the
power of God working by them. Our Savior alleges the doctrine in
Deuteronomy, Mat. 4.4. Deuteronomy. 8.3.
Man lives not by bread only, but by every word of the mouth of God: meaning
that providence of God, whereby God does bless the means, and command the
sustenance to be comfortable unto us. By this word God made men stronger, and
of longer life before the flood, when they did feed upon herbs and fruits,
then they were in the ages ensuing, Genesis 1.29. Genesis 9.3.
when they had the use of flesh and stronger nourishments. Number. 6.3.
By this word Sampson, though he were a Nazarite (and therefore did abstain
from wines and strong drinks (was yet by weaker food the strongest man in all
Israel. By this word Daniel and the three young men, Dan. 1.12.
though they were homely fed with pulse to eat, and water to drink, were yet
in better plight then all the Nobles in the Court of Nabuchadnezar. Ioh. 6.5.
Math. 14.16.
By this word our Savior Christ did ordinarily sustain his disciples, and
sometimes miraculously relieve others by loaves made of barley, which is
acknowledged by Galen to be a grain of very small nourishment, Hieron. in
Ezech. cap. 4.
and Saint Hierome does call it iumentorum cibum, A thing in that country
given most usually to cattle. By this word God does continually bless his
creatures to the benefit of them that fear him, and give unto them that
staff of bread and strength of nourishment which he threatens in his law,
Leuit. 26.
Agge. 1.6.
that he will take it away from the wicked: and does then indeed take it away,
when (as the Prophet says) they eat and are not filled, they drink and are
not satisfied, they cloth themselves, and have no warmth: and what wealth they
get, it is put in a broken bag: by that hole in the bag he means Gods
curse in the bottom, whereby in shall be at last vainly wasted, that as it
never came from God, so it shall run all to the Devil. No further comfort can
we expect by God his creatures, but as he does vouchsafe to bless them to our
uses, and therefore our principal care and endeavor ought to be, not so much
to obtain the creatures themselves, as to procure the good favor of God,
which may bless all unto us. And when are any way helped and relieved, 2. Chro
^^
not to attribute our recovery to the outward means (as was Asa his fault in
the disease of his feet, to attribute more to the help of physic then to
God) but to give the glory to God, and with a thankful heart to celebrate
before the Lord his goodness, and to declare his wonderful works before the
sons of men. The Psalmist does here call it a wonderful work, when the Lord
does at those times send help, when the matter does seem to be even past
help in the judgment of man. For in all his Histories he shows the
extremity of the dangers before the Lord does set to his helping hand. God
preserves exiles and strangers, when wandering in the desert, they are hungry
and thirsty, Psalm. 107.5.
and their soul fainting in them. He delivers prisoners when they are
brought to such misery, V. 12.
that they have none to help them. Ver. 38.
He heals the diseased, when they are past receiving any sustenance, when (as
the Psalmist speaks) their soul abhors all manner of meat, and they are
even at deaths door. He helps such as are tossed in tempests, Ver. 26.
when the billows lift them up to heaven, and throw them down again to hell,
so that they stagger like drunken men, and be at their wits end. Thus still
does the Prophet make the goodness of God most to shine, when men being fallen
into succorlesse distresses, God with his outstretched arm does then presently
work a wonderful deliverance. Genesis 21.17
When Abraham at the commandment of God had sent away Agar with bread and a
bottle of water, she being come to Beersheba, wanting water, and her bottle
being spent, she cast her young child under a tree, and went a bows shoot
off, because she would not see if dye, but it is said there, that God heard the
voice of the child, and said to the mother, Arise, I will make of him a great
nation, and God opened her eyes to see a well, whereby both she and her child
were relieved; the child being an infant, had no understanding to pray, yet it
is said, that the Lord heard the voice of the child; when things come to
extremity, Psalm. 46.1.
God is (as David says) a present help in time of trouble, and as he
speaks himself by the prophet Esaias, ^say 65.24.^
Before they call I will answer, before they cry, Psalm. 105.18
I will say, here am I. Joseph was not only in prison, but his feet hurt with
the stocks. Ion. 2
Jonas in the Whales belly, and covered with waves: Daniel in the Lions den
closed with a stone, Dan. 6.17
Act. 12.6.10.
and surely sealed up: Peter, when he was imprisoned, had chains about his
body, soldiers to watch him, and an iron gate to enclose him, yet all those
and many thousands in such like cases, were by the mighty hand of GOD
miraculouslie delivered: what hope by any reason of flesh and blood could the
Israelites have, Exodus 14.8
when they were pursued with all the chariots and horsemen of Egypt? before
them was the red sea, behind them Pharao with a terrible army, on either side
hills not able to be passed over: No way was there to human reason, how
they could escape: but GOD in his divine wisdom saw a way, he divided the red sea, that the people might safely pass thorough it, and when the
Egyptians did attempt to do the like, v. 27.
their whole army was overwhelmed in the depth of the sea. And may not the
like of late be said of us in this Realm of England? what full account did
the enemies make very shortly to swallow us up? how far were they grown to
such insolency, that no law could repress them? what pains did many take to
gad into foreign Countries, to work some inuasio^ or subversion? what little
hope was there in most of our rich men, when giving over hospitality for fear
of alterations, they sought only to furnish themselves with wealth, and made
wicked Mammon their staff and strength? what great despair was in many
valiant young sons of Gentlemen and Yeomen, when skorning to take pains in
any honest vocation, they chose rather to live either in open theeuerie, or in
idle dispersing of rumors, hoping that shortly the day would come, when the
poorest should live of the spoil of the richest, and the best sword should
most prevail.

Amongst all these dispaires of men ill minded, it pleased God when we were
bereaved of our most Gracious Queen, (whose memory be blessed for ever) to
send us according to the expectation and hearty desire of the faithful, a most
noble, religious, wise and virtuous King, and with him such an assured hope of
an established succession, that we are never able sufficiently to magnify his
inestimable goodness and mercies.

And the more to testify that it was his own handy work, it was the good
pleasure of God, that when at the first (our Sovereign King, being far absent
from the chief seat of his Realms) authority could not of a sudden be
presently established, In that time (as it were) of magistracy sleeping, all
parts were found so quiet and obedient, that the most simple in the world
might see, such a governor now to be placed over us, as who^ God does
vntertake to protect with his own right hand. When in the Arc o^f Noah the
ravening birds, Genesis 7.2.
the Hawk, Gripe, and Vultur lived quietly with the Dove, and tamer fowls,
and when the Wolf, Lion, and Leopard, remained in peace with the simple sheep
and heyfer, then it appeared evidently that this agreement was not ordinary,
but a very wonderful work of the finger of Gods own hand. And even so
wonderful of late was the providence of God, in repressing the cruel
affections of them, which had before ill will against Sion. The Lord make us so
truly thankful for these his unspeakable benefits, that his graces and
favors may still be multiplied toward us. And the Lord so still extend his
miraculous preseruations, that by our noble king and by his most royal issue,
the holy Gospel may be continued to us and our posterity for ever.

The second thing that is to be observed in this text, is the manner how we
must show our thankfulnsse, to wit, first both privately and openly both
before the Lord, and before the sons of men: and secondly with offering the
sacrifice of praise, and telling Gods works with gladness. To celebrate Gods
goodness before the Lord, is to do it religiously and zealously as in Gods
presence. Ioh. 4.24.
God is a spirit, and they which worship him, must do it in spirit and truth.
David in his thanksgiving does principally encourage his soul to praise God.
Psalm. 103.1.
Praise the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy name. In
the time of Gods service, our mind must still carry in self as now talking with
God. When the word is preached unto us, Aug. Sermon. 112. i would temp.
God speaks to us, when we pray or give thanks we speak unto God: Cypr. lib,
2. ^p. 2.
if then in those holy exercises our hearts be carried away with wordly or vain
cogitatio^s, it is an evident token that Satan does then endeavor to steal our
heart from God, and that our outward profession is nothing but mere hypocrisy.
Of such serving of God, the Lord himself does pronounce by the Prophet Esaias,
This people does draw near unto me with their mouth, Esaias. 29.13^
and honor me with their lips but their heart is far from me. That we may give
thanks in soul and spirit, it is altogether requisite, that the heart of every
particular man do understand the sense and meaning of the words which are
uttered: 1. Cor. 14.8.
for (that I may use the co^pariso^ of the Apostle) unless the trumpet do give
a certain sound, that the army may plainly understand when is sou^ded the
alarm and when the retreat, how shall the soldier order himself aright in the
battle? Even so in the service of God, unless the people do understand when
they pray, and when they give thanks, for what they pray, and for what they
give thanks, how can they in heart join with the Pastor? how can they serve the
Lord in zeal and spirit, Psalm. 103.1.
and every thing within the^ praise Gods holy name. 1. Cor. 14.1^.
I had rather (says S. Paul) speak five words with understanding to instruct
others, then ten thousand words in a strange language. of the preaching of the
word, because in that Chapter he names sometimes the instructing of others,
and the edifying of others. The confess that preaching must needs be in a
known language, but as for prayer and thanksgiving, and such Psalms and
hymns, as are song unto God, they say, that all these may be in Latin,
although it be either in them, or before them which understand not the Latin
tongue. Resp.


But it is more clear then the Sun, that the Apostle does speak, not only of
preaching, 1. Cor* 14.15.
but also of all manner of prayer and thanksgiving in the Church of God. He
says in the fifteenth verse, I will pray with the spirit (that is, with the
strange language, which was then the extraordinary gift of the spirit) but I
will pray also with understanding, I will sing with the spirit, but I will sing
also with understanding. He wills therefore not only preaching of the word,
but also all prayers, hymns, songs, and anthems whatsoever, to be in that
tongue, which may be understood by them, by whom they are presented to God. I
think that every good Christian ought to be persuaded that when the minister
does publicly utter either prayer or thanksgiving, the whole Church either
does or ought to join with him in the offering of that spiritual sacirfice
unto God. But in the verse following, V. 16.
the Apostle does put the matter out of all controversy, he says, if thou
shall bless with the spirit, he which occupies the place of the unlearned,
how shall he say Amen to thy giving of thanks, seeing he understands not
what thou have said? Thou truly do give thanks well, but the other is not
edified. It is therefore a thing necessary to thanksgiving, as well as to
prayer or preaching, that the heart do understand what is uttered before the
Lord. If an unknown tongue had no place in the Apostles time, where was the
miraculous gift of Gods spirit? much less may it challenge any place now, when
it is gotten more imperfectly, and by more ordinary means. If in that
primitive church not only the latin or greek, Acts. 2.9.
or hebrew, but also all languages under heaven, were vouchsafed to be powered
down by the holy ghost, then why should not every tongue be equally sanctified
to give thanks unto God, Phil. 2.11.
and to confess that Jesus is Christ, to the glory of God the Father.

Thanksgiving must be done with ioyfulnesse (as here David shows) now the
old saying is true, ignotinulla cupido, Psalm. 107.22.
There is neither hearty desire, nor true joy, in that whereof the mind is
unskillful and ignorant. All things in the Church of God ought to tend to the
edifying one of another. As preaching ought to edify: so also thanksgiving.
The Apostle does condemn it, 1. Cor. 14.17
when thou do so give thanks that thy brother is not edified The Prophet
and Psalmist does here require such a thanksgiving unto God, that his works
may be declared before the children of men.

That cannot be counted a declaring of Gods works, which is published in that
tongue, whereof the assembly has no knowledge. As in prayer the heart should
be touched with the want of that thing which it desires: So in thanksgiving
the heart should acknowledge and feel the joy of that for which it gives
thanks. And all must be done to the glory of God, Romans 15.6.
which is then best performed when the whole Church does with one heart and one
voice glorify God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. The more publicly the
thanksgiving is understood, the more evidently thereby is the glory of God
set forth. And the more we declare Gods works before the children of men, the
more acceptable do we offer our praise unto God. David vowed this
thankefulnsse unto God, when he said, Psalm. 22.2^,
I will declare thy name amongst my brethren, in the midst of the
congregation I will sing praise unto thee. He accounted it his chiefest joy,
Psalm, 42.^.
to lead the people to the house of God, with the voice of joy and
tha^ksgiuing. Psalm. 122. v. 1.
And in another Psalm, I am glad (says he) when any say unto me, let us go
to the house of God. As in the other duties of our life, so also in the service
of God, 1. Cor. 6.20.
we must glorify God both in body and soul, for they are Gods. When Satan
tempted our Savior, he offered to him all the kingdoms of the world, and the
glory thereof, Math. 4.8.
if he would but fall down and worship him, he seemed to be content with the
bodily worship only. So his eldest son Antichrist, when he cannot draw
Christian princes to admit his damnable idolatry, nor yet by any means stir
up sufficient powers to overthrow them, then his last refuge is, to grant to
his reconciled vassals a dispensatio^ to go to the church and Sacraments in
body, so that they keep their souls still faithful unto him, he is then
contented only with the soul. But the eternal God requires of us an entire
worship and service both in body and soul. Seeing he made both body and
soul, and Christ Jesus redeemed both body and soul, and both body and soul
must live for ever in the world to come, we are commanded and bounden to keep
our selves from all pollution, as well of flesh as of spirit, 2. Cor. 7.1.
and to glorify God both in body and soul, for they are Gods. When the
Israelites were by the captivity of Babylon, removed from that public place
of Gods service, where they were wont both in body and soul to praise God,
they wept by the waters of Babylon, and said, Psalm. 137.4. Dan. 6.11.
how can we sing the Lords song in a strange land? Daniel chose rather to be
cast into the Lions den, then that his body should be withheld only three
days from the open praising of God. God abhors all hypocrisy, when men
shall in his worship pretend one thing and do another, he calls hell by a
proper and peculiar name, Math. 24.31.
the portion of hypocrites, Romans 2^.1
he requires of us a whole sacrifice both of body and soul: he will have
both the one and the other, all or none, whole, or no part.

The common translation does interpret this text, as declaring unto us, to whom
we must offer our thanksgiving, to wit, unto God. O that men would therefore
praise the Lord for his goodness. If we take the words in that sense, they may
very well agree with the whole argument of this Psalm. For certain it is,
that in all distresses and dangers, the Prophet will have us both only to
fly to God for succor, and only to praise him for gracious deliverance. He
means here sundry calamities, banishment, enprisonment, sickness,
tempestuous weather, immoderate drought, unseasonable rain, but still he
ascribes unto God the deliverance, and therefore to him only must be rendered
all thanks and praise. In the Church of Rome, for every several disease or
peril, they have a several Saint to call upon. Petronella for the Ague, Roch
for the plague, Valentine for the falling sickness, Otilia for the eyes,
Apollonia for the teeth, our Lady and Saint Margaret for women in childbirth.
They make Christopher to be their patron against sudden death, Agatha against
fire, Hubert against the biting of a mad dog, Scholastica against thunder,
Anthony for their swine, Loy for their horses, Wendeline for their sheep, Luke
for their Kine. They make several patrons and defendours, not only for every
country: as Peter and Paul for Italy, Denis for Faunce, George for England,
Andrew for Scotland, Patricke for Ireland: but also in a manner particularly
for every vocation and trade, as Iuo for Lawyers, Joseph for Carpenters, Lucas
for painters, Gutma^ for cobblers? what was this else but to rob God of his
honor: and to ascribe that to the creature, which is due to the Creator only,
whose name be blessed for ever and ever? for all troubles, and all people
whatsoever the commandment of God is general by the Psalmist. Psalm. 50.14.
Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will hear thee, and thou shall
glorify me. God is a jealous God, he will not give his glory to any creature.
In ascribing somewhat to their Saints, they think that thereby they honor
them, but they do them the greatest dishonor that may be, when they make them
means to rob God of his honor. The Saints of God do by their own examples in
the Scriptures abundantly instruct us, to whom we are to ascribe all divine
praises and worship. August. de sancta virg. cap. 3.
The blessed Virgin (blessed in bearing Christ by co^ception in her body, but
more blessed in that she bare him also in the heart by faith) does acknowledge
God to be a Savior as well as al believers, and therefore she praises God with
these words. My soul does magnify the Lord, Luc. 1.46.
and my spirit does rejoice in God my Savior. When John would have fallen down
to have worshipped the angel, Apoe. 22.9.
he was straightly forbidden: The Angel said, take heed that thou do it not, I
am a servant as thou art, worship God. Much less may men admit divine worship
in me^, whom the Psalmist does call in this place the sons of Adam. And in
which respect Saint Peter denied to be worshipped by Cornelius, for when he was
fallen down at his feet, to reverence him, the Apostle took him up saying,
Stand up, Act. 10.26
for I my self am also a man. When we are exhorted here to celebrate before
the Lord his goodness, and his wonderful works before the children of men, we
are put in mind of a notable effect of thankfulness, which is both in our
selves and in others, to conserve a memorial of God his loving kindness, and
that not only among our selves, but as much as we can, even unto all
posterities for ever. In Exodus, Exodus 13, 14
the father is commanded to declare to his children for ever, the mighty
deliverance of the Israelites out of Egypt, David says, Psalm. 88.
we will show the praise of the Lord to the generations to come, his strength
and wonderful works that he has done. True thankfulness has not only a
regard of things present before the eyes, but it calls also to remembrance,
the benefits of former times. Thankful must we be for this our present happy
government under such a mighty Monarch, and most Christian Prince, and yet
still not forget the singular benefits which we have heretofore also received
under her, who being assisted by Gods mighty hand, did in time of greatest
dangers deliver us from the thraldom of blindness and idolatry, and by whose
godly care every village of this Realm has been seasoned in some measure
with the knowledge of God his truth. David makes this an excellent property of
true gratitude, not to forget the former blessings of God: Praise the Lord O my
soul, Psalm. 103.2. ^ and v. 7
and forget not all his benefits: he made his ways known to Moses, and his
deeds to the children of Israel. It was a miserable ingratitude in that people
of Israel, Psalm. 106.7.
when (as it is said in an other psalm) they considered not Gods wonderful
works, neither were mindful of his manifold mercies, but were disobedient at
the sea, even in the red sea: when the red sea was like two walls on either side
of them, even in the red sea, they forgot the mercies of God, and had not the
goodness of the Lord in remembrance. And such (I am afraid) is our unthankfulness
in this realm of England. In this most happy and ioiful time, and in the
midst of Gods great favor and loving kindness, we consider not only Gods
wonderful works, neither are we so mindful as we ought to be of his infinite
mercies and goodness, Basil. ad Iullitam Martyrem.
we are like those eyes, which (as Basil says) when things are set close and
hard to the^, they do not discern nor behold the^. The nearenes of Gods
benefits does as it were shut our eyes, and cast us into a slu^ber of
security, we are more ready to talk of our safety against al foreign foes,
then we are to give humble praise unto God, and to testify our thnakfulnes by
amendment of life: the like that Senator of Rome, Messala Coruinus, who grew so
far overwhelmed with oblivion, that at the last he forgot his own name, we
forget our own name, we forget that we are the soldiers and servants of
Christ, we forget that spiritual warfare whereunto we are called to set all
the powers of body and mind against sin, we consider not duly the end,
whereunto all Gods blessings are directed, nor yet the right and holy use which
ought to be made thereof: when God sends troubles, he tries our patience,
when he sends deliverance, he tries our thankfulness; Chrysostom in psalm.
9
Chrysostom says very well, that then when we have most need, of God^
providence, when we are delivered from adversities, and then we have most
cause of fearing, when we are freed from dangers: for as he makes his
comparison, like as we do much more fear the Lion or Leopard, being let
loose, then when they are chained up, so our untamed affections, when by
prosperity they are let loose, are much more to be feared, then when they were
tied up, and bound by dangers and afflications. Let us therefore learn, how to
carry our selves, when we have escaped any perils: Psalm. 30.
let us not say in our prosperity, we shall never be removed, because God
has made our hill so strong, let us not be like the Heyfer, Ier. 31, 1^.
which running in good pastures forgets to undergo the yoke: let not our
worldly happiness be like that rankenes of soil, which by overmuch moisture
destroieth the good plant: let not outward ioies draws us headlong into
iniquities, Genesis 19.35
as Lot being dru^ken, committed incest: but rather let every blessing of God,
be a good encouragement to us, to stir us up to a more earnest zeal of
rendering thanks to the Almighty. Let us love God, for he loved us first: 1.
John 4.1^.
let us (as the Psalmist says here) praise the Lord for his goodness, and for
his wonderful works before the children of men. Then shall we not only
escape those grievous punishments, wherewith God does usually plague and
punish the unthankful, to wit, the taking away of his blessed word, and the
giving of it to an other nation, Mat. 21.4^
that shall bring forth the fruit of it: the sending of that fearful famine,
Amos ^.11
not a famine of bread, nor a thirst of water, but a famine of the word of God,
when me^ shall go from North to the East, Esaias 5.6,
from one sea to another, to seek the word of God, and shall not find it, the
taking away of the hedge and fencing of his vineyard, that it may be wasted
and trodden down, the ouerwhelming of men with a spiritual blindness, Esaias 6, 10.
when their heart shall wax fat, and their ears heavy, and their eyes closed
up, that they should not believe nor be saved, Luke 14.24
that seeing they have vntha^kfully despised grace offered by Christ, they
should therefore never be partakers of his supper: But also on the other side
we shall have all the blessings and favors of God more and more plentifully
powered upon us: Bern, de contemp. mundi.
for as unthankfulness (according to Bernard) Est ventus vrens' siccans fontes
pietatis and fluenta gratiae, is a parching wind drying up the fountain of
mercy, and the rivers of grace, so tha^kfulnesse for one benefit is a step
to the receiving of an other: then we may be well assured, that if we be
found thankful for benefits received, he which has begun a good work in
us, Phil. c, 16
will finish the same even until the day of Christ. He will continue his
Gospel to us and to our posterity for ever: He will so carefully protect us,
that he which touches us, shall touch the very apple of his eye: Zach. 2, 8
He will bless us both prince and people in this life, and in the world to
come, crown us with everlasting life with our heavenly king Christ Jesus,
where we shall for ever yield such praises unto God, as shall never wax
weary, never cease, never have end: we shall perpetually join with them in
that ioifull song, Holy, holy, Apoc. 4, 8.11
holy Lord God Almighty, thou art worthy O Lord to receive glory, honor and
power, for thou have created al things and by thy will they are have bin
created, worthy is the Lamb that was killed, Apoc. 5.12
to receive power and riches and wisdom, and strength and honor, and glory,
and praise: Of which celestial thanksgiving he make us al partakers that dyed
for us all, even that Lamb Christ Jesus, to whom with the Father and the holy
Ghost, be all glory, Majesty, honor, and praise now and for ever Amen.

The End of the First Sermon.
THE SECOND SERmon of Thanksgiving.
PSALM 107. V. 21. And sacrificing the sacrifice of praise, let them tell
forth his doings with gladness.


COncening that which has already been spoken in the forenoone, as well of
the general argument of the Psalm, as also of the particular handling of the
former part of my text, I purpose not now (right Worshipful and beloved) to
make any repetition thereof, partly because it was so lately uttered, and
partly because (as some of you know) I must of necessity hasten to another
place. It remains only now that I proceed somewhat further with the fruits
and effects of thankfulness (which then I began to speak of) and to enterpret
the verse following, of our offering the sacrifice of praise, and telling forth
his works with gladness.

The sacrifices which here the Psalmist speaks of, are not propitiatory, but
eucharisticall, not for ransom of sin, but for rendering of thanks. The
propitiatory sacrifices of the old Testament, Heb. 10.1.8.
were types and shadows of the passion of Christ: The truth being come, those
shadows are vanished away. The last altar was the Cross, the last sacrifice
was the body and blood of Christ, Heb. 7, 17,
and the last sacrificing priest was Christ Jesus himself, a priest for ever
after the order of Melchizedeck. The order of Aaron had successors which did
often offer sacrifices, because they were imperfect. But the order of
Melchizedeck is to have no successor. Christ offered a perfect sacrifice, and
therefore without any need of repeating it, he offered himself once for all.
Heb. 10.14.
No mortal man, nor yet any angel of God was fit to offer this sacrifice, but
only Christ Jesus himself, who was holy, pure, Heb 7.26.
blameless, and higher then the heavens, he offered himself once for all.
Heb. 9.26.
He ordained the sacrament of his body and blood, not to be an altar, 1, Cor,
10.21.
but a table, not to offer, but to receive, not to be a sacrifice, 1, Cor, 10,
16
but a heavenly supper: wherein our souls do feed upon the body and blood
of Christ, and do enjoy a communion or common partaking thereof, not to be a
propitiatory act, but eucharisticall, as that sacrament was called in the
primitive Church eucharistia, a solemn and public thanksgiving unto God for
all the benefits which we receive in and through his Son Christ Jesus. The
sacrifice was offered by Christ himself. It is sufficient for us by faith to
feed upon it, and thankfully to acknowledge that all is ours, 1. Cor, 3, ^2,
as we are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Phil, 1, 17,
Without this faith all our thankesgiuings are but dead sacrifices, as were the
offerings of Kaine, Genesis 4.3.
who did offer to God as well as Abel, but not with the faith of Abel. Luk, 1^,
11,
And as were the speeches of the Pharisie, Lord I thank thee that I am not as
other men, when he sought more to exalt himself, then to give glory and
praise unto God. Be there never so good a proportion of a body in the outward
lineaments, yet if the life be absent, it is not a body but a carkase: even so
be there never so good words in prayer and thanksgiving, yet if the soul be
absent (for the life and soul of God his service is faith in the blood of
Christ) then is our honoring of God but only a mere shadow ad carkase,
howsoever it do carry an outward show of holiness. The good Christians of the
primitive Churches, did not think it sufficient in God his great deliverances,
to testify their joy with bonefires, ringing of belles, reuelings, and
belly-cheare, but they showed their thankfulness by a general and solemn
receiving of that sacrament which they called Eucharistia, the sacrament of
thanksgiving, to wit, Cyprian in sermon. de orat. Dom.
the Supper of the Lord, by the often and zealous receiving whereof, they did
both testify their thankfulness unto God, and acknowledge also by whom they
hoped that their prayers and praises should be graciously received. Apoc. 8.3.4.
Christ only it is that has the golden censer to offer up the prayers of the
Saints before the throne of God, and with the smoke of the odours, that is,
with the sweet savor of his oblation the prayers of the Saints, go up to the
presence of God. David when he has called to mind the manifold blessings of
God, Psalm. 116, 13,
can find no other way to be thankful, but only by receiving the cup of
salvation, and calling upon the name of the Lord, V. 17
by paying his vows unto God, and offering unto God the sacrifice of
thanksgiving. True thankefulnes requires that our heart should love God, our
lips praise God, our body and soul obey God, and our goods, with all that
we have, serve for the glory and honor of God. And each of those duties is
accounted in the holy Scriptures to as it were a sacrifice offered to God. For
the heart, the Lord says by the wisdom of Solomon: Prou. 23.26.
My Son give me thy heart, and let thine eyes mark deligently my ways. The
sacrifice of the Lord (says David) is a contrite spirit, a contrite spirit and
a broken heart, Psalm. 51.19. ^
O Lord thou will not despise.

In the sacrifices of the old Testament, the Israelites did first behold the
wrath of God against sin, that the reward of sin was death (for the Ram,
Rom 6.23.
Heyfer, and such like being sacrificed, did plainly show unto them what they
had deserved) and thereby they conceived a grief for sin, and a loathing of
sin. Secondly it was unto them a lively figure of the passion of Christ, Ioh.
8.56.
whereby they were stirred up to love the Lord for his goodness, and to
rejoice in the beholding of the days of Christ. And thirdly the sacrifice was
as it were a vow of amendment of life. They vowed, that as that beast was
slain upon the altar, so they would from thence forth slay and mortify the
wicked corruptions of their sinful nature. In which respect God does call it a
covenant, Psalm. 50.5.
when he says, they make a covenant with me by their sacrifice.

If these things, to wit, the grief for sin, the love of God, and the full
purpose to amend were wanting, then was the sacrifice before God abominable.
To him will I look (says God) even to him that is poor and of a contrite
spirit, Isay. 66.2.
and that trembles at my words, otherwise he that kills a bullock, is as
he that slays a man, and he that sacrifices a sheep, is as he that
cutteth off a dogs neck, and he that offers an oblation, is as he that
offers swines blood, and he that remembers incense, is as he that blesses
an Idol, such are these which have chosen their own ways, and whose soul
does delight in their own abominations.

2^ Cor. 5.14.
Then do we give the heart unto God, when we say with the Apostle, the love of
Christ constaineth us, or when we perform that of the Psalmist. Love the Lord
all ye Saints of his, Psalm, 31.24
for the Lord preserves the faithful, and plenteously rewards the proud
doer. The old Verse is true, Non clamans sed amans cantat in aure Dei, Not he
that cries out, but he that loves does sing in the ears of God. David when
he would give thanks for his victories, said, I will love thee O Lord my
strength, Psalm. 18.1,
or as travelers do translate it ex intimis visceribus te diligam, I will love
thee from my inward bowels, Racham. futur e^chomca.
O Lord my strength, for so indeed the Hebrew word (...) does signify.

Heb. 13.15* Osea. 14.8.
Another sacrifice of thanksgiving, is to offer the fruit of our lips
confessing unto his name, that is, with our tongue to praise God. David does
call his tongue his glory, because thereby he did principally set forth the
glory of God to the edifying of others. Awake (says he) my glory, Awake,
Lute and Harp, Psalm. 57.9.
I my self will awake right early. And in an other Psalm, psalm. 30.13,
Thou have put off my sackcloth, and girded me with gladness, therefore my
glory shall sing unto thee, that is, my tongue a principal member made for thy
glory. The Apostle does command us generally, Col. 3.17.
that whatsoever we do in word or deed, we should do all in the name of the
Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father: That is indeed to consecrate our
tongue wholly to the glory of God, not now with the mouth to praise God, and by
and by with the same mouth to dishonor God, but every where, and in all our
speeches to have an eye to that, for which our tongue was made, to wit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.11.
the glory of God, and the edifying one of another. Above all things (says the
Apostle) swear not, Iam. 5.12.
Ephesians. 4.25.
put away lying, and speak every man the truth one to another, v. 29,
for we are members one of another. Let no rotten or filthy communication
proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to edify, withal that it
may minister grace unto the hearers, V. 31
let bitterness and railing be put from you, and blasphemy, and all
malitiousnes. Otherwise, howsoever we do with the tongue sometimes praise
God, if we do with the same tongue in our other speeches dishonor God, it
does then evidently argue that our praising of GOD was nothing but mere
hypocrisy: for so says Saint James, Iam 3.9
with the tongue we bless GOD the Father, and with the same tongue we curse
men made after Gods image, this cannot be: Can the same fountain send forth
both sweet water and bitter? and how then can there come out of one mouth both
blessing and cursing? This (says the Apostle) ought not to be. The people of
Israel when God had showed his infinite favor toward them, in delivering them
from bondage, in sending them a pillar of cloud, Deuteronomy. 8.3.4.
for the day, and for fire for the night to guide them in the desert, in giving
them water out of the stony rock, and feeding them with food from heaven: 1.
Cor. 10.10. Numb. 14.37,
in so protecting them that for forty years, their garment did not wax old,
neither did their foot swell, They were so far from giving praise unto God,
that they fell to the clean contrary, that is, to murmr against God: But for
this their wretched unthankfulness they were plagued some with leprosies, some
with fiery serpents, some the earth swallowed up, some perished with the
pestilence, that of above six hundred thousand, there came but two of them
into the land of promise. A fearful judgment of GOD against such as refused
to offer to God the calves of their lips, Osea 14.8.
confessing unto his name. An other sacrifice of thanksgiving is, in the whole
course of our life, to consecrate our bodies and souls to the obedience of God
his holy will, Romans 12, 1
I beseech you (says the Apostle) for the tender mercy of GOD, that you offer
up your body and Soul, a lively sacrifice holy and acceptable unto GOD
which is your reasonable serving of God, 1. Cor. 6.20
and fashion not your selves like to this world. In an other place, he gives
the reason why we must offer this sacrifice both in body and soul to glorify
God, to wit, because they are Gods: God made them, Christ Jesus redeemed the^,
whatsoever is bought from us, is none of our own, ye are bought says the
Apostle, with a price, Christ gave his body and blood for us, that he might
purchase us unto himself, Tit. 2.14
that he might redeem us ftom all iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar
people unto himself: zealous of good works* whosoever therefore yields any
part of his body, or mind to commit sin, he does therein commit sacrilege,
he robs the Lord Jesus of that, which in duty should be offered to him.
The word sacrificing does import a killing or slaying,

Romans 8, 13
The Apostle shows what we must slay, to wit, our own vices and corruptione:
if ye mortify the deeds of the flesh by the spirit, ye shall live: mortify
your earthly members, Cos. 3.15.
fornication, uncleanness, coueteousnesse. This mortification must especially
take place in those sins, whereunto we are either by nature or by age most
inclined: what great thing is there performed of the riotous young man, if he
avoid covetousness? or of the old man, if he avoid the wanton lusts of
youth? But if the old man do subdue anger, nigardly care, waiwardnes, and such
other crimes, whereunto the nature of his age is most inclined, or if the young
man can by prayer and the power of Gods spirit mortify those filthy lusts
whereunto he finds himself most endangered, then do they offer unto God a
very acceptable sacrifice: for this sacrifice does highly please God when
every man shall examine his own conscience, and when he has found to what
vice he is most bent, does then strive to mortify that sin by earnest
prayer, and by the assistance of God his spirit: Gal. 5.24
if we do not seek by all good means to slay sin, before it of it self
does forsake us, if the young man will not abandon his lusts, until age do of
necessity pluck it from him, then he forsakes not sin, but sin
forsakes him, and that is not to offer a sacrifice unto GOD, if our strong and
youthful times be consecrated unto pleasures, and we only purpose either in
sickness or in old age to repent of our follies, imagining that at the last
gasp, one word will be sufficient, Mal. 1.13,
then are we like to those Jews, whom the Prophet Malachie does condemn,
for that having whole and sound cattle, they kept them to themselves, and
offered unto GOD the sick and maimed: Eccl. 12
But the wise man does exhort us to remember our Maker in the days of our
youth, even thy best and most flourishing time, thou must consecrate the same
unto God: do not give thy good wine of thy best years unto pleasures, and the
dregs of thy infirmities unto God, but says he, remember thy maker in the
days of thy youth. God made us after his own image, and that image of his
must we offer unto him again. Our Savior says, Give unto Caesar the things
which are Caesar's, Math. 22, 23.
and unto God those things which are Gods. Augustine by that speech infers,
Deus exigit ab homine imaginem suam ab homine, sicut Caesar suam in nummo, Aug.
epist. 45
God requires of man to receive his own image in man, as Caesar does require
to receive his own image in his coin. Ephesians. 4.24.
That image of God is (as the Apostle teaches) to put on the new man created
after God in righteousness and true holiness, and to be renewed in the spirit of
our minds: our affections must first be sanctified before they ca^ be fit to
offer the sacrifice of praise. Look to thy feet, Eccl, 4.17
says the wisema^, when thou entrest into the house of God, and be more ready
to hear the^ to offer the sacrifice of fools, Chrysostom,
for as in the making of a garla^d, it is not sufficient that the flowers be
sweet and clean but the hand that makes them, must be clean also: even so in
prayer and thanksgiving, it is not sufficient that the words be pure and holy,
but the heart that offer them, must be holy also. Psalm. 26.6
David says, I will wash my hands in innocence, and so will I compass thy
altar. 1, Tim, 2 8
Paul wills men in prayers to lift up pure hands without wrath, and without
contention: As the h^rt must be charitable in respect of our neighbor, so must
it be pure from filthy lusts in respect of the carriage of our selves. Romans
12.2. Iam. 2.27.
In these two points does S. James conclude the very sum of that which is
called our reasonable serving of God. Pure Religion (says he) and undefiled
before God the Father is this, to visit the fatherless and widow in their
adversity, and to keep a man's self unspotted of the world, if compassion of
heart and love be absent, our other offeringes can not please God, although I
should as the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 13.3
give all my goods to the poor, and even give my body that I be burned, yet if
I want love, I am nothing. And if we be not sanctified in regard of our own
lives, then the wisdom of God does reject our sacrifices. Prou. 15.8.
The sacrifice of the wicked (says Solomon) is an abomination to the Lord. He
that turns away his ear from hearing the law of God, his prayer is
abominable. Prou. 28.^.
Let our thankfulness then appear by the fruit of good life. Pliny lib. 18
cap. 14.
Let benefits be that to our hearts, which Pliny writes of pulse, beans, and
lupines, Non exhauriunt agrum, they do not pill the ground, but they make the
soil the more fruitful, and the more that we taste of Gods blessings and
favors, the more, Phil, 2.11^
let us be filled with the fruits of righteousness, to the glory and praise
of God: otherwise our outward show of thanksgiving, is nothing but mere
hypocrisy, like theirs of whom Paul does pronounce, Tit. 1.1^.
they profess that they know God, but by works, they deny him, being
abominable and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate. Furthermore our
sacrifice of thanksgiving, must extend to the right use of our goods: first,
that we joyfully yield a portion thereof, to the maintenance of God his honor
and service. David when the King of Arauna or Orna would have given him a plot
of ground, a threshing flower to build an Altar upon it, and wood also for the
sacrifice, would not take it of gift, but would needs pay for it, and said,
that he would not offer unto God that which cost him nothing. 2. Sam. 24.24.
And when he had given toward the building of the temple 3000. talents of
gold, and 7000. talents of silver, besides many vessels of gold, silver, and
brass, 2. Chro. 29, 9
it is said that the heart of David rejoiced exceedingly, and that he accounted
it but as a chief rent for that which he held every whit of God in capitie: V.
12.
they are thine (says he) O Lord, to thee they are due? what are we that we
should thus offer unto God? The earth is the Lords, Psalm. 24, 1.
and all the same contained, whatsoever we have, we hold of him in chief, and
this is that which he requires for our tenor, to wit, that partly we be
cheerful in mainteining his service, and partly bountiful in relieuing our
needy neighbor. To do good (says the Apostle) and to distribute forget not,
for with such sacrifice God is pleased. Nothing ought to make us to be more
forward in alms deeds, then to call to mind that God does account it a
sacrifice that is offered to himself (for sacrifices are offered unto God) and
that Christ will account as done to himself? Whatsoever is done to the least of
his brethren. Prou. 10
He that gives to the poor (says the wiseman) lends unto the Lord, and
whatsoever he lays out, he shall be paid again. The prayers and the alms of
Cornelius went up in remembrance before God. 1, Pet. 4,
Saint Peter shows that our prayers must have as it were two wings, that they
may mount up to heaven on the one side sobriety, in respect of our selus, on
the otherside fervent love, in respect of our neighbor. They must first have
life, for if they be dead, they cannot pierce the heavens. Now the life of our
prayers and thanksgiuings is faith, without faith, no man can please God. When
they have the life of faith, that they be a living sacrifice, then must they
also have the wings of temperance and alms deeds, as had the prayers of
Cornelius: whereby they went up in remembrance before God. The free gift of God
is first taken hold of by faith, and then good works do follow, as a fruit of
our thankfulness.

First the Saints are blessed of the Father, to receive a kingdom not
purchased by their alms deeds, Math, 25, 34,
but prepared for them before the foundation of the world was laid, and thereof
does proceed their works of charity, as a sacrifice of thanksgiving, and yet
those works also the gift of God, Aug, in Psalm. 102.
as Augustine says, Deus coronat in nobis dona sua. God does crown his own
gifts in us. Good works must be always done to a good end. 2. Sam, 15, 2,
When Absalom called the poor unto him, and did help to right their causes,
he seemed to have an upright and charitable mind. But when he sought thereby to
steal away the hearts of the subjects, and to stir them up to rebellion
against his Sovereign Lord and Father, then was his show of justice nothing
but damnable hypocrisy. And the like account must be made of all charitable
deeds whatsoever, if they be done to a sinister end, to wit, to ascribe
merit unto them, and thereby to derogate from the sacrifice and passion of our
Savior Christ. Let us then endeavor to the uttermost of our power to obey the
will of God, but let our intent and purpose be only thereby to offer to God a
sacrifice of thanksgiving, to glorify God our Creator, Christ Jesus our
Redeemer, and the holy Ghost our Sanctifier, 1, Pet, 1, 10
to make our election and calling more sure unto our selves, Mat. 5.16
and by the light of our good works to cause others to glorify our father in
heaven.

Of the manner, how our sacrifices ought to be offered, to wit, with singing
and joyfulness of mind, as here the Prophet exhorts us to tell forth Gods
works with gladness, or (as some interpret it) with singing, I shall (God
willing) speak at some other convenient time. God of his infinite goodness
grant us grace so with thankful hearts, ioifull lips, and virtuous lives to
glorify his holy name in this life, that we may be glorified to him for ever
in the life to come, and with the blessed Angels sing perpetual praises in
heaven to him, Apoc. 4, 11,
who is worthy to receive glory, and honor and power, To this invisible and
eternal Lord, three persons and one God, be ascribed all majesty, praise and
dominion now and for ever Amen.

Why in right there should be no refusing to come now to our Church.
WHereas you requested me the other day to set down a brief note of the
chiefest arguments, which may induce and persuade a Recusant to come to the
Church, and to resolve you particularly of this one point, in what respect
prayer in the Church is more acceptable unto God, then prayer made in fields or
private houses: I have thought good to return this unto you for an answer:
that there are six special reasons, for which it must needs be better
pleasing to God, to frequent Churches and public places of prayer, then to be
addicted only to the exercises of our private mansions.

First it is a dutiful obeying of God his holy ordinance, who has commanded
not only private prayer, 1. (...), 11, 2.8.
and prayer in every place: but has also appointed by his law, that there
should be a public place consecrated for his service. ^eut, 12, 5.
In that place (says he) which the Lord your God shall choose amongst all your
tribes, to set his name there, in that his habitation ye shall seek unto him.
To have it in the same place where the Jews had it, is not commanded to us,
(...), 4.21.
but the equity of the Law does still remain, to wit, that there should be
always a house of God wherein the people may be assembled. As likewise to have
the same Sabbath which the Jews had, the Apostles did not think it requisite,
but the equity of the Law, to wit, to have one day amongst the seven to be
allotted for the public service of God, that they thought altogether necessary.
And the chose the first day in the week, because in that Christ rose again
from death, which was therefore called dies Dominicus the Lord his day. In the
Lord his day John was rapt in the spirit, and heard a voice. Apoc, 1, 10.
In that first day of the week, Act, 20, 7,
the Apostles in the Acts did minister the holy Sacrament, and in the same
first day they made collections for the poor.

1. Cor, 16, 2,
Secondly, by frequenting the public place of God his service, God is most
glorified. We must glorify God both in body and soul, 1, Cor, 6, 20,
for they are gods. The Prophet Daniel chose rather to be thrown into a den of
Lions, Dan. 6.11,
then that he would have his body but only three days to be debarred from
honoring God. He honored him as he might, because there was no public place
permitted. But where there is a public place assigned for the service of God,
there must especially our zeal incline unto it, and the more public the place
is, the more is God glorified thereby. The Prophet David says, I will praise
thee o Lord in the great congregation, Psalm, 35.18.
in much people I will give thanks unto thee. Psalm, 40, 11. Psalm, 22, 22,
And again I will declare thy righteousness in the great congregation,
behold, I will not refrain my lips, and that Lord thou know. In another
place, I will declare thy name amongst my brethren, in the midst of the
congregation I will sing praise unto thee. And again, I was glad when they
said unto me, Psalm, 122.1.
We will go into the house of God. And when he was by his enemies driven away
from that public place of God his service: although he prayed and sang hymns
unto God, in the mountains and caves, and other places of his exile: yet that
loss of the public place of God his worship, did grieve him more then the
loss of his native soil, of his acquaintance, of his kindred, of his goods,
or any other joy or treasure whatsoever. psalm, 27.4.
One thing (says he) one thing especially I have desired of the Lord, and I
will still require it, that I dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of
my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to visit his holy Temple: He
grieved that he could not do (as he had done in times past) even to lead the
people into the house of God. Psalm. 42.2.
My tears (says he) has been my bread day and night, because I had gone with
the multitude, and lead them to the house of God: His wish was rather to be a
doore-keeper in the house of God, Psalm. 84.11,
then to dwell in the tents of ungodliness.

Thirdly, it is a comfortable apprehending of the promise of Christ, who has
pronounced, Math. 18, 20,
that, Where two or three are assembled in his name, he is in the midst of
them, and that whatsoever they, ask, they shall receive. Although he name two
or three (because the Church is indeed a little flock in respect of the great
multitude of the wicked:) yet it is evident, that our Savior speaks not
there of private conuenticles: but of the Church of God, as may appear by the
often naming of the Church in the verses last going before. Now there is the
place of the Church where the word of God is taught, and the Sacraments
administered according to the institution of Christ, and public prayer and
thankesgiuings offered unto God: Teach all nations (says Christ) and Baptize
them in the name of the Father, Math, 28, 19.
and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, then follows the promise, I will be
with you to the end of the world. The Apostle when he has made mention of the
Church, 1. Cor, 11.1^ 20.23.
and public place of the assembly, when ye come together in the Church, V. 23,
when ye come together into one place, etc, he adds, that which I received of
the Lord, that have I delivered unto you, how the Lord Jesus in the same night
that he was betrayed, took bread, V. 33,
etc. and after, when ye come together one tarry for another. He requires of
the Romans, Romans 13.6,
that they all with one heart, and one mouth glorify God, and to the
Ephesians, that praises be given in the Church through Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 8.21.
unto all generations for ever: Math, 28.20.
where is the word and Sacraments, there is especially the ero vobiscu^ vsque
ad co^summationem seculi.

Fourthly, the alotting of the place amongst Christians, must needs be in the
power of the supreme magistrate, and of such laws as are confirmed by him.
Ios, 6.6. and Ios. 11.
If Joshua being Duke, did take order for matters in the Church: 1. Chro. 23.6.
2. Chro. 3.14. 1. Reg. 2.35.
If David and Solomon did set the courses of the Priests and Levites, remove
the bad, and place better in their room: 2. Chro. 17.8. 2. Chro. 19, 8,
If Iehosaphat did send Elithama and Iehoram Priests to instruct the people,
and set the Priests and Levites for the judgment of the Lords cause: 2. Chro.
31, 4,
If Ezechias did not only appoint the courses, but also prescribe to every one
their portions and stipends: If Asa, 2, Chro, 29, 1, 2, Reg, 23, 4,
Josias, and other godly Kings of Judah, did account it their chiefest charge to
purge the Church from Idolatry, then why might not Constantinus, Theodosius,
and other Christian Emperors imitate their godly ensample? And when now our
Christian, most noble King, does inioyne or establish orders for the public
service of God? Why should not all good subjects obey, not for fear, but even
for conscience sake? Where Princes do command Idolatry, Rom, 13, 5,
or any thing directly against the word of God, there the subjects may say with
S. Peter and the Apostles, Act. 5, 29,
we must rather obey God then man. Yet in no wise may they rebel, Eccl, 10,
17, Romans 13.1.
nor in heart wish the subversion of God his anointed. But (God his holy name
be praised we have no need to fear any such edicts* we may of all people under
heart, most willingly submit our selves to that obedience, where goalinesse
and loyalty may both meet together, Psalm. 85.10,
and righteousness and peace may kiss each other.

Fifthly, in respect of the prayers themselves, great cause we have had (and no
doubt shall have still) most carefully to frequent them, the prayers being all
(even in the conscience of the adversary) most godly and needful for all good
gifts and graces requisite both for Prince and people, and all made through our
only mediator Christ Jesus, 1. Tim. 2, 5.
There is one God (says Paul) and one mediator betwixt God and man, even the
man Christ Jesus. 1. Ioh. 2.2.
If any man sin (says Saint John) we have an advocate with the father Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. Aug. in Psalm.
108.
Oration quae non fit per Christum, non solum non potest delere peccatum, sed
and ipsa fit peccatum The prayer which is not made through Christ, does not
only not put away sin, but even it self is made sin. And further it must
needs be a great comfort to the unlearned, and a joy generally to all, when the
prayers are made in that usual known language, wherein the whole Church may
join together with one heart, and one voice to praise God.

The Apostle says, I will pray with the Spirit, 1. Cor, 14.15.
V. 16.
I will pray with understanding also. He which occupies the place of the
unlearned, how can he say Amen to the giving of thanks, when he understands
not what thou say? I had rather in the Church speak five words to the
instructing of others, then ten thousand in a strange language: V. 19.
If there were in our Churches blasphemous prayers maintained, or Idolatry
erected, then we should with Sidrach, Misach and Abednego, choose rather to die,
then to yield so much as the body to prostrate it self before them. But
otherwise, for every small abuse or corruption (which is crept into the Church)
we are not to take occasion thereby to refuse the place of God his service.
There were corruptions when there was buying and selling in the Temple of the
Jews: Luc, 19.45, Luc. 2.22, Luc. 19.47. Act. 3.1.
yet Joseph and Mary did present themselves to the oblations in that Temple,
Christ refused not to teach daily in it, the Apostles refused not to pray in
it, Luc. 2, 37,
and Anna the ancient widow is commended for that in her fasting and prayer she
served God day and night in that Temple.

Sixthly, our intent in coming to the Church, is not to judge the faith of
other men, but every one to examine his own faith. Paul says: Let a man
prove and examine himself, 1, Cor, 11.28 31*
and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup: If we would judge
our selves, 2, Cor. 13.5,
we should not be condemned: Try and examine your selves, whether ye be in the
faith, or no. If any do come unworthily in a wrong faith, or without
repentance, the Apostle denounces of him, 1. Cor. 11.29,
that he eats and drinks his own damnation. He cannot condemn others, he
damneth but himself. It was said to him that had no wedding garment, Friend
how came thou hither, not having a wedding garment? Math. 22, 12,
he was himself cast into utter darkness, he did not condemn the rest of the
guests, which were clothed with faith, working through charity. Gal. 5.6.
The Apostles knew that Judas was a traitor, our Savior had before certified
them of it, Math, 26.21.22.
yet they refused not to receive the Sacrament with him. Judas received his
own damnation, he could not condemn the rest of the Disciples. If the time
employed in the Church be not for the Sacraments or prayers, but for the
preaching of the word, our assured preservation against all error, is to clean
to the holy Scripture, the old and new Testament. Aug, in Psalm. 57.
Saint Augustine says, Auferantur de medio chartae nostiae, prodeat in medium
codex Dei. Away with our writings, and let the book of God be brought forth.
Aug. contra Petilianum Donat cap. 16.
Vtrum ipsi Ecclesiam teneant non nisi diuinarum Scripturarum canonicis libris
ostendant Whether we or they have the true Church, let it be showed no other
way but by the Canonical books of the divine Scriptures. We must imitate the
people in Beraea, Act. 17, 11,
who did search out and examine the Scriptures alleged. In the interpretations
of the Scriptures the Apostle liddeth us, 1. These. 5.21.
to try all, and to hold that which is good. That is best, which best agrees
with the grounds of faith, and with the general course of God his holy word. To
condemn that which we neither hear nor know, must needs be within the
compass of rash judgment.

Thus our intent in frequenting the Church, must be to obey the ordinance of
God, who has appointed a public place for prayer and thanksgiving, for the
Sacraments, and for the hearing of his holy word. Our intent must be so to
worship God, that God may be publickely glorified and our brethren by our
ensample edified. Our intent must be to obey God his Vicegerent upon earth, our
Christian governor. Our intent must be to judge our selves, to amend our
selves, and to humble our selves. Otherwise, if we attribute a holiness to the
soul, or stone, or timber, as though our prayers should be better accepted for
them, then do we incur a manifest idolatry. So likewise in fasting, if it be
undertaken, as making one meat more holy then another, as though fish were
more holy or more meritorious then flesh, or the egg more holy then the
Pullet, or the milk more holy then the Heyfar, or as though wines, fruits, and
iunkets were more holy then other kinds of nourishme^ts? what is it else but a
damnable superstition, 1. Tim. 4.1.
and as the Apostle does call it) the doctrine of devils? But to fast, Psalm.
33.14.
to subdue our corrupt nature, and to humble our souls (as is not done by
those fasting meats) or to fast to make us more fit for prayer, Act. 13.3.
Act. 14.23. 2. Chro. 20.3. 2. Sam. 12.22.
when we would either crave some great blessing of God, or divert some heavy
judgment, it is an exercise very acceptable and agreeable to the will of God.
And in political orders for the sustenance of a Common wealth, a good subject
is bounden to order his diet according to the laws under which he lives. But
either in fasting or in altering of diet, to account our meat more holy, or
more meritorious then another, it is a very evident and detestable
superstition. So is it with the places of God his service: If we ascribe
holiness or merit to the earth, stones, timber, or to any form or fashion of
building, it is a plain derogating from the merits of the passion of Christ,
and to travel to them with that mind, is a kind of Idolatry. The place wherein
God spoke to Moses, Exodus 3.5.
is called holy earth, the place (says God) wherein thou stand is holy
ground. But this holiness was by means of the presence of God: who vouchsafed
at that time there to be present. Psalm, 99.5.
The footestoole of God (that is the very pauement of the Temple) is called by
the Psalmist holy (according to the interpretation of some) yet was it holy in
respect of the presence of God, by his Arc and Testament. Many things in the
old Testament were named holy, as Sacraments, and types and figures of Christ
and his Church. Heb. 10.1. Col. 2.16.
But (the truth being come, and those types and shadows being vanished away)
we acknowledge now no other Sacraments then those which our Savior Christ
himself has ordained, neither do we attribute any merit to any thing: but
only to the obedience and satisfaction of Christ Jesus. If our Temples were as
gloriously furnished as was that Temple at Jerusalem: or our meats as good as
that Manna which fell from heaven, or our garments as holy, Exodus 25.7.
and as precious as was Aaron his Ephod: yet neither our buildings, nor our
food, nor our vestiments can set one foot into our salvation, but all must be
ascribed wholly and entirely to that free justification, Rom, 3, 24, 1. Ioh.
1.7. Heb, 9, 14,
which we have by the redemption of Christ Jesus. Our coming to the Church,
must be to humble our selves in it, and not to seek merit or ransom by it.
We must obey God his holy ordinance, and yet when we have done all we can do,
we must say still we are unprofitable servants. Luc. 17.10.
When our Savior Christ does command us to shut the door of our closet,
Math. 6, 6,
and to pray in secret, his meaning is not to oppose private prayer against his
public ordinance, but he does oppose it against the pride of the Pharisees,
who by praying in the sinagogues and in the corners of the streets, sought to
exalt themselves: and therefore were justly rejected of God. And yet did the
proud Pharisie not refuse to pray in the same Temple with the sinful Publican.
Luc. 18.10,
And therefore they which refuse to come to our public place of prayer, must
needs acknowledge, that either in want of charity, they make us worse then
Publicans, or else that in abundance of pride they are themselves worse then
Pharisees. For the Pharisie and Publican came both together to the Temple to
pray. He would not eat with him, nor converse with him privately: and yet he
would not forsake the Temple, because the other came to it. This action had
been (no doubt) acceptable unto God. If the Pharisie had not had a proud
conceit of his own merit, and a scornful contempt of his neighbor. Nothing
is more requisite for the composing of this controversy, then that we be first
thoroughly prepared with that true humility of heart (whereof the Apostle
speaks) every man to think another better then himself, Phil. 2.3.
which God grant us all, to whose grace and protection I commit you now and
ever. From Tanridge this 31, of December. 1603.

Your assured, S. H.

FIFIS.

