S. PAVLS CONFIDENCE DELIVERED IN A SERMON before the IVDGES of ASSISE.

By Robert Harris.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN BARTLET, at the gilt Cupin Cheape-side, 1628.

S. PAVLS CONFIDENCE.
ACTS 24.16. And herein do I exercise my self to have always a Conscience
void of offense toward God, and toward men.


THe words read were uttered by Paul; the place where, was 1. Caesarea, 2. the
judgment hall: the time when, when Tertull us the Orator had made a bitter
inuectiue against him; the manner how, by way of Apology and Defense, being
deeply slandered. The order of them is thus: 1. he wipes away the Lawyers
aspersions in particular, 2. gives account of his life in the general. And
here (for here lies our business at this time) he does two things, 1. he gives
us a sum of his Faith, verse 14.15. 2. of his Life, 16. In point of Faith and
Profession Paul and we agree, in Life and Practice we are far wide; and
therefore we will dwell upon that this hour. This verse then contains the
brief and map of Paul's life; where first note his action (exercise) Secondly,
the subject of it, Paul's self. Thirdly, the object of in his conscience.
Fourthly, the end of it, to have it void of offense in all cases, toward all
persons.

For the First, Paul does, as Solomon bids him, set his bones to work, and all
his strength. Time he neither idles nor sleights, but uses both diligence,
skill and constancy together; (...)
for all these are wrapped up in his word.

For the Second, He thought it best husbandry to till his own ground, best
policy to be wise for himself, and to keep home; and therefore he takes
himself to task, and becomes his own Physician.

And in the third place; because it is as good do nothing as nothing to the
purpose, he makes choice of a good subject to work upon (conscience.)
Conscience is a thing much talked of, but little known, and yet less
practiced than understood. I mean not a school Lecture, or Philosophical
Discourse; yet must I expound my Text. Conscience is considered two ways; one
way by Philosophers, another way by Divines. Philosophy and natural Learning
bring us thus far acquainted with the nature of Conscience: i. the Masters
hereof (for the most part of them) make the soul a building consisting of many
rooms; some higher, some lower; whereof the highest is the understanding. This
understanding is either speculatiue, containing some general notions and
principles of truth; or practical, containing the like principles and axioms
of good things: for at the first there were (nay still there are) some general
principles, belonging partly to knowledge, partly to practice, left in the
soul of man. Now to this latter, belongs (in their judgment) Conscience,
whose office is to reason and discourse; and therefore belongs to the
understanding: And its work lies about that which is good or bad, at least
doable; and therefore belongs to that part or respect of the understanding
which is termed practical.

In this, there is considerable, 1. the nature, 2. the working of Conscience.
The nature; so they conceit of it, as of a natural faculty in the
understanding only or chiefly. For the working, it accomplishes its own
operations, and drives them to an issue by discourse, thus; That which I would
not have done to me, I must not do to others: I would not have wrong done to
me; therefore etc. This conclusion, is a conclusion of Conscience; and for the
premises they have in their distinct discourses several terms: but of them
enough.

2 For Divines; We may distinguish them into two fourmes: i. some are pen men
of holy Writ, some only of private books. These latter are not so attentive to
the term as to the thing; and therefore they call sometimes the power of so
reasoning, sometimes the whole reason and syllogism, sometimes each proposition
apart, sometime the effect and consequent following such an application and
conclusion, by the name of Conscience. But now come to the inspired Prophets
and Apostles, and there the word is used(as other words of like nature in like
cases are) two ways; 1. more strictly and properly, when it is joined with
other faculties of the soul, Cic. pro Cluen. dixit conscientiam mentis nostrae
etc.
as Tit. 1.15. 1 Timothy 1.5. In the first it is differenced from the mind, in
the latter from the will. 2. More largely, when it is put alone; and so it stands
for the whole heart, soul and spirit working inwardly upon it self by way of
reflexe. So the Hebrews generally spoke, making heart, spirit, soul,
conscience, all one, especially the two former. So John speaks in his first
Epistle. Thus the word is here used, being referred both to God and man. Paul's
conscience, heart, and spirit, sound one and the same thing in this place; the
difference at the most is but in the manner of considering.

Well, what would Paul with his conscience? he would have it void of offense:
he would go an end in the ways of God, without halting, without stumbling;
for that's his allusion. A wise Traveler, in a rough way, is loath to offend his
foot, lest that offend him: Paul is the same for his conscience; by no means
would he wound that, lest that should wound him. Hence his study to keep his
Conscience void of offense: Offense 1 say, first passive: whereby his spirit
might be grieved; secondly, active: whereby his spirit might grieve either
himself or others unseasonably. This was his study, and thus inoffensiue and
straight he would be with all persons (God and Man) so that his Conscience
should not be upon him for faltring with either, and (in all cases, by all
means, or at all times) as his words may indifferently be construed. (...)
Thus lived Paul at last, who was so wild at first: why should we despair,
having the same Chirurgian? But of the Words so much. Now for Instructions:
your selves see many, let me commend the maine unto you, and bind up all in
this one.

Doct. Christians must have a special care of themselves, that they do not in
any thing offend their own consciences. To keep the conscience from offense
and hurt, must be the task of every Saint. Look how charie a proud woman is
of her beauty, a wise man of his eye, a weak man of his stomach; so (and
much more than so) should a Christian man be careful of his conscience, of his
heart. Will you precept for this? Solomon speaks home, Pro. 4.23. Above all
watchings watch the heart etc. That Is the tower that commands, and Conscience
is one of the Jewels that's there lodged. Will you example? One Paul is
sufficient: He was once averse enough, but after conversion (in point of
faith) he was all for Christ, (in point of life) all for conscience, c. 23.
Heb. 13.18. Acts 23.1. and 2 Cor. 8.28.
Will you reasons? There are enough both for the one and the other, namely, for
heeding, the conscience first; and each man his own next. For the first, we
will out of many cull but two reasons.

Reas. 1. Give the conscience content and rest, and it will pay thee a hundred
fold, and prove to thee, (next to God its Master) the greatest friend in the
world:.i. the trucst friend; whereas others are sometimes too short in
reproves, sometime in comforts; mutter and will not speak out, but think
more than they will say, and say more to others than to thy face; this friend
Conscience (if thou deal friendly with it) will deal friendly with thee. This
will round thee in the ear, and say, This is well, howeuer it be taken; and
therefore be not discouraged: this is naught, howeuer applauded or painted; it
is stark staring naught, pride, hypocrisy, etc. therefore amend. Ah
(brethren!) as no friend lies so near us, and can sound us so well as
couscience, so none will deal so plainly with us, if we do not offend it.

2. Conscience is the fastest friend in the world. Others go and come, and
stand afar off, now at hand, now I know not where; but conscience is no
starter, its never from our fides, out of our bosoms: in rides with us, it
sits with us, it lies with us, it sleeps, it wakes with us: and as it can say
much from God and of us, so it will if not offended.

3 The sweetest friend in the world. A good cheerful heart (says Solomon) is
a continual feast. Oh then a satisfied and pacified conscience, what is that?
what joys be those which will carry a man out of the earth, and make him say,
Though I have wife, children, friends, wealth, house, health, ease, honor,
etc. after my own heart, yet these are nothing to my contentments within? What
ioies those that will make one, sing under the Whippe, at the Stake, in the
Flames a Oh Conscience, thou have a special gift in comforting, that can
make the patient laugh when the spectators weep; and carry frail flesh
singing and rejoicing through a world of bonds, rods, swords, racks, wheels,
flames, strappado's! these joys be strong, vnspeakcable indeed, this peace
passing man's understanding etc. Phil. 4.

4 The surest friend in the world. Other friends love not to come to a sick
man's bed side, or if so, they cannot abide to hear his groans, to see a dead
man, at the most they can but follow one to the grave: but Conscience will make
ones bed in sickness, and cause him to lie the softer; will stand by him when
he groans, and do him comfort; will hearten him upon death, when its coming;
and say, Thy Redeemer lineth; will whisper to him when departing; and say, Thy
warfare is accomplished; will lodge the bodre in grave as in a bed; manne the
soul to heaven, and make him able to look God in the face without any
terror: So fast a friend is this, that when riches, husband, parents, friends,
breath, life; nay, patience, hope, faith, have left us, in some measure, this
will not leave us. And would not such a friend, a friend so true, firm, kind,
sure, be much made of; shall such a one be offended.

Reas. 2. The conscience offended becomes the sorest enemy. The greatest
friends are bitterest foes when once divided: no wars to civil, to domestical
wars. The nearer the worse: and the conscience is nearest; and therefore (if
an enemy) the heauiest.

For this enemy is, 1. vhauoydable. Others may be kept off with strength, or
put off with skill: but so will not conscience; no bars, no bolts, no
bulwarks, can keep that from thy table, thy bed. Dan. 5.5.
Belshazzer may sooner keep out ten thousand Medes, than one conscience: That
will pass through all his Officers to his Presence; and in the face of his
Nobles and Concubines arrelt him, and shake him in despite of his security.
Nor will this watchful. Officer be bobd with a bundle of distinctions and
cuasions. When God sets it on work, it marches furiously like John, and will
take thee up with his answer; What peace so long as thy whoredom and sins
remain: As there is no respondens like conscience, so no obiector like to that. A
man may make a shift with a wrangling Sophister, with the Devil himself,
better than with his conscience. For no Devil knows that by me, which I do
by my self: And the conscience shall have hearing when the Dinel shall not;
for conscience is the Kings Solicitor, and speaks for the great King.

2. This enemy is insufferable: it strips us at one stroke of all other
comfort. A sick stomach makes one weary of his bed, chair, chamber, house,
meats, drinks; yea, that meat that before much pleased, now increases his
sickness. So does a sick conscience; it takes away the relish of all
natural comforts, of all spiritual exercises and ordinances; and makes one a
burden and terror to himself. 2. it fills one full of horrors and
unhappiness. A wounded spirit who can bear? the Stone, Gout, Strangury, who
can bear? Yes, etc. But when the pillars are shaken, that which should bear
up all is wounded, when the heauen's fight against a man, and a pour creature
must wrestle with infinite instice, power, etc. oh how hard is this? The wrath
of a King is terrible, the rage of Seas, of Fires, of Lions, but still here is
creature against creature, weak to weak; but who knows the power of Gods
anger, Psul. 90? Who can stand before that consuming fire? not Men, not
Mountains, not Angels. The terrors of God and anguish of spirit casts the
Devil himself into a frenzic, and makes him mad; nay, a wounded spirit made
the Heir of all things utter his griefs in these sad terms ( My God, my God,
etc.) That which a thousand mockes, ten thousand prisons and persecutions
could not have done; this one alone, when nothing else ailed him, was able to
effect: and therefore good reason have we to guard this part, and to give our
spirits no occasion of grief. And for the first, these Reasons shall serve the
turn.

Now touching the second. Every man must keep his own vine, and please his
own conscience. Why; Hold still whilst I pour in these? Reasons, because I
am in haste. 1. It Is fit that every one should be beft seen in his own Book:
and it is a thousand pities, that in this bookth age, this Book of Conscience is
least studied. 2. This is a meare-stone that diuides the Christian and the
Hypocrite. The Hypocrites knowledge runs outward and fromward, the Christians
looks inward and reflects upon is salfe: the ones is science, the others
conscience, the one leaves to be doing with other men's consciences, the other
with his own. 3. Here Is the trial of a man's wisdom. He that's wise, says
Solomon, will be wise for himself, and, The righteous has care of his own
soul. 4. This watching at home, keeps out pride, judging in businesses
abroad, makes one quiet with others, tame in himself, low and base before God
in his own eyes. But we must away. 5. He will be a sorry Physician to others
that has never practiced upon himself in this kind, etc.

Use. 1. Here Is matter of complaint and chiding. I told you at first, that wear
of Paul's Faith, not of his Life. It Is true in this sense: Paul professed the
truth of Christ, so do we; he called upon Gods Name, so we; he gave assent to
the Word written so we; he apprehended a life to come and resurrection, so
we: But now Paul dwells, non in protestations and speculations; but he comes
to practicew to conscianee: here we leave him. In this age, consciecce is used
as love is; We spend all in words, and send it away in complements; we keep
none our sehues; we have (our. exercises) now; but they are exercises of body,
of estate, of wit, of memory, of learning, they he not exercises of
conscience. No sooner can you name the thing before some kind of Scholars, but
they are presently disputing, What think your. Is conscience, an act, an babit,
or a faculty, or the whole soul with its eyes inward? or what is it: They
spend the time in defining it, rather than, in resining, and reforming of it.
Here of comes it, that when they are sent for to a sick patient, (...) reat;
they be as far to seek, as that Physician who has read much, but practiced
nothing: and for the many; once mention conscience, and they will quickly put
you by with a rude Proverb, That conscience was hanged a great while ago. Thus
the term is now grown odious, the thing it self a mere stranger.
Certainly, it is few men's exercise to study conscience; their (own) conscience.
Indeed Flies are busy about others sores, and so is the world about others
consciences. Every one now is a master, nay one man is many masters. law. 3.1.
He will sit and keep Court in the conscience of a thousand; Lord it over his
brethren, his betters; judging all callings, all professions, all consciences,
but his own. I will dot spend breath upon such as bark at all good, because
they would have none in the world. I wish that all the pains of some
Professors were not speat in this; even in rifling others consciences, rather
than their own. Religion, religion is something else than a judging of other
men. After meare, the heat should repayne homeward; not fly as far off from
the heart and stomach, as the body will bear it: and when we have heard a
Sermon of conscience, we should recoyle upon our selves, with, What have I
done? or, What shall I do? not look upon another, and carue all to him; much
less fly upon them who stand as far off us, as the King has land. Oh men
unwise, who are more troubled with others diseases than their own; and more
desirous of peace in their neighbors houses than at home. Well, Paul would
have been sorry to see his neighbor suffer shipwreck: but yet he is most
chary of his own vessel, lest that should dash and receine some bruise: by no
means would he have his conscience offended. But out upon such Christians as
this age brings forth; fear of man, hope of gain, love of honor, of case, of
favor, will make them run over their conscience and all Gods mounds. Rather
than the man will endure the frowns of his Master, the wise of her husband,
the tenant of his Landlord, he will lie, cousin, swear, run, ride, do any
thing on the Sabbath: nay, for one pound, shilling, groat, penny, you may hyre
a man to gash his conscience; so little care have men of giving it offense. But
how far stretches Paul's care? To all cases, to all persons. To all: To all
certainly, at all times: first, toward God, secondly, toward man. Toward
God: Mark this all ye Ciuilians, that cry out as Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3. of
disorder, so ye of Conscience, What conscience, what conscience? when you are
worst your selves. A good conscience must begin with God; you neither begin nor
end there. A mecre carnal civil man is all for man, nothing for God: he pays
men their own, lives quietly and fairly to the world-ward, and therefore
thinks himself a man of conscience. But what conscience is in this, to deal
well with the subject and not with the Prince? What conscience in breaking the
first article of agreement between God and man, which is, to know him? What
conscience, to dwell in Gods house and pay him no rent; to enter into bonds,
and never think of payment; to smite God with oaths for man's often fences; to
steal away time from God, when he has given us much? Show me a mere
carnal civil man that makes conscience of the first, second, third, or fourth
Commandment; of gerting knowledge; of setting up God in his house; of
forbearing an oath; of keeping the Sabbath, etc. Verily, where there is no God,
there can be no confidence: And such a man is without God in the world.

For the second, Paul's conscience reached to men also. Let all Professors (as
they will be called) note this, A good conscience begins with God, but ends in
Man. A conscionable man, as he must be a professor, hearer, lover of the Word,
a keeper of the Sabbath, a zealous obseruer of the first Table: so must he be a
peaceable, just, sober, free, kind, honest man, and deal squarely with all
men. Thus it should be: But O times, O manners! now Profession is become
loathsome, and, to say the truth, the behavior of many is such, that it would
make an unsettled man call into question all Profession, all Religion, all
Conscience almost. We talk of Conscience, but where is it: who makes
conscience of his words? who of his bargains? who of his place or promise:
Every man cries out of other: but who discharges his own part? We have a
saying in Gods Book, He that prouides not for his kindred, is worse than an
Infidel. What cares the rich if his poor kinsman starve? We have a precept,
Husbands love your wives: What conscience is made of this? We have a
commandment Speak not evil of the ruler: We have a charge, Do good against
evil: A charge, Toil not to be rich, Defraud not, Whisper not, etc. A
command, Be rich in good works: Fashion not your selves to the world: What
shall's say to these things? Is there a conscience at all: Any ceraintie in the
Word at all? Any heaven, any hell? What do we mean thus to slubber over
matters: If we belecue nothing, mean nothing in good earnest, why do we
dissemble: why forbear we any thing? If we be in earnest in one commandment,
why not in all? If in one thing, why not in every thing, as Paul was? He was
still like himself, at all times, in all cases. We have our reserved cases.
One will be a Christian, and a man of conscience: but he has his infirmity;
he does nor love his wife. Another will be your hearer: but he must live by
his trade. A third will be your convert, so you will help him to above ten in
the hundred: the just rate he likes not, it sounds like. Usury; but as much
above as you can, with a good conscience. A fourth will gine something to a
Preacher, upon condition he may bear the Preachers purse, and be his Farmor. A
fifth will ride with you from morning to night; so he may hold his finger
still in other men's sores. Away, Hypocrites, away, make no mote profession,
talk no more of it, till you mean to be honester men; either show us Paul's
conscience, or none. If you cannot reach this here; yet you must that there,
Heb. 13.18. Defire to live, etc. else there is no truth in you, no comfort for
you, no heed to betaken of you, down you will when a little pressed, like a
hollow wall.

2. All ye of Paul's Profession, use this exercise, cease from others; begin
with your selves; travel not so much for good houses, good livings, good
faces, good heads, as for good consciences; seek not so much the favor of the
world, the countenance of Princes, as of your own conscience. Here study,
here sweat, here labor to be throughout blameless. Oh the peace of a quiet
and well pleased conscience is great! the boldness of him that has it, is
great; he eats well, sleeps well, dwells well, lives well, he is in much
safety, he can hold up his face joyfully before a world of accusers. So is not
the unconscionable: Every bush is a man, every man an enemy, every leaf an
executioner. A sound of fear is in his ears, and the noise of troubles makes
him ask, Who can stand before a continual burning? As for liberty, that's
lost: he must not speak against others, lest they stop his mouth: he must be a
servant to every one, of whom he would borrow a good word. For the purpose:
Say a man be covetous; how must he crouch to every one for his word? how many
apologies and excuses must he drop at every door? whereas a good conscience
concludes, I have done my best; and now let them say their worst, I will wear
it as a Crown. Well then, since so many sweet things be bound up in conscience;
peace, comfort, courage, liberty; esteem it highly, and resolve with Paul, I
had rather dye than lose my rejoicing this way. Lose it if you will not, take
up his exercise, and keep it from offense. Which that you may do, I will show
you these things.

1. What it is to offend the conscience: 2. what be the degrees of this
offense: 3. what the means whereby: 4. what the remedies: 5. what the letts in
the use of these remedies.

First, to offend the conscience, is to trouble the welfare of it. The foot is
then offended, when the health of it is impeached, and the exercise of it
hindered, that either it cannot stir at all, or not straightly, and with any
ease. Think the same of conscience: the health of it stands in three; 1. in
the clearenesse of it: 2. in the goodness of it: 3. in the liveliness and
sensiblenesse of it; as it is in the eye: the clearness of it is double, 1.
oppesed to ignorance and delusion: 2. to hypocrisy and falsenesse. The
goodness of it stands in the quietness and peace of it: And thereto is
opposed, 1. a troubled conscience, and, 2. a benumbed conscience. The
tenderness of the conscience, is its quickness in apprehending its own
estate, and judging of its own doings: Whereto is opposed 1. a sleepy, 2. a
dead and seared conscience. When any thing is done or left undone, whereby the
clearenesse, quietness, or working of the conscience is any way impeached,
then conscience is offended.

Secondly, the degrees of these offenses are diverse, as a man may more or less
wound his foot against a stone. V. notes on Pron. 18.
1. there is a tempting of the conscience: when a man unresolved of the
lawfulness of a thing, venters upon it as upon meat never tried before: 2. a
wounding of the conscience: when a man for fear, hope, etc. does a thing
against knowledge: 3. a killing of it: when he trades in known sins, of
purpose to paue and brawne his conscience.

3. The means, whereby the conscience comes to be offended, is double: 1. when
we are wanting to it: 2. when wrongful to it. Wanting, when we do not watch
and save the conscience, as we do the eye from dust. 2. When we do not
speedily look to wounds, if any. If any thing breed in the eye, it may soon
be lost: The conscience is a vessel that must be washed daily (as dim eyes
be) and that by Repentance and Faith.

3 When we do not establish the heart and conscience. A weak child soon
stumbles, unless vpheld; so conscience. This must be vpheld first, by grace,
secondly, by conference etc.

2 Wrongful to it; 1. when we hinder the work of it: for every thing
delights in acting its own operations: 2. when we force sin upon it against
light of nature or grace, especially gross sins.

4 The remedies: 1. Pacify it; not by dawbing etc. but by Gods means. 1. The
sin offending must be reuersed; as meat that will not be digested: it sticks
as an arrow in the flesh, that must be plucked out by repentance and
satisfaction. 2. Christ's blood applied, the only salve for a sick soul. 2.
When reconciled, peace must be maintained. Here take these rules: 1. do nothing
wilfully against conscience; 2. nothing doubtingly when resolution may be had;
3. nothing blindely: for meat unwittingly taken, may after trouble.

5 Thus you see directions. To the end that you may practice, remove 1. letts;
which are of two heads: 1. want of will, 2. want of skill. The first arises
from three wants; 1. of faith, as if the course were unprofitable, 2. of love
to Gods truth, man, etc. 3 of truth and uprightness: we had rather be
hypocrites than otherwise etc. See all, 1. Tim. 1.5. 2. Want of skill; which
arises 1. from want of understanding the Word, 2. want of experience, 3. want
of exercise etc.

Then since in this vessel (Conscience) lies all our treasure, faith, life it
self, etc. therefore preserve it well, get over all difficulties, help faith,
love, truth etc. use all means etc. follow Paul till thou can say with him,
I desire to keep a good Conscience.

3 Apology for such as stand upon Conscience. These are the worlds fools; but
it is no matter, they are Gods jewels and delight: and when they stand, as Paul,
before the judgment feat of man, nay of God, they shall find a good
conscience a better breast plate and buckler than a world of wealth. Only be
sure of this; 1. that it is conscience. There be two things in the world that
look a little like it, but are not conscience: 1. Custom, which breeds in
blind men, Popish persons, and most unregenerate men, who have had good
breeding, a kind of trouble and regret; which is no more conscience than the
aching of the stomach when it wants its set meals. 2. Prejudice and conceit,
when a man upon some presumptions and probabilities has pitched upon a
conclusion, (either for or against a thing) and will not be removed. True
Conscience differs from both these: For first, that knows it ground; secondly,
that ground is some Scripture: which because it may be happily mistaken,
therefore conscience is ever teachable, as willing to hear as to speak, to
lay down as to take up an opinion. Not so the other: they are violent if
opposed, and every man that thinks not as they think, wants judgment, or
truth, or both. 2. This conscience must be clear toward God and man, and
have both it eyes. What has the hypocrite to do with conscience? A man of
conscience must and usually will be suitable and throughout orderly; though I
doubt not, but that there is a partial hypocrisy, as well as ignorance in
some men at all times, and in all men, even in Saints, at some times. 3. It
must be our own conscience, as Paul here speaks: and fourthly, to make an end,
a good conscience must be qualified as is heavenly wisdom (for this is a
great part of it,) How is that? St. James shows it, chap. 3.17. 1. pure in it
self, 2. peace, toward others and it self, 3. moderate, and not exacting
extremities, 4. teachable and easy to be persuaded, 5. pitiful and helpefull
every way. And as it must have these excellencies, so must it be void of
partiality in causes and persons; and of hypocrisy between God and it self.
And he that has such a conscience, or labors for such with Paul's exercises,
shall hold out his profession, and hold up his face, when a thousand others
shall blast and wither.

FINIS.

