AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST THE PLAGVE. OR (...): A Salve for all sores: Which applied
and practiced, will soon awaken the Lords mercy, and suddenly cause the storms
of his just judgments to vanish away.

Delivered in a Sermon, preached within the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul's,
London.

Iehovae liberatori.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher. 1625.

TO THE HONOrable, and right worthy Sir Francis Wortley Knight and Baronet,
Grace mercy and peace from God our Father and our Lord Jesus Christ.
Right Noble Sir,
IF I may be bold to look so high, I dare look no higher, then your self in
this my Dedication; were I able to bring forth a birth worthy of a higher
countenance, to whom should I present it, but unto my gracious Lord of
Pembroke, Nostri hujus saeculi miraculum, I am sure, Reipublicae sustentaculum,
unto whom in spem veni, for earthly encourageme^ts. But I never yet could so
ouerweene my own abilities, as to think their fruits worthy of such a
patronage. And I must deal plainly with you, I am altogether timorous, (if not
a little presumptuous) to shrowde your Honors name in the forhead of such
vnliterate lines; yet since that not only your Noble desires for my good, but
also your intensiue and extensiue exhibition of more then common love, do
justly challenge some testification of thankfulness (without which I might
rightly incur Claudius Caesar's censure upon ingratitude) therefore Ingratos
reuocauit in seruitutem. Sueton.
instead of a better acknowledgement, I dedicate this poor widows mite, this
formlesse first borne issue, and in that my self, my best devoted service to
your noble protection. I remember what Socrates did reply to Aeschines his
scholar, when being poor he took it to heart that he was not able to
gratify him in a more ample manner, An non intelligis quam magnum munus mihi
dedisti? nisi forte teipsum parui aestimas; Do thou not know (says his
Master) how great a gift thou have given me? belike thou accountest thy self
little worth. Implying that he accounted his gift (though poor) more precious
than theirs who were rich; because (though his gift was but very small) yet he
cast in all that he had; Likewise it is granted that there is no proportion
between such a seeming something, such a less then nothing as this, and the
great love and observance which you have condignlie merited at my hands; Yet
seeing the Moralist tells me, that where only the quality of the affection
and not the quantity of the present is to be attended: Modicum non differt a
magno, it skils not whether the present be great or small, so that your
affection may always rest beyond desert, and gracious acceptance, far
exceeding expectation, in which hope resting, I crave leave for writing, and
take leave of writing: praying God to bless you still in this life, and to
crown you with blessedness it self in the life to come.

Your Honors in love and duty, Tho: Hastler.

Ad Lectorem.
Scripta vide; monitusque cave: cupit ipse moneri,
Sed non morderi. Neu fallat Nominis vmbra:
Quaerito non a quo, sed quae sint scripta: faueto.
Mente bona studui prodesse, fruare: Ualeto. Aug. ad Licent. Epist. 41.

Servus tuus peripsum, and conservus sub ipso, T. H.

AN ANTIDOTE against the Plague.
Conf^^^ out of Math. 8. ^^rse 25. Then his Disciples came unto him, and awoke
him, saying, Lord save us, we perish.
CHrist being wonderful in his Nativity, wonderful in his Ascension, and
wonderful in his Transfiguration, is here (...), beyond admiration by his
miraculous works. In this Chapter are specified 4. several miracles first, the
cleansing of a leprous man, 2 the curing of a woman troubled with a fever, 3
the healing of the Centurions servant, and lastly, the strange appeasing of the
wind: and therefore this is rightly called by S. Ambrose, Scriptura miraculosa.
the miraculous Scri^^^^^. This miracle is record^^ (...) such as are either
sick, or troubled, or oppressed, or beset with any danger, that whatsoever
storm of adversity shall strike our sails, or what calamity soever shall
befall us, we may remember, that the blessed Disciples, even the nearest and
dearest to our Lord Jesus, have tasted of the same whip before us; therefore in
the^, as it were in a Crystal Glass, we may view the common state of Christ's
Church militant: It is like the Arc that floated upon the waters, like the
Lilly, that grows among the thorns, like the bush that burnt, and was not
consumed, like Christ's ship, in this place, covered over with waves, and yet
not suncke, praemuntur iusti, vt pressi clament, clamantes exaudiantur,
exauditi glorisicent Deum, says Leo the first, the righteous are therefore
pressed with sore afflictions, that they might cry unto the Lord, and crying
might be heard, and heard might glorify God, pessima necessitas, optima or
andi magistra, says Bernard, the sharpest Bernard de pug spirit.
perplexity is the best Schoolmaster or mistress of Prayer. When the
Disciples once perceived, that there was (...): a mighty storm, a shaking
tempest, which strongly had environed them: when the Lord had sent forth (...),
a vehement whirlewind, or as Lorinus terms it, plurium conflictu^ ventorum, a
conflict of many winds, which all at once smote the ship on every part, and
brought the swelling waves every way upon it, as if in an instant they would
have buried both ship and passengers in the surges: when the merciless Ocean
under them was thus billowing, the brittle ship about them reeling, the
Mariners for fear of shipwreck, lamentably shreeking, and Christ their only
hope and help in the stern fast sleeping, when this great ieopardie had even
almost seized on them all, Then his Disciples came unto him, and awoke him,
saying, Lord save us, we perish. In which words (not tying my self to tread
precisely in the exact steps of logical rules) for our better instruction, and
further light, we may observe four generals; first, who procured this calm,
(his Disciples) secondly, of whom Division, parts 4. Quis, a quo, quid, quomodo.
did they procure it, of Christ, (they came to him) thirdly, the effect of
their coming, (they awoke him,) lastly, the manner how they did awaken him, by
prayer: the form which they used being here expressed, Lord save us, we
perish. Upon all these I intend to treat somewhat orderly and briefly,
according to Gods assistance, and the times permittance. To begin with the
first: Then his Disciples came to him, (then) that is, when the sea thus raged,
the ship thus tossed, the tacklings thus shattered, the passengers thus
trembled and shaked, then and not before, the Disciples came to him: first, they
would make trial, whether the winds would cease or decrease naturally, and the
storms calm of themselves, but when they saw all dangers increased in greater
extremity, and more grievous vehemency, when they thought themselves past all
hope of recovery, when they despaired of their own safety, (...), then, when
the last wave was ready to sweep them away, They came unto him, and awoke him,
saying, Lord save us, we perish. Discipulorum serotina mora, sit Christianorum
maxima cura: it was an ancient Fathers observation upon this place. 1 Observation.
The Disciples most dangerous delay, must minister a great caution to all
Christians, willing them to be wary in the timous prevention both of present
and future evils. Time me thinks should yield us (in these our contagious and
deadly times) a strong persuasion of a timely return unto the right way: we
are all out by sin, and therefore we must begin again by repentance, that
we may regaine our peace with God in time: for when the time is past, periit
spes nostra, our hope is gone, now it is time, yea time, the appointed time is
come, momenti transitus, anni transitus, aeui transitus, once lost, and ever
lost. Will you show mercy to your souls, by repenting your sins? Defer not
from day to day, Deterrior posterior dies, says devout Bernard, delay is
dangerous, the longer the worse: say not with thy self, I will amend
hereafter, for how know thou, whether hereafter thy heart shall be hardened,
as was Pharaohs, Exodus, 14, 4. or whether the grace of the Holy Ghost shall be
taken from thee as it was from Saul. 1 Samuel 16, 14. or whether thou shall
repent, and lament in vain, as did Esau, Heb. 12. 17. or whether thou shall
cry peccaui too late with Judas, Math. 27. 4. It is true, beloved, that our
sins shall be pardoned whenever we repent: but we cannot repent,
whenever we will, because repentance is the gift of God, and we have not God
at our command, but as Saint Augustine truly says, Qui dat poenitenti veniam,
non semper dat peccanti poenitentiam. God which always pardons the repentant
sinner, does not always give repentance unto sinners, but as they neglected
him, so he rejects them, and suffers them to heap unto themselves wrath
against the day of wrath.

Strike therefore whilst the iron is hot, make hay while the Sun shines,
hoyse up sails whiles the wind blows, time and tide tarry for no man: Behold
now the accepted time, behold now the day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6. 2. Now God
calls us per beneficia, per flagella, per praedicatores, by his benefits, by
his plagues and punishments, by his Ambassadors, all continually wooing us, to
apply that most sovereign medicine of repentance to these bitter wounds, which
the sting of sin has made in our souls. Oh! let us not defer, and put off
this necessary cure! One has said very well: Qui veniam per poenitentiam
Diez. loco de poenitentia.
repromisit, diem crastinam ad poenitentiam non promisit. He that has promised
to pardon us, if we repent, has not promised us, that to morrow we shall
repent. Wherefore let us lay aside all excuses and delays, lest by little and
little we grow key cold in love, and rustie in sin: prolong not an hour, nay,
not a moment, for the clouds of Gods ance may in an instant ouer-cast thy
soul, and in ictu oculi in the twinkling of an eye, the plague tokens of the
Lords wrath may take a deadly impression in thy body, and then furor arma
ministrat, his fierce anger will quickly afford him weapons, and as Lactantius
says, tarditatem irae, grauitate supplicij compensabit, he will requite the
slownesse of his wrath with the severity of his vengeance: for quanto diutius
Deus expectat, tanto grauius vindicat: Aug. sermon. 102 de tempore.
how much the longer God expects and waits for our conversion, so much the more
grievously will he be avenged upon us, if we repent nor. Serior esse solet
vindicta, seuerior: God uses to come to punish on leaden feet, but he pays
home with iron hands, he will reach them far, and he will smite them full. And
therefore to day if you will hear his voice harden not your hearts, defer
not till the last gasp, for, (...): unseasonable good is not good at all,
untimely sacrifice avails not, prayer, that comes out of time, is like a
mess of meat set upon the grave when the dead is no what the better for it.

How might I (beloved) urge unto you in all your weightiest affairs the
presentest prensation, and speediest apprehension of the very forelocke of
Time, but Cintheus aurem vellit, Time calls me to the pursuit of my text.

It follows in these words, (his Disciples) then his Disciples came to him:
Disciple, is properly a Latin word, and does signify in English a Scholar, or
learner: from the verb Disco. The original also is of the same (...). Disco.
expression: so that in a general nification, all that professed the Gospel of
Christ, were called his Disciples: but more strictly they only did bear the
name of his Disciples, who were learners of his Doctrine, Professors of his
life and conversation, and Preachers of both to others: and they were of two
sorts; first, and of a lower order, the 70 sent forth two and two before his
face, into every city, and place, whither he himself would come to preach the
Gospel, and work miracles, as they are specified by the Evangelist, Lu. 10.
1. who these 70 Disciples were though Eusebius, Epiphanius, and others, tell
us; yet in the Gospel their names are concealed, and Christ bade them rejoice,
that their names were written in Heaven, Luke 10. 20.

The other, and higher order, were the twelve Apostles, many times called his
Disciples, and made known by their names. Mat. 10. 1. Mar. 315. Luke 9. 1, 5.
Tertullian, Ierom, and other learned Divines, say; herein the truth answered
ancient types, Tertul. cont. Marci. l. 4. cap. 24.
both of the twelve Patriarchs, and seventy Elders, called their Sanedrim, as
some, the 70 souls that came with Jacob into Egypt: Ierom, Epist ad Fabi olam
Mansio. 6.
others, the twelve fountains of Water, and seventy Palme-trees in Elim. Who
those Disciples were that came to Christ by Prayer in this extremity of
peril, is a question, because the text does not clear it: but out of all
doubt they were Disciples, not one, or two, but (as far as may be gathered)
even all the Apostles; and great reason, for as the penitent theife said to his
fellow, they were all in the same comdemnation: if the Luk 23. 40
ship had suncke into the waves they had all perished, Lord, save us, we
perish. And therefore not only Peter, James and John, though counted Pillars,
and in Gal. 2. 9. Mat. 17. 1. Mar. 5. 37.
many things preferred before the rest, but all, go to Christ to further the
common good, and to help by their prayers to procure the common salvation. Yet
take notice by the way, that as all the Disciples came, so none but Disciples
came, and their coming was not tam passibus corporis, quam fide cordis, says
venerable Beda: not so much with the feet of their bodies, as by the faith of
their hearts: hereby giving us to understand 2 Observation.
whose prayers are so powerful with God to remove both a public and private
calamity, either from themselves or others: not the prayers of enemies to God,
and alienates from the house of Israel, but of faithful friends, favorites
and constant followers of our blessed Savior The Lord hears the prayers of
the righteous, and his ears are open to their cries, he will fulfill the
desires of such as fear him, he is nigh to such as call on him in faith, Psalm.
145, 18. quia juxta mensuram fidei, erit mensura impetrandi, says Ambrose,
because the more faith we have, the more grace we shall receive: therefore
Christ teaches us to say Our Father, to make us confident of obtaining, and
concludes with Amen, significare indubitanter a Domino conferri, quod fide
petitur, to signify, that we shall undoubtedly receive whatsoever we
faithfully desire, says Saint Augustine.

It was Abraham the friend of Iam 2. 23. Genesis 18. Penult. Heb. 3. 6: Exo. 32.
10.
God that prevailed so much with his prayer for the Sodomites. It was his
faithful servant Moses, would not let him alone, but stood up in the breach,
and turned away Gods anger, that he could not destroy the people, as he said
Psalm: 106. 23. It was religious Iosuah, that by his prayer commanded the Sun
and Moon to stand in the firmament Josh. 10. 12. It was fervent Elijah whose
tongue was Froenum coeli says Austin, the bridle of heaven; opening, and
shutting it by Iam 5. 17. Numb. 25. 13. Psalm. 106. 30.
his prayer. It was zealous Phineas, that prayed and so the plague ceased. And
the Apostle concludes in general, it is the prayer of the righteous man that
so much avails, Iam. 5. 16. Tu^cor nostrum fiduciam in oratione accepit, cum
sibi vitae prauitas nulla contradicit, therefore the godly have confidence that
God will be answerable to their requests, because they are correspondent to
his will, and then do they steadfastly rely upon the grant of their Petitions,
when there is no prauity of life, nor any wickedness of conversation to
contradict their profession says Gregory in his Morals: and therefore St.
Basil says, that a prayer should be filled up, non tam syllabis, quam
operibus, not so much with words, as with works; because God hears not sinners
Acts 12. 7. but their best prayers (as the Prophet speaks) are Psalm. 109, 6
turned into sin, and when they send the^ up to the Almighty for Oration de
carne pudica, de anima innocenti, de spiritu sancto offerenda. Tertul. Apolog.
cap, 30.
a bliss, they double but a curse, for using his sacred name in their mouths,
and hating to be reformed: no matter therefore whether the wicked pray or no?
yea all their fasting, praying, and crying, not worth a straw, but oh ye meek,
ye true Disciples, ye that have your hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience, and bodies washed with pure water; ye Heb. 10. 11.
that have clean hands and a pure Psalm. 24. 4.
heart, ye are Gods favorites, pray for a calm; ye are the Chariots 2 king
2. 12.
and horsemen of Israel, stand in the gap day and night, keep not silence, and
give the Lord no rest, till he have mercy on Esaias 62. 6.
Sion, and has taken his sore plague from Jerusalem: So much for the first
part, viz, the persons procuring this calm (his Disciples.)

Now secondly, to whom go they? where do they seek it? (to him,) that is, to
Christ, their Lord and Master. The Heathenish Jonah 1. 5.
Mariners in Ionahs storm did cry every man to his God. In nothing were the
Gentiles more sottish then in this, ascribing particular tutelar gods, to
particular places: Babylon had Belus; Egypt, Isis; Athens had Minerua; and
Ephesus, Diana: The Caldeans had Baal; Sidonians Ashteroth; Ammonits Moloch or
Milcom; Moabites, Chamos; Syrians, Rimmon; and Philistims, Dagon: Yea, the
Elements had Other Countries had other gods, the Relics whereof are recorded
by Tertullian in Apol. c. 23. Angelici quia in Angelorum cultum inclinati. Ang.
de bar. c. 39. Angelici vocati, quia angeles colunt. Isidor. Origin. l. ^. c. s.
their several gods, to rule over them: as the Heaven had Jupiter, the Air
Juno, the Sea Neptune, and Hell Pluto: yea, for every purpose and occasion, for
every time and season, they had one god or other to call upon. And do not the
Antichristian Angelites, or Angeliques rather (for so does Saint Augustine, and
Isidore name those heretics, that either did adore, or were inclined to the
worship of Angels) parallel the Ethnicks in every respect? nay, do they not
transcend them in folly, as much as their Hyperdulia to the Virgin Mary, does
their Dulia to common Saints? Surely many learned Authors will make the^
confess no less: for what Arithmetician is so perfect in the calculations of
the Algebra, that I ooke Francis de Croy. G. ARTH. in his three Co^formities.
cap 4, 5.
he can number the infiniteness of diverse Patrons, Advocates, and tutelar
Saints, whom they have canonized, for the use of every Country, place,
creature, and disease. Our Disciples are better taught (Popery was not then
hatched, nor this point of invocation known in the Church, for the space of
360 years together after the birth of our Savior) they do not in this
dangerous storm and tempest, invocate Saint Grache, St. Barbara, Saint
Alivirgo, Saint Andoche, or Saint Nicholas: no nor Noah, Moses, or Jonah, who
had been in dangered by Seas, and waters before, but they come to Christ the
true and only Lord of Sea, and Land, and all: whose President must be our
imitation, whose pattern 3 Observation.
must be our direction, guiding us to call on God only in our days of
trouble, that he may hear us, and we may praise his most glorious name. Rome
would make us believe, that during the time of Pestilence we must pray unto
none but Saint Sebastian, and his successor Saint The latter pestilent God is
worshipped in Venice.
Roche, Saints invented to intercede against such a deadly disease: wilfully
and directly opposing and contradicting the command and counsel of the Lord of
Hosts, Psalm. 50. 15. Call on me in the day of thy trouble, and I will deliver
thee: Athanasius has observed that David, Athan. ^rat. 4. cont. Arian page 260
though oftentimes plunged into many perplexities, and beset with those prim
weapons of the Lords wrath, the sword, famine and pestilence, (...): yet he
never prayed unto any other, but God himself for his deliverance. Could Isis
or any other God or goddess have freed Pharaohs land from those ten plagues,
sent upon them for open rebellion? surely then the Magicians might have
prevailed: but that Jehovah who was the Egyptians only punisher, was the
Israelites only deliverer: and the same Lord, whose justice was the revenger
of our sins by this mortal disease; his all-sufficient mercy can only
succor, aid and deliver us. And therefore let us all with weeping, fasting
and praying, return unto God, and say with Saint Augustine, Cui alteri praeter
Aug. Confess. lib. 1. cap. 5.
te clamabimus; To whom else should we cry in our sore afflictions besides
thee: and with Chrysostom, (...); Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Hom. 1.
Let us not mediate this Saint, or that Saint, this Angel, or that Angel, but
only the name of the Lord Jesus.

There are three unanswerable Reasons 3.
reasons why we should only pray to God; first, because he 1. Because he is
only omniscient
only is omniscient, that is, such a one, as knows all things: he that
hears our prayers must be able to search the secrets of our hearts, and
discern the inward disposition of our souls, for the pouring out of good
words, and the offering up of external sighs and tears, are but the carcass
only of a true prayer; the life there of consists in the pouring out of the
very soul it Psalm. 62. 8. 1 Samuel 1. 13, 15. Romans 8. 26. Rom 8. 27.
self, and the sending up of those secret groant of the spirit which cannot be
uttered. But the Godhead only searches the hearts, and only he knows what
is mind of the spirit: he hears in Heaven his dwelling place, and gives to
every man according to his ways, for he, even he only knows the hearts of
all the children of men, as Solamon teaches us in the prayer, 2 Chronicles. 6. 30.
which he made at the Dedication of the Temple. May not therefore Romish
Doctors worthily be taxed, from whom mental prayers are presented to the
Saints as well as vocal: and with whom they are believed to receive both the
one and the other.

Me thinks Anselmus Laudunensis in his interlineall Gloss upon that Text,
Abraham is Augustinus dicit, quia mortut nesciunt, eti am sancti, quid agant
vivi, etiam eorum sil^^ Gloss. interlineal. in Esai. 63.
ignorant of us, and Israel knows us not, (Esa. 63. 16.) should make them
blush for shame, where he notes, that Augustine says, that the dead, even the
Saints, do not know what the living do, no not their own sons: with whom
concordeth Hugo de Sancto Victore, in his book de spiritu and anima, Aug de
cura pro mortuis cap. 13.
cap. 29. Ibi sunt spiritus defunctorum, vbi non vident quaecunque aguntur, aut
eveniunt in ista vita hominibus. The spirits of the dead be there, where they
do neither see, nor hear the things that are done or fall out unto men in
this life. And if they are ignorant of outward acts and gestures, then much
more of inward requests and motions: therefore seeing, (...), God alone
searches the reins, and beholds the hidden things, as Athanasius speaks;
Let us conclude this reason with that golden sentence of David, O thou that
hear prayer, unto thee Psalm 65. 2.
shall all flesh come.

Secondly, we must call only upon God, because he only is omnipotent, which
can only help us. None but the Almighty could have delivered Israel out of
Egypt, that house of bondage and furnace of affliction: Exodus 13. 3
Daniel out of the Lions Dan. 6. 5, 13, 22, 28. Zach. 3. 2, ^d 5.
den: Iehoshua out of that long Captivity of the Jews: Joseph out of the
pit, slavery, and false slanders: Moses, Jeremy, Paul and Peter out of their
variety of persecutions and troubles: And therefore those Prophets, Apostles,
and holy men of God did cry unto God only, to save and deliver them.

A third reason as pregnant and forcible as the two former, is observed by
Saint Augustine, Quoniam creaturae exhiberemus Aug lib. 1. ^ont. Max.
came seruitutem, quae vni tantum debetur Deo: because in so doing we should
wrong our selves in giving that to creatures, weh is due only to the Creator:
but why should I allege any mortal men, when as all Christians have been
taught from God himself, that no part of his worship is to be communicated
unto any creature: For it is written, Math. 4. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord
thy God, and him only shall thou serve. But prayer is such a principal part
of this service, that it is usually put for the whole, or at least, as
Lactantius does most truly say, Summus colendi Lactant. de vero cultu. l 6. c.
25. f. 399.
Dei ritus est, exore iusti hominis ad Deum directa laudatio: the chiefest part
of Gods worship is an humble faithful prayer and praises out of the mouth of a
righteous man: and therefore Saint Paul setting down the whole armor of a
Christian, puts prayer as the chiefest part of all: and so Zanchius says
Zanch. in c. 6. ad Ephesians.
that this is Optimum genus, ideoque vltimo ab Apostolo armaturae explicatum;
the best part of all our Christian weapons, and therefore last expressed by the
Apostle, because that unless Gods help be craved by prayer, reliqua arma
parum prosunt, all the other armor will avail us nothing: and therefore
Clemens Alexandrinus might very well conclude, (...); Clem. Alex. lib. 7.
stromat.
We do not without cause honor God by prayer, and with righteousness send
up this best and holiest sacrifice. Whereunto learned Ignatius has added a
monon in his sixth Epistle to Philadelphia, (...); have God alone before your
eyes in your prayers: and great reason, for to be prayed unto, is so proper
unto a Deity, that to give it to any creature is truly judged sacrilegious
impiety, which robs God of his glory, Christ of his office, and the agent
himself of salvation: and God himself, to signify no less to the whole
generation of Adam, has given the public place of his worship the
denomination Esaias. 56. 7. For denominatio fit a principaliore causa.
of the House of Prayer.

And therefore concerning the blessed Virgin, we honor her name, we reverence
her memorial, and with all generations we call her blessed: but to pray unto
her we may boldly say with Saint Bernard, libenter certe gloriosa Uirgo tali
honor carebit, The glorious Virgin is willingly content to want such honor.

Likewise of the blessed Angels and Saints, we gladly confess, that their
commemoration, is like the composition of the perfume, that is made by the Art
of the Apothecarie; it is as sweet as honey in all our mouths, and more
delightful then Music at a banquet of Wine: and as for the triumphant
Saints, whilst that they were concumbitants in the Church militant, we
willingly did enjoy them as our fellowsouldiers, (...) striving To. 15. 30.
together with us, and (...), helping together with their 2 Cor. 1. 11.
prayers to God for us, yea, and being received up unto glory, Honorandi sunt
propter imitationem, non adorandi propter religionem; they are to be honored
for imitation, not to be adored Vide Aug. lib. de quantitale anima and de
moribus Eccles. Catholica, et Manieh lib. 1. cap. 30.
for religion, says Saint Augustine: to invoke any of them we have neither
precept from God, nor practice in the ancient Church, nor promise in Gods word,
to be heard, and they themselves cannot possibly deserve it, neither do they
in the least manner desire it. But if it were possible for them to hear such
unlawful prayers of men, they would with both hands (as we say) put them from
them, and labor to purge themselves from such flat Idolatry, with their song of
obedience, Not unto us Lord, not unto us, Psalm. 115. 1.
but to thy name be such honor ascribed.

But our Romish Doctors, to maintain their inuocations of celestial Spirits,
do cozen simple people now a days, (as their predecessors did the Christians
in the Apostles times) under the Col. 2. 18.
pretense of humility, saying, Uide Theod. ibid,
that the God of al things was invisible and inaccessible, and
incomprehensible: and therefore (as Theodoret testifies) they counseled their
followers to procure Gods favor by the means of Angels: like as the heathen
Idolaters, to cover the shame of their neglecting of God, were wont, miser a
vti excusatione, dicentes, Ambr. in Romans cap. 1.
Per istos posse ire ad Deum, sicut per Comites pervenitur ad Regem, says
Ambrose, to use this miserable excuse, that by these they might go to God, as
by Officers we go to the King. The very self same rag our Romanists have
borrowed from them to cover their superstition with, that the wickedness thereof
might not appear. But Saint Ambrose has met well with them, and sufficiently
discovered the vanity of such a gross and carnal imagination: Men (says he)
go to Kings by Courtiers, quia homo vtique est Rex, because the King is but a
man; ad Deum autem quem nihil latet promerendum Copiosius legas apud Ambr. in
Romans cap. 1.
suffragatore non opus est, sed mente devota; but as for the Lord, from whom
nothing is hid, we need no spokes man to make him favorable unto us, only
there is required a devout mind. But above all others, S. Chrysostom may
suffice an indifferent Reader, dashing all such replies with this full answer,
(...), Chrysostom. in dimission. Chananaea. Tom. 5. edit. Savig. page 195.

Vide cund. Sermon. 7. de poenitent. Tom. 6. edit. Savil. page 802. and in Psalm.
4:


etc. God is always near (says he.) If thou will entreat man, thou ask
what he is adoing, and he is asleep, he is not at leisure, or the servant
gives thee no answer: (...), but with God there is none of these things.
Whithersoeuer thou go and call, he hears: there is no want of leisure,
nor a mediator, nor a servant that keeps thee off: (...); say, Have mercy
upon me, and presently God is with thee. For while thou art aspeaking, says
he, I will say, (...), Behold here I am (Esaias 58. 9.) but I have been
ouer-tedious in the satisfaction of this point. I will conclude, and reduce all
to that one question of S. Paul, Romans 10. 14. How shall they call upon him in
whom they have not believed? Where it is manifest, that none must be
inuocated, but such as must be believed in: but none must be believed in but
God alone: for, Credimus Paulo, sed non credimus in Paulum: credimus Aug.
tract. 29. in Johan
Petro, sed non credimus in Petrum, We believe (says S. Austin) Paul, but we
believe not in S. Paul: we believe Peter, but we believe not in S. Peter. And
therefore let us all conclude with Origin, Soli Domino Deo; Let our prayers be
offered only to the Lord our God, who does at all times hear us, and will
undoubtedly deliver us from this deadly Pestilence, if we pray powerfully with
a sincere faith and pure conscience.

And thus I have vnuailed the party to whom the Disciples came for assistance
in this their dangerous case.

I am in the next place to discover the effect of their coming: the Text
tells us, They awoke him. Fearful death, of all miseries the last, and the
most terrible: against which an holy Father has made this exclamation; Apud
Lud. Granatens. Exercit. de Orat. and Medit.
O Death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee? how quickly and suddenly
stealest thou upon us? how secret are thy paths and ways? how universal is thy
signiory and dominion? The mighty cannot escape thee, the strong lose their
strength before thee, the rich with their money shall not corrupt thee. Thou
art the hammar that always strikes: thou art the sword that never blunteth:
thou art the snare wherein all must be taken: thou art the prison wherein all
must lie: thou art the sea wherein all must perish: thou art the pain, that
all must suffer: thou art the tribute that all must pay. If thou come but in
thy natural course, thou causest those two amorous twins, soul and body to
tremble and quake and at their forced separation, to sweat even drops of
anguish: and if thou only seem to offer thy irresistable atachement to any
accidentally, and in a violent manner, oh thou art dreadful beyond comparison.
This more then exceeding terror unawares looking the Disciples in the face, and
being in all readiness to seize on them, caused them suddenly to send forth a
pitiful outcry to their Lord and Master, with such clamours and vociferations,
even as if they had been at their wits end: so that dispensing with all
ceremonies and complements, they iogged him, says Alphonsus Salmeron, so long
till they awakened him: and surely the original imports no less, (...),
suscitauerunt, they raised him up: the same word is used in many places of
Scripture, where mention is made of the resurrection, as, Destroy this temple
and Ioh. 2. 19.
in three days I will raise it up: and Many bodies of Saints which Mat. 27. 52
slept arose: and, If Christ be risen from the dead, how say some among 1 Cor.
15. 12.
you there is no resurrection of the dead? In which and many other Texts, and
specially in that Chapter to the Corinthians the word of my Text is used, and
not improperly: for what Stulte quid est somnus gelidus nisi mortis imago? Ovid.
is deep, fast, and sound sleep, but mortis imago, and (...), the very image
and brother of death, as the Heathen could say, (...). Homer.
(...), says Menander, Sleep is nothing else but a short kind of death. Now
Christ was in a fast and dead sleep, for so much the word (which is here and
in S. Mark used) signifies: his (...) ligo, vere soperatus, aut demersus
somno profundo
senses were well and fast bound, as if he had no operation of life; and
therefore the Disciples are said to raise him, as it were from the dead.

Behold here in the Disciples, importunity! and in our Savior, opportunity!
they awaken him suddenly; he awaketh seasonably: they awaken him violently by
reason of their fearfulness; he awakeneth voluntarily, to give them a speedy
deliverance. And are not we plunged into greater extremities, and more
grievous calamities then ever the Disciples were? Yes surely, for our sins
have provoked Bellatorem fortem, the mighty warrior, the Icr. 20. 11.
Lord of Hoasts, the righteous Judge, to whet his sword and Psalm. 2. 12, 13.
bend his bow, and make them ready, to prepare the instruments of death, and
arrows to destroy us: our eustomary sins have forced out the Lords decree, and
have brought forth three deadly weapons; his Ferrum. Fames. Morbus.
Sword, and Famine hover over us, being ready to light upon us, and we are
already beset plurium conflectu febrium, with a conflict of many diseases; the
Angel is a darting the rightayming arrows of the Lords wrath at every man's
door: Gods deadly tokens, the only marks of his displeasure, and our
disobedience, are sent forth promiscuously to all sinners, especially to
wilful and obstinate transgressors, and though thousands fall on the one side,
and ten thousands on the other, and they never touch thee, yet sin will bring
them home to thy heart at last. For, like as one that shoots at a mark,
sometimes is gone, and sometimes is short, sometimes lights on the right
hand, sometimes on the left; at length hitteth the mark: so the Lord of Hoasts
being incensed with the general wickedness of this City, shootes at great
men beyond us, at mean men short of us, at our friends on the right hand, at
our enemies on the left; at length hitteth our selves. The longer his hand is
in practice, the more certainly he strikes.

What, were the Disciples in the jaws of such perils? were they thus beset
with the Lords vengeance? out of all doubt they were not, and yet they being
conscious, that their sins were the cause of this raging tempest, they speed
by fervent prayers to awaken their merciful Savior: Faciamus nos similiter:
Beloved, let us do the like. Culpae comes, iustissime poena semper est, The
companions Lyps de Constantia. lib. 2. cap. 16
of our sins, are many plagues, which continually attend us, like so many
hunger-starued Lions, ever gaping to devour us. (...), and our God is fallen
into a deep sleep. So burdensome, so grievous, so wearisome have our sins
been unto the Lord, that they have awakened his slow anger, his righteous
justice, and lulled his long patience, his forbearing mercy fast asleep. We
now find that verified which S. Austin long ago foretold: Tunc in te dormit
Christus, Aug. in Psalm. 56.
cum oblitus fueris passionis Christi, when thou forgettest the passion of
Christ, then Christ sleeps in thee: and then (says he) nauis tuaturbatur,
thy ship is troubled, thy heart is worthily troubled, because excidit tibi in
quem credidideris, thou forgettest him, on whom thou should believe: thy
passions are great, when thou art unmindful of Christ's passion: and then art
thou insensible of his passion, when by sin thou do pierce thine own
soul, and crucify thy Savior afresh; qui ex proprio and pretioso sanguine,
who of his own precious blood made a plaster to cure thy festred wounds. Et
hinc illae lachrymae, hence our sorrows and griefs, hence our plagues and
punishments. And dearly beloved what shall we do? The best advice I can give,
is that which Christ gives his Spouse in the Canticles, Chap. 6. 13. Return,
return O Shalamite; Return, return that we may behold thee. I thus
paraphrase it; Return O my Spouse, Daughter of Jerusalem return, return to
me, return to thy self, return to thy former feeling of my grace, return,
that both my self, and all the Company of Angels, may see thee, and rejoice
in thee.

This Spouse of Christ is the mother of us all, the holy Catholic Church, in
whose bosom we are nourished: Take we then the advice given unto her, for an
advice unto our selves. Return we from our evil ways, return we from our
all sins, return we unto the Lord our God, that both he and all the company
of Angels may see us, and rejoice in us.

Life is sweet unto us, mutet Aug. sermon. 1. de tempore.
vitam, qui vult accipere vitam, says S. Augustine, If we are desirous to
retain this life, and enjoy the blessed life of heaven, we must change our
wicked life on earth. Mortificemus peccata, Christum excitemus, and fidem
recolamus: Aug.
let us mortify our sins by unfeigned Repentance, rowze up Christ by a
fervent and lively prayer, and reviue Gods worship in a more sincere, diligent,
devout, and constant manner, and all the storms of our sore afflictions shall
soon vanish away.

So I proceed to the last part in the procuring of this calm, viz. their
prayers in these words expressed; Lord save us: we perish. The three
Evangelists who do record this story, use three several titles attributed
unto our blessed Savior in this compendious form of prayer: all which (though
the Latin and our English express not) are significant and emphaticall in
their orginall propieties. S. Marks title is, (...), Master, carest thou not
that we perish? The Greek word there specified signifies a Teacher of
letters, manners, or any art: in relation whereunto they were called Disciples,
Scholars, or Loarners. Saint Lukes title is, (...), Englished a Defender, a
present Helper; such as in times of war are sworn brethren, to live and die
together, Commiles succenturiatus: and in times of peace, Guardians of Infants.
Shepherds have the same title, who are (...), Defenders of their flocks. The
title in the text is, (...), which imports power, or might, answerable to
that glorious Tetragrammaton, Jehovah, which the Septuagints constantly
translate throughout the old Testament in this sacred word, an essential name
never given to any but only the true God.

The titles well weighed afford good use of Instruction, and much matter of
Consolation. In that they call him Lord, we are encouraged to pray with
confidence, because he is Jehovah, all-sufficient to deliver us: and in that
they call him Teacher and Defender, we are certified of the Lords willingness
to hear us, and forward readiness to help and succor us: in that he is
their Master, they pray in love; in that he is their Lord, they pray in fear:
he being their Master and Defender, they are not timidi, ouer-fearefull; he
being their Lord and Jehovah, they are not tumidi, ouer-bold. The same Lord and
Master is our Jehovah, and ready helper, and therefore we likewise must pray
(in this time of deadly pestilence) first confidently, not despairing: quia
irrisio Dei est, si quid illum ores, Pellie. in Mat.
quod exor aturum te non certe confidas; because it is a mocking of God, says
Pelican, to pray unto him, and to doubt that we shall not have our requests:
for this cause Christ tells us, Mark 11. 14. that whatsoever we desire when we
pray, believe that we shall have it, and it shall be done unto us, especially
if it be petitio decentium, says Damascen, James 1. 6.
a request of such things as are fit for God to give, and us to have. For these
S. James bids us Ask in faith, and waver not, and we shall receive our
desires. Secondly, because their Lord is our Jehovah, therefore we likewise
must pray reverently, not presuming. The very consideration of Gods greatness
should move us to supplicate with all humility.

Uarus Germinus was wont to say to Caesar, Qui apud te, O Caesar audent dicere,
magnitudinem tuam ignor ant: qui non audent, humanitatem tuam nesciunt: They
that dare speak to thee, do not know thy greatness, they that dare not, are
ignorant of thy humanity and meeknes: I may say far better, Our God is meek
and lowly in heart, that we may speak unto him; but he is so great in Majesty
and power, that one ought to speak in all humility: and that not with the
Gentiles, whose Heathenish fashion was adorare sigillaria suaresidendo, to
worship God as they sat; but meekly kneeling upon our knees, that we may show
both inward and outward humility. For this was the practice not only of great
sinners, but of the holiest Saints, thousands of Angels do cover their faces,
and Christ himself, the Son of God did often use to fall down, to kneel, and
prostrate himself upon the ground, when he prayed unto his Father: Et
prostratus in terra orat Medicus, and non inclinatur Cypr. 2. ad Don.
agrotus: And shall this heavenly Physician kneel, and we think much to
stoop? Consider with thy self says Saint Bernard, quanta cum humilitate
debet rana paupercula adorare eum: With what great humility ought we poor
worms of the earth to adore him? And therefore as Eusebius reports of that
most Christian Constantine, that it was his usual custom, every day to shut
up himself close into some secret place of his palace, and there upon his
bended knees, and with a most submisse humble voice to make his devout prayers
and Soliloquies unto Almighty God. Thus confidently, and thus reverently let us
all draw near unto our Lord and Savior, and then our gracious Defender, our
powerful Jehovah will speedily take from us this our great ieopardy.

Before I conclude, it is not amiss to give you notice, that Saint Luke, to
express the Disciples zealous devotion, ingeminateth the title given to Christ
in this short form of prayer, with a double appellation, (...) Master, Master,
we perish, O gracious defender, O powerful Jehovah, we are ready to be cast
away and buried in the waves: hereby giving us to understand, that breuis
oration, sifortis, penetrat calu^, 4 Observation.
a short prayer, (though but in 3 words, as was the Disciples) so it be fervent
is most powerful, (...). Domine salua nos, Lord save us.
pierces the skies, and is accepted of the Almighty Lord.

The prayer of the blind men was short, O Lord, Son of David, have mercy
upon us, and yet prevailed, Math. 20. 31. The prayer of the Publican shorter,
God be merciful to me a sinner; and yet as available, Luke 18. 13. The
prayer of the penitent Thief very compendious, Lord remember me when thou
come into thy Kingdom, and yet most forcible, Luke 23. 42. The prayer of
the father of the sick child most brief Lord help mine unbelief, and yet
very effectual: Mark 9. 24. Yea, many times we find that an earnest seeking
with the heart, has prevailed without any words uttered by the tongue, as
Moses when he cried to God with his heart, and yet opened not his mouth; For
that is most true which Saint Gregory says, Tanto minus quis clamat, quanto
minus desiderat, and tanto fortius coelos penetrat, quanto fortius desiderat,
the more earnestly we desire any thing, the more lowdly we do cry unto God,
and the colder is our desire, the slower is our calling on him, and the harder
to obtain it of him.

Luther to this purpose calls prayers and supplications, bombardas
Christianorum; the Christians Canons: and surely being well charged with faith
and repentance, and fired with zeal and feruencie of spirit, they shoot
far, and pierce deep. Here therefore we may be informed, what is the very
bane and pests of our prayers, and what is the only cause they are no more
available to remove this mortal sickness: surely, because faintness,
coldness, and boldness do so much frequent our prayers. There is first, a
faint, a fearful, and distrustful praying amongst us; there is secondly, a
cold, a formal and superficial praying with us; and there is thirdly, a bold,
a proud, and presumptuous praying unto dreadful Jehovah, and this last is the
worst: trepida nec procedit quidem nedum ascendit; the faint and fearful
prayer, cannot get out, much less get up: it sticks so fast between the
teeth, or in the throat rather: tepida procedit, sed in asconsu languescit and
defecit, the cold and formal prayer comes forth fast enough, but it cannot
get up it freeseth (for want of spirit and feruor) by the way, ere it come to
appear in Gods presence: temeraria ascendit, sedresilit; the cold and
presumptuous prayer flies up apace, but it is as fast beaten back again, for
presenting it self ouerboldly, and saucily in Gods sight: Nec tantum non
obtinet gratiam, sed meretur offensam, and in stead of a blessing, it brings
a curse with it: thus far devout Bernard.

I have read of two ladders by which men climb to heaven; seruent prayers, and
crying sins, the godly by the one, and the wicked by the other. By the
sinful Ladder did Sodom and Niniue climb. Oh let not our sins be such
climbers! rather then they should press into the Presence Chamber of Heaven,
and grow acquainted with God, let us keep them down, and here punish them:
for Hoc nobis Deus insevit. God has planted this principle in every man's
heart, that sin must be punished: must it! by whom? Saint Austin tells you,
aut ab ipso homine Aug Enarrat. in Psalm. 58.
poenitente, aut a Deo vindicante, either by man repenting, or by God
revenging. Now if any notwithstanding he remains impenitent, nevertheless
shall hope for mercy, let him hear what Chrysostom says, Quomodo Chrysostom.
in 1 Cor. hom. 23.
Deum rogas, vt tibi parcat, cum tu tibi minime parcas? How can thou desire
God to have compassion upon thee; when thou have no compassion upon thy self?
Aulus Gellius writes, that the Romans sent the Carthaginians, Hastam and
caduceum, Aul. Gel. l. 10. c. 27.
a spear and a white wand, the Ensigns of war and peace, and offered them
their choice: So deals the Lord with us, upon our repentance; he offers us
conditions of peace, and protests to repent himself of the evil intended,
and to remove far from us his judgments already inflicted. Ergofratres
puniamus peccata nostra: therefore brethren let us be our own purishers:
punish we our selves, our sins, that God may have mercy on us: and turn this
heavy plague from us: he cannot show mercy upon workers of iniquity, Quasi
blandiens peccatis, aut non erudicens peccata, as if he flattered men in their
sins, or had no purpose to root out sin. Prorsus aut punis, aut punit,
Believe H^c Augustinus in loco prius citato.
it either thou must punish thy self for thy sins, or God will punish thee:
vis non puniat punitu. Will thou that God should not pun^sh thee, then punish
thou thy self: and wash away thy sins with the bitter and brinish tears of
unfeigned repentance, through a lively faith in the blood of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ: that forsaking the Ladder of our crying sins we may
climb up to heaven with the ladder of our fervent prayers: and having all
brought our selves into the same danger of mortality; Let us all with one
accord, sigh forth incessantly, the Disciples powerful and importunate
request; Lord, sauevs: we perish.

O Lord our God the give of all graces, the forginer of all our sins, and the
present helper and ready defender of them, that fly to thee for succor: grant
unto us we humbly beseech thee an unfeigned remorse for all our misdeeds; that
our hearty ropentance, may awaken thy mercy, and cause thy justice to fall
into a deep sleep: So then we shall with all Saints for evermore sing
Helleluja. Salvation, and glory, and honor, and power unto the Lord our God for
evermore.

Amen.
FINIS
Ad Lectorem.
GRammata si desint, si syllaba forte redundet,
Si praecedenti menda sit vlla libro:
Ignoscas Lector; quid enim labecula laedit?
Et navos penna corrige quaeso tua.
Tibi in Christo addictissimus, A. L.


