THE EXAMINATIONS, Arraignment and Conviction of George Sprot, Notary in
Aye-mouth, Together with his constant and extraordinary behavior at his
death, in Edenborough, Aug. 12. 1608.

Written and set forth by Sir William Heart, Knight, L. Justice of Scotland.

Whereby appears the treasonable device betwixt John late Earl of Gowry and
Robert Logane of Restalrig (commonly called Lesterig) plotted by them for the
cruel murdering of our most gracious Sovereign.

Before which Treatise is prefixed also a Preface, written by G. Abbo^ Doctor
of Divinity, and Deane of Winchester, who was present at the said Sprots
execution.

LONDON: Printed by Melch. Bradwood, for William Aspley. 1608.

A PREFACE to the Reader.
AMong those troubles and crosses, wherewithal our heavenly Father is pleased
to exercise his best children, while they remain in this Tabernacle of their
flesh, there is no one more frequent, than such evil and slanderous reports,
as the virulent tongues of malicious persons, out of a hatred to their virtues,
are desirous to lay upon them. For there was never Age nor Country, wherein
either man or woman was adorned with rare and eminent qualities, for the
service of God, and advancement of true religion, but immediately such as were
ill-affected began to employ their wits, and beat their brains, how by
calumniation and forged imputations, they might obscure the luster of those
singular parts, which their quick but envious eye had discovered in them. That
worthy Moses the meekest Number. 12.3.
man upon earth is reproched as ambitious, and charged by Core, to Number. 16.3.
take too much upon him. That admirable Daniel was Dan. 6.13.
accused to the King as a contemner of his Greatness, and violater of his
Laws. It was objected to zealous and just Nehemiah by Neh. 6.6.
Sanballat, that himself and the people of Judah intended a rebellion. Paul and
Silas, two great instruments of Gods glory, were complained upon as seditious
persons, and Act. 16.20.
disturbers of the peace and quietness of the city. The old Christians, men no
doubt of virtuous behavior, yet because in time of persecution they assembled
themselves together in the night, for the worship of their God, and profession
of their faith, were reported by the Gentiles to have the Feasts of Eusebius.
Eccl. Hist. lib. 4.7.
Thyestes, (that is, to eat the flesh of children) and to do as Oedipus did,
that is, promiscuously to commit fornication with their mothers, sisters and
daughters. Yea, their own Lib. 5.1.
servants were brought by the terrors of the Infidels to accuse them of such
crimes. Tertullian complains of this, declaring that it was objected to the
Christians; Tertull. Apolog. cap. 2.
that they killed a babe newborn, and in the blood thereof did dip their
Eucharist, and so eat it; as also, that suffering their dogs of purpose to
ouerturne their lights, they in the dark committed incest with their mothers
and daughters. Hence it grew, as a kind of Proverb, That it was the part of
Christians to do good, and yet to be ill spoken of. So Euagrius Eccl. Hist.
lib. 3.40.
Euagrius reports, touching that holy and blessed Emperor Constantine the
Great, that the Ethnicks laded him with many false criminations:, because he
took away their Heathenish superstitions, and in place thereof advanced the
service of Christ Jesus.

In all which accusations, and other of like nature, (if we look advisedly
into them) we shall perceive, that both Satan has his work, and evil men
have a part, yea that God himself has a finger. Satan has his work,
because (as Cyprian writing of Cornelius, says) It is Cyprian. Epist. ad
Antonian. Lib. 4.2.
evermore the work of the Devil, that he may with lies ^eare the servants of
God, and by false opinions spread concerning them may defame their glorious
name; that such as are bright in the light of their own conscience may be
sordidated, or dimmed, by the reports of other. Evil men have their part,
either because with Zoilus, when they Aelian. Hist. lib. 11.10.
can do not hurt to the good and virtuous, at least they will speak ill of
them; or else, because (as Hierome writes) Hieron. Epist. 10. ad Furiam.
It is the solace of evil men to carpe at the good, thinking that by the great
number of offenders the guilt of their faults is diminished and abated. Nay,
God has a finger in it, to try and sharpen men, and by that means to fit
them to himself. For slanders have that force in them, as Gregory well notes,
speaking thus: Gregor. Hom. 38. in 40. Hom.
Going through almost all examples, we find, that there has not been one good
man whom the naughtiness of evil men has not tried: for, that I may so
speak, the sword of our soul is not brought to the exactness of sharpness,
if the file of other men's naughtiness has not rubbed and fretted it. Again,
in as much as we should grow into deep and dangerous security, if it were not
for such remembrances, our heavenly Father is contented that by such
calumniations we should be rowzed from the sleepiness and drowzinesse of the
world. Plin Nature. Hist. lib. 8 16.
Pliny writes, that the Lion is subject to no sickness, but only a fastidium,
or fullness of stomach: wherewithal when he is oppressed, the way to cure
him is to offer him some contumely; which is by tying an Ape near him: for the
Lion is so moved and vexed for the time, with the tricks which the Ape plaieth,
that he riddeth and puts over that, which so much before offended him. Even
so God uses the contumelies of base persons, and the reproaches of the vilest,
to rowze up men of excellent spirits, that they surfeit not in voluptuousness,
and so consequently be lulled asleep in idle security, to their own harm
and peradventure ruin.

But be it for one or all these reasons, certain it is, that in our age as
well as in times bypast, the dearest children of God have tasted of this
trial, and have been forced to endure very horrible imputations and staining
aspersions, which the venomous tongues of ungodly men have striued to cast upon
them. It were no hard matter to name very strange calumniations which have been
invented by the vassals of Antichrist, and published by the adorers of the
beast in diverse books (which are no better than defamatory libels) against Gods
servants of the highest rank upon earth, because they ouer-turned the strong
holds of idolatry, and gave free passage to the Gospel of Christ Jesus. But I
forbear to give such particular instances, and rather leave to the
consideration of the wise, whether it may ever be hoped, that such irreligious
creatures (who have sold themselves to Satan the accuser of the brethren)
will make spare to lash and scourge such single persons as stand in their way,
and hinder their designs; when they make no conscience to brand our holy
faith, and the generality of our profession, with reports most odious, and
such as must needs be acknowledged for abominable, if they should be true: but
in sooth are in the sight of God, of Angels and men, before heaven and earth*
but plain fictions and forgeries, containing in them no parcel of verity. Of
which sort are those defamations* which a countryman of ours, without all
shame, avouches in a Certain Articles or forcible reasons printed at Antwerpe
1600:
Pamphlet not long since put out, and published to the world; That the
Protestants are bound in conscience, never to ask God forgiveness of their
sins: That the Protestants are bound in conscience to avoid all good works:
That the Protestants make God the author of sin; the only cause of sin:
that man sins not; that God is worse than the Devil. And that of Ross.
contra Henri^. Gallum. cap. 4.5.
Rosseus writing against the French King now reigning: Hominum animas cum
corporibus interire, and homines a brutis pecoribus nihil differ,
Euangelicorum infinita millia credunt. Infinite thousands of Protestants do
believe that the souls of men die together with their bodies, and that men do
nothing differ from brute beasts.

Such truthlesse, shameless, and graceless assertions they have not sticked
to proclaim openly in the face of the Sun. The knowledge whereof should cause
all men indifferently affected, not to be credulous or light of belief, when
they find gall and bitterness cast out of the mouth or pen of an enemy of
the Gospel against any contending for the truth, though it be but a private
man; but especially to suspend their judgments, when persons of highest
quality, for maintaining Gods cause, are traduced by an enemy, or defamed by
some vile one, whose tongue and pen indeed is no slander, as we commonly
speak. For these great ones are the special mark whereat malice does aim;
and as poison ordinarily hasteneth to the heart, so does envy let drive at the
head, at those who be most eminent in the State and Commonwealth. When Cato
the elder lived, there was not in all Rome so worthy a man as he: for (as
Plin. Nature. Hist. lib. 7.27.
Pliny notes) he was the best Orator, the best Leader or General in the
field, the best Senator or Counselor that was in that City: yet was he so
entreated as never man was, being publicly called to his answer four and
forty several times, whereby one while his fame was hazarded, another while
his life: and yet always he was honorably, or as the yoonger Pliny has it,
Plin. de viris illustrib.
gloriously absolved and acquitted. Doubtless there was against him a great
deal of spleen, a very great deal of malice. From the touch whereof, even
Kings and Princes are so far from being free, that they are more subject to
it than any other persons: which made Diog. Laert. in Antisth.
Antisthenes to say, That it was a Kingly thing, when thou have done well, to be
ill spoken of for thy labor. And if we be desirous to see a famous example of
this, there is no one more notable than that of holy David, who being first a
Prophet, and afterward a King, (but in both most unspotted touching the crimes
laid against him) yea being a man after Gods own heart, yet was accused and
charged with many heinous iniquities; which caused him to complain both before
and after his coming to the Crown: as unto Saul: 1. Sam. 24.10.
Wherefore give thou an ear unto men's words, that say: Behold, David
seeks evil against thee? And to God himself: O Psalm. 7.3.
Lord my God, if I have done this thing, meaning, which they laid unto him; if
there be any wickedness in my hands, intending, such as they would fasten upon
him, then let the enemy persecute my soul and take it. And in another place,
speaking to the slandering Adversary, Thy Psalm. 52.2.
tongue imagines mischief, and is like a sharp razor that cutteth
deceitfully. And yet further: The Psalm. 119.69.
proud have imagined a lie against me. So in the next Psalm: Psalm. 120.2.
Deliver my soul O Lord from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue. These
things, and that the Psalm 69.12.
drunkards did make songs upon him, did many times exceedingly grieve him, that
he who labored to seem innocent, should be reproched as nocent; that he who
was but the Patient, should be held for the Agent; that the man wronged, should
be reported to do wrong unto other; that he whose life was sought, should be
termed by Shimei, 2. Sam. 16.7.
a man of blood, and a murderer. This troubled and grieved him above measure.
For it is the property of innocence and integrity, that if it may find no
other reward, yet it would gladly shine in the simplicity and sincerity of it
self. But when there was no other help to be freed from those slanders, David
had one assured remedy; that was, to retire himself to the Lord, and commend
his cause to his Maker: As he excellently does in the three and fortieth
Psalm, where being oppressed by the malice of his adversaries, and complaining
of it in the first verse: Psalm. 43.1.
Judge me O God, and defend my cause against the unmerciful people: deliver me
from the deceitful and wicked man, he helps himself in the last verse,
rebuking the impatiency which he found in his own soul, and directing his
affections unto another course, verse. 5.
Why art thou cast down my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? wait
on God: for I will yet give him thanks: he is my present help and my God.

Many men have been desirous to have their fame cleared from the reproaches of
their enemies, and have sought means to have their hearts eased from the
disturbances and distempers whereinto false accusations have put them. Zeno is
much commended, that with such calmnesse he could turn aside those bitter
taunts which some bestowed on him: for being asked, how he did bear himself
against evil speeches: Diog. La* ert. in Zenon.
I do, says he, as if an Ambassador should be sent unto me, and I should
return him without an answer. This for a Philosopher, who was but an heathen
man, was an excellent resolution. But in these words of David, there is a way
more noble than Zeno could conceive; that is, to look up to our great God, and
commit all to him, expecting his good leisure. It is not enough when a man
being privy to his own innocence does not boil within himself, or fret
against the wicked (which are things Psalm. 37.1.
forbidden unto us) but he must go a step farther, and propose to his own
heart some more notable example. And in this case who is rather to be imitated
by a Christian, than our Savior Chirst? Concerning whom S. Chrysostom said
well: That Chrysostom Homil. 1. de in^^^^treh. Dei natura.
when he cast out devils, and did innumerable good things, and yet was ill
spoken of; against those men who said, that he had the Devil, he did not send
any thunderbolt, he did not overthrow those blasphemous mouths, he consumed
not with fire those unchaste, ungrateful, unworthy tongues of theirs: but
only with these words put aside those evil speeches; I have not the Devil,
but I honor him who sent me. This is most truly related of our Savior: but
there was in him somewhat else, which is better observed by S. Peter: 1. Pet.
2.23.
When he was reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened
not, but committed it to him that judges righteously. And this, committing it
to him that judges righteously, was the course which David used: to wait
patiently on the Lord, to cast up his eyes to heaven, and commending to God the
integrity of his ways, to leave all to his disposing. And this is the very
Lesson which he teaches both himself and other. For in the seven and
twentieth Psalm, having spoken of his Psalm. 27.12.14.
adversaries, of false witnesses which rose up against him, and such as speak
cruelly, he concludes with this document, Hope in the Lord; be strong, and
he shall comfort thine heart, and trust in the Lord. Which is the most sound
instruction, that any creature can have: to look up to his Creator (to whom
all hearts are open, and no privy thing can be secret) and to commend to his
providence, to his fatherly care and wisdom, the vnspottednesse of his ways,
and the simplicity of his conversation. And assuredly that God who is the God
of truth, will be the patron and protector of innocence in his servants. It
is a strong consolation which David gives in this case; Psalm. 37.5.6.
Commit thy way unto the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall bring it to
pass. And he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy
judgment as the noone day. But it follows: Wait patiently upon the Lord, and
hope in him: As if that must be the means to attain thy desire: not to run
before thy Maker, and appoint him the time when thy integrity shall be
cleared, and the dimming clouds of obloquie shall be blown from thy
estimation; but to leave that to his managing, to his dispose and direction.
For as S. Chrysostom tells us; Chrysostom. in Psalm. 129.
If it be in the power of God to give unto us, it is also in his power to give
when himself pleases. It is said of him, that he does all things in Sapient.
11.17.
measure, number and weight. But if before the number be full, or the measure
be up, thou will limit him the time when thy innocence must appear: thou
take on thee to be wiser than the Lord, and in a sort mounting up into his
throne in heaven, thou do iustle him out of his seat of majesty and
eternity. If thou will set down the decree for time or place, or the manner of
purging thy self, or how the wickedness of thine enemies must be displaied,
thou make thy self the Judge, and the Lord of heaven and earth shall be but
thy executioner. Leave the maine then to him (which does not fore-close thee,
but that thou may use all honest means to lay open thy vnspottednesse) and
thou shall have reason with David to thank him, and say: Psalm. 43.5.
He is my present help and my God.

And in truth it is strange to see the Lords work in this behalf, how, when
the fame of his servants has been unjustly denigrated by false accusations,
he taking the matter into his hands has in his good time dispelled all mists
of slander. Hereof David himself had singular experience. For when Saul was
informed that David sought his life, and by the often ingeminations of
malicious men this was taken for a truth, and David was accordingly persecuted,
and in danger to be murdered, God put Saul 1. Sam. 24.4. c. 26.7.
two several times into the hands of David, that easily he might have slain
him: which being entertained as an invincible argument of David's fidelity, Saul
himself by the irrefragable evidence of truth was forced to cry out, 1. Sam.
24.18.
Thou art more righteous than I: for thou have rendered me good, and I have
rendered thee evil. And a second time: 1. Sam. 26.21.
I have sinned: come again my son David, for I will do thee no more harm,
because my soul was precious in thine eyes this day: behold I have done
foolishly, and have erred exceedingly. Eusebius has such another example, of
Eusebius. Ecel. Hist. lib. 6.8.
Narcissus the Bishop of Jerusalem, who was a virtuous and worthy man, and yet
by three persons was accused of a heinous crime. The story does not clearly
deliver what it was: but by circumstances it may be gathered to be
incontinency. These three to give the more reputation to that accusation,
wherewithal they charged him, did use diverse imprecations and execrations on
themselves, if those things were not true which they objected against him. As
the one wished that himself might be burnt, the second that he might die of a
loathsome disease, the third that he might lose the sight of his eyes. This
constant and consenting crimination so affected Narcissus, though privy to his
own uprightness, that he withdrew himself from his abode, and living
privately commended his righteous cause to God: which had such effect, that not
very long after, the first of his accusers was indeed consumed with fire, the
house being burnt in which he remained: the second died of the same disease
which he wished upon himself: and the third being much affrighted with the
punishment of his fellows, had remorse of his sin, and came and openly
acknowledged the conspiracy of them three against innocent Narcissus: but
withal, he had such feeling of his own iniquity, that pouring out continual
tears, he lost the sight of his eyes with the rheum that descended. A most
memorable narration to their comfort, who, being wronged by men in their fame
or good name, commend their cause to God. Like to which is that of Theodor.
Eccl. Hist. lib. 1.20.21.
Theodoret, who reports, that Eustathius the Patriarch of Antioch had many
combats with the Arrians for defense of Christ's truth: and when he still
prevailed against them, they out of their malice suborned a harlot to accuse
him of fornication, and openly to maintain, that a child was his which she
held in her arms: by which means he was constrained to fly to the same
succor that Narcissus formerly had done; which had such force with Almighty
God, that within a while after the harlot was stricken with a grievous
sickness, which wrought in her so powerfully, that she freely confessed the
combination of the Arrians against the holy man: and how she was suborned to
accuse him wrongfully, whereof she was now sorry. But whereas she had said that
Eustathius was the father of her child; that indeed was true of another
Eustathius, but not of the Bishop of Antioch. Wherein we may behold, that even
so long agone Equivocation was in use, but it was with leaud persons, as
heretics and harlots: but withal Gods work appears, that he will not
evermore suffer innocence to be oppressed, and truth to be wronged; but at the
last verity shall break forth, as the Sun which was darkened with a cloud.
And this merciful favor of God to his servants was not only in the ages past,
but our days have experiments of the very like occurrents; as in a famous case
lately acted at Edenborough may sensibly be discovered: whereof, because I was
an eyewitness at my late being there by the commandment of his Majesty, I
have thought it my duty, in honor to God and love to his truth, to declare
what I saw and heard; that this following Treatise penned by an honorable
personage of North-Britaine might not go forth unaccompanied with the
Declaration of one of South-Britaine, for so much as he beheld.

There are few in this Island of any understanding, but have heard of the
traitorous and bloody attempt of the Earl Gowrie and his brother against the
person and life of our most blessed Sovereign. Wherein albeit there were such
evidences and arguments, as that any man who would have taken notice thereof,
might have been sufficiently informed therein even at the very first* and
afterward by the clear depositions (for most pregnant circumstances) and ample
attestations of many persons of honor and quality, the Parliament of that
Kingdom took full knowledge thereof, and accordingly proceeded to the
forfaiting of the whole estate of that Earl, and of his heirs for ever: yet
some humorous men, whom in that respect I may justly term unthankful unto
God, and undutiful to their King, out of fond imaginations, or rather, if you
will, seditious suppositions of their own, did both at home and abroad, by
whisperings and secret buzzings into the ears of the people (who were better
persuaded of them than indeed there was cause) employ their wits and tongues to
obscure the truth of that matter, and to cast an imputation where it was least
deserved. Which when God had permitted for the space of some years to ranckle
and foster in the bowels of those who were the Authors of it; the same God in
his wisdom at last meaning to cure them if they would be cured of that
malady, discovered, that in the same treason, although carried never so
secretly, there were other confederates, of whom hitherto the world had taken
no kind of knowledge. And albeit two of the persons interested in that
business were lately dead, and departed unto far greater torment than all the
earth could lay upon them (unless they died repentant) yet it was apprehended
that a third party remained, who had foreknowledge of that conspiracy, and
was able to utter much of the secrets of it; one George Sprot, a Notarie
inhabiting at Aye-mouth, a place well known in that country. Which matter, or
some part thereof, being made known to an The Earl of Dunbar.
honorable person, a most faithful servant to his Majesty, first by some
words that fell from Sprot himself, and afterward by some papers found upon
him, it was so wisely carried, and so prudently brought about, by the great care
and diligence of that noble man (God Almighty blessing the business) that so
much was reueiled as follows in this Treatise, upon the Acts to be seen;
which are here set down at large, word for word as they agree with the
process original, and other examinations, that such as have been auerse may
at last receive satisfaction. Touching all which, I shall say nothing, but only
report that which befell upon the day of his death, when he suffered for that
treason. Having then the sentence passed on him upon Friday the twelfth of
August 1608 in the fore-noone, and publicly being warned to prepare himself
to his end, which must be that after-dinner, he most willingly submitted
himself unto that punishment, which (as he then acknowledged) he had justly
deserved. And being left to himself til dinnertime was expired, then came to
him into that private place where he remained, some of the Archb. of Glasc.
Bis. of Brickh. L. Halyrudeh. L. Collector. L. Register. L. Justice. D Maxey. M
Hodson. M. P. Galoway. M. I. Hall. N. Chapter Lumsden with others.
reverend Bishops, diverse L.L. of the Session, two of the English Ministers
there employed by his Majesty, with diverse other Ministers of the town of
Edenborough. Before whom he first acknowledged and avouched his former
confession to be true, and that he would die in the same; and then falling on
his knees in a corner of that room, where he and they then were, in a prayer
to God uttered aloud he so passionately deplored his former wickednesses, but
especially that sin of his for which he was to die; that a man may justly
say, he did in a sort deiect and cast down himself to the gates of hell, as
if he should there have been swallowed up in the gulf of desperation: yet
presently laying hold upon the mercies of God in Christ, he raised himself,
and strangely lifted up his soul unto the Throne of Grace, applying joy and
comfort to his own heart so effectually, as can not well be described. In the
admitting of this consolation into his inward man, he burst out into tears, so
plentifully flowing from him, that for a time they stopped his voice. The sight
and hearing whereof wroght so forcible an impression in those persons of honor
and learned men who beheld him, that there was scant any one of them, who could
refrain tears in the place, as diverse of themselves that day did witness
unto me. The effect of his prayer was the aggravating of his crime in
concealing the treason against the Kings Majesty; into which, he said, God
did most justly suffer him to fall, by reason of his former wickedness which
he had so desperately multiplied in despite of God and his holy Word. And
thereupon going on with many sensible speeches and most feeling comparisons,
he insisted on the fearful and dreadful danger wherein he was, if the Lord
in judgment should look upon him. Notwithstanding, at last he proceeded: Yet
most merciful father, whereat he made a stay, and repeating the word father
with a marvelous loud and shrill voice, he added, why should I call thee
father, that have so many ways and so horribly transgressed thy commandments,
in all the course of my life, but especially in concealing this vile, fearful
and devilish treason against my most gracious Sovereign? Lord, Lord, there is
nothing belongs to me but wrath and confusion: and so went on in a strange
unaffected current of words, lively expressing the sorrow of his heart. Yet
there he stayed not, but spoke forward to this purpose: Notwithstanding, Lord
thou have left me this comfort in thy Word, that thou have said, Come unto me
all ye that are weary and laden, and I will refresh you. Lord I am weary, Lord
I am heavily laden with my sins, which are innumerable: I am ready to sincke
Lord even to hell, without thou in thy mercy put to thy hand and deliver me.
Lord thou have promised by thine own word, out of thine own mouth, that thou will refresh the weary soul. And with that he thrust out one of his hands, and
reaching as high as he could, with a louder voice and a strained, cried, I
challenge thee Lord, by that word, and by that promise which thou have made,
that thou perform and make it good to me, that call for ease and mercy at
thy hands. Lord hear me, Lord pardon me, Lord comfort me by thy holy spirit:
assure my conscience of the forgiveness of my sins, and say to my soul,
that thou art reconciled. And so after many zealous petitions uttered to the
like effect, he applied to himself the mercies of God in Christ Jesus, in whom
he assured himself of Gods favor, with earnest request, that he might
continue in that assurance to the end, whereof he nothing doubted.

Afterward, being brought to the scaffold, where he was to die, he uttered many
things, among which I observed these: He acknowledged to the people, that he
was come thither to suffer most deservedly; That he had been an offender
against Almighty God in very many respects; But that none of his sins was so
grievous unto him, as that for which he must die: wherein, notwithstanding he
was not an Actor, but a Concealer only. That he was ingyred in it by the Lord
of Rastalrig and his servant the Lord of Bour, both which, he said, were men
that professed not religion. Whereupon he exhorted men to take heed how they
accompanied with such as are not religious; because, said he, with such as make
not profession of religion, there is no faith, no truth, no holding of their
word, as himself had tried and found. But touching the treason for the
concealing whereof he was condemned, he added, That he was preserved alive to
open that secret mystery which so long had layen hid; That God had kept him
since that attempt of the Earl Gowrie from very many dangers, but notedly
from one, when being in apparent hazard of drowning, he was strangely
delivered: which, said he, was Gods work, that I might remain alive unto this
happy and blessed day, that the truth might be made known. And now I
confess my fault to the shame of my self, and to the shame of the Devil; but
to the glory of God. And I do it not either for fear of death, or for any
hope of life, (for I have deserved to die, and am unworthy to live) but
because it is the truth, which I shall seal with my blood. My fault, says
he, is so great, that if I had a thousand lives, and could die ten thousand
deaths, yet I might not make satisfaction, that I should conceal such a
treason against so gracious a King. These and the like words, when he had
spoken upon one side of the scaffold, he turned him to the second side, and
afterward to the third, (that all the people might hear) where he spoke to the
same purpose as formerly he had done. And here it may not be forgotten, that in
the uttering of these things his tongue served him very well, with words
ready and significant, his memory was perfect, his countenance reasonably
erect and full of alacrity, without all fear of death, his voice was loud and
audible on every part: which was the more strange, because at the times of his
examination, as also that very fore-noone, at the hour of his arraignment, his
speech was low and weak; but now so strong, as if God of purpose had given him
power to deliver his words in such a manner, that all the people might hear and
understand.

When this aboue-mentioned declaration had been made, Sprot returned to that
part of the scaffold where he first began to speak, and there falling on his
knees, he uttered a prayer to the same purpose as is set down in this ensuing
Treatise. And having ended the same, one of the Ministers prayed again, and
the prisoner joined with him, That God would forgive his sins, and receive
his soul to mercy. After which, Sprot standing up made diverse requests: First
that what he had delivered by this Confession on the scaffold, might be put
into his Process, that the world might take notice of it. Secondly, that such
as were present (as they might have opportunity) would be suitors unto the King,
that his Majesty would forgive him this offense, for the which, he said, he
craved pardon of God, of his Sovereign, and the world. And thirdly, he
desired those of the Ministry which were present, that wheresoever they, came
they would proclaim in the Pulpit his confession of his crime, his sorrow for
the same, and his full hope that God would pardon him. And to the end that this
might be performed, he took the hands of such Ministers as stood near about
him, so binding a promise on them. And here, being told by the said Ministers
and other persons of quality, that being so near his departure out of the
world, it concerned him to speak nothing but the truth, and that upon the
peril of his soul: he answered, that to the end that they should know, that
he had spoken nothing but the verity, and that his Confession was true in
every respect, he would (at the last gasp) give them some apparent token for
the confirmation of the same. Then fitting himself to the ladder, the
Executioner comes to him, and, as the manner is, asking forgiveness of him;
With all my heart, says he, for you do but your office, and it is the thing
I desire; because suffering in my body, I shall in my soul be joined unto my
Savior. Ascending up to the ladder, he desired the people to sing a Psalm
with him, which they did with many a weeping eye. He named the sixth Psalm,
and beginning it or taking it up himself, in every verse or line thereof he
went before the people, singing both loud and tunably unto the very end. Then
once again confirming and auowing his former confession, he covered his own
face, and commending his soul to God, he was turned off the ladder; where
hanging by the neck some little while, he three several times gave a loud
clap with his hands, that all the standers by might hear: which was the sign
or token (as it seems) which he a little before had said that he would give
at his last gasp, for the ratification and auowing of those things, which by
his confession he had so many times declared and delivered. These things were
done in the open sight of the Sun, in the Kings Capital town, at the
Market-crosse in Edenborough, in the presence of diverse thousands of all sorts:
of the Nobility, of the Clergy, of the Gentry, of the Burgesses, of women
and children, my self with the rest of the English Ministers standing by and
looking on, and giving GOD the glory, that after so long a space as eight
years and eight days (for so it was by just computation after the attempt of
Gowrie) he was pleased to give so noble a testimony unto that, which by some
maligners had been secretly called in question without any ground or reason. I
have reported at length those particulars which I heard and saw, which that
honorable personage, who wrote this Treatise following does somewhat more
briefly deliver, but yet both of us very truly, as thousands can witness.

Out of both these narrations there may Eccl. 10.20.
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought: for the foul of the heaven shall
carry the voice, and that which has wings shall declare the matter; what will
he do, when acts of hostility in rebellious manner shall be entered into? And
does his Divine Majesty disclose it, and will he not also punsh it? The
example of that Earl Gowrie among thousands of others may be a sufficient
instruction in this behalf, who for his Sovereigns love and gracious favor
testified in many respects, and intended many more ways unto him, returning
nothing but ungratefulness and traitorous resolutions, dug a pit for
another, but by Gods judgment fell into it himself: and did not only lose in
one day his fidelity, estimation and life, but overthrew his house and all the
honor of his family, through succeeding generations. Therefore far be it at
all times from any noble heart to walk in his ways, or upon any occasion to
entertain such coffeehouse as may grow to undutifulness: for when the
wrath of God shall overtake men offending in this kind, and the justice of a
King shall once proceed against them, what horror must there needs be in their
bowels and conscience? what trembling and affrighting in their very soul? If
this poor man Sprot, for concealing that odious combination, found such
touches in himself, and such remorse in his heart, what quaking and
dreadfulnesse may we think will fall on him who is guilty of the highest act
of treason and rebellion?

Secondly, we here may see the Lords I have said, Psalm. 82.6.
Ye are Gods; so he blesses and vpholdeth them as his Deputies and
Vicegerents, men representing himself, especially if sincerely they serve and
fear and love him. He is a God of order, and loves subordination in all
Kingdoms and Countries, where if he grace, countenance and protect inferior
Magistrates, what will he do to the heads and chief governors of his
people, who are next to his own greatness? He has set them above other in
honor and glory, which causes them to be more observed according to their
state: but withal, the prayers of their subjects are powered out for their
welfare, day and night, and at all times; which concurring with their own
requests to God, do find acceptance with the Highest to their noted prosperity
and eminent felicity. It preserves from many perils, to have at all hours
and seasons the prayers and supplications of faithful men and women houering
over their heads, which may be perpetual Remembrancers for them to their
heavenly Father, if by humane fragilitie and unavoidable imperfections they
should forget themselves.

Sovereign; to whom as the Lord has given many blessings and much happiness
beyond all his Progenitors, so he has maintained and protected his person in
a marvelous and strange manner, not only from his cradle unto this day, but
(as it is very well known) from before his coming into the world. And how did
the Lord free his servant even from the brincke of the pit, and from the gates
of the grave at the time of Gowries attempt? as also since that day, when those
wicked sons of Belial, the stain of the Land and Country wherein they were
borne, intended that Powder Treason? Which as on the one side it expects at
the hands of his Majesty a greater thankfulness to God the King of kings, so
on the other side it calls for of us who sit peaceably under his shadow,
everlasting tokens of gratefulness to so merciful a Lord, and hearty
obedience to our Sovereign, whom God has raised up, defended, protected,
maintained, vpheld with his extraordinary favor to no common end; but to the
enlarging of his Church, to the further ruin of Antichrist; to the uniting of
Kingdoms, to the comfort of all the godly dispersed through Europe. And happy
is he, not who can find devices, and cast imaginary perils to hinder such a
work, but who in his poor place can with a faithful heart give furtherance
to the same.

tanquam e postliminio, after so many years, and that as from the bones of a
dead man, when living men would not believe it, God has given farther light to
the opening of the conspiracy of that ungodly Earl Gowrie; which some few
persons, affected more to a rebel that is dead, than to their living
Sovereign, did endeavor to disguise and mask at their own pleasure. The
strange conceits of whom I can never sufficiently wonder at; that men
professing conscience and zeal to the truth, should upon no kind of ground or
show of probability, suffer such vnreuerent thoghts to enter into their
hearts; especially against his sacred person, whose life has been so
immaculate and unspotted in the world, so free from all touch of viciousness
and staining imputation, that even malice it self (which leaves nothing
unsearched) could never find true blemish in it, nor cast any probable
aspersion on it. Against his sacred person, whom as they must acknowledge to be
zealous as David, learned and wise as the Solomon of our age, religious as
Josias, careful of spreading Christ's faith as Constantine the Great; so if
they will speak truth, they must confess to be just as Moses, undefiled in
all his ways as Iehosaphat or Hezechias, full of clemency as another
Theodosius, far from spilling the blood of any of his Nobility, but rather
sparing those who have lift up their hand against him. Notwithstanding, when
preposterous affection had so blinded these men, that they would not see this
truth, the Lord has given light yet once more to the rectifying of their
judgments. A singular example of Gods unlimited and unbounded wisdom, who
will do things as he likes. That when as S. John says, Apoc. 22.11.
Qui sordescit, sordescat adhuc, He that lift to be peevish and refractarie and
selfe-conceited, did think he might have persisted and died in that
peevishness and refractarie conceit, and supposed that never any thing in this
world should have been able to reform him, may see before his face so
illustrious a testimony of his misconceited fancy, and almost vnsatisfiable
undutifulness, that unless his face be hardened and his heart obdurated
against both heaven and earth, he must cease to be perverse. God is the God of
truth: and he who is the protector of innocence in the poorest, will certainly
be the mainteiner and defender of integrity and sincerity in his noblest and
dearest servant. It is fit that he should have his own will, to put off and
prolong his mercies till the time which seems good to himself, that men may
wait upon him, and patiently expect, and still tarry the Lords leisure: yea
that his power may be known, who can bring light out of darkness, and good
out of evil, and truth out of treason; who can give hope beyond hope. But when
he is once resolved that things acted in secret shall be preached upon the
house top, that iniquity shall be opened, that simplicity shall be cleared, and
innocence disburdened of scandalous imputations, if men would not speak, or
children sound out the truth in the streets, Luc. 19.40.
yet the very stones shall cry, as our Savior once answered to the maligning
Pharisees. Blessed be the GOD of justice, who cleereth up the fame of his holy
ones, when malice would obscure it.

Lastly, here may be a warning to men Mal. 2.7.
lips of the Priest should always preserve knowledge, so should they preserve
truth. And we are to go before our flocks and Congregations in obedience and
obsequiousness unto the Christian Magistrate, not in sowing sedition, or
making of mutinies, to the disturbance of the State. Who should stick closer
to Moses welding so huge a charge, than Aaron and his tribe? And who should
rather labor to do his Prince all right, than the Minister of the Gospel,
who next after teaching men their duty to GOD, is made to teach obedience and
respectiuenesse unto Kings? And who more deserves to be chastised than he, if
he wilfully transgress?

These things I thought not amiss to observe to thee, Christian Reader, before
thou come to the perusing of this plain and true narration, touching the
examination, arraignment and death of the person here described. GOD Almighty
bless the Kings Majesty, grant unto him many days full of piety and
felicity; and after this mortal life expired, send him an everlasting Crown
of glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Thine in the Lord, GEORGE ABBOT.

THE EXAMINATIONS, ARRAIGNMENT, AND Conviction of George Sprot, Notary in
Aye-mouth: Together with his constant and extraordinary behauior at his death
in Edenborough, August 12. 1608.
Written and set forth by Sir William Heart Knight, L. Justice of Scotland.
Whereby appears the treasonable device between JOHN late Earl of Gowrie
and Robert Logane of Restalrig (commonly called Lesterig) plotted by them for
the cruel murdering of our most gracious Sovereign.
I Thought good (gentle Reader) for satisfaction of the true hearted and well
affected subjects to their gracious Sovereign, and closing of the mouths of
his Majesty's malicious enemies, to spend a little time in discourse of a
strange and almost miraculous accident, that fell out of late, anent the
revealing of the practices of Gowries treasonable Conspiracy, intended against
his Highness royal person. Which purpose was hidden and concealed, until the
time it pleased God to move one George Sprot (who was privy thereto) to
manifest and confess the same, as by this that follows may appear.

This Sprot after diverse examinations being moved with remorse of conscience,
for the long concealing of the foreknowledge of this treasonable conspiracy,
confesses, declares and deponeth, with the peril of his own life,

That he knew perfectly, that Robert Logane, late of Restalrig, was privy and
upon the foreknowledge of Gowries treasonable conspiracy. And for the greater
assurance of his knowledge, deponeth, That he knew that there were diverse
Letters interchanged betwixt them, anent the treasonable purpose aforesaid, in
the beginning of the Month of July 1600. Which letters James Bour, called
Lord Bour, seruitor to Restalrig, (who was employed mediator betwixt them,
and privy to all that errand) had in keeping, and showed the same to Sprot in
the place of Fast-Castle. The first of Gowries Letters containing in effect, as
follows: Good Lord of Restalrig, you understand what conditions should have
been betwixt us, of before. Indeed I purposed to have come by your house, but
understanding of your absence in Lothiane I came not. Always I wish you either
your self to come West, or else to send some sure messenger, who may confer
with me anent the purpose you know. But rather would I wish your self to
come, not only for that errand, but for some other thing that I have to advise
with you.




To the which Letter Restalrig wrate an answer, and sent the same to the Earl
of Gowrie, by the said James Bour, of the tenure following: MY Lord, my most
humble duty and service heartily remembered. At the receipt of your Lordships
Letter I am so comforted, that I can neither utter my joy, nor find my self
sufficiently able to requite your Lordship with due thanks. And persuade your
Lordship in that matter, I shall be as forward for your Lordships honor, as if
it were mine own cause. And I think there is no living Christian that would
not be content to revenge that Machiauellian massacring of our dear friends,
yea howbeit it should be, to venture and hazard life, lands and all other
thing else. My heart can bind me to take part in that matter, as your Lordship
shall find better proof thereof. But one thing would be done: namely. That
your Lordship should be circumspect and earnest with your brother, that he be
not rash in any speeches touching the purpose of Padua. My Lord, you may easily
understand, that such a purpose as your Lordship intends, can not be done
rashly, but with deliberation. And I think for my self, that it were most
meet to have the men your Lordship spoke of, ready in a boat or bark, and
address them as if they were taking pastime on the sea, in such fair Summer
time. And if your Lordship could think good either your self to come to my
house of Fast-Castle by sea, or to send your brother, I should have the place
very quiet, and well provided after your Lordships advertisement, where we
should have no scant of the best Venison can be had in England. And no others
should have access to haunt the place, during your Lordships being here, but
all things very quiet. And if your Lordship doubt of safe landing, I shall
provide all such necessaries as may serve for your Lordships arrival, within a
flight shot of the house. And persuade your Lordship you shall be as sure and
quiet here, while we have settled our plot, as if you were in your own
chamber: for I trust and am assured we shall hear word within few days from
them your Lorship knows of; for I have care to see what ships comes home by.
Your Lordship knows I have kept the L. Bothwell quietly in this house in his
greatest extremity, say both King and Counsel what they liked. I hope (if all
things come to pass, as I trust they shall) to have both your Lordship and his
Lordship at one good dinner before I die. Haeciocose, to animate your Lordship:
I doubt not my Lord but all things shall be well. And I am resolved, whereof
your Lordship shall not doubt, of any thing on my part, yea to peril life,
land, honor and goods; yea the hazard of hell shall not affray me from that,
yea although the scaffold were already set up. The sooner the matter were
done, it were the better; for the Kings bucke-hunting will be shortly: and I
hope it shall prepare some dainty cheer for us to dine against the next
year. I remember well my Lord, and I will never forget, so long as I live,
that merry sport which your Lordships brother told me of a Nobleman at
Padua: for I think that a parasceue to this purpose. My Lord, think nothing
that I commit the secrecy hereof, and credit to this bearer: for I dare not
only venture my life, lands, and all other things I have else, on his credit,
but I durst hazard my soul in his keeping, if it were possible in earthly
men: for I am so persuaded of his truth and fidelity. And I trow (as your
Lordship may ask him if it be true) he would go to hell gates for me: and
he is not beguiled of my part to him. And therefore I doubt not but this will
persuade your Lordship to give him trust in this matter, as to my self. But I
pray your Lordship direct him home with all possible haste, and give him strait
command, that he take not a wincke sleep, while he see me again, after he
come from your Lordship. And as your Lordship desires in your letter to me,
either riue or burn, or else send back again with the bearer: for so is the
fashion I grant.




Which letter written every word with Restalrigs own hand, was subscribed by
him after his accustomed manner, Restalrig. And was sent to the Earl Gowrie by
the said James Bour. After whose return within five days with a new letter
from Gowrie, he stayed all night with Restalrig in A house of Restalrigs.
Gunnes-greene: and Restalrig rode to Lothiane the morn thereafter, where he
stayed five or six days. Then after his returning, past to Fast-Castle, where
he remained a certain short space.

And farther deponeth, that he saw and heard Restalrig read the last letter,
which Bour brought back to him from Gowrie, and their conference there-anent.
And heard Bour say; Sir, if ye think to make any commodity by this dealing,
lay your hand to your heart. And Restalrig answered, that he would do as he
thought best. And farther said to Bour, Howbeit he should sell all his own land
that he had in the world, he would pass through with the Earl of Gowrie, for
that matter would give him greater contentment, nor if he had the whole
Kingdom: and rather or he should falsify his promise, and recall his vow
that he had vowed to the Earl of Gowrie, he should spend all that he had in
the world, and hazard his life with his Lordship. To whom Bour answered: You
may do as you please Sir, but it is not my counsel, that you should be so
sudden in that other matter. But for the condition of Dirlton, I would like
very well of it. To whom Restalrig answered, Content your self, I am at my
wits end.

And farther Sprot deponeth, that he entered himself there-after in conference
with Bour, and demanded what was done betwixt the Lord and the Earl of
Gowrie. And Bour answered, that he believed that the Lord should get Dirlton
without either gold or silver, but feared that it should be as dear unto him.
And Sprot inquiring how that could be; Bour said they had another pie in hand
nor the selling of any land: but prayed Sprot, for Gods sake, that he would
let be, and not trouble himself with the Lairds business; for he feared,
within few days, the Lord would either be landlesse or lifelesse.

And the said George Sprot being demanded if this his deposition was true, as
he would answer upon the salvation and condemnation of his soul; and if he
will go to death with it, seeing he knows the time and hour of his death to
approach very near; deponeth for answer, that he has not a desire to live,
and that he knows the time to be short, having care of no earthly thing, but
only for clearing of his conscience in the truth of all these things, to his
own shame before the world, and to the honor of God, and safety of his own
soul; that all the former points and circumstances contained in this his
deposition, with the deposition made by him the fifth day of July last, and the
whole remanent depositions made by him sen that day are true, which he will
take on his conscience, and as he hops to be saved of God, and that he would
seal the same with his blood.


And farther being demanded where this above written letter, written by
Restalrig to the Earl of Gowrie, which was returned again by James Bour, is
now; deponeth that he abstracted it quietly from Bour, in looking over and
reading Bours letters, which he had in keeping of Restalrigs; and that he left
the above written letter in his chest among his writings. when he was taken
and brought away, and that it is closed and folded within a piece of paper.

This foresaid deposition was made by him the tenth of August 1608, written by
James Primerose, Clerk of his Majesty's Privy Counsel, and subscribed with
the said George Sprots own hand, In the presence of The Earl of Dunbar. The
Earl of Lothiane. The Bishop of Rosse. The L. Schune. The L. Halyrudehouse.
The L. Blantyre. Sir William Heart, his Majesty's Justice. M. John Hall, M.
Patricke Galoway, M. Peter Hewart: Ministers of the Kirkes of Edenborough.


Subscribed with all their hands.

And also the eleventh day of the foresaid month and year, the said George
Sprot being re-examined, in the presence of a number of the Counsel and
Ministers aforesaid, and it being declared to him, that the time of his death
now very near approached, and that therefore they desired him to clear his
conscience with an upright declaration of the truth; and that he would not
abuse the holy name of God, to make him, as it were, a witness to untruths:
and specially, being desired that he would not take upon him the innocent blood
of any person dead or quick, by making and forging lies and untruths against
them:

Deponeth, that he acknowledges his grievous offenses to God (who has made
him a reasonable creature) in abusing his holy name with many untruths, sen
the beginning of this Process: but now being resolved to die, and attending
the hour and time, when it shall please God to call him, he deponeth with many
attestations, and as he wishes to be participant of the Kingdom of heaven,
where he may be countable and answerable upon the salvation, and condemnation
of his soul, for all his doings and speeches in this earth, that all that he
has deponed sen the fifth day of July last, in all his several depositions
were true in every point and circumstance of the same; and that there is no
untruth in any point thereof.

And having desired M. Patricke Galoway to make a prayer, whereby he might be
comforted now in his trouble: Which was done:

The said Deponer with many tears after the prayer affirmed this his
deposition to be true: and for the confirmation thereof, declared, that he
would seal the same with his blood.

And the next day thereafter, being the twelfth of the foresaid month of
August, the said George was brought forth and presented in judgment upon
pannell, within the Towlebewth of Edenborough, before Sir William Heart of
Preston, his Maiestis Justice; and there in a fenced Court holden by him that
day, assisted by the honorable persons following, his Assessors in that
errand, They are to say, Alexander Earl of Dumfermling L. Chanceller. George
Earl of Dunbar, Treasurer. John Archbishop of Glascow. David Bishop of Rosse.
Gawin Bishop of Galloway. Andrew Bishop of Brechine. David Earl of Crawford.
Mark Earl of Lothiane. John L. Abirnethy of Saltoun. James L. of Balmerinoth,
Secretary. Walter L. Blantyre. John L. Halyrudehouse. Michael L. Burley. Sir
Richard Cokburne of Clarkintoun, Knight. M. John Preston of Fenton Barnes,
Collector General. Sir John Skeyne of Currhil, Knight, Clerk of Register:
was delated, accused, and pursued by Sir Thomas Hamilton of Binning, Knight,
Advocate to our Sovereign Lord for his Highness Entries, of the crimes
contained in his Indictment, produced by the said Advocate; whereof the tenure
follows:

GEorge Sprot Notarie in Aye-mouth, You are indicted and accused, for so much as
John sometime Earl of Gowrie having most cruelly, detestably, and treasonably
conspired, in the moweth of July the year of God 1600 years, to murder our
dear and most gracious Sovereign the Kings most excellent Majesty: And
having imparted that devilish purpose to Robert Logane of Restalrig, who
allowed of the same, and most willingly and readily under took to be partaker
thereof: The same coming to your knowledge at the times and in the manner
particularly after specified, you most unnaturally, maliciously, and
treasonably concealed the same, and was art and part thereof in manner
following. In the first, in the said month of July six-hundred years, after
you had perceived and known, that diverse letters and messages had past betwixt
the said sometime Earl of Gowrie, and the said Robert Logane of Restalrig, you
being in the house of Fast-Castle, you saw and read a letter written by the
said Robert Logane of Restalrig with his own hand to the said John sometime
Earl of Gowrie, of the tenure following.

MY Lord, my most humble duty and service heartily remembered. At the receipt of
your Lordships Letter I am so comforted, that I can neither utter my joy, nor
find my self sufficiently able to requite your Lordship with due thanks. And
persuade your Lordship in that matter, I shall be as forward for your Lordships
honor, as if it were mine own cause. And I think there is no living
Christian that would not be content to revenge that Machiauellian massacring of
our dear friends, yea howbeit it should be, to venture and hazard life, lands
and all other thing else. My heart can bind me to take part in that matter, as
your Lordship shall find better proof thereof. But one thing would be done:
namely, That your Lordship should be circumspect and earnest with your brother,
that he be not r^sh in any speeches touching the purpose of Padua.


And a certain space after the execution of the aforesaid treason, the said
Robert Logane of Restalrig having desired the Lord of Bour to deliver to him
the foresaid letter, or else to burn it; And Bour having given to you all
tickets and letters, which he then had either concerning Restalrig or others,
to see the same, because he could not read himself, you abstracted the above
written letter, and retained the same in your own hands, and diverse times read
it, containing farther in substance nor is formerly set down, according to the
words following.

My Lord, you may easily understand, that such a purpose as your Lordship
intends, can not be done rashly, but with deliberation. And I think for my
self, that it were most meet to have the men your Lordship spoke of, ready in
a boat or bark, and address them as if they were taking pastime on the sea,
in such fair Summer time. And if your Lordship could think good either your
self to come to my house of Fast-Castle by sea, or to send your brother, I
should have the place very quiet, and well provided after your Lordships
advertisement, where we should have no scant of the best Venison can be had in
England. And no others should have access to haunt the place, during your
Lordships being here, but all things very quiet. And if your Lordship doubt of
safe landing, I shall provide all such necessaries as may serve for your
Lordships arrival, within a flight shot of the house. And persuade your
Lordship you shall be as sure and quiet here, while we have settled our plot,
as if you were in your own chamber: for I trust and am assured we shall have
word within few days from them your Lordship knows of; for I have care to
see what ships comes home by. Your Lordship knows I have kept the L. Bothwell
quietly in this house in his greatest extremity, say both King and Counsel
what they liked. I hope (if all things come to pass, as I trust they shall) to
have both your Lordship and his Lordship at one good dinner before I die.
Haeciocose, to animate your Lordship: I doubt not my Lord but all things shall
be well. And I am resolved, whereof your Lordship shall not doubt, of any thing
on my part, yea to peril life, land, honor and goods; yea the hazard of hell
shall not affray me from that, yea although the scaffold were already set up.
The sooner the matter were done, it were the better; for the Kings
bucke-hunting will be shortly: and I hope it shall prepare some dainty cheer
for us to dine against the next year. I remember well my Lord, and I will
never forget, so long as I live, that merry sport which your Lordships brother
told me of a Noble man at Padua: for I think that a parasceue to this
purpose. My Lord, think nothing that I commit the secrecy hereof, and credit
to this bearer: for I dare not only venture my life, lands, and all other
things I have else, on his credit, but I durst hazard my soul in his keeping,
if it were possible in earthly men: for I am so persuaded of his truth and
fidelity. And I trow (as your Lordship may ask him if it be true) he would
go to hell gates for me: and he is not beguiled of my part to him. And
therefore I doubt not but this will persuade your Lordship to give him trust in
this matter, as to my self. But I pray your Lordship direct him home with all
possible haste, and give him strait command, that he take not a wincke sleep,
while he see me again, after he come from your Lorship. And as your Lordship
desires in your letter to me, either riue or burn, or else send back again
with the bearer: for so is the fashion I grant.


Which letter written every word with the said Robert Logane his own hand, was
subscribed by him after his accustomed manner, with this word, Restalrig.

And albeit by the contents of the foresaid letter you knew perfectly the
truth of the said most treasonable conspiracy, and the said Rober Logane of
Restalrig his foreknowledge, allowance and guiltiness thereof; like as you was
assured of the same by his receiving of diverse letters sent by Gowrie to him,
and by his sending of letters to Gowrie for the same purpose, and by sun dry
conferences betwixt the said Robert Logane of Restalrig, and the said James
Bour, in your presence and hearing concerning the said treason; as well in the
said month of Iulie immediately preceding the attempting of the said treason,
as at diverse other times shortly thereafter, as likewise by the reueiling
thereof to you by the said James Bour, who was upon the knowledge and device of
the said treason, and was employed as ordinary messenger by the said Robert
Logane of Restalrig, to the said sometime Earl of Gowrie, in the traffic of
the said damnable treason, whereby your knowledge, concealing and guiltiness
of the said treason was undeniable: yet, for farther manifestation thereof,
about Iulie 1602 years, the said Robert Logane of Restalrig showed to you that
Bour had told him, that he had been somewhat rash to let you see a letter
which came from the Earl of Gowrie to the said Robert Logane of Restalrig, who
then urged you to tell what you understood by that letter. To whom you
answ^^^d, that you took the meaning of it to be, that he had (...) upon the
counsel and purpose of Gowries conspiracy. And he answered you, what ever
he had done, the worst was his own: But if you would swear to him, that you
should never reueile any thing of that matter to any person, he should be the
best sight that ever you saw: and in token of farther recompense he then gave
you twelve pound of silver. Nevertheless, albeit you knew perfectly the whole
practices and progress of the said treason, from the beginning thereof as said
is, as well by the sight of the said letters, as also by your conferences with
the said James Bour, called Lord Bour, and Robert Logane of Restalrig, yet
during all the days of their life times, who lived till the year of God 1606
years or thereby; and so by the space of six years after that you knew the
guiltiness of the treasonable conspiracy aforesaid, you most treasonably
concealed the same: and so you was and is art and part of the said most
heinous, detestable and treasonable conspiracy, and of the knowledge and
concealing thereof: and therefore you ought and should incur, vnder-lie and
suffer the sentence and pain of high treason. To the token, that ye have not
only by your depositions subscribed with your hand and solemnly made in
presence of many of the L L. of his Majesty's Counsel, and of the Ministers
of the Borough of Edenborough, of the dates, the fifth, fifteenth and sixteen
days of Iulie last bypast, and tenth and eleventh days of August instant,
confessed every head, point and article of the Indictment above written, but
also by diverse other your depositions subscribed likewise with your hand, you
have ratified the same, and sworn constantly to abide thereat, and to seal
the same with your blood, which you can not deny.

Which Indictment being read openly in judgment to the said George Sprot,
before he was put to the knowledge of an Inquest, he confessed in the presence
of the said L. Justice and whole Assessors above named, the same and every
point thereof to be true and of verity. And therefore the Justice ordained the
same Indictment to be put to the knowledge of a condign Inquest of the honest,
famous and discreet persons underwritten. They are to say: William Trumbill of
Ardre. William Fisher Merchant, Burgess of Edenborough. Robert Stuart there.
Edward Iohnston Merchant, Burgess there. Harbert Maxwell of Cauens. James
Tennent of Linhouse. William Trumbill, Burgess of Edenborough. George Brown
in Gorgy mill. John Hucheson Merchant, Burgess of Edenborough. John Leyis
Merchant, Burgess there. James Someruell Merchant, Burgess there. William
Simintoun, Burgess there. John Cunnison in Dirlton. Thomas Smith Merchant,
Burgess of Edenborough. And John Cowtis, Burgess there.
Which persons of Inquest being chosen, sworn and admitted, after the
accusation of the said George Sprot, before them of the said treasonable,
heinous and detestable crimes contained in the Indictment aforesaid, and
reading of the said Indictment of new again in his and their presence; the
said George Sprot of new confessed in the audience of the said Inquest the
foresaid Indictment and every point thereof to be true and of verity.
Whereupon the said Sir Thomas Hamilton of Binning Knight, his Majesty's
Advocate, as before, asked act and instrument. And in respect thereof protested
in case the said Inquest cleansed him of the said crimes, for wilful and
manifest error. And therefore the whole fornamed persons of Inquest removed
all together forth of Court to the Inquest house, where they being enclosed, by
plurality of votes elected and made choice of the said Harbert Maxwell of
Cauens to be Chanceller or Foreman. And having with great deliberation
gravely considered the effect and whole circumstances of the said Indictment,
and constant judicial confession made by the party pannelled, as well before
the said L. Justice and his Assessors, as thereafter in presence of the Inquest
themselves, they all voted upon the whole effect of the said Indictment. And
being ripelie and well advised therewith, reentred again in Court, where they
all in one voice by the mouth of the said Chanceller or Foreman, found,
pronounced, and declared the said George Sprot (according to his own
confession iudicially made in their presence and audience) to be guilty,
culpable, filed and convict of art and part of the said most heinous,
detestable and treasonable conspiracy contained in his Indictment
aboue-written, and of the knowledge and concealing thereof. For the which cause
the said Justice, by the mouth of the Dempster of Court, by his sentence and
doom decerned and ordained, The said George Sprot to be taken to the Market
Cross of Edenborough, and there to be hanged upon a gibbet till he be dead,
and thereafter his head to be stricken from his body, and his body to be
quartered and demeaned as a Traitor, and his head to be affixed and set up
upon a prick of iron upon the highest part of the Towlebewth of Edenborough,
where the Traitor Gowrie, and others of the Conspiratours heads stand; and his
whole lands, heritages, tacks, stedings, rooms, possessions, goods and geere
to be forfeited and eschet to our Sovereign Lord his use, for his treasonable
and detestable crimes above specified. Which was pronounced for doom.

Extractum de libro Actorum Adiornalis S. D. N. Regis per me D. Iohannem
Cohburne de Ormestoun militem, Clericum Iustitiariae eiusdem generalem. Sub
meis signo and subscriptione manualibus. The doom being pronounced, the said
George was conuoyed to a privy house, where he remained at his secret
meditation, and afterward in conference with the Ministers and others, unto
the time all things was provided necessary for his execution: and being
brought to the place where he was to die, he in public audience of the whole
people, at the three sides of the scaffold, ratified the former depositions
made by him concerning the treasonable practices intended and devised betwixt
Gowrie and Restalrig, for the murdering of our most gracious Sovereign, and
bereauing his Highness of his life, and his own knowledge and concealing of
their guiltiness. For the which he humbly craved God and his Majesty
forgiveness, being most sorry and grieved that he had offended God and the
Kings Majesty in concealing such a vile, detestable and unnatural treason,
enterprised by them against his gracious Sovereign, who has been ever so
good and gracious to his subjects, protesting that if he had a thousand lives
to render, and were able to suffer ten thousand deaths, it were not a
sufficient satisfaction and recompense for his offense. And that God had
preserved him from many great perils, when his life was in extreme danger, to
bring him to this public declaration of that detestable and horrible fact in
presence of all the people, uttered by him in these words following: To my own
shame, and to the shame of the devil, but to the glory of God. And for
satisfaction of the consciences of all those (if any be) that have or can make
any doubt of the truth of this so clear a matter, he acknowledged that his
haunting with Restalrig, who was a man without religion, and subject to many
other vices, as also his continual being in company with the Lord of Bour,
who likewise was irreligious and without fear of God, and his being ingyred by
them into their matters after his first sight of Restalrigs letter written by
him to Gowrie, brought him from one sin to another, and consequently upon
this grievous crime, for the which most justly, worthily and willingly he is
now to render his life. And thereupon he desired all the people there present
to beware of evil company, and namely of the society of those who are void
of religion. And farther desired, that this his declaration might be inserted
in his Process, and that the Ministers of Gods word would publish the same
from their Pulpits to the people: for which purpose also he took diverse of
them there present by the hand, with their promise to do the same, saying to
them, That this was the most glorious day that ever his eyes did see. In the
midst almost of these speeches, he did prostrate himself and fell upon his
knees in presence of the whole people, making a very pithie prayer, in the
form following.

O Father, how should I call thee Father, that am so unworthy to be called thy
son? I have wandered astray like a lost sheep, and thou of thy mercy have
brought me home unto thee, and have preserved my life from many dangers until
this day, that I might reueile these hidden and secret mysteries, to mine own
shame, and thy glory. Thou have promised, that whenever a sinner from his
heart will repent and call to thee, that thou will hear him, and grant him
mercy.

And thus he continued a good space in a most fervent prayer, to the great
admiration of all the standers by. Afterward ganging up the ladder with his
hands loose and untied, being on the upper part thereof, he desired liberty to
sing the sixth Psalm, and requested the people to accompany him in the singing
thereof. Which being granted, he took up the Psalm himself with a very loud
and strong voice, far by his accustomed form, being before his coming to the
scaffold a weak spirited man, of feeble voice and utterance; and was assisted
with the number of a thousand persons at the least, who accompanied him in
singing that Psalm. After the ending whereof he openly repeated and ratified
his said former confession: and with that, recommending his soul to God, he
fastened a cloth about his own eyes, and was cast over the ladder, so ending
this mortal life.

I had almost forgotten that, which in this action of his death was strange,
and in a manner marvelous. For being urged by the Ministers and other of good
rank upon the scaffold, that now at his end he should declare nothing but the
truth (touching the matter for which he suffered) on the peril of his own
salvation, or condemnation of his soul; he for the greater assurance of that
his constant and true deposition, promised (by the assistance of God) to give
them an open and evident token before the yielding of his spirit. Which he
accomplished thereafter. For before his last breath, when he had hung a pretty
space, he lift up his hands a good height, and clapped them together aloud,
three several times, to the great wonder and admiration of all the beholders.
And very soon thereafter he yielded his spirit.

By this Narration afore-going, each man may learn, that the contriuing and
plotting of treason against Kings and Princes, is a thing odious in the sight
of God, and therefore ordinarily is disclosed by him, at first or at last, by
one means or another: and that it is not good to conceal any such conspiracy
intended by enemy or friend, because the life and safety of a Christian King,
who is the common Father of the Country, ought to be dearer to all good men,
than the love or acquaintance of any whatsoever: who howbeit he make show of
many fair things in him, yet in this alone, That he purposes evil against
the Lords Anointed; sufficiently declares himself to be of a rebellious and
ungodly disposition. And how woeful the fruit is either of such traitourous
resolutions, or of the concealing of them, may be seen (as in a glass) both
in the sudden end of the Earl Gowrie, and in the execution of this George
Sprot with more deliberation.


