C. BRETTERG


DEATHS ADVANTAGE LITTLE REGARDED, AND THE souls solace against sorrow.

Preached in two funeral Sermons at Childwal in Lancashire at the burial of
Mistress Katherin Brettergh the third of June. 1601.

The one by William Harrison, one of the Preachers appointed by her. Majesty
for the County Palatine of Lancaster, the other by William Leygh, Bachelor of
Divinity, and Pastor of Standish.

Whereunto is annexed, the Christian life and godly death of the said
Gentlevvoman.

The second Edition, corrected and amended.

PHIL. 1. 21. Christ is to me both in life, and in death advantage. REVEL. 12.
17. Then the dragon was wroth with the Woman, and went and made war
with the remnant of her seed which keep the commandments of God, and have
the testimony of Jesus Christ. AT LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston. 1602.

TO THE CHRISTIAN Reader, grace and peace in Christ be multiplied.
IF any do wonder why I would presume to publish this rude Sermon in these
bright Sunshine days of the Gospel, wherein so many learned books and
profitable treatises be already set forth by others, and yet are little
regarded by the people: I wish them to understand, that I was drawn hereunto
by the importunity of some, who hearing it preached, earnestly desired to have
it printed: their request being importunate, and yet reasonable, I could not
well deny it. And yet I hope it will not be hurtful to any, but profitable to
sor^e. I know that speaking has always been Rernard. epist. 314.
accounted more powerful than writing: and therefore Papias, Eusebius. eccles.
hist. lib. 3 cap. 39.
a companion of Polycarpus, thought he did not profit so much by the writings
and books of the Apostles followers, as by the authority of the persons and
the lively voice of the speakers. And Habes n^scio quid latentis (...) viua
vox: and in aures discipuli de authori^ ore transfusa, fortius sonat. Hier.
Paulin^.
Hierome said, that the lively voice had a secret force, and being powered from
the mouth of the speaker into the ears of the hearer, has a stronger and more
powerful sound. Whereupon Aeschines, when he had read the oration which
Demosthenes had made against him, and perceived that the people did greatly
wonder at the force and excellency of it; answered them, Quid si ipsam
audissetis bestiam, sua verba resonantem. Hier. ibid.
What would you have thought, if you had heard him pronounce it with his own
mouth? Yet writing has his use and profit: both for the instruction of those
which did not hear the doctrine delivered by lively voice, and also for the
help of their memories which before heard it. Our Sermons are like an untimely
fruit, which dies so soon as it is borne, they are forgotten so soon as
they are heard. And therefore as Paul was not grieved Philip. 3. 1.
to write the same things to the Philippians, but thought it a sure thing for
them: so we need not to be ashamed to write those things which before we
preached, that the people may the better understand and remember the same.

Moreover, I was willing to give a public testimony of that godly
Gentlewomans death, at whose burial it was preached: to clear her from the
slanderous reports of her popish neighbors, who will not suffer her to rest in
her grave, but seek to disgrace her after her death. It is not unknown to
them which either read the histories of these later times, or are acquainted
with popish practices, that the religion of Papists, was first set up, and is
still maintained by cruelty, and lies. By cruelty, in murdering the Martyrs,
in persecuting the Protestants, and now of late in these parts, in beating and
wounding the bodies, in killing and spoiling the cattle of those which
withstand them by public authority. By lies, in teaching forged miracles to
confirm their own doctrine, and in spreading abroad false reports against our
best professors to hinder our doctrine: as they have bitterly reviled them for
the course of their lives; so have they most shamefully slaundered them for the
manner of their death. It would make a man's ears to tingle to hear what
malicious slanders and manifest untruths some of the Romish faction have
published, concerning the death of Bellarm. de not. Eccles. 4 17. ex Cochleo.
Lindan. etc.
Luther, of Bellarm. d^ not. Eccles. 4. 8.
Calvin and Lindan. de sug. Idol. cap. 11.
Bucer, worthy instruments of Gods glory, and faithful teachers of his
truth. As also concerning the death of the ^ox. Act. mon. p. 520. ex Alan.
Cope. dial.
Lord Cobham, Alan. Cope. ^ia^og. and More dial. Act. mon. sag 743.
of Richard Hunne, More praefat. contra Tindal.
of Thomas Bilney, and of Harding. reioynd. against Iuel. fol. 184. See Act.
and mon. p. 1766.
Perotine Massy, holy Martyrs, which sealed the truth of Christ with their
own blood. Yea have not some of that sect scattered abroad slanderous Libels
of Master Beza his reuolting at his death? when he was living, and able to
answer them with his own handwriting. No marvel therefore though their
followers, treading in their steps, do now unjustly reproach them which profess
the same doctrine, and being dead indeed, cannot answer for themselves. It
were better for them with Balaam, to desire to die the death of the righteous,
then thus to slander them after their death. I will not blame them with cursed
speaking, seeing Michael the Jude 9.
Archangell would not so deal with the devil: but I shall pray unto the Lord
to forgive them, and to open their eyes that they may see his truth. And God
grant that we which now profess his truth, may so live and die, as that we may
give them no occasion to speak evil of it.

Amen.
Thine in the Lord, WILLIAM HARRISON.

Analysis of Deaths advantage little regarded.
Concerning the death of the godly, mentioned Isai, 57. verse. 1. these 4.
points may be observed.
1. The persons which dyed, who are described by two titles. 1. The righteous,
where we may consider 1. The causes by which they are made righteous, namely
by 1. Faith applying Christ's merits to make them righteous before God. 2.
Sanctification and the fruits thereof, to make them righteous before men.
2. The marks whereby they may be known to be righteous, which be four. 1.
The generality of their obedience: if it extend it self to the whole course
of their life. 2. The end of it, if it be directed to Gods glory. 3. Their
perseverance, if they continue therein unto the end. 4. Their affection to
righteousness in others, which is showed in Laboring to make them righteous,
which yet be not. Loving them which be already righteous.


2. Merciful men so called Passiuely, because God has received them to
mercy. Actiuely, because they show mercy unto others: both to their Bodes and
Souls.


2. The manner of their death expressed by two phrases. 1. Do perish: which
must be understood Not in regard of their souls: for they are immortal and
incomptible. But in regard of their bodies: for they perish; yet only for a
time, and during that time remain members of Christ's mystical body: by
virtue whereof they shallr^e again.
2. Are taken away: and that is in respect of their Souls, an^ so their death
differs much from the death of he wicked. Bodies, an^ so there is no
difference betwixt them and the vicked.

3. The careless regard in others, which is declared by two several sentences.
1. No man co^sidereth it in heart. 2. No man understands it. Concerning which
consideration 3. points are observed.
1. The reasons why all should consider their death. 1. Because it is Gods
work. 2. Because it is a thing precious in Gods sight. 3. It tends to Gods
glory. 4. It serves for the instruction of the^ which remain alive.
2. The matter, what things we should consider at their death. 1. The
certainty of our own death. 2. The nature of death in all, defacing Gods
image, and making a separation betwixt them and those things which they loved
most dearly. 3. The cause of their death: for they are taken away either in
Judgment, or Mercy.
4. The manner of their death: for thereby we may learn how to dye.
3. The abuse of it, which is committed by Not considering their death at all.
Considering it amiss, and that Fondly, through natural affection, when our
friends and kinsfolk are taken away. Frowardly, thinking the^ to die il,
because 1. Their death is sudden and extraordinary. 2. They are strangely
assaulted with temptations. 3. They speak idl^e and blasphemously by reason of
their disease.




4. The end of their death to free them from evils to come: which evils be
Ordinary, and that either Corporal, as diseases, losses, and all manner of
crosses. Spiritual in their souls, namely 1. Their combat with the devil. 2.
Their practice of sin. 3. Their society with the wicked.

Extraordinary: to wit, those judgments which for some late and grievous
sins, the Lord was ready to bring upon the people amongst whom they lived.

W. Harrison.

Deaths advantage little regarded.
ISAI. 57. 1. The righteous perishes, and no man considers it in heart: And
merciful men are taken away, and no man understands that the righteous is
taken away from the evil to come.
THe holy Prophet of the Lord, in the 9. verse of the Chapter immediately going
before, has foretold of a fearful judgment which was like to fall upon the
Jews. He calls for the wild beasts of the field and the forest, to come and*
denoure them: meaning thereby the Gentiles, which should be the executioners of
the Lords judgments upon them. And because the Lords judgments are always
righteous, he afterward shows the causes which would provoke him to inflict
them. The first cause is set down at large in the rest of the verses following
in the same Chapter, the blindness, idleness, covetousness, and security of them
which were appointed for teachers among them: the neglect of their duty, being
a special occasion of the peoples sin, is alleged as the first cause of
the judgment ensuing. The second cause was in the common people, set down in
the first verse of this Chapter, and that was their careless regard of the
death of righteous men, though many of them were taken away, to forewarne them
of some strange judgment to come; yet they regarded it not, but still
proceeded forward in their sins, and therefore were like to cast of some
miseries, from which the righteous were freed by their speedy death.

In these words four several circumstances are to be observed. 1. The persons
who did dye. 2. The manner of their death. 3. The contempt and careless regard
of their death. 4. The end of their death. 1. The persons which dyed, are
described by two properties. 1. the righteous. 2. merciful men. 2. The manner
of their death is set forth by two several terms, perishes: are taken
away. 3. The contempt and careless regard of their death, is also set down by
two phrases, no man considers it in heart: and no man understands it.
Lastly, the end wherefore they dyed was, to prevent future evils: the righteous
is taken away from the evil to come: of these in order.

1. For the persons which dyed, the Prophet 1
says, the righteous perishes. Concerning whom, two things are to be
considered: first, the means by which men are made righteous: secondly, the
marks by which we may know who are righteous. For the former, you must know
that by nature all are corrupt and unrighteous, but yet may be made righteous
by justification, and sanctification: for there is a righteousness of
imputation, and also a righteousness of sanctification; the one to make us
righteous before God, the other to make us righteous before men. The
righteousness of imputation is the righteousness of Christ imputed unto us by
faith, for our justification. Our own inherent righteousness is not sufficient
to make us truly and perfectly righteous before God, and therefore this
Prophet says afterward in the name of himself, and of all the people, All our
righteousness Isal. 646.
is as filthy cloutes. And Daiud, one of Gods faithful servants thus framed
his prayer unto the Lord: Enter not into judgment Psalm. 143. 2.
with thy servant: for in thy sight shall none that lives be iustisted. And
Paul thus speaks of himself in regard of his Apostleship, I know nothing by
my self, yet am I 1. Cor. 4. 4.
not thereby justified. Nothing can satisfye the justice of God, and make us
appear righteous in his sight, but only the righteousness of Jesus Christ,
imputed to us. And therefore the same Saint Paul said, I have counted all
things loss, and do judge them to be Phil. 3. 9.
dung, that I might win Christ, and might be found in him, not having mine
own righteousness which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, even the righteousness which is of God through faith. The same doctrine
he taught unto others, whose salvation he desired as well as his own. As by
Romans 5. 19. Sicut ille ex semesips* nascentibus, lices non man ^^cauerint de
ligno, factus est causa mortis: ita Christus, qui ex ipso sunt, tametsi nihil
ius^e egerunt, factus est pro^isor iustitiae qu^ per crti^em nobis omnibus
cond^na^is.
one man's disobedience (says he) many were made sinners: so by the obedience
of one, shall many be made righteous. Whence we may reason, as Augustine and
others have done against the Pelagians, that as Adams eating of the forbidden
tree was imputed to all his posterity, though they never tasted of the fruit
with their lips; so the righteousness and obedience of Christ shall make all
them which are of him, righteous before God, though they themselves have as yet
practiced no righteousness. Again he says, that God has made him sin for
us, which knew no sin, that we should be made the righteousness of God in him.
As therefore Christ was made sin for us, not by infusion of sin into his
person, but by imputation of our August. cont. ^ulian. Pelag. lib. 1. cap. 2.
ex Ioh. episc^p. Delicta nostra, sua delicta ^ecit, vt iustitiam suam nostram
iustitiam fac^res. August. in Psalm. 21. Bernard in Cant. ser. 71. lla est
iustit^^* per qua^ imp^u^erigitur, vt cadat in poenam.
sins unto him: so must we be made righteous before God, not by infusion of
righteousness into our own persons, but by imputation of Christ's righteousness
unto us. As the Moon and all the Stars borow all their light from the sun:
so the Church and every member of it borow all their righteousness from Christ
the sun of righteousness. If this he true, then the heathen Philosophers and
wise men, which lived most uprightly in the sight of men, and yet wanted the
knowledge of Christ and faith in him, could not be righteous before God. They
wanting the law, did by nature many things contained in the law, yet could not
be made righteous thereby: that was but a righteousness, by which an ungodly man
is lifted up that he might fall into punishment. ^ulgent* de incar. and great
Chri. cap. 27.


And in this respect, the Jews which rejected Christ (how holy soever their
lives were in outward show) could not be righteous before God, because as Paul
testifies of them, they being ignorant of the righteousness Romans 10. 3.
of God, and going about to stablish their own righteousness, have not
submitted themselves to the righteousness of God.

And likewise in regard hereof it is hard to find in the Church of Rome a man
that is truly righteous before God. For the papists hold, that we are made
righteous by infusion of grace, and practice of good works, and that we can be
no more righteous by the righteousness of Christ imputed unto us, then we may
be wise by another man's wisdom, or learned by another man's learning. But if
they would duly consider either the perfection of the Lords justice, or the
imperfection of our inherent grace and good works, they would not imagine that
the one could be satisfied by the other. Augustine Quod lex operum mina^do
inperat, lex fidei credendo impeirat. De spirit. and lit. cap. 13.
said, that which the law of works commanded by threatening, the law of faith
does obtain by believing. Christ Jesus as he is mediator, is as truly given
unto us of God, as any land can be given by one to another, and therefore we
may as well be made righteous by his righteousness, as one man may be made rich
by another man's riches given unto him. And it is strange to see the partiality
of Papists in the matter of impuratio^, for they teach that the fastings and
satisfactory Rhem. Test. 2. Cor. 8. sect. 3.
deeds of one man be available to others, yea and that holy saints or other
virtuous persons may in measure and proportion of other men's necessities and
deseruings, allot unto them, as well the supererogation of their spiritual
works, as those that abound in worldly goods may give alms of their
superfluities, to them which are in necessity: and yet they deny that the
righteousness of Christ may be imputed unto us for justification; as if the Lord
would accept the works of men to satisfy for us, and not the righteousness of
his own Son.

2. Secondly, men are made righteous by 2
sanctification, when by the spirit of God the mind is enlightened, the heart
is mollified, the will is rectified, the affections are changed, and the whole
course of the life is reformed: so that whereas before they liked and loved,
and lived in sin, now they abhor it, and avoid it: and therefore it is
said, he that does righteousness is righteous, as 1. Ioh. 3. 7.
he is righteous: and whosoever does not righteousness is not of God. Yet this
does not make us perfectly righteous, but imperfectly, and not before God, but
before men, and of this James speaks, saying, Was not Iam. 2. 21.
Abraham our father justified through works, when he offered his son on the
altar? Ye see Verse. 24. Th. Aquin. in hunc locum.
then how that of works a man is justified, and not of faith only. That is, a
man is declared, manifested, and tried to be just by the works of the law, and
so do diverse of the Schoolmen expound that place. And indeed unless we did
so understand it, the Apostle James would contradict the Apostle Paul, who
says, that a man is justified by faith, without To. 3. 20, 28.
the works of the law: so that there is one righteousness imputed, another
righteousness exercised and declared. Whosoever are justified by Christ's merits,
they are at the same instant sanctified by his spirit, and made able to
practice righteousness in their conversation.

Herein God excels all Princes in the world, for they may upon good
consideration receive again into favor those which have offended them, as
David did Absalom; yea they may restore them to the former dignities which they
had taken from them: yet they cannot alter their nature and disposition, to
make them more dutiful then they were before. But God thus deals with his
subjects that have offended him: he does not only forgive them their sins,
and receive them into favor for Christ's sake, but also sanctifies them by his
spirit, to keep them in obedience afterward.

Now the marks, whereby a righteous 2
man may be known, are to be learned: for many would be reckoned in this
number, which are unrighteous: There is a generation Pro. 30. 1^.
which are pure in their own conceit, and yet are not washed from their
filthiness. Although the best and surest knowledge arises from the causes of a
thing, and therefore we might best learn who is a righteous man by that which
was spoken before; yet because those things are inward and secret, I will teach
you four outward marks whereby a righteous man may be discerned.

First, a righteous man may be known 1
by the generality of his obedience, if it extend it self to the whole course
of his life, and to all the commandments of God. If he do not take liberty
in any one sin, but strives to avoid all: nor omitteth any one good duty,
but indeuoureth to perform all, being like to Zacharias and Elizabeth, Luke 1.
6.
who were just before God, and walked in all the commandments and ordinances
of the Lord without reproof. Considering that God will not dispense with any
of his servants for the breach of any one of his laws, as Princes sometimes
upon special occasions dispense with some of their subjects for penal
Statutes, and seeing that he who binds us to all in general, binds us to
every one in particular: and that whosoever Iam. 2. 10.
keeps the whole law, and yet fails in one point, is guilty of all: a
true righteous man will be as careful to keep one as another. Some men are
like to Naaman, for he professed the true God of Israel, and promised to serve
and worship him alone: yet desired to be borne withal for one special sin:
herein (says he to the Prophet) the Lord be 2. King. 5. 18
merciful unto thy servant, that when my master goes into the house of
Rimmon, to worship there, and leans on my hand, and I bow my self in the
house of Rimmon, the Lord be merciful unto thy servant in this point. So they
are willing to avoid all other sins save only one which serves most for
their pleasure or profit, they desire to be pardoned for it. These are little
better then Herod was, for he feared John Baptist, and reverenced him, heard
him gladly, and did many things after Mar. 6. 20.
him: but when John told him that it was not lawful for him to have his
brothers wife, he would not obey him, because that sin served most for his
pleasure. Although a Ship be sound in all parts but one, and leaketh in no
place save only one, yet it may be drowned by means of that one. Though the
walls of a besieged City be Greg. mag. moral. 11. 19. cap* 17.
strong, and well fortified in all places save one, and have no breaches save
only one, the enemies may enter in at that one, and spoil the City. Our
soul is as a Ship on the sea, if it have but one hole where it leaketh, it may
make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience: it is as a City besieged by
the Devil and his angels, if there be but one breach in the walls of it, the
devil may there enter, and spoil it. A bird is catched in a snare or grinne,
and held fast in it, as well by one claw, as by both legs, or the whole body:
so the Devil, who lays snares for our souls, may catch and hold them as
well by one sin, as by many. I acknowledge there is imperfection in all.
Righteous Lot had a fault, just Noah had a fall, David showed his infirmity,
and Peter his frailty: yet the righteous either sin of ignorance, not knowing
that they do amiss: or if they know it, it is not often, but seldom*
afterward they are grieved for it, and made more careful to avoid it. But he
which without repentance continues still in one gross sin, and often
practices it, cannot be reputed a righteous man, though he eschew many other
sins. A little leaven sowreth the whole lump. As dead flies putrefie a
Eccles. 10. 1.
whole box of ointment, and a little folly, him that is in estimation for
wisdom; so one sin being continually practiced, spoileth all his
righteousness.

Secondly, a righteous man may be known 2
by the end whereunto his works of righteousness are directed, and that is the
glory of God. Let your light so shine before men (says Matt. 5. 16.
Christ) that they may see your good works, and glorify your father which is
in heaven. And Paul says, Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever 1. Cor. 10.
31
else ye do, do all to the glory of God. Though men practice never so many
good works, yet if in doing of them they propound not this end, they are not
to be accounted righteous men; no more then he is to be esteemed a good Archer
which can draw a strong bow, has a fair loose, and does shoot far, and yet
always shootes a great way off from the mark. In this respect the Pharisees
were not to be reckoned Matthew. 6.
in the number of righteous men, for they did all to be seen of men: they did
fast, and pray, and give alms, to be seen of men.

The Papists also fail in this property: for they do all to merit thereby,
like to hired servants and laborers, which work for their wages, and would do
little or nothing for their Masters, unless they might be well paid for
their pains. But we must acknowledge our selves not to be servants, but
sons, and not sons of the bondwoman, but of the freewoman: and that we
ought of duty to serve the Lord all the days of our lives, though we should
receive nothing for our labor. In all our works we must seek his glory; if
he bestow any reward upon us, we may take it as an undeserved gift of his
bountiful goodness. I grant indeed that righteous men have some hypocrisy
and vaineglorie mingled with sincerity in their best actions, and do some
things as well for their own praise, as Gods glory: yet if there be more
synceritie in them, then hypocrisy; if they do more good works for Gods
glory, then for other sinister ends, they lose not the name and dignity of
righteous men. For as the Philosophers teach concerning elementary bodies, that
they are not made of one element only, but of all four, yet have their names
of the praedominant element, as some are called earthly bodies, not watery,
aeriall, or fiery bodies, because they have more earth, then water or air in
them: and as the Physicians say of the humors in man's body, that although they
be not pure, but mixed one with another, yet every one does carry the name of
that humor which does most abound: so may we say of the general conversation
and the particular actions of men, that if in them they seek more the glory
of God, then their own praise or profit, they are truly righteous.

Thirdly a righteous man may be known 3
by his perseverance in righteousness, for he which is truly made righteous by
faith in Christ, and sanctification of the spirit, will Romans 11. 29.
continue righteous unto the end. True and saving righteousness is one of those
gifts of Ezekiel. 18. 24
God which are without repentance. It can not be lost fully and finally. Those
which turn from their righteousness and commit iniquity, shall not live: their
former righteousness shall be forgotten, and they shall dye in the sins which
they have committed. If the righteousness of any be like a Hes. 6. 4.
morning cloud, or as morning dew, which is dried up and vanishes away, so
soon as the sun ascends on high, it shall never be acceptable to God. He
only which continues righteous to the end shall be saved. As God never
cease to bestow blessings upon us, so should we never cease to serve him in
holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives. Though we hire servants
for a year, and take apprentices for seven years, yet must we serve the Lord
for ever. Yea the righteous do not only hold fast that which they have
received; but their teeth are so set on edge with the sweet taste of
righteou^^es, that still they desire to increase it. So many as are perfect,
will be thus minded with Paul, not to count Phil. 3. 13.
themselves as if they had already attained to it, but they forget that which
is behind, and endeavor themselves unto that which is before, and follow hard
toward the mark of the price of the high calling of God in Jesus Christ.

Lastly, a righteous man may be known 4
by his affection to righteousness in others. He which loves righteousness it
self, will love it as well in others as in himself: yea, he will love all
others in whom he beholds any seeds of righteousness, his delight will be in
the Saints that are in the earth, Psalm. 16. 3.
and in them which excel in virtue. He which loves a child for his fathers
sake, as David loved Mephibosheth for Ionathans sake, loves the father
himself better: so he which loves righteous men for righteousness sake,
declares thereby that he loves righteousness it self far better.

Moreover, a righteous man loves righteousness so well, that he will labor to
make others as righteous as himself. David promised, that if ye Lord would
create in him a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within him, and restore
him to the joy of his salvation, then shall I teach thy ways to the wicked,
Psalm. 51. 13.
and sinners shall be converted unto thee. And Peter when he is converted, must
strengthen his Luke 22. 32.
brethren. As every thing seeks to beget his like; so a righteous man seeks
to make another righteous. As fire cannot be smoothered, when once it has
taken hold in any place, and finds matter to work upon, but will burn
further and further, till it have consumed all before it: so true righteousness
wrought in the heart of one, cannot there be suppressed, but will spread it
self abroad, and work upon others for their conversion. He which would be
esteemed righteous, and yet keeps all his righteousness to himself, and does
not impart unto others, may justly be suspected to have no sound righteousness
at all.

The second title given to them which 2
dyed: merciful men: Which may be taken two ways, either passiuely, or
actiuely. Passiuely (that is here first in nature and order) for such as God
has received unto mercy, as he did Paul; because he sinned ignorantly 1. Tim.
1. 13 Romans 9* 23.
through unbelief. In this respect they are called vessels of mercy, prepared
unto glory. And of this number are only they which repent and amend. For as
Solomon says, He Prou. 28. 13
that hides his sins shall not prosper: but he that confesses and forsakes
them shall have mercy. If we take this title in this seuse, we may see good
reason wherefore it was annexed unto the former. First, to show who are truly
righteous before God, namely such as he has received unto mercy, in forgiving
their sins. Which plainly appears by Paul's proof out of David: who
says, that David declares the blessedness of Romans 4. 6.
the man, unto whom God imputes righteousness without works. And how proves he
the imputatio^ of righteousness without works, but by the remission of sin.
Blessed are they Verse. 7.
whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the
man, to whom the Lord imputes not sin. Again, this title so taken might be
added to the former, to confute the sinister censure which carnal man gave of
those which were taken away in the flower of their age, judging them to be
punished for their sins and rejected of God: it was not so, they were
received unto mercy, and those which suruiued them, were reserved for
punishment.

Actiuely it may be taken for such as show mercy unto others. And in this sense
it is opposed to a cruel man. He that is merciful Prou. 11. 17.
rewards his own soul: but he that troubles his own flesh is cruel.
These two properties are always found together in the same persons, and
therefore Christ says, Blessed are Matthew. 5. 7.
the merciful, for there shall obtain mercy And the King in the parable which
had forgiven his servant ten thousand talents, said unto him when he had cast
his fellow servant into prison for an hundred pence: ought Math. 18. 33
thou not to have had pity on thy fellow, even as I had pity on thee? and
then delivered him to the iaylers, till he should pay all the debt: and so will
the Lord deal with men; and therefore James says, there shall be judgment Iam.
2. 13.
merciless to him that shows no mercy. And contrariwise, he which receives
mercy of the Lord, will show mercy unto men. For as the sun beams lighten
upon the earth do not only heat the earth it self, but also by their
reflection do heat the next region of the air: so the beams of the Lords
mercy lighting on the heart of any christian, do not only heat him with inward
comfort, but also reflect backward, and cause him to yield some comfort unto
his brethren. Yet here we must understand such as show mercy unto others: as
they were merciful to their brethren, so God was merciful to them, would not
punish them with the wicked, but took them away, that he might free them from
future calamities.

There be two kinds of mercifulnes, the one showed toward the soul, the other
toward the body, an example of both we may behold in Christ: when he saw the
multitude Math. 9* 36, 37.
scattered abroad as sheep having no shepherd, he had compassion on them: and
bad his disciples pray unto the Lord of the harvest, that he would thrust forth
laborers into his harvest, and presently after sent his disciples abroad to
preach the Gospel among them. There was mercy showed to their souls. Again,
when a great multitude had bin with him three days in the wilderness, he had
compassion on them, and would not send Math. 15. 32
them away fasting, least they should faint in the way. And therefore wrought a
miracle in feeding four thousand me^ besides women and children, with seven
loaves and a few little fishes. There was mercy showed to their bodies. There
be six works of mercy Tho. Aquin. secunda secunda qu. 32 ar^. 2.
appertaining to the soul, set forth in this verse: Consule, castiga, solare,
remitte, fer, ora. Instruct them which be ignorant, correct them which sin,
comfort them which be heauie-hearted, forgive them that offend thee, bear with
the weak, and pray for all men. There be seven works of mercy appertaining to
the body, comprehended in this verse: Visito, poto, cibo, redimo, tego,
colligo, condo. To visit them which be sick: to give drink to them which be
thirsty: to feed them which be hungry: to redeem the captives: to cloth the
naked: to lodge the harbourlesse: and to bury the dead. Many do separate these
works of mercy: some will be merciful to the bodies of them which are in
distress, they keep great hospitality, relieve the bodies of them which want;
but do nothing for their souls: these are merciful but in part, they omit the
chiefest works of mercy: yea they are no more merciful to men redeemed by
Christ's blood, then they are to brute beasts. If their Ox or Horse want
meat, they will feed him: if diseased, they will seek help for him: if he be
fallen into a pit or ditch they will draw him out: and will they do no more for
man, having an immortal soul redeemed by Christ? As the miseries of the soul
are more dangerous, so should they be more carefully regarded, and pitied.
Others seem to pity men's souls, but not their bodies: they will instruct
others, admonish them, forgive them, and pray for them, but will not give them
one penny to help them withal: being like unto a popish prelate, who being
asked a penny by a poor man, refused to give it, but offered to bless him:
which the poor man refused, because he thought that if it had been worth a
penny, he would not have given it to him. As man consists both of body and
soul, and is subject to miseries in them both: so must we be merciful to him
in relieuing of both.

The second circumstance observed in the ^*
text, shows the manner of their death: They perish, and are taken away.
There were many unrighteous and unmerciful men in those days, and in that
country; yet they remained alive, when the righteous and merciful were taken
away by death. It is Heb. 9. 27.
appointed for all men once to dye, at one time or other, and now the righteous
did lead the way. Death is the way of all the world; as Josh 23. 14. 1. King.
2. 2. Eccles 7. 4.
Joshua calls it: and the way of all the earth, as David terms it: and the
end of all men, as Solomon names it: therefore the righteous must walk this
way as well as others. Their flesh is grass that withers; and their glory
is a flower that fades: death spares them no more then others. The wise
Eccles. 2. 15.
dies as well as the fool. Yea in this respect the condition of the children
of men, and the condition of beasts are alike, as the one dies, so dies the
other: all was of the dust, and shall Eccles. 3. 19.
return to the dust. No marvel then, if the condition of all men be alike.
As well died Abel whose sacrifice God accepted, as Caine whose sacrifice God
rejected: as well Abraham the father of the faithful, as any children of
unbelief: as well Isaac son of the free woman, as Ishmael son of the bond
woman: as well Jacob whom God loved, as Esau whom God hated: as well chaste
Joseph, as incestuous Ammon: as well meek Moses, as railing Rabshekah: as well
zealous Phineas, as the lukewarm angel of Laodicea: as well David a man
according to Gods own heart, as Saul from whom God took his spirit and mercy:
as well Solomon the wise, as Nabal the fool: as well tender hearted Josiah, as
hard hearted Pharaoh: as well the humble Publican, as the proud Pharisie: as
well poor Lazarus to be carried into Abraham's bosom, as the rich glutton to
be carried into hell: as well John the beloved disciple, as Judas the traitor:
as well Simon Peter the Apostle, as Simon Magus the sorcerer. Merciless death
does exercise her cruelty upon all alike.

Question.
Why should this be so? Has not Christ dyed for the righteous, why then should
they dye? Death is the reward of sin: Christ has satisfied for all their
sins, wherefore should they bear this penalty of sin?

Answer.
The righteous must dye the first death,though Christ have died for them, and
suffered for their sins. His death shall free them from the second death, but
not from the first death, which is the separation of soul and body. He has
only altered the nature and use of the first death, but not quite taken it
away. Whereas at first it was ordained for a punishment of sin, he has made
it a passage into heaven: it was threatened and inflicted as a curse, but he
has turned it into a blessing. It did at first deprive men of good, but now it
puts them in possession of good. Christ has taken away the sting of it: and
therefore Paul says, O death where is thy sting? So as it can More minime
quidem adhuc abesse cogitur, sed cogitur non obesse.
no more hurt us then a Be which has lost his sting. It does not hurt us, but
help us; not hinder us, but further us in obtaining of glory. Jacob not long
before his death, pronounced this as a curse from the Lord Bernard. in trans.
upon the tribe of Simeon and Leui for their Malach. Genesis 49. 7.
cruelty, I will divide them in Iaakob, and scatter them in Israel. Yet when
the children of Leui showed their zeal and obedience in killing the idolaters
at Moses commandment, Exodus 32. 28. Deuteronomy. 33. 9. Josh. 21.
the Lord turned this curse into a blessing. Their scattering was a furtherance
unto them, to make them more fit to teach the people in every city, and
receive the tithes of every tribe. So at the first the Lord threatened death at
the punishment of sin, but by faith in Christ, it is made the end of sin, and
beginning of glory. He who could at the beginning bring light out of darkness,
could afterward bring a blessing out of a curse. If Phisicians by their art
can extract an antidote or preservative against poison, out of poysonfull
things: why may not God by his infinite power and wisdom, draw good out of
evil, a mercy out of judgment, and a blessing out of curse? Yea and as
Augustine teaches, death remains August. de peccat. merit. ^^ remiss. lib.
2. cap. 34.
still for the righteous, to exercise their faith withal. If immediately upon
remission of sin there should follow immortality of the body, faith should be
abolished, which waits in hope for that which is not yet enjoyed. Yea the
Martyrs could not testify their faith, their patience, their courage, their
constancy and love unto Christ, in suffering death for his sake.

But now let us more particularly consider the titles given to the death of the
righteous. First it is said, that he perishes, which must not so be
understood, as if he were quite destroyed, brought to nothing, and had no more
being: as it befalls brute beasts at their death, whose souls being
traduced with their bodies are mortal, and perish with their bodies: the
righteous has a being even after death; yet may be said to perish in regard of
outward appearance; in the judgment of flesh and blood, he seems to perish.
Yet we must know that the righteous consists of soul and body: his soul
being immortal cannot perish by any means: it can live out of the body, as
well as in the body. When it leaves the body, it goes unto the Lord. This
Solomon taught: Dust returns to the earth as it was, Eccl. 12. 7. Phil. 1. 23.
Luke 16. 22.
and the spirit returns to God that gave it. This Paul wished, desiring to be
loosed and to be with Christ. This Lazarus enjoyed at his death, being carried
by the Angels into Abraham's bosom. And this John in a vision saw performed to
the Martvrs: under the Altar he saw the souls of them, which were Revel. 6.
9.
killed for the word of God.

But the body of a righteous man may be said to perish: because it loses
the form, the nature, and property of an humane body. It is within a short
space eaten up of worms, and turned into dust and ashes: so as there can
appear no signs of a body. Though we make never so much of our bodies, yet
can we not keep them from perishing: though we feed them most daintilie,
clothe them most costly, and cherish them most carefully; yet at last they
will become a thing of naught: the beauty of them will fade, they shall be
deformed, and most ougly to behold. The strength of them will be taken away, so
as they shall not stir an hand or a foot: the agilitie of them will be lost:
they shall remain stiff and be nummed: the parts and members of them shall
perish and fall away one after another. The flesh, blood and bones shall be so
strangely turned to dust and earth, that there shall not remain any property
or quality of them: and a man, if he knew it not before, would never judge
that dust and earth to have been flesh and blood and bones of a living man: yea
so greatly shall our bodies be altered, that men shall not be able to discern,
which dust came of them, and which came of the earth.

Yet one thing I must needs add, for the comfort of the righteous: that
although his body seem thus to perish in the judgment of men, yet it still
has a being in the sight of God, and does even at that time, and in that case,
remain a member of Christ's mystical body. For the union betwixt Christ and
the faithful, is not of souls only, but also of bodies: the body of every
faithful 1. Cor. 6. 15.
man and woman is truly united to Christ's body. And this union cannot be
broken, death cannot dissolve it, though death does break the union betwixt
man and wife, yet it cannot break the union betwixt Christ and the faithful.
As death did Fulgent. ad Trasimund. de pas. d^m. lib. ^.
not make a separation betwixt the two natures of Christ at the time of his
suffering: but his soul and body being far distant, Damasc. de orthod.
fide. lib. 3. cap. 27
the one in heaven, the other in the grave, were at that time, and in that case
personally united to his godhead: no more can death make a separation betwixt
Christ and the faithful; though their bodies do putrify, and lie rotting in
their graves, yet still they remain members of his body. And as the husbandman
does make as great reckoning of that corn which he has sown in his field,
and lies hid under the clods, as he does of that which he has laid up safely
in his garner, because he hops it will come up again and yield increase: so
Christ Jesus does as highly esteem of those bodies, which are laid in their
graves, as of those which yet remain alive, because he knows that one day
they shall rise again unto glory. They are sown in dishonor, but they shall
rise again in honor. Their life is but hid for a time, and will be found out
again. Christ is able to restore that which nature has destroyed: God does
herein deal no otherwise with the bodies of the righteous, then a Goldsmith
will Chrysostom. in Matthew. ho. 35
deal with a picture of gold or a piece of plate, that is bruised and worn out
of fashion: he will cast it into the fire and melt it, not to destroy it, or
suffer it always to lie in the fire, but to make it a better picture or piece
of plate then it was before, and therefore will take it out of the fire again,
and fashion it according to his mind. Wherefore let not the condition of our
bodies Chrysostom. in 1. These. 4.
after death, make us unwilling to dye.

If any man entending to reedifie an old rotten house, do first put the
inhabitants out of it, and then pull down the house, and prepare for the
building of it again: have the inhabitants of the old house any cause to be
grieved? Will they not rather be glad that it is pulled down, because they
hope that it will be made better then ever it was before, and they may dwell in
it with more safty and delight. Now our bodies are as old rotten houses for our
souls to dwell in, if God cause our souls to depart out of them for a time,
and then destroy them, that afterward he may reedifie them, and make them
fitter habitations for our souls, what cause have we to lament? Nay rather if
we look not so much on the present estate of our bodies after death, as upon
the glorious estate which they shall have after the resurrection, we may
rejoice and praise God for this his work toward us.

2 But another phrase is here used, to express the death of the righteous (
are taken Pagnin. Thesa^r.
away.) The Hebrew word does sometime signify to be gathered (though as some
observe, it be never spoken of things scattered) and in that sense it is used
for the death of the righteous, when the place, whither they be gathered, is
mentioned. As it is said of Abraham, Genesis 25. 8. Genesis 3^. 29. Judge. 2. 10.
that he died in a good age, and was gathered to his people: and likewise of
Isaac. As also the generation which entered with Joshua into the land of Canaan,
is said to be gathered unto their fathers. Sometime this word does signify to
take away: as when Rachel said, God has taken away my rebuke* Genesis 30. 23.
Iere. 16. 5.
and the Lord says by Jeremy: I have taken my peace from this people. And so
it is rather to be expounded in this place, because it is set down without any
addition. We may here observe a several doubling of the same things in this
verse: two words to set forth the persons which died: two words to declare the
manner of their death: and afterward two words also to show the careless regard
of their death among the wicked.

It was usual with the Hebrews, to repeat things diverse times together, either
in the self same, or in the like words. Yet we must not think that there be
any vain repetitions in the Scriptures, seeing Christ forbids us to use
vain repetitions in our Matthew. 6. 7. Mat. 12. 36.
prayers, and will call men to account at the day of judgment, for every idle
word that they speak. We may not imagine that the holy Ghost did use any
vain repetitions or idle words in penning the books of Scripture. These
repetitions serve for good purposes. In prayers they show the seruencie of him
that prays, and his earnest desire of the thing which he asks. In
Prophecies they declare the certainty and speedines of the execution: as
appears by Pharaohs dream, which as Joseph told him, was doubled unto Genesis
41. 32. August* in Psalm. 74. and Psalm. 71.
him the second time, because the thing is established of God, and God hastes
to perform it. In narrations they serve either for confirmation, to assure the
hearers that the matter is true, of great importance, and worthy to be heard
and marked: or else for explication, the latter clause expounding the former.
For as nature has given unto man's body two members of the same kind and use,
as two eyes to see withal, two ears to hear withal, two hands to handle
withal, and two feet to walk withal: that if the one should fail in his
office, the other might help it: so the holy Ghost has given two words of the
same kind and signification, to many sentences of Scripture, that if the one
shall fail in his office, and not fully express the meaning, the other might
help it. And this is the reason, why the words are so often doubled in this
verse, least any should gather by the former phrase that the righteous so
perishes, that he has not any more being at all: he now says, that he is but
taken away. And he may be said to be taken away, both in respect of body, and
also in respect of soul. In respect of body: for although his body be not
translated in such a manner, as the body of Henoch was, that he Genesis 5. 24.
Heb. 11. 5. Deuteronomy. 34. 5.
might not see death; nor as the body of Moses which the Lord took and buried
no man knows in what Sepulcher; nor as the body of Elias, which was carried
from the earth in fiery Chariots; nor as the bodies of them which shall be
found alive at the coming of Christ unto judgment, which shall not die, but
be changed, and presently 1. Cor. 15. 51
ascend with Christ into heaven: yet is the body of every righteous man taken
from amongst men, to be laid amongst worms; from ye living unto the dead; from
above the earth, to be laid under the earth; from his house to his grave; from
a place of watching to a place of sleep; from a place of care, labor, and
trouble, to a place of ease and rest: from a place of pleasure and pain, of joy
and sorrow mingled together, to a place where he shall be void of sense to
feel any of them.

2 In respect of his soul, consider terminum a quo* and terminum ad quem,
whence and whither he is taken. From his body, to be brought unto God: from an
house of clay, to an house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens:
from men to Angels: from sinners to them which be perfectly righteous: from his
greatest enemies, to his best friends: from the Church militant, to the Church
triumpliant* from earth to heaven: from a strange country, to his own home:
from a prison, to a place of liberty: from bondage, to freedom: from misery,
to happiness: from sorrow, to joy. Whence lie is taken you all do well know,
which have any experience in the world: whither he is brought, the Apostle
teaches: when he says: Ye are come to the Heb. 12. 22 23.
mount Sion, and to the city of the living God, the celestial Jerusalem, and
to the company of innumerable Angels: And to the congregation of the first
borne, which are written in heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to the
spirits of just and perfect men: and to Jesus the mediator of the new
testament.

Who would be unwilling thus to be taken away? And why should the righteous be
afraid of death, by which they are thus taken away? Had the Israelites any
cause to be unwilling, or to fear to be taken out of the land of Egypt, the
house of bondage, and to be carried as it were upon Eagles wings into the land
of Canaan, a land that flowed with milk and honey? No more cause have the
righteous to fear death, which would carry them from the bondage of this
world, to the heavenly Canaan, a place of eternal rest. And why then should we
mourn immoderately for the death of the righteous? When Joseph was taken from
Genesis 45. 28
prison, to be made a chief ruler in Egypt, if his father Jacob had bin in
prison with him and had been acquainted with his preferment, should he have
had any just cause to be grieved? So soon as he heard of it, he rejoiced,
and was willing to go unto him. When Saul was taken from seeking his fathers
asses, and anointed to be king over Israel, had his father Kish any reason to
lament? When David was taken from following the Ewes great with young ones, and
ordained King to feed the Lords people, had his father Ishai any just occasion
of sorrow? No more cause have any of us to bewail the death of the godly,
seeing they are as highly preferred as any of the^. When Hester was taken from
Mordecai (who had brought her up as his own daughter) to be married unto king
Ahashuerosh, and crowned as Queen, did he lament it? was he not most willing to
leave her? Why then should any man be so unwilling to leave either daughter or
wife, though never so dear unto him, seeing that she is but taken up into
heaven, there to be married unto Christ, the husband of his Church, and there to
be crowned as a Queen to reign in glory with him?

But in this taking away, there is great difference betwixt the godly and the
wicked. They are also taken away, but why? The godly are taken out of the
world, because the world was not worthy of them: Heb. 11. 38.
but the wicked are taken away, because they are unworthy to live in the
world. Those are taken away in mercy, these in judgment: those in the Lords
favor, and these in his displeasure. And whence are these taken, or whither?
They are taken from the practice of sin, to suffer punishment for sin: from
ease to torment: from the first life, to the second death: from men to devils:
from earth to hell: from prison, to the place of execution. In a woeful taking
shall they be, when they are thus taken away. Their lamentable taking away is
described in him, that will not in time be reconciled to his brother. The judge
delivers Mat. 5. 25.
him to the sergeant, the sergeant takes him, and casts him into prison, whence
he must not come till he have paid the utmost farthing. Likewise in him that
would Mat. 18. 34.
not forgive his fellow servant an hundred pence, his master being wroth
delivered him to the iayler, who took him and cast him into prison, till he
should pay all that was due. Also in him that wanted the wedding garment at the
marriage feast of the Mat. 22. 13.
kings son: the king says to his servants, bind him hand and foot: take
him away, and cast him into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth. Likewise in the unprofitable servant, which would not employ his
masters talent, the talent must be Mat. 25. 30.
taken from him: he must be taken, and cast into utter darkness, where is
weeping and gnashing of teeth. Lastly, in them which would not suffer their
king to reign over them: he shall say, those mine enemies which Luke 19. 27.
would not that I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before
me.

It is a grievous thing for one that is making merry among his companions, to
be suddenly apprehended by a sergeant or officer for a traitor, thief, or
murderer, and presently without bail or mainep^ise to be taken from his
company, and carried to prison, and from thence to the place of execution: As
grievous is it for a wicked man that lives in the pleasures of sin, to be
taken away by death, which is the Lords sergeant to apprehend him, and bring
him Natiuitas mala, vit^ peivr, mors pessi^a. Bernard* in tra^ sit. Malach.
to the prison of hell. As his entrance into the world was evil, and his
continuance in the world was worse; so his taking out of the world shall be
worst of all. Oh then let us take heed least we be thus taken away. Let us
learn to live in the world, as the righteous do, and then shall we be taken
away as the righteous are. Balaams wish is used by many: Let me die the death
of the Numb. 23. 10.
righteous, and let my last end be like his. And yet they will not live the
life of the righteous: but few of these obtain their desire. Look what way a
tree boweth while it stands and grows, the same way it commonly falls when
it is cut down: even so, look how men are inclined in their life time, to
righteousness or unrighteousness; so shall they fall at their death.

Men can hardly begin righteousness at their last end. Late repentance is
seldom sound repentance. Men drawing near to their end, shall be so
affrighted with death, so troubled with pain and grief, that they shall not be
able to set themselves to repent soundly. They shall then rather seek ease for
their bodies, then mercy for their sins, or grace for their souls. The
beginning of every thing is hardest, and therefore he Dunidium sacti qui been
coepit, habet.
which has begun well, is said to have done half his work. As it is in other
things; so is it with repentance: it is a harder matter to begin repentance at
the first, then to renew it afterward: and therefore the fittest time should be
taken for the beginning of it: and that is rather the time of our life, then
the time of our death: rather the time of our health then the time of our
sickness. In the time of our life and of our health, we be scarce able and fit
to begin serious repentance: but much more unable and unfit shall we be in the
time of sickness and death. We read in scripture but of one which became
righteous at his last end, the thief on the Cross: we read of one, that no
man might despair; though he have deferred his repentance so long: we read
but only of one, that no man might presume to defer it so long. The surest
and safest way is to begin in time, and make no delays: least afterward it be
too late.

3 The third circumstance to be observed in the text, is the careless regard
of the righteous man's death. No man considers it in heart. It seems that
many godly persons were already dead, and their death did declare that God had
some special work in hand, yet the common people which were left behind them,
did little regard it. This careless contemning of their death, does show that
ye hearts of the common people were possessed with great security, to make so
small reckoning of such a strange work of God. All the works of God are
carefully to be regarded of us, who are set in this world to take a special
view, and to make an holy use of them. And therefore David thought the wicked
deserved to be broken down, and not built up again, because Psalm. 28. 5.
Psalm. 68. 20.
they regarded not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands. Now
the taking of the righteous away, is one of his special works. For to him
belong the issues of death. Psalm 90. 3. Job. 14. 5.
It is he that turns man to destruction. The number of his months are with
him: he appoints his bounds which he cannot pass. If a sparrow shall not
fall on the ground without Mat. 10. 29. 31.
our father in heaven, then the righteous which are of more value then many
sparrowes, cannot perish without his will and appointment. Certain it is that
none die sooner or later then he sends for them.

The works of Princes are much considered, and often talked of among the
people; and ought not the Lords works be much considered of us? Their works
may be done foolishly, rashly, and unjustly: but the works of God, are done in
number, weight and measure, in wisdom, justice, and mercy. Precious in the
sight of the Lord is the Psalm. 116. 15.
death of all his Saints: and shall their death be vile and contemptible in
our eyes? People most commonly do highly esteem those things, which are dear
and precious among Princes: and shall the death of the righteous which is so
precious in the Lords sight, the Prince of all Princes, be lightly esteemed of
us his people? None of them lives Romans 14. 7. 8. Phil. 1. 20.
to himself, neither does any die unto himself. Whether they live, they live
unto the Lord: or whether they die, they die unto the Lord: whether they live
therefore, or die, they are the Lords. Yea they do glorify God both by life
and by death. And therefore we should not lightly pass over their life or
their death. But consider how they Ioh. 21. 19.
have glorified God by their death and by their life, and praise him for the
same.

But why are we to consider their death? What may we learn thereby? We learn
these four things: First, the certainty of death. Secondly, the nature of
death. Thirdly, the cause of death: and lastly, the manner how we must die.

First, by considering their death, we may learn the certainty of death in
our selves, that we must dye as well as they: in which respect Solomon says,
it is better to go to the Eccles. 7. 4.
house of mourning, then to go to the house of feasting; because this is the
end of all men: and the living shall lay it to his heart. That is to say, he
which remains alive, by seeing one dead, shall consider in his heart that all
men shall so die, and that he himself shall die as well as others. The death
of others is as a looking glass, wherein we may clearly behold the
uncertainty of our own lives. We may call their death, as some do the
sacrament, visible verbu^, a visible word or sermon, teaching us our own
mortality: for we have no better assurance of our lives then they had: what we
now are, they have been: and what they now are, we may be: and we know not
how soon. He which has taken them away now, may within a while (if it please
him) take us also away and bring us unto them. As death assaulted them, so will
it assault us; and we ca^ no more resist it then they could, but must yield as
they did. We are ready to forget death, and the forgetfulness of death, makes
us to forget our duty unto God: let us therefore consider the death of others,
thereby to be put in mind of our own.

2 Secondly, by their death we may know the nature of death in all others: for
it deals with all alike. We may there see how death does deface that image of
God which was in the body, and how it does destroy the body, which was a
temple for the holy Ghost to dwell in. If one see a fair house of a noble man
to be much defaced, and fallen to ruin, so as one stone is scarce left upon
another, it will pity his heart: so should we be moved in our hearts to see
the body of a righteous man, which was an house for the holy ghost to dwell
in, to be so pitifully ruinated by death. Again, we may see what strange
separations death does make. The soul and the body which have a long time
lived together, as two familiar copanions, are put asunder by death: and no man
knows how long it shall be before they can meet together again.

Besides this, death makes a separation betwixt old and loving friends. The
husband is separated from the wife of his youth, with Prou. 5. 18.
whom he rejoiced: the wife is separated from her husband, who was her veil
to shield Genesis 20. 16.
and to save her: parents are taken from their tender children, which they
leave as orphans in the world, not knowing what will become of them: children
are taken from their kind parents, who could have been content to have gone in
their steed, yea familiar friends, whose souls were knit together in
affection, and whose love exceeded the love of women, as did the love of David
and Jonathan* are severed one from another by death: the knot of their
friendship is broken: their mutual kindness can be no more showed by one to
another. W(...) grief it is for loving friends to depart one from another, we
may see in Paul's friends and hearers, when he took his leave of them, and told
them that they must not see his face any more: They wept all abundantly, Act.
20. 37, 38.
and fell on Paul's neck and kissed him; being chiefly sorry for the words which
he spoke, that they should see his face no more. We had need therefore by the
death of others to be put in mind of this separation beforehand, y^ when it
comes, we may be the better prepared for it.

Lastly, death makes a separation betwixt the rich man and his wealth: We
brought nothing ^. Tim. 6. 7.
into this world, neither must we carry any thing out of this world: Yea, men
leave their riches they cannot tell unto whom. If that question be asked many
that are ready to die, which was demanded of the rich man, who had laid up
store for many years, This night shall thy soul be taken from thee, then Luke
12. 20.
whose shall these things be which thou have provided? they might truly
answer, that they cannot tell. Men heap up riches, and cannot tell who shall
enjoy them: they bequeath them to some, and others go away with them. We had
need to think of this before hand, that we may use this world as if we used
it not: and when we have food and 1. Tim* 6. 8.
raiment, to be therewith content: and to be more willing to leave these things
when death approaches. If a man do not in his heart deeply and seriously
consider of these things a long time and often before death, he shall be as
unwilling to leave all these things at the hour of death, as the young man was
to sell his goods and give them to the poor, when he was commanded by Christ.
In things that be of weight and importance, Matthew. 19.
and yet very difficult, it is needful to use preparation before hand: for
without it we shall be unfit when we come to the pinch. Soldiers which be
chosen and appointed for the wars, do exercise themselves with their weapons
before hand, and are content to be trained by others which have better skill
and experience, that so they may learn in time of peace, how to behave
themselves in time of war: So had we need in time of our life to learn how to
die, and to be taught by others which die before us, what we must do at the
hour of death.

3 Thirdly, we must consider the cause or end of their death. Some of the
righteous are taken away in judgment, and some in mercy. In judgment, when
God in displeasure does strike them with death, to correct them for their
sins. Thus was the man of God taken away which came out of Judah, and cried
out against the Altar in Bethel, that Jeroboam had set up; because he believed
1. King. 13, 24.
the lie of an old prophet in Bethel, and did eat and drink with him there,
contrary to Gods commandment, a Lion met him by the way, and slew him. Thus
also were many of the Corinthians taken away for abusing the Lords supper: For
this 1. Cor, 11. 30
cause many were sick and weak, and many did sleep; yet they were righteous
persons: as Paul before had testified of them, Ye are washed, 1. Cor. 6. 11.
ye are sanctified, ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by
the spirit of our God: and afterward he reputeth them which were sick and did
so sleep, to be judged of 1. Cor. 11, 32
the Lord, because they should not be condemned with the world. The Lord is
sometimes so sharp with his own children, that for the example of others, he
will inflict a bodily death upon the^, as a correction for their sins. That
should be regarded of all others, that their harms may make them wise, and
move them to speedy repentance, least they be more sharply dealt withal. For
as Christ says, If these things be done to Luke 23. 31. 1. Pet. 4. 1^
a green tree, what shall be done to the dry? And as Peter says, If judgment
first begin at the house of God, what shall the end be of the^ which obey not
the Gospel of God? If the master of a family do sharply correct his own
children for their faults, let not the servants think that they shall escape
unpunished if they commit the like faults. If any one which sits at table
with us, by eating of some dish, or drinking of some cup, do surfeit, or fall
sick, or into a swoune, or die presently, it will greatly move us, and we
cannot be persuaded by any to taste of that dish, or drink of that cup, for
fear of the like: Even so when we see Gods children that live amongst us to
be taken away by death for practicing of some sin, it should greatly move
us, and we should so abhor that sin, that nothing in the world could
persuade us to practice it.

Again, others are taken away in mercy for their benefit, and for a reward of
their righteousness, to free the^ from those judgments which the Lord intends
to bring upon the world: and thus were these righteous men taken away, which
here are mentioned. Their death should be considered, as a warning given unto
men, of some fearful judgment to come, and therefore should call the^ to
repentance, that they might prevent the judgment: but of this I will speak
more afterward in the last circumstance.

4 Lastly, we must consider the manner of their death, for thereby we may
learn how to die: it may be as a pattern or example to direct us in our
death. The wicked die either sottishly or impatiently, or else desperately.
Sottishly, like blocks and idiots, having neither penitent feeling of their
sins, nor comfortable assurance of salvation. Being like unto Nabal, whose
heart ten days before his 1. Sa. 25. 37
death, died within him, and he was like a stone. Such men die like lambs, and
yet shall be a pray for the devouring Lion: they go quietly like fools to the
stocks for correction.

Others dye impatiently, who do not willingly bear the Lords correction,
deserved by their sins; but rage, fret, and murmr, as if God dealt too
rigorously with them, and through impatiencie will use unlawful means for
their recovery: as Ahaziah did, who being sick, sent messengers 2. King 1. 2.
to enquire of Baal-zebub the god of Ekron if he should recover of his disease.

Others dye desperately* their consciences accusing them most terribly for
their sins, without any hope of pardon; as Caine, Genesis 4. 13. Matthew. 27. 5
who said my sin is greater then can be forgiven; or Judas, who despairing of
pardon for his sin in betraying our Savior, went and hanged himself. The
consciences of many wicked men lie quietly, and never trouble them all their
life time, but are stirred up at their death, and then rage and torment them
like a mad dog which is lately awaked out of sleep. But the righteous die most
comfortably, they believing in Christ, and having repented of their sins, are
assured in their own souls that all their sins are pardoned in Christ: they
will make confession of their faith, and give testimonies of their repentance
unto others, for their comfort and example. They will patiently endure all the
pains of their sickness, ^s Job did, knowing that al comes from the Lord, and
that it is his fatherly correction, and a sign of his love, because he
chasteneth Heb. 12 ^.
whom he loves: yea, they receive their sickness as the Lords messenger,
speaking to their souls, as the Prophet Isaiah did to Hezekiah: Put thine
house in order* for thou shall dye and not live, and therefore they prepare
themselves for another world. Yea further in their sickness they can pray most
fervently, as king Hezekiah did, Isai 38. and then they will give most
fruitful and comfortable instructions to those which they leave behind. As
the Swan sings most sweetly a little before his death; so the righteous speak
most divinely a little before their end. Whosoever searches the scriptures,
may read the divine prophecy of Jacob unto the twelve Patriarchs, Genesis 49.
the holy blessing of Moses upon the twelve tribes Deuteronomy. 33. the godly
exhortation of Joshua to the people of Israel placed by him in Canaan, Josh.
23. the wise counsel of David unto Solomon, who was to succeed him in the
kingdom 1. King. 2. Whosoever reads the Ecclesiastical histories, may not
only see the virtuous lives, but also the christian like ends of the Saints
and Martyrs in the Church. And whosoever will be present at the death of those
which truly fear God, may thereby learn how they themselves ought to dye: for
when the outward man does decay, the inward man is renewed more and more. They
show, that the nearer they do approach unto their end, the nearer they draw
toward heaven.

But in these our days many may be found, who either do not at al consider
the death of the righteous, or else do consider it amiss. Though it be a
matter worth consideration; yet some do not consider it at all: because they
see so many die, they make the less reckoning of it: til death knock at their
own doors, they never regard it: they must needs die themselves, before they
can be brought to consider of death: they care not who sinck, so they swim;
nor how many die, so they may live: yea this is greatly to be lamented, that
some do regard the death of a Christian, no more then they regard the death of
a dog. But seeing we may learn so many profitable instructions by their death,
let us now begin to consider it better then ever we did before.

Others do consider it, but yet amiss; either fondly or frowardly. Fondly,
through natural affection arising from kindred, affinity, or familiarity* If
a stranger dye, it nothing moves them: but if one of their own friends dye,
they sigh and sob, they howl and lament. If the father lose his son, he
cries most pitifully, as David did for Absalom* O my son Absalom, my son,
my son 2. Sa. 18. 33.
Absalom: would God I had dyed for thee: O Absalom my son, my son. If the
mother lose her children, she behaueth her self like Rachel weeping for her
children, and would not Matthew. 2. 18
be comforted, because they were not. If children lose their parents, they cry
after them as Elisha did after Elias, when he was taken up, 2. King. 2. 12
my father, my father. If a sister lose her brother, she weepeth for him, as
Mary did for Lazarus. If the husband lose his wife, he John 11.
weepeth for her, as Abraham wept for Sarah: G^n. ^3. ^.
Yea he mourns like a Turtle Dove which has lost his marrow. If the wife
lose her husband, she deals like Naomi, who would not be called Naomi, that
is beautiful: but Mara, that is, bitter, because the Lord Ruth. 1. 20.
had given her much bitterness. If one familiar friend lose another, he
lamenteth his death, as David did the death of Jonathan: woe is me 2. Sam. 1. 26
for thee, my brother Jonathan: very kind have thou been unto me: thy love to
me was wonderful passing the love of women.

Indeed I can not deny, but y^ we ought in a special manner to consider the
death of those which are near and dear unto (...) for it may be they are
taken from us; because we were unworthy of them; or because we gloryed and
trusted overmuch in them and were not so thankful for them as we ought. If we
had any help by them, we must consider whether God have not deprived us of them
for the punishment of our sins, as the widow of Sarepta did at ye death of her
son, saying unto Eliah: Art thou come unto me to 1. King. 17. 18.
call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my son? Yet this consideration
must be ordered by wisdom, it must not be joined with excessive sorrow.
Neither must we consider their death alone, but also the death of others which
dye in the Lord, and to learn to make an holy use thereof. For as Sampson
found sweet honey in the carkas of a dead Lion; so we may find some sweet
instructions in the dead corpse of every righteous man: yea the more righteous
that they are which do dye, the more should their death be considered, because
it may yield greater store of instruction unto us. And it may be that God does
take away those which are near unto us, because we do carelessly regard the
death of those which be far off.

Again, some consider the death of the righteous very frowardly and peeuishly,
yea I may say maliciously and preposterously. For if any of them be taken away
by a sudden and extraordinary death, they presently censure them as plagued of
God, and condemn their former profession, thinking that God would not have so
dealt with them, if he approved either of them or their profession. But they
must be instructed in this point by wise Solomon, who says: that no man
knows love or hatred of all that is before Eccles. 9. 2.
him. All things come alike to all: and the same condition is to the just and
the wicked, to the good and the pure, and to the polluted: to him that
sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not. Eli was a Priest, and a good man;
yet 1. Sa. 4 18.
brake his neck by falling backward from his ^eate. Jonathan was a sworn
brother unto David, a godly and faithful friend; 1. Sam. 31.
yet was he slain in battle by the hands of the Philistines. That Prophet of
God which came out of Judah to Bethel to speak against 1. King. 13.
Jeroboam, and the altars which he had built for idolatry, was no doubt an holy
man; yet was he killed in y^ way by a Lion. Josiah was a good King, like unto
him there was no King before him, neither after him rose any like him: yet was
he slain in the valley of Megiddo by Necho King of Egypt. 2. Chr. 35. 23
Iob^ children were well brought up by their godly father, and it is said, that
before Job offered sacrifice for them, they were sanctified: Job. 1.
yet within a while after, as they were eating and drinking in their eldest
brothers house, a violent wind overthrew the house, and killed them all.

We must not therefore judge of men by their death, but rather by their life.
Though sometime a good death may follow an evil life: yet an evil death can
never follow a good life. Correct thine evil life, and fear not Corrige male
vinere, ti^e male ^^ori: sed n^^i tim^r^* Non potest male mori, qui been
vixerit.
an evil death: he can not die ill that lives well, says Augustine. And
afterward answers the objections of these men, and makes this the foot of his
song. Thou will say unto me have not many just men perished by shipwreck?
Certainly, he can not dye ill, which lived well* Have not many just men been
slain by the N^m mul^i iusti nau^sragio perierunt?
enemies sword? Certainly, he can not die il which lived well. Have not many
just men been killed by thieves? Have not many righteous men bin torn in
pieces by wild beasts? Certainly, he can Certe non potest male mori, qui been
vixe^i^* etc.
not die ill which lived well etc. But I will say unto such as censure the
righteous for their strange and violent death, as Christ said of those
eighteen, upon whom y^ tower of Siloam August* de d^s^^^l. Christian. cap. 3.
fell and flew them: Think ye that these were greater sinners then others? I
tell you nay; but except ye repent, ye all shall likewise perish Luke 13 4. 5.


As for sudden death, it is evil to them which lead an evil life, because it
finds them unprepared, it carries them away ^odainelie unto torment: but it is
not evil to them which live well; because it finds them prepared: it frees
them from much pain which others endure through long sickness, and carries them
forthwith to the place where they desire to be. The righteous do so dispose
of themselves in the morning, as if they might die before night; and at night,
as if they might die before morning: and therefore whenever death comes it
finds them prepared, and is a benefit unto them.

2 Again, if the righteous a little before death, be dangerously tempted by
Satan, and show their infirmity by uttering some speeches which tend to
doubting or desperation (though after ward they get victory, and triumph over
the devil) carnal people think there is no peace of conscience, and therefore
no salvation to be had, by that religion: and so speak evil of it. Let such
consider the estate of Job in his misery, who cursed the day of his birth,
said that the arrows of the almighty did stick in him, the venom whereof
had drunk up his spirit: that the terrors of God did fight against him that
the Lord was his enemy: did write bitter things against him: and did set him
as a butte to shoot at. As also the estate of David, through terror of
conscience, while he concealed his sin. His bones consumed, he Psalm. 32. 3.
rored all the day long, his moisture was turned into the drought of summer.

Again, let him know that the devil does most tempt the best. He then tempted
Christ, when he was baptized and filled with Luke 4. 1.
the holy Ghost: so will he most tempt Christians, when they have received
greatest gifts of Gods spirit. As thieves labor to breakedowne, and rob those
houses only, where great store of treasure or wealth is laid up; and as Pirates
desire to take that ship which is best laden with the dearest merchandise: so
the devil does most seek to make a pray of them which are endued Chrysostom. ad
pop. Anti^c^. hom. 2. Luke 11. 21.
with the greatest measure of spiritual graces. When the strong man armed
keeps the house, the things that he possesses are in peace: but when a
stronger then he, overcomes him, then he gathers greater forces, and makes
a new assault to enter again. In any commotion, whom do rebels kill and
spoil? not those which submit themselves unto them, and join with them in
their rebellion: but those which are faithful to their Prince, and fight for
their Prince against them, as has appeared of late in the rebel of Ireland.
Now the devil is as a Terrone.
rebel in the Lords kingdom: whom then will he most trouble and assault? not
the wicked which submit themselves unto him and join with him in rebellion
against God, but the godly which abide faithful, and fight under the Lords
banners against him. Whosoever would reign with Christ in heaven, must
overcome the devil on earth: for he promises: To him that overcomes Revel.
3. 20.
will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I overcame, and sit with
my father in his throne. How can there be a victory, wherothere is no
battle? And how can there be any battle, where there is not assaulting and
resisting? And no marvel though the devil do most assault the righteous at
their death, for he takes the opportunity of the time, his wrath is the^
great: knowing that he has but a short time. He must Revel. 12. 12.
either overcome the^ at that instant, or else not at all: yea he takes the
advantage of their present weakness, and those sins which before he
persuaded people to be small and light, at the time of death he makes great
and heavy, Even as a tree or Dadr. lo. comm. tit. mors metuenda malis. Et
Ioh. Maria Verrat. de incarnat. cap. 12.
piece of wood, while it swims in a river seems to be light, and one may
easily draw it; but when it comes to the shore and is laid upon dry ground,
can scarcely be drawn by ten men: so sin is made light by the devil so long
as men live; that so he may still encourage them to practice it; but when it
comes to the shore of death, then he makes it heavy, and begins most to
trouble their consciences with it, that if it were possible they might by it
be brought to desperation. In the midst of the temptation when the godly
seem most to be overcome, they are but like to a man in a trance, who lies as
though he were dead; Act. 20. 10.
yet he has life in him: and therefore as Paul saw that life was in Eutiches
embraced him, and delivered him alive, when the people took him up for dead;
so God sees life in the righteous being tempted, when men take them for dead:
and he will at last so restore them, as that they shall live for ever with him.

3 Lastly, others beholding them which were reputed righteous, to die very
stranglie, to rave, to blaspheme, to utter many idle and impious speeches, to
be unruly and behave themselves very foolishlie^, they begin to suspect their
profession: but let them know, that these things may arise from the extremity
of their disease. For in hot fevers and burning agues, the choler ascending
into the brain, will hinder the use of their understanding; and so cause the^
thus to misbehaue themselves rather like madmen then Christians. And therefore
as Paul said of himself after regeneration, it Romans 7. 17.
is no more I that do it, but the sin that dwells in me: so may I say of
them, it is not they which do it, but the disease which is upon them. All
sins committed by the righteous in those extremities, are but sins of
ignorance, because they want the use of reason to judge of sin: they are also
sins of infirmity, arising from the frailty of their flesh: and for them they
will afterward repent, if they recover the use of reason, and be able to know
them to be sins: or if they do not; they are freely pardoned in the death of
Christ, as well as other such sins be. Wherefore I say to those, which censure
them uncharitably for that their end, as Christ said to the Jews fontheir
carnal censure of him. Judge not according to John 7. 24.
the appearante, but judge righteous judgment: yea, judge not, that ye be not
judged. Matthew. 7. 1.


5 In the last place the final cause and end of their death is to be
considered. They be taken away from evil to come. The special evils from
which these righteous persons were taken, are mentioned in the former Chapter,
to be devoured in a cruel manner by the wild beasts of the forest. Verse ^.
But we must further understand that the evils from which the righteous are
taken, are either ordinary or extraordinary. The ordinary evils are those
which either all men, or most men do suffer. And these are either corporal or
spiritual: corporal, as sickness and diseases, aches and pains in their
bodies, grief and sorrow, toil and labor, crosses and losses, outward
troubles and persecution. Gods children so long as they live are subject unto
these, as well as others; yea oftentimes more then others. He which will be
Christ's Disciple must take up Luk 9. 23.
his cross daily and follow him. Through many tribulations we must enter
into the Act. 14. 22.
kingdom of heaven. Judgment begins at the house of God. The Lord does
chastise 1. Pet. 4. 17
his children by his judgments, least they should be condemned with the world.
A August. in Psalm. 91.
father has two sons, the one offends, and is corrected; the other also
offends, and is not corrected, why is the one corrected and not the other?
because the father has hope of his amendment, and reserues the inheritance for
him: but he has no hope of the other, and therefore will not correct him, but
does disinherite him and cast him off: so does God deal with men. Those which
he sees incorrigible, he lets alone, though they offend; yet he seldom
corrects them, but casts them off: but others which may by correction be
brought to repentance and kept in awe, he often corrects, and for them is
reserved an inheritance immortal and undefiled in heaven: yea the world hates
them, because they are not of the world; yea among men they shall oftentimes
suffer evil for righteousness sake. And God hereby will make trial of their
faith, of their patience and constancy, and herein make them examples unto
others: so that they must look for afflictions so long as life lasts: but
death makes an end of them al. Life and misery are two twins, which were borne
together, and must die together. And therefore John heard it from heaven, and
was commanded to write it for the comfort of men on the earth: blessed are the
dead, which die in the Lord, for they Reave. 14. 13.
rest from their labors, and their works follow them. Then shall God wipe all
tears from their eyes, then shall there be no more sorrow Revel. 21. 4.
nor crying, nor pain. Then shall they have everlasting rest and no labor:
continual joy, and no sorrow: perpetual pleasure, and no pain: great plenty
of all good things, and no want: all manner of happiness, and no misery.

The spiritual evils, from which they are freed by death are three. First
their combat with the devil. Here we are in continual warfare: this is the
militant Church: so long as we live and abide in it, we must fight as the
Lords soldiers, and not against flesh and blood; but against principalities,
against powers, and against worldly governors, the Princes of the darkness
of this world: and not for a natural or temporal, but for a spiritual and
eternal life: not for an earthly, but for an heavenly kingdom. And in this
battle there is no time of truce. If the devil be overcome at one time, he
will on a sodame, and none knows how soon, give a fresh assault again* but
death ends tho battle: not as if the devil got the victory by our death, as
it is commonly seen among warriors on the earth, if the one die in fight, the
other gets the upper hand: but the faithful at their last end, get a final
conquest, and then ascend to heaven there to triumph. The devil cannot assault
them there. He may compass the earth, but he cannot enter within the lists of
heaven. He never came thither to assault any, since he was first cast out;
though he tempted Adam in the earthly Paradise, and got him thrust out of it:
yet can he not tempt any in the heavenly Paradise, to cause them to be thrust
thence. And therefore as a soldier which has endured an hard and dangerous
battle a long time, does greatly rejoice when he has gotten the victory: so
may the faithful rejoice at the hour of their death, because then they make a
final end of their spiritual enemies, and begin their triumph over them.

2 Another misery from which they are freed, is the practice of sin. Who
lives and sins not, as Solomon says: In many things we offend all. Though
we be ^ruely sanctified, yet it is but in part, and therefore we may say with
S. Paul. I allow not that Romans 7. 17. 19. 22. 23.
which I do, for what I would that I do not: but what I hate, that do I. And
further, I delight in the law of God concerning the inner man, but I see
another law in my members, rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading
me captive unto sin. And nothing is more grievous unto a true Christian heart
then the practice of sin; and therefore every one in this case, will cry out
with the same Apostle. O wretched man that I am, who shall Romans 7. 24.
deliver me from the body of this death? But death destroys sin. Sin
brought in death: and death drives out sin. After death all the righteous
shall be perfectly sanctified; and made like the Angels to do the will of the
Lord readily, willingly, and cheerefullie. As herbs and flowers breed worms
in them, yet those worms at last will kill the herbs and flowers: so sin
bred death in it self, but at last death will kill sin. And as Sampson could
not kill the Philistims, who were his greatest enemies, but by his own death:
no more can the righteous kill sin which is not their least enemy, but by their
own death. At the first, death was ordained as a punishment for sin, but now
it is used as a means to stop the course of sin. It was then said unto man, if
thou sin, thou shall die the death: but now it is said, thou must die, least
thou sin: that Maiore and mirabiliore gratia saluatoris in vsus iustitiae
poena peccati co^ue^sa est, tunc enim dictum est ^omin^, ^io^ieris si
peccaueris: nunc dicitur morere, ne p^^ce^, etc. August. ciuit dei. 13 4.
Epiphan. cont. haeres. lib. 2. sect. 1. haeres. 64. cont. Orig.
which the^ was to be feared, that men might not sin, must now be suffered,
least they should sin. Sin has taken such deep root in our bodies, that
it cannot be destroyed, unless the body be as it were quite plucked up by the
roots: least any roots remaining, new buds of sin do sprout from the same*
If a wild figgetree do grow in the walls of a fair temple, and spread the
roots of it al along over all the stones of the whole building; it will not
cease from springing, till all be pulled down: if the stones be pulled down,
they may afterward be set up a gain in their own places, and the temple made
as fair as ever it was: and so the figtree may be pulled up by the roots and
will grow no more (this comparison have the learned used.) In the same manner,
the Lord a skillful workman, having made man for his temple, there sprung
sin in him like a wild figtree, which was spread wholly over all parts of
man, and it could not be destoryed, until the body was destroyed by death:
and God having destroyed the body by death, that so he might quite root out
sin, will build it up again, to be a new temple unto him: yea man's body was
in this respect like unto a fair and Epiph. ibid.
beautiful picture of gold, which an envious and ill disposed person does so
mangle and disfignre, as that it cannot be brought unto the same form and
beauty, unless the owner do melt it again, and fashion it all a new.

3 Furthermore, it is some evil for the righteous to dwell among ill
neighbors. It greatly greeueth them to see others commit sin, and dishonor
God. Lot being 2. Pet. 2. 8.
righteous, and dwelling among the Sodomites, in seeing and hearing their
unlawful deeds, vexed his righteous soul from day to day. And Psalm. 119. 136.
David said, Mine eyes gush out with rivers of water, because they keep not thy
law. And also, Psalm. 120. 5.
woe is me that I remain in Meshech, and dwell in the tents of Keaar. He
which is truly grieved for sin in himself, will also be grieved for sin in
others. Now the world is so fraught with sinners, that if a man would not keep
company with fornicators, or with the covetous, or with extortioners, or with
idolaters, then as Paul says, he must go 1 Cor. 5. 10.
out of the world. Death therefore frees men from this evil, because it takes
them out of the world, and suffers them not to behold either the sins which
men commit against God, or the evils which God does bring upon them: yea death
does carry them into heaven to the holy angels and spirits of just and
perfect men, which sin not at all, but fulfill the will of God in all
perfection. They shall have cause to rejoice for them, and not to be grieved at
them.

There be also extraordinary evils, from which the righteous are delivered by
death; and those are extraordinary judgments which the Lord brings upon the
people and country where they dwelt, for some late and grievous sins. Thus was
a young child of Jeroboam dealt withal. The Lord threatened to bring evil upon
the house of Jeroboam, and to sweep off the remnant of his house, as a man
sweepeth away dung til it be all gone. Yea the dogs should eat him of
Ieroboams stock that died in the City, and the fowls of the air should eat
him that died in the field: yet that child should die in his bed, and all
Israel (as it is said) shall mourn for him: for he only of Jeroboam shall 1.
King. 14. 13.
come to the grave, because in him there is found some goodness toward the Lord
God of Israel, in the house of Jeroboam. Thus also was good king Josiah dealt
withal. The Lord told him before hand, because thine heart melted, and they
have humbled thy self, have rent thy clothes and wept before me: behold
therefore 2. King. 22. 20.
I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shall be put in thy grave in
peace, and thine eyes shall not see all the evil which I will bring upon this
place. And thus was Luther dealt withal (as some have observed) who was taken
away in peace, not long before the Lord brought Caluins comment upon this place.
that miserable calamity upon Germany, which he had often foretold, would
come upon that people for the contempt of the Gospel. Who also desired that he
might be called out of the world, before he saw those grievous punishments
which he greatly feared. Though this be no perpetual law: for sometime the
righteous perish in the common destruction among the wicked, as Jonathan did
with Saul and other Israelites Cyprian de mortal. sect. 5.
in battle against the Philistims. And in the Pestilence Christians have dyed
with the Infidels.

Sometime God spares the wicked for the righteous men's sake which live among
them. The Lord promised Abraham, that if he could find ten righteous men ^n
Sodom, he would not destroy the city for Genesis 18. 32.
those tennes sake. And Job said, The innocent shall deliver the yland, and it
shall be preserved Job. 22. 30.
by the pureness of his hands. Yea wheat and tares must grow together till the
harvest, Mat. 13. 30. 39.
that is, good and bad must live together in the world, until ye end of the
world. Yet oftentimes God pluckes his children out of fire, which shall consume
the wicked; and prouides a place of safety for them in heaven, before he power
forth his judgments upon the earth. Lot was commanded Genesis 19. 22.
to make haste unto the city of Zoar to save him there, because the Lord could
do nothing unto Sodom, till he was come thither. And when the Lord would
destroy Jerusalem for the abominations committed in it, he showed to the
Prophet in a vision Ezech. 9, 4.
the destroyers, coming forth with their weapons to destroy: yet they must not
touch any, until they were all marked in their fore heads, which mourned for
all the abominations done in the midst of it. And the destroying Angels must
not hurt the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till the Revel. 7. 3.
servants of God were sealed in their foreheads. As the righteous are careful
to serve the Lord; so is he careful to preserve them. As they have not bin
partakers with the common sort in the practice of sin, so shall they not be
partakers with them in suffering punishment. He takes them from among the
wicked, and then executes his judgments upon the wicked alone. The Egyptians
did use to gather their corn out of the fields, and laid it up in their
barnes, and then caused the Israelites to gather the Exodus 5.
stubble to make brick withal; and in some Countries, Farmers first carry the
corn into their barnes, and then burn the stubble in the field where it
grows: so the Lord first gathers the righteous into the kingdom of heaven,
and then consumes the wicked on the earth. It is far from the judge of all
the world to slay the righteous with Genesis 18. 25.
the wicked.

1. In this respect those which survive the righteous have just cause to fear
some present Uses.
evils, and labor by unfeigned repentance, if it be possible, to prevent them.
Their death is a plain prognostication of some evils to come, and should be as
a trumpet to awaken others out of the sleep of* sin. Many of the wicked
rejoice when the godly are taken away from them: they love their rooms better
then their company: they hated them and their profession in their life time,
because, as they say, they are not for our profit, and they are contrary to our
doings: they check us for offending against the Wisd. 2. 12. 15.
law: it grieueth us to look upon them: for their lives are not like other
men; and therefore at their death they are glad that they are rid of them: when
indeed they have greater cause to howl and weep for the miseries that shall
come upon them. The righteous need not to imitate the ungodly practice of
Herod, who being ready to dye, Joseph. antiquit li. 17. cap 9. de bell. Iudaico
lib. 1. ^1.
and thinking that his death would be a great joy to many, shut up in prison
some noble men of every town: and required his sister Salome, and her husband
Alexa, that so soon as he was dead, they should kill those noble men, and then
all Iudaea would lament his death. The Lord himself does often make the death
of the righteous to be lamented, by sending of extraordinary judgments
immediately after their death. When Noah enters into the Arc, the world is
drowned with the flood: when Lot departs out of Sedome, it is burnt with fire.

2 In this respect also y^ righteous have no cause to fear death, but rather
to desire it: for what is it but an ending of some troubles, and a preventing
of others? They may with Paul desire to be loosed and to be with Phil. 1. 23.
Christ, which is best of all. It is true which Solomon says, That the day of
a man's death is Eccle^. ^. 3.
better then the day of his birth. For the day of a godly man's birth is the
beginning of his misery: but the day of his death, is the end of his misery.
Indeed the day of a wicked man's death is the most woeful day that ever befell
him; for he is not taken away from the evil to come, but he is taken unto
evil, to be tormented in hell for evermore. And therefore he fears death as
much, as a malefactor fears a Sergeant that comes to carry him to prison,
where he is like to abide till the day of execution. That is true in them which
the Devil said. Skin for skin, and all that ever a man has, will he give Job.
2. 4.
for his life. And as the Gibeonites were content rather to be bondmen, and
hewers of Josh 9.
wood, and drawers of water, then to be killed by the Israelites as other
nations were: So they had rather endure any kind of misery then to die as
others do, because they fear a worse estate after death, and therefore must
be pulled from the earth with as great violence, as Ioab was pulled from the
horns of the altar, unto which he had fled 1. King. 2. 28
as to a place of refuge. But the godly knowing what an happy exchange they
make by death, they desire to dye so soon as it pleases the Lord. Indeed
none ought for the ending of present calamities, or preventing of future
miseries, to shorten their own days, as Saul did by falling on his own sword:
nor yet for the present enjoying of eternal happiness, procure their own death;
as Cleombrotus did, who reading Plato his August. de Ciuit Dei. lib. 1. ca. 22.
Nullam a^^^am recipio, quae me ^^clenti separatur a corpore.
book of the immortality of the soul, cast himself headlong from a wall, that
he might change this life for a better. He only who gave life, must take it
away: and the Lord may say to such, I will receive no souls, which against my
will have gone out of the body: the Philosophers which died so, were martyrs of
foolish philosophy. Yet seeing that death freeth Yales stulta philosophia
habeat martyrs.
the righteous from present and future miseries, they may be most willing to
dye, so soon as the Lord calls for them: and Hieron. ad ^ar^ell.
when death approaches, may say with Simeon: Lord now let thou thy servant
depart Luke 2. 29.
in peace.

3 Lastly, in this respect we must learn not to mourn immoderately for the
death of the righteous. Though we received great comfort, and inioyed some
benefit by them while they were alive: yet seeing that death is an advantage
unto them, we should be content patiently to bear our own loss, in respect
of their great gain. If two friends should lie in prison together, or should
dwell together in a strange country, where both of them were hardly used, were
many ways injured, endured great want, and sustained much misery: though they
loved one another dearly, and the one were an help and comfort to the other;
yet if the one should be taken from the other, and brought to his chiefest
friends, and among them be not only freed from all such miseries as before he
had endured, but also be advanced to great preferment; will the other which is
left behind him, be discontented at it? Will he not rather wish himself to be
there with him in the like case; then desire, that either he had stayed with
him, or might return again? This our life is as a prison, or strange
country, in which we endure great misery, and may every day look for more:
if therefore our dearest friends be taken from us, freed from these miseries,
and advanced to great glory with Christ and his Saints in the kingdom of
heaven; we have no cause to wish that either they had stayed longer with us, or
might return again unto us; but rather desire that we might quickly go unto
them, to be glorified in like sort. Though we may think that they dyed too
soon for us, yet they dyed not too soon for themselves: for the sooner they
come to rest and happiness, the better it is for them. Their condition is far
better then ours, for they are freed from misery; we are reserved for further
misery: they are already arrived at the haven of eternal rest: and we are still
tossed on the Greg. Naziar. suner. patris.
sea of this world, with troublesome waves, and dangerous tempests they have
ended their journey with lesser travail, and making a shorter cut: and we are
yet travailing with wear^^omnesse in our journey. If any one of them could
speak after their death, he would say unto those which weep for him, as Christ
said to the daughters of Jerusalem: Weep not for me, but weep for your
selves, and for your children; because of the Luke. 23. 28
dangerous days which shall ensue: Or as Christ said unto his disciples, If ye
loved me, ye would verily rejoice, because I go unto the Father. John. 14. 28.


But if examples do move any thing at al, I may apply all that has bin spoken
to our present occasion. A righteous woman is perished: a merciful woman is
taken away: let us lay it to our hearts, and consider that she is taken away
from evil. I am fully persuaded that she is delivered from ordinary evils: and
it may be her death has in her self prevented some extraordinary judgments
which remain for us that are left behind. Sin is now so ri^e and ripe among
us, that we may justly fear some strange future evils: God grant, that as she
has prevented them by her death, so we may prevent Illa quidem anima in
societa^em recepta sidelium atque ca^tarum, lauds nec cu^at, nec qu^rit
humana^, ^n^tationem tantum qu erit. August. Epist. 125. ad Cornel.
them by our unfeigned repentance.

I know that she, being received into the society of the Saints in heaven,
neither cares for, nor seeks man's praises: she neither needs our prayers,
nor yet our praises: if she desire any thing, it is our imitation. Yet to
praise ye dead, is a thing lawful in it self, and profitable unto the living.
If it had not bin a thing lawful, neither David would so highly have commended
Jonathan for his fervent and constant love, 2. Sam. 1. 26. neither would the
holy Ghost have commended king Josiah for his integrity above all others, 2.
Chro. ^5. 23. Neither would the author to the Hebrews have so greatly praised
Heb. 11.
the Patriarchs and Prophets for their excellent works of faith. Neither would
Christ have commanded, that wheresoever the Gospel should be preached
throughout all the world, that which the woman had done in Math. 26. 13.
^anointing him, should be spoken of* for a memorial of her. God would not
have the virtuous deeds, and holy examples of the righteous to be buried with
them, but to be kept in remembrance, for the imitation of others. Christ
commended some while they were alive, as the Centurion for the greatness of his
faith, Math. 8. John Baptist for his constancy, his ^obrietie in his apparel,
and the dignity of his office, Math. 11. May we not then praise the dead? For
we may best commend sailors when they arrive at the haven, and soldiers when
they have gotten the victory. These praises may profit the living: they may
comfort the friends of the deceased, assuring them of their happy exchange by
death. And for this cause the Fathers in their consolatorie letters written to
them which lost their friends, have inserted large praises of them: they may
stir up others to praise the Lord for them, and likewise provoke the^ to
follow their good example. As fire, when it is raked into, will cast forth some
Basil. s^rm. in ^o^d. Martyr.
heat and light; and precious ointment if it be stirred, will cast forth a
sweet smell to the^ which be near: so y^ praises of Saints departed being
mentioned, will yield some comfort and profit to those which hear them.

I may the more boldly speak somewhat of this godly Gentlewoman, whose soul
(I doubt not) God has taken unto himself, and whose body is now to be
committed unto the earth, because I knew both the course of her life, and the
manner of her death. It pleased God betime to season the vessel of her heart
with heavenly liquour, whereof it did always taste afterward: good seed was
sown in her soul at the beginning, which budded and brought forth good fruit
unto the end. She was by nature very humble and lowly, not disdaining any:
very loving and kind, showing courtesy to all: very meek, and mild, in
forbearing every one; so as they which did daily converse with her, could
never see her angry: and hereby she got the love of all. For matters of
religion few went before her. She gave her self much to reading: as Paula did
train up her maids De scripturis sanctis quotidie aliquid discere.
to read, and learn every day some thing in the Scriptures; so did she
accustom her self to read every day eight chapters in the bible: and would
not suffer any occasion Hieron. Epitaph. Paul ad Eystoch.
to hinder her in that task: yea and moreover at convenient leisure would
read over other godly books for her further instruction. She was also much
given to prayer: for besides that she would both morning and evening join in
prayer with the family, she was espied to seek out solitary places for private
prayer and meditation. She did most dutifully frequent the public exercises in
the Church: had a special care to sanctify the Sabbath; and was greatly
grieved, if she might not hear one or two Sermons on that day. Although she
dwelt far from the Church, yet would she never be absent, if she were able
either to go or ride. Yea she might be found in the Church when others which
dwelt nearer, and were able to have come, might have bin found in their houses,
or unfit places for that time. By these means she did greatly increase in
knowledge, not being like those women which are ever learning, but are never
able to 2. Tim. 3 7.
come to the knowledge of the truth. But rather like David, who understood
more then the Ps. 119. 100
ancient.

She had a very tender conscience, and would often weep not only for her own
sins, but also for the sins of others; especially if she espied a fault in
those which were near unto her, and whom she loved dearly. had a dangerous
conflict, yet a joyful conquest. Not long after the beginning of her sickness,
being a week before her death, I coming to visit her, found her some what
troubled in conscience; the enemy had then begun to assault her: but within a
while, by conference with me and others and also by prayer, she was comforted.
But after our departure, the enemy did more strongly and strangely assault her
again, as might appear to them which were present: for she neither would, nor
yet could conceal it.

Though I was not present at this conflict, yet was I present at the conquest.
I coming to her the day before her death, found her exceedingly ravished with
the joys of heaven, praising God most cheerfully for his great mercies, and
wonderful works of God toward her, repeating many verses of the Psalms, and
other places of Scripture, to express the work of the Lord unto her, and to
set forth her thankfulness unto him. She said, the path was smooth, and strowed
with flowers where she did tread, that she was as it were in Paradise, and
felt a sweet smell, as in the garden of Eden: that the joys which she felt
were wonderful, wonderful! repeating that word oftentimes together. I cannot
rehearse the least part of those heavenly speeches which then she uttered. She
often desired others to pray and to praise God for her: and when I had once
ended prayer, within a while after she would desire me to pray again. The next
morning which was the day of her death, I saw her continue in the like sort,
though not able by reason of her weakness, to speak so much: she then desired
our prayers again for her, and when prayer was ended, and I gone out of the
house toward the Church, she caused me to be called back, to pray once
again with her; and when I departed, wished some faithithfull Minister to help
me, and thus continued in godly speeches and prayers until her last end. This
was the manner of her death.

I have heard that some speak very uncharitably of her, by reason of her
temptation, and thereupon mutter much against religion it self: but such
should remember that which I have spoken before, that the Devil most
assaulteth them which be most godly, thinking to hinder all religion, if he may
prevail with such: Origin. in Number. ho. 27 Hier^n. ad E^stoch. de custod.
virgin^t.
and if you yet Auguct. de temp. sermon. 85. Chrysolog. sermon. 79.
doubt of this point, I could show the testimony of the best learned to approve
it. And in temptation the best may quail, to show how Chrys^^t* ad pop.
Antio^h. hom. 1. and hom 30. in Genes. Cyprian. ep. lib. 3 epi. 1. Bernard. in
Psalm. q^^ habitat. se^. 7. Greg. mag. pastoral. part. ^. adm. 29. ^^ist. lib.
7. cap. 53. and lib. 10. ^^p. 38.
weak we are, and to keep us from presumption. Yet seeing that as Jacob
spoke of the tribe of Gad, An host of men shall overcome him, yet he shall
overcome in the end: so it came to pass in her; her enemy for a while seemed
to prevail, but in the end was trodden down under her feet. We should rather
praise God for the victory, then speak evil of her for the combat: and fear
least he who tempted her so strongly will also tempt us; and therefore let us
put upon us armor of proof, that we may be able to stand in the day of
trial. I pray God, that those which speak evil of her Gen* 49. 19.
death, do not die worse then she did. Howsoever it was, I will say with Paul
Who Romans 14. 4.
art thou that iudgest another man's servant the stands or falls to his own
master. I hope she rests with the Lord, and therefore let ill tongues rest,
and speak no more against her. Although her mother have lost a dutiful
child: her husband a chaste, a loving and discreet wife: her brethren, a dear
and kind sister: her neighbors, a peaceable and courteous neighbor: her
friends, a religious kinswoman: her familiar acquaintance, a virtuous
companion: the poor, a charitable relieuer: and I my self, one of my best
hearers. Yet I will say to all, as Hierom did to Eustochium concerning her Non
moeremus qu^d talem amisimus, sed gratias agimus, quod talem habuimus, imo
habemus. Deo enim viuunt omnia etc. Hieron. ad Eustoch. epitaph. Paulae.
mother Paula: Let us not mourn because we have lost such a one, but let us
rather give thanks, that we have had such a one; yea rather that we still have
such a one; for all live unto God: and whosoever returns unto the Lord, is
reckoned in the number of the fanstlie. Let us learn to imitate those good
things which were in her: let us be stirred up by her death both to consider
the uncertainty of our own lives, and also to prepare our selves for our last
end: that it may be the beginning of our everlasting glory. The Lord God grant
that every one of us may do it.

Amen.
FINIS.
THE SOVLES SOLACE AGAINST SORROW.

A funeral Sermon preached at Childwall Church in Lancashire, at the burial
of Mistress Katherin Brettergh, the third of June 1601. in the afternoon of the
same day.

By W. LEYGH Bachelor of Divinity and Pastor of Standish.

PSALM 126. 5. 6. 5 They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. 6 They went
weeping, and carried precious seed: but they shall return with joy, and bring
their sheaues.

IONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston. 1602.

To the reverend man of God, and faithful Preacher, M. William Leygh, Bachelor
of Divinity, and Pastor of Standish in Lancashire: William Brettergh wishes
increase of all good graces, for the gathering of Gods Saints, and building up
of his Church, and for his own everlasting salvation in Jesus Christ.
GOod Sir, after I had read with comfort, that which I gained from you with
much entreaty, I mean a copy of your Sermon, preached at my wives Funeral; I
was so full and pregnant of the birth, that I could bear no longer, but must
needs bring forth the same, and lay it in the lap of Gods children: which how
ever I use it in the nursing, was from your self a per^est birth. Happily you
will deem I do you wrong, to publish the same without your futher warrantie:
indeed you may and my self should think none other; but that fearing upon a
second entreaty you might either persuade me in your love, or ouer-awe me by
your authority* to desist from printing the same: I have thought good rather to
venture upon all carthly replies, the^ to hazard the want of so heavenly a
solace. Good sir pardon my boldness, for and if you would give me your house
full of gold, I cannot keep in, what God will have out: nor can I be silent
where God will speak: The best is, I lack no privilege: The Lord has given
good success: The Examiner full allowance: The Learned good approuall: And my
conscience is clear within: I do it neither to your praise, or my own, but
with a single heart to set out the Lords glory. And for the wantonness of the
world, the iniquity of the time, and the multitude of malicious wreslers, of
whom you speak; let them alone, whilst they but pine themselves in feeding
upon our best things. The Lord give you grace, countenance, and continuance in
the bleshed work of the Ministry, for his Sions sake.

London this 20. of November 1601. Your assured in Christ Jesus, William
Brettergh.

The Souls Solace against Sorrow.
ISAIAH. 57. 2. Peace shall come: they shall rest in their beds, every one
that walks before him.
IT was the preparation and day before the Saboath, when Joseph of Mark. 15.
42. Ioh. 19. 38.
Arimathea, with Nichodemus and the women that came from Galile; begged of
Pilate the body of Jesus; wrapped it in sindon; imbalm'd it with spices; buried
it; and so gave him the last duty of eternal obsequie.

As that was honorable in Christ the head; so is it not dishonorable in us
his members. And for that I hold this day, you have done well, who have
followed the hearse of this our dear sister, to give her the last honor of
burial; though last (I say) yet not the least of Christian duties. All which
on your behalfes (blessed preacher, and blessed people) how readily and
religiously has been performed, I rather joy to feel in my heart, then can
find the way to express with my tongue: howbeit in lieu of my unfeigned love
to her that rests now in peace; as also of you my dear brethren, who yet a
while must endure the wars of this woeful world; give me leave in respect of
both, to charge my self with a duty more particular, and more abounding. For
as the Mary's could not be satisfied Mark. 16. 1.
with all that was done by Joseph and Nichodemus for their master Christ,
unless their poor balm went withal: so can I not content my self with all you
have done (though most sufficient) unless I bring some sindon of mine own,
and buy some balm to bestow upon this Saint.

As love is full of labor; so it spares no cost; and for that I say with
David, I will not 2. Sam. 24. 24.
offer burnt offerings unto the Lord my God, of that which cost me nothing: so
then being called unto this place, by him who may command me much, for that
his praise is in the Gospel (I mean the saddest Saint in all the assembly) I
did not consult with flesh and blood, but have as you may see, most willingly
obeyed the heavenly call.

Desirous by my best endeavors, and sweetest balm, to comfort the living, by
commending the dead: so did Isaiah in this place, as you have heard from the
former Angel, who took the commination to himself, out of the verse going
before, of Gods peremptory summons of all by death; just, and unjust;
righteous, and unrighteous; faithful, and faithles; and has left the
consolation for me, thereby to raise you up from deep despair, and put you in
a place of peace, lay you in a bed of rest. with the Saint that gone is, and
all such as walk before the Lord.

That all must die, as has bin told you, there is no remedy; for we come by
the womb, and go by the grave; and ere you come to the sweet running waters
of Shilo, Isai. 8. 6.
that runs softly, you must pass the turbulent waters of Jordan, that go
roughly. Ier. 12. 5.
Death is the Lady and Empress of all the world, her seasure is without
surrender, and from her sentence there is no apple.

It is not the majesty of the Prince, or holiness of the Priest; strength of
body, feature of face, learning, riches, or any such secular regard can plead
against death, or privilege any person against the grave: nay I say more, be
thy days never so few, or thy years never so full: count with Adam, and tell
with Methusalem 969. years truly Genesis 5. 27.
told; yet die thou must: be they many, or be they few, all is one; years are
no privilege against the grave.

For the general then I thus conclude, statutum est omnibus semelmori. The
decree Heb. 9. 27. Dan. 5. 5. and 25.
is out, all must die: Balthashars emblem is upon every wall: and his imprese
is upon all flesh, Mean, Mean, Tekel Vparsin. Numerauit, appendit, diuisit. God
has numbered thy days: he has laid thee upon the balance, and thou art found
wanting; thy kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes, and Persians.

Say Princes, say Pesants, say all, corruption Job. 17. 13. 14.
thou art my father, rottennes thou art my mother, worms and vermin ye are
my sisters, ye are my brethren; say grave, thou art my bed; sheet, thou art my
shrine; earth, thou art my cover; green grasle, thou art my carpet; death
demand thy due, and thou gathering host Dan, come last, sweep Joshua. 6. 9.
Numb. 10. 25.
all away.

And now my brethren that all is gone, where is the remain of our religious
hope? spes in olla: nay spes in vrna. There is hope in the grave: ^o says
Isaiah the son of Amos, in this place, of all the Prophets most Euangelical,
and of all the Evangelists most Prophetical.

In which Scripture, for the better carrying away of the whole, you may observe
these special points. First, gladsome tidings from heaven, and what it is:
peace to the Division.
soul, and rest to the body. Secondly, gladsome tidings from heaven, and to
whom it is: to all such as walk before him. Every word if you weigh well,
truly Evangelical; I mean good news from a far country; gladsome tidings
of heavenly things.

What more acceptable then the wells of sweet water to a thirsty soul? what
more pleasing then to hear of peace, in the time of war? what so to be
desired in this moyling world, as after toil to hear of rest? And what so
comfortable to check all misery; as to hear of mercy? And fully to be
assured, that in the midst of death, we are in life, and that peace shall
come.

This impression of immortality, and assured hope of deliverance, from
danger, death and misery, has ever possessed the hearts of Gods Saints, and
been as it were, a nail of the sanctuary, to keep them in Eccles. 12. 11.
life, and fasten them to a further hope of future perfection. Thus peace shall
come.

Job in the plea of all his miseries (as he thought) endless, easeles, and
remediles, to the weak and silly eye of flesh and blood; yet upon a better
survey, with the single eye of faith, held by this very hope, and none other:
Peace shall come.

For when he had grieuouslie complained, that the Lord had hedged up his ways
Job. 19. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. etc.
that he could not pass, and set darkensse in his paths; when he had spoiled
him of his honor, and taken the Diadem from his head; when he had destroyed
him on every side, and removed his hope like a tree; when his armies of
afflictions came together, made their way upon him, and camped about his
tabernacle; when his brethren were removed far from him, and his acquaintance
were strangers unto him; when his neighbors had forsaken him, and his
familiars had forgotten him; when his household servants both men and maids,
took him for a stranger, and would not answer him, though he prayed them
with his mouth; when his breath was strange unto his wife, though he besought
her too, for the childrens sake of his own body; when the wicked despised
him, his secret friends abhorred him, and those whom he loved, were turned
against him: finally, when beside these great losses, and most cruel
unkindness, he was tucht in his own person, so as his bone claue to his
flesh, and he only escaped with the skin of his teeth; yet in all these
dolours, thus he demurred, Peace shall come: though in different words, yet in
equal sense, he made it the issue of all his maladies. Scio quod redemptor
meus viuit. I know that my redeemer lives, and he shall stand last on the
earth: and though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet shall I see God
in my flesh, peace shall ^ome. Oh that these words were now written! Oh that
they were written; even in a book, and graven with an i^on pen, in lead, or in
^^one for ever, to the ^^lace of al distressed Saints. I know that my Redeemer
lives, and that peace shall come.

David, even distressed David, anchored upon this hold, when tossed upon the
^eas of worldly woes, he felt the froth and fury 1. Sa. 17. 11 1. Sam. 22. 9.
10.
of Saules rage; and Doegs despite; the rebellion and incest of his own
children; besides 2. Sam. 15. 1. King. 1 5. 2. Sam. 13. 1. Psalm. 6. 6.
the horror of his proper sins, which night by night caused him to water his
couch with tears: all these surges had sunk his soul, had not his eyes been
fixed upon this pr^montorie bonae spei, Peace shall come: which undoubtedly he
felt in his heart, when he spoke with his mouth, and said, to the solace of his
shrinking soul. I should utterly have Psalm. 27. 13. 14.
fainted, but that I believed verily to see the goodness of the Lord in the land
of the living: O tarry then the Lords leisure, be strong, and he shall comfort
thy heart.

Paul is powerful in this kind of pleading, and if you mark it well, in the
course of all his Epistles, you shall find, that ever as afflictions were
multiplied, his joys were increased. Death was to him an advantage: Phil. 1.
21.
dissolution was his desire; and to be with Christ was best of all: Peace shall
come, was his plea against all the issues of death and doom.

When in labors more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prison more
plentiously, 2. Cor. 11. 23. etc.
in death often; when of the Jews five times he had received forty stripes
save one; when thrice beaten with rods, once stoned, thrice he had suffered
shipwreck, and been in the deep sea both night and day; when in iourneyings
often, in perils of water, in perils of robbers, in perils of his own nation,
in perils among the gentiles, in perils in the city, in perils in the
wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren, in wearines
and painefulnes, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fasting often, in
cold and nakedness: and to conclude, when beside the things that were outward,
he was combred day lie, and had the care of all the Churches; yet here was his
hold, and to this hope was he fastened, Romans 8. 18.
I account that the afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the
glory which shall be showed unto us. Therefore we faint not (says the blessed
Apostle upon the like plea) but though our outward man perish, yet the inward
2. Cor. 4. 16. 17. 1^.
man is renewed daily; for our light afflictions which is but for a moment,
causes unto us a far more excellent and eternal weight of glory: while we
look not on the things which are seen, but on the things which are not scene:
for the things which are seen, are temporal, but the things which are not
seen, are eternal. Peace shall come.

^^ul, Paul, this issue of life and soule-solace; his heavenly hold; and
spiritual rauishment, has made thee to forget all that is behind, and to hold
hard unto that mark Phil. 3. 13. 14.
which is before, even* Jesus Christ, the author and finisher of thy faith.
Here in Col. 3. 3. 4.
grace, thy life was hid in Christ, and for that now in glory it does appear
in Christ: happy place, happy Paul, happy shrine, 1. Cor. 10. 11
happy Saint, so to be blessed both in life, and death: and woe unto us, upon
whom the ends of this world are come, if being compassed Heb. 12. 1. 2.
with so great a cloud of witnesses, we do not cast away every thing that
presses down, and the sin that hangs so fast* o^, tunning with patience
the race that is set before us, and looking unto Jesus the author and finisher
of our faith: who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, and
despised the shame, and is set at the right hand of the throne of God.

And here me thinks, upon the sense and 2. Woeful wants.
sight of sin, which swarmeth every where, to the subersion of states, and
destruction of souls: I find no cause of such so great excess, as that with
men, there is no Ephesians. 4. 17. 18. 19. Passion* of mortality.
passion of their mortality: there is no impression of their eternity. For
and if there were, assuredly then oderunt peccare* (...)i virtutis amore,
oderunt peccare mali for mid^ne poenae. The good, they would not sin in love
of virtue, and the evil they durst not sin for fear of punishment. Did the
sinner Isai. 30. 33.
but think of this, that Tophet is prepared of old* and that even for the
mighty as well as the mean^; it is prepared. That the gulf thereof is deep
and large, and the burning is* fi^^ and much wood, with the breath of the Lord,
like a river of b^imstone* still to kindle it: I say, had he* but a passion of
these things, little do I doubt, but his heart would fall* his soul would
shrink, and he would leave sin for fear of punishment.

To pass* over a due regard of these things* and to come to the tenth of our
lost 1. Pet. 4. 3. 4. 5. 6.
time, and careless days, pitifully spent and wasted in woeful security.
Did we but afford out souls though extraordinary, yet any the least
meditation of the shortness of our life; more brittle the^ glass; more light
then smoke; more swift then wind. 2. Of the day of our death* sure in the end,
unsure in the time, and bitter when it comes. 3. Did we but with fear
foresee, diem Revel. 6. 17. Act. 17. 31.
and Deum vltionis, a day and a God of revenge, by a judge; infallible for his
wisdom; inflexible for his justice; infugable for his power; when to call upon
the mountains, cadite, cadite, fall upon us, fall upon us, Luke. 23. 30
will be too late. 4. And finally to close with hell, to the horror of all
hellish hearts: could we but feel in heart and semblance, Isai. 66. ^4.
the intolerable pains of hell, endless, easeles and remediles in the damned;
would much abate the heat of our sinning, strike it in the blade, break it in
the head, and kill it at the heart.

But alas, and woe unto us, that ever we Lam. 5. 16. Zoph. 1. 12. Isa. 22. 12.
13.
lived to see such excess of sinning with all states, in all security.
Hanibal ad portas. Imminet mors, iudicium det, infernus omnia horrenda: et
quasi nihil ad nos* ridemus, ludimus, peccataque peccatis adi^cimus. Death is
at our doors; judgment is oue^ our heads; hell is at hand; all horrible: and
yet without horror we laugh, we leap, we dance, we play, we lie upon beds of
iuorie, and stretch Amos. 6. 4. 5. 6.
our selves to the full of our folly: we eat the lambs of the flock, and
the calves our of the stall; ^e sing to the sound of the viollvaine delights*
and we invent to our selves instruments of music like David: as he to the
service and honor of his God, so we to please our unsanctified affections, and
extrauagant lusts. But good Lord how long? how long without measure shall we
provoke thy Revel. 6. 10.
majesty? How long without repentance shall we behold our misery? How long
without compassion shall we look upon Zech. 12. 10.
him whom we have pierced? how long by swearing, and lying, and killing, and
Hos. 4. 1. 2.
stealing, and whoring, shall sin break out, and blood touch blood? Oh Lord
thou know. Pedibus timor addidit alas. fear forces flight. Oh set thy
fear Lord before our face, so settle it in out hearts, as henceforth Gal. 1.
16. Act. 26. 19.
we do no more consult with flesh and blood, but readily obey thy heavenly
call, by flight from sin, for fear of judgment.

2 As for the second cause of our excessive 2. Impression of eternity.
sinning, to wit, the insensibilitie of peace to come, of future rest, of
heavenly being, passions of our joy, and impressions of our eternity; I say
the want is woeful, but the feeling is of force to beat back Satan, with all
his retinue, either of sin, death, 2. Cor. 12. ^.
hell or doom. It made Paul to forget not only sin, but himself to, and
say whether in the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell, God he knows;
but I feel things that are unutterable. It made the Disciples in the
transfiguration upon the mount* to translate Math. 17. 4.
their thoughts from mortal mould, and say, in sense and feeling of that
heavenly being, Bonum est esse hic. It is good Lord for us to be here, let us
make tabernacles. It made Simeon say with solace, when having laid in his
heart, what he lapt in his arms; even sweet Christ, the rauishment of his
soul: Lord now let thou thy servant depart in Luke 2. 29.
pe^ce according to thy word: mine eyes have seen thy salvation* I fear no
sin; I dread no death; I have lived enough, I have my life: I have longed
enough, I have my love: I have seen enough, I have my light; I have served
enough, I have my Saint: I have sorrowed enough, I have my joy: sweet Babe, let
this Psalm serve for a lullabie to thee, and a funeral for me: Oh sleep in
my arms, and let me sleep in thy peace.

And here out of Simeon would I raise a doctrine. Simeon had it by revelation
from Luke 2. 25. 26.
God, that he should not taste of death till he had seen the Lords Christ;
nor do I think, but that God in like lenity, does and will deal with all his
Saints, and never suffer the good and righteous to depart out of this world
comfortles. Moses saw the Number. 27. 12
land of promise before he died. Aaron saw his son Eleazar in his room
before Number. 20. 28 1. King. 1. 30
he died. David saw Solomon his successor ere he died. Ezekias saw his house in
order 2. King. 20. 1. Math. 17. Act^. 7. 55.
ere he died. Christ was glorified upon the holy mount ere he dyed. Stephen saw
y^ glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand ere he died. And Simeons
sight of Christ ere he died shall be to me, and I hope to all the Elect of God,
an assured symboll or sacrament of the certainty of our salvation by faith, in
and by the sight of our sweet Savior, whom we shall behold in soul and
spirit, ere we leave this life. Amor transit in amatum; nec sinit amantem esse
sui ipsius, sed amati. Love does symbolize, and the mind is not where it
lives, but where it loves. Terram diligis, terra es: aurum diligis, aurum es.
Deum diligis, non audeo dicere Deus es: audi Psalm. 82. 6.
tamen scripturam dicentem, an non ego dixi, quod dij e^^is? Do thou love
earth? thou art earth* Do thou love gold? thou art gold. Do thou love God?
(I dare not say thou art God) yet hear the Scriptures speaking, have not I
said ye are Gods? As and if the author should say, out of the familiarity we
have with God, we are made partakers of the divine nature, according as his
divine power has given unto us, all 2. Pet. 1. 3.
things that pertain unto life and godliness, thorough the knowledge of him
that has called us unto glory and virtue.

Good Ignatius confirmed this doctrine, as in life, so in death; for qualis
vita finis ita. Of whom it is reported that being opened, they found in his
heart, the fruit of his faith and daily meditation, written in letters of
gold, to this effect. Amor men's crucifixus est, my love is crucified.

Learned Cruciger confirmed the same, when dying he said: Inuoco t^ Deus,
fiducia filii tui, licet languida, tamen aliqua fide. Oh God, I call upon thee
in confidence of thy son, though with a faint faith, yet with some faith: and I
am encouraged so to do, for I see him in glory, whom I have followed in grace.

Nor can I pass in silence, what fell out in experience not long sithence, at
the memorable death of a memorable Saint in this our country; a Gentleman,
Scholar, and Preacher, rarely qualified both in life and death. Oxford will
witness the one, and Heaton hall the other, where it pleased God to call to his
mercy that worthy man, and powerful preacher master John Holland bachelor
of divinity, a burning M. John Holland.
lamp consuming it self, to lighten others; for God in mercy called him by a
lingering sickness, which staid till he was ready, and pared him to such an
end, as seldom I have heard, but yet never saw the like in any.

To pass the course of his sickness in much patience, yet with great passion;
and to come to his end, when he put in practice the fruit of his godly life: It
pleased him the day before he dyed, as formerly often, so then more egerly, to
call for the holy Bible, with these very words, Come, O come, death approaches,
let us gather some flowers to comfort this hour: and turning with his own
hands to the 8. Chapter of Paul's Epistle to the Romans, he gave me the
book, and bade me read: at the end of every verse he made a Selah, or pause,
and gave the sense in such sort and feeling, as was much (we saw) to his own
comfort, but more to our joy and wonder. Pity it were those speeches, with
other his writings, should be buried with him, and kept in private from the
public good of many. Having thus continued his meditation and exposition for
the space of two hours or more, on the sudden he said, O stay your reading,
what brightness is this I see? Have you light up any candles? To which I
answered no, it is the Sunneshine, for it was about 5. a clock in a clear
Summers evening. Sunshine (says he) nay my Savior shine: now farewell
world, welcome heaven, the day star from an high has visited my heart: O
speak it when I am gone, and preach it at my Funeral: God deals familiarly
with man. I feel his mercy, I see his majesty, whether in the body, or out of
the body, I cannot tell, God he knows, but I see things that are unutterable.
So, rainshed in spirit, he roamed toward heaven, with a cheerful look, and
soft sweet voice, but what he said, we could not conceive. At last shrinking
down again, he gave a sigh, with these words: Ah, yet it will not be, my sins
keep me from my God. Thus that evening, twice rising, and twice falling, with
the Sun in the morning following, he rise then never to fall* when again
raising himself, as Jacob did upon his staff* he shut up his blessed life,
with these blessed words, O what an happy change Heb. 11. 21.
shall I make? from night, to day? from darkness, to light? from death, to
life? from sorrow, to solace? from a factious world, to a heavenly being? O my
dear brethren* sisters, and friends* it pitteth me to leave you behind: yet
remember my death when I am gone, and what I now feel, I hope you shall
^^id^ere you dye, that God does* and will do ^^^ familiarly with men* And now
thou fiery Chariot, that came done to fetch up Eliah, carry me to my happy
hold: and all ye blessed Angels, who attended the soul of Lazarus to bring it
up to heaven, bear me, O bear me into the boson^ of my best beloved. Amen,
Amen come Lord Jesus, come quickly, and so he fell a sl^ope.

I say the truth my brethren, I lie not, my conscience bearing me witness in
the holy Ghost, with an appeal from my own Richard Holland Esquier.
credit, to the right worshipful his brother, and all the standers by, to
justify what I have said, in comfort of their own souls and warrantie of the
doctrine ^ayme at, which is to prove, That God never suffers Note well.
his elect to depart this life comfortless; nor will I am persuaded call them
hence, till they have seen with Simeon the Lords Christ, either in soul;
spirit, body, or both.

The life of this persuasion, is the death of sin; and such hope of eternity,
is the revenge of iniquity. Fie upon sin, whilst I behold my Savior: fie
upon shame, whilst I behold my glory! Heaven is my hope, the visions of my
heart, are the impr^^sions of my joy; and To wit* either external or internal.
revelations are exp^ations to all Gods children; they have bin, they are, and
they will be, never wanting in supplementum fidei, to help faith.

And for conclusion of this point, remember Luke. 17 32.
Lots wife, was Christ his advertisement, to inure us with a forgetfulness of
our own people, and our fathers house, that the Lord Psalm. 45. 10. 11.
might have pleasure in our beawty: But so to look upon Zoar, and flee
thither, was Lots sanctuary: O it is but a little one, and my Genesis 19. 17.
soul shall live. What is Sodom, other then this sinful world? And what is
Zoar, other then that heavenly being? O let me take you by the hand, bring you
out, and say with the Angel, Escape for thy life, look not behind thee,
neither tarry thou in all the plain, escape into the mountain least thou be
destroyed.

And let this suffice, for the first circumstance of my text, as balm from
heaven to sweeten our miseries in this life, and to bury our iniquities in the
grave. Now pass we from the peace of the soul, to the rest of the body, and
quiet of both, urged by the spirit, in the second place, as an Antidote to
prevent a poison much infecting all flesh: who without all comfort of future
blessedness, do, to the hazard of their souls, stand doubtful of the
resurrection, as also of the rest of their souls, after they be departed. The
one sort are the Atheists, the other are the Papists of these days and times:
But the text is powrefull to put back both Iordans, that the Israel of God may
enter Ios. 3. 15. 16 17.
Canaan without cross or fear. For if the Lords elect shall rest in their
beds, they shall rise from their beds. Rest implies a resurrection, when the
time of refreshing shall Acts. 3. 19. 20. 21.
come. It is an improper speech to say, he rests, who never rises. It may
be some go to bed who never rise, strooken with a deadly sleep or l^thargie,
but none to the 10. 5. 28. 29
grave, but out he must, at the general sommons of all the world: for the
trumpet shall Job. 14. 14.
sound, and the dead shall rise. If a man dye, shall he live again? Then all
the days of mine appointed time will I watch* till my changing do come.

Again for the second: If after our death we rest in our beds, and as it is in
another place, such blessedness accompanteth saints Revel. 14. 13.
who d^e in the Lord, that there rest from their labors: then after death, no
place of pain, No Purgat^rie.
no punishment, no Purgatory. Is there light in darkness? is there truth in
error? Is there life in death? Is there fire in water? Is there ease in pain?
rest in labor? good in evil? sweet in sour? Is there a purging fire in hell
must fine us for heaven? Sweet Christ, where then is thy blood? which alone,
say we, nothing else, and none other, purges our sin, pleads 1. Io. 17.
Acts. 4. 12 1. Io. 2. 1.
our cause, and purchases our place. We need no other sacrifice, we need no
Acts. 20. 28
other advocate, we need no other key to open to us the p^rt of the paradise
of God. And if the blood of Jesus plead better things then the blood of Abel,
for the blood of Abel cried revenge, but the blood of Heb. 13. 24
Christ cried pardon, pardon: then stay your bulls, and drops of your leaden
divinity: down with your Dagon and Babel of all confusion, by shrift, shrine,
merit, or medall, all too light, to balance with Heb. 9. 14. Ier. 23. 21.
the blood of the Lamb: for what is chafe to corn?

It pities my heart to see the desolations of Christendom, and of this my
dear Country in many places, where millions of souls are ^illily lead by bad
and blind guides, Tuper Tho^^^ sanguinem, que^ pro se impendit. fa^^^os
Christ^ seddere, quo Thom ^as cendi^.
factious Jesuits, and seditious seedsmen, lead I say from the blood of Christ,
to the blood of Hales, and Becket: from the fire upon the Mount, to the painted
fire of Purgatory, Poets says, and heathenish helps, Romish institutions,
decretals apostaticall, lying oracles, illusions, and flattering diuinations.
This they do, and this they dare do, without care of conscience, fear of
God, of faithfulness to his cause, which wittingly and willingly (I verily
think) they do betray, to make good their hellish Hierarchy, and Babel of all
confusion.

For what grosnes is this besides the impiety, to think a people ever so
foolish, as should take out this lesson, to carry to their graves, from the
living to the dead; yea, and Isa. 8. 19. 20. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 9 10.
that in plea of salvation to: from the living God, to dead idols: from the
living word, to dead traditions: from the living bread in heaven, to a dead
^alfe or cake at Dan, and Bethel: from the blood of Christ that gives life, to
the fire of Purgatory that brings death.

When Christ bleeding upon the tree, had uttered this voice cons^mmatum est, it
is Io. 19. 30.
finished, he gave ^^ the ghost. Th^n he said* and (...) he ^ustered, not for
himself is a 2. Cor. 5. 21.
private person, but for us his members, a public good. Shall he say it is
finished? and shall we say it is not finished? The Lion A^o 1. 3. 1.
has rored, who will not be afraid? The Lord has spoken, who can but tremble?
O tremble for fear ye faithles generation, who dare yet say it is not
finished? Pray saints in heaven, help fire in hell, Purgatory play thy part,
purge to the full: and thou Pope president of this Limbo lake, rule at thy
pleasure: help in, help out, and if upon displeasure thou thrust Myriades of
Distinct. 4. cap. 51. pa^a.
souls into hell, yet let none be so bold as to ask, Why do thou so? It is
enough, o it is enough to make good with this, all your doctrine: Sic volo, sic
iubeo* stet pro ratione voluntas. Ask no questions: search no scriptures:
seek no reasons: I have said, is enough: my pleasure is a precept; counsel, a
command; and my will is a reason. And now me thinks whilst I hear them say,
without word of God, or warranty of reason: Hear heaven, help purgatory,
pardon pope, that is to say, pray saints, purge fire, speak indulgence, for
the rest and ease of souls departed: (a check to the blood of my Christ, to
the truth of my text, and quiet of the saints that gone ar^) I cannot but say
as Job said of his friends, Miserable comforters Job. 16. 2. Job. 21. 3.
are ye all: Suffer me a little to speak, and when I have spoken mock on.

1 I say, the saints in heaven upon whom Saints hear^ us not.
you call, to whom you pray, and before whose images you so prostrate your
selves, I say they hear you not, and for that, they help you not; they rest
from their labors, and their works follow them, and not yours: I say no such
works of wickedness, as your prayer to them is, whereby you rob Isa. 42. 7.
God, to cloth a Saint. To the proof whereof, for that you say our doctrine is
new, and of yesterdayes birth, The days shall speak, and Job. 32. 7.
the multitude of years shall teach wisdom. Saints in heaven hear not;
Saints in heaven help not; Saints in heaven have no 1. King. 8. 39 2 Chronicles. 6.
^0.
sense of our miseries: it is no new doctrine: it is ancient; it is heavenly;
and he that has ears to hear, let him hear.

Augustine in his book de cura habenda August. de (...) hab. pro mort. cap. 13.
pro mortuis, teaches, Animas Sanctorum in coelis esse, nec interesse nostris
his terrents negotijs. That the souls of the blessed are in heaven; nor do
they respect our affairs here on earth; as and if he should say, cease your
praying, for no more does their affection reach yours, then your prayer does
reach them. And this does he prove, by Against the ^^^^^^ ^nt^^^a^^on of the
d^^d.
these reasons sound and good, unanswerable, if truth might prevail, when it
pleadeath on earth, as when it judges in heaven.

And first he begins with his mother Monicha, dead and gone, whose affection
toward him, in life was ever such, as he thought could not but reach him from
heaven, if Saints had feeling of our miseries here on earth: Vt volet accipiat
quisque quod dicam, says the Father; Let men judge of my words as they please;
for that I may say nothing of others, yet dare I say of her, Si rebus viuentium
interessent animae mortuoru^, me ipsum p^a matter nulla nocte desereret, quem
terra marique s^cuta est vt mecum vineret. If the souls of the dead did
respect the affairs of the living, then my dear mother would never fail me
night or day, who by sea, and by land, followed me in this life to live with
me. Absit enim vt facta sit vita foeliciore crudelis etc. Be it far away,
that a blessed life should make her more unkind, or cruel; so as in all y^
anguish of my soul, I never felt her solace, who whilst she lived could
never abide to see me sad. But without al doubt, quod sacer psalmus personat,
veru^ est, quonia^ pat (...)s and matter mea dereliqueru^t Psalm. 27. 10.
me; Dominus ^^tem assumpsit me: because my father and my mother have forsaken
me, the Lord have taken me up. If then our fathers do forsake us, how can they
care for us: and if our fathers do not care for us, qui sunt ill^ mortuorum,
qui nor unt quid agamus, quidue patiamur: who are they among the dead, that
know what we do, or care what we suffer?

2 A second reason is taken out of Isaiah the Prophet, who moved in misery,
after a deliverance, and greatly complained of mercies withheld, and
compassions restrained, gained at no hand, but at the hand of God: nor was
pitied of any, but of himself: and for that he ^^ith, doubtless thou art our
father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel know us not, yet thou Lord
art our father, and our redeem^r thy name is Isai. 63. 16.
for ever. Whereupon the father concludes, with an argument drawn from the
stronger, Si tanti Patriarchae quid ^rga populum ex his procreatum ageretur
ignorauerunt etc. If two so great Patriarchs were ignorant, what should become
of that people themselves had begotten, and from whose strain should spring by
promise, Christ the father of all ^^^^. ^. ^3.
the faithful: If Abraham being the friend of God, yet could never enter into
that secret: nor Israel as preuayling with God, Genesis 32* 2^.
yet never obtained such a blessing, as once dead, either to know, to ease, or
help their posterity, in life or death: then hush to heaven, and to all that
therein is, except God, al are ignorant, none can know, none can help, none can
hear, none can ease our plaint or pain, either in earth, or elsewhere.

3 His third argument is drawn from the memory of blessed Josiah, unto whom
Huldah the Prophetisse pronounced this blessing from God, that he should dye,
and be gathered unto his fathers before he saw the evils which the Lord had
determined upon that place and people. Her words be these: Thus says the Lord,
because thine heart did 2. K^n. 22. 16 20.
melt, and thou have humbled thy self before the Lord, when thou heardest what
I spoke against this place and against the inhabitants of the same: to wit,
that it should be destroyed and accursed, and have rent thy clothes, and wept
before me, I have also heard it says the Lord. Behold therefore I will gather
thee to thy fathers, and thou shall be put in thy grave in peace, and thy eyes
shall not see all the evil which I will bring upon this place. Hereupon I
infer with the father, hos put amus quietos, quos inquieta vita viuorum
solicitat? May we think them at quiet whom the troublesome sturs of this world
may vex? I trow no, for do but suppose, that the Saints in heaven did behold
the miseries here on earth; Princes the subversion of their kingdoms; Noblemen
of their houses; Gentlemen of their lands, line, and families; did fathers see
the sins of their sons, and mothers the shame of their daughters, clad with
pride, fed with idleness, and shod with blood, to the destruction both of their
bodies and souls; finally, did heaven but hear, see, or feel with passion,
how Sion is Lam. 1. 4.
wasted, her stones lie buried in the dust, and there is none to pity her
desolations; did they but see the grass of the earth dieperd with the blood of
the saints, by Antichrist Turk and pope.
in the east, and Antichrist in the west; banding themselves together against
the Lord, and against our Christ, the one to destroy the honor of his person,
the other of his offices: I say, if Saints in heaven, had a sense and feeling
of these miseries, woes, and calamities, small were their rest, little were
their ease, and heaven were no hold for happiness.

If the presence of God were upon hell (as on says, infernus in amoenum
conuerteretur Paradisum) it would become the port of Paradise: so contrarily,
it may be said, if the presence of our sins, woes, and calamities, should
p^ster heaven: if earthly miseries, hellish horrors, and (as our adversaries
will have it) Purgatories plaints should reach the saints; then should heaven
be turned into hell; rest into toil; peace into war; and blessedness into
bane.

Job saw this, when he said of the dead, he changes his face, when thou
castest him away, Job. 14. 20. 21
and he knows not if his Sons shall be honorable, neither shall be
understand concerning them, whether they shall be of low degree. Whereunto
accords Augustine in another August. li^. de spirith and anima cap. 29.
place: The sons of them that are dead, are there where they do not see, nor
hear what things are done or chances in this life: such is their care for
the living, that they know not what we do; even as our care is for the dead,
that we know not what they do.

For conclusion of this point (that I be not tedious) say no more either for
your selves, or over your dead. Hear heaven; help saints; send peace; give
rest: they see you not; they hear you not; nor have they feeling of your
miseries. Your ora pro nobis is out at doors, and your Missa requiem, is a
pregnant idol. Popes pardons are bables for Pagans to sport withal; and like
the mad Gaderen, you hunt the graves of the Mark. 5. ^.
dead, to grieve the living, taking up these and such like stones, to wound
your selves, and build up your Babel of all confusion. Heb. 6. 9.
But of you my brethren, I am persuaded better things, and such as accompany
salvation, though thus I speak: for God is not unrighteous that he should
forget your work and labor of love, which you show toward his name, giving
Heb. 13. 15. 16.
him alone the sacrifice of your prayers and praises: saying with holy Job, my
Job. 16. 19. Psalm. 73. 25.
witness is in heaven. And with the sweet Psalmist, Whom have I in heaven but
thee? and whom have I in earth besides thee? As also Hester. 14. 3.
with blessed Hester: O my Lord, thou only art our King, help me desolate
woman, which have no helper but thee. And for the dead, ^cclu^. 38. 21. 23.
take this from Siracides for a memento. Forget it not, seeing he is at rest,
let his remembrance rest: cease thy prayers, thou shall do him no good, but
hurt thy self.

2 Now to come to the second support, Purgatory^ caseth not.
I mean our adversaries bath, to supple and ease their dead, before they come
to heaven: and for that they cry help Purgatory, purge fire; heathenish in
devise, hellish in practice, and Romish for gain. That I may say no more, I
can say no less of that popish puddle, if I say the truth; but as the Apostle
1. Cor. 8. ^.
said of an idol, Idolum nihil est; so say I of Purgatory, Purgatorium nihil
est; it is none of Gods creatures; it is none of Gods ordinances: it was never
in his counsel; and for that it can never stand with his providence.

Nay if you read the approuers of it, who love it most, and like it best, you
shall find Judge. 15. 4.
the^ like Sampsons foxes, tied by the tails, but divided in the heads,
burning the corn of the Philistims, whilst Isreal's sheaues stand upright: I
mean consuming themselves, whilst they cavil with us about a birth of no
being: for if, they could but agree at home, ere they war abroad, 1. where
the place is, 2. when it began, 3. how long it shall continue, 4. who is there
punished, 5. what is the pain, 6. and lastly, who be the tormentors: happily
it might make us Prove these points ye Papists.
to sound a retreat, and move a parley. But when in all, or most of these,
they are at ods with themselves, I trust (by the grace of God) they shall never
be at even with us, or with any that fear the Lord in truth.

It would require a longer discourse, then now I can stand upon: to descend
into each of these particulars, being limited with the time, mine own
weakness, and your wearines; yet if any man doubt, let him demurre with me
upon a further trial, and conference, when I shall (if God will) satisfy him
to the full; that in all these several points, they do nothing else but agree
to disagree: in the mean time I dare avouch as first I did, that purgatory is
not at all.

1 That is was never known in the Exodus 24. 8. Numb. 12 7. Exodus 25. 40.
Church of Israel, or a doctrine sprinkled upon that people, with the blood of
the old covenant by Moses, who was faithful in Gods house, and delivered all
he saw upon the mount.

2 That purgatory has no foundation in the new testament, and that the blood
of Christ never taught it in that covenant; but was of it self sufficient to
purge and Gal. 3. 13. To. 8. 2. 3.
preserve tam a poena quam a culpa: though our adversaries say contrary.

3 That neither the Primitive Church, nor the Fathers of the same, for the
space of many ages, did ever acknowledge the purgatory of the Church of Rome.
I say God never ordained: Scripture never taught: spirit never guided: father
never agreed upon such a doctrine: but as they that were converted to Christ at
the first; whether from Iudaisme, or from Paganism, did bring with them,
either their ceremonies, or their opinions; so in this error, as in others.

Plato taught it in his schools: Virgil in his rythmes: both Pagans Papising.
Bonauenture at all a^enture, and Durand not dangerous of the doctrine, have
taken it up; both Papists Paganising. To justify what has bin said of old:
Pictoribus, atque poetis quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas. Horace.


To Painters, to Po^ts (to Papists) of skill,
Has ever b^^ granted to same what the* will.
For the proof of al these assertions, I refer you to the worthy writings
of that noble Berrean Lord Phillip of Mornay; lumen The ^^^^ of France, the
s^^^rg^ of Rome.
Galliae, ma^tix Romae, in his treatise of purgatory, laid down in his third
book of the sacrifice pretended in the Mass.

And now for conclusion of this point, in clearing of the truth, pitifully
dearned with these clouds of error, let these few Scriptures, and Fathers
dispell the fogge; so as the sun of righteousness may shine in your hearts,
and beget you to a better 1. Pet. 1. 3.
hope.

A voice from heaven has said it, and you may believe it. Blessed are the dea^
that die in Revel. 14 13
the Lord (Amodo) even now, for they rest from their labors. In blessedness is
no pain: in rest is no toil, and if this happiness be Amodo, Even straight
upon the dissolution; there is no danger by the way: there is no delay by
purgatory.

Paul has said it, you may believe it, Phil. 1. 21. 23.
Christ is to me both in life and in death advantage, desiring to be loosed,
and to be with Christ, which is best of al: as and if he should say, never can
I lose by Christ, in life he is my grace; in death he is my glory: when I am
gone, I Io. 12. 26.
shall be where he is; not in pain, but in blis, where no fire shall purge,
nor water Ruel. 7. 14.
wash; having already dipped my stole in the blood of the lamb.

Christ has said it, you may believe it, his Io. 17. 24.
word is a warrant to your weary souls. Father, I will that they which thou
have given me, be with me even where I am, that they may behold my glory,
which thou have given me. It is his will, and who dares wrest it? the head will
have his members, the bridegroom his spouse, God his elect, and Christ his
redeemed: and where will he have them, but where he is? and that is in heaven.
Popish purgatory is no Palace for Christ his abode; ergo, no place for
Christians to behold his glory.

Nor has Christ said it but sworn it to, in supplementum fidei, to help
faith; that by Heb. 6. 18.
two immutable things, wherein it is impossible that God should lie; First,
promise: and Secondly oath; we might have strong consolation. His oath is this,
never to be reuersed: Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears ^o. 5.
24.
my words, and believes in him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall
not come into condemnation, but has passed from death to life. O happy
hearers* but thrice happy believers, for whose cause the Lord has sworn, in
certainty of your salvation and speedy passage from death to life, without
tuch of fire, meede of merit, or need of Popish indulgence.

One says well, velox est sermo dei, and velocem desiderat habere sequentem.
The word of God is swift, and it requires a speedy Psalm. 147. 15.
follower: if speed in following; much more in attaining: if speed in the
body, much more when it has put it off: if under the cross we groan and go
forward, with how much more speed shall we haste to the crown, when tears
shall be wiped from our eyes, and we shall be translated out of this world,
to reign with God for ever. And if it be true of a glorified body, that
Augustine has, corpus est vbi volet animus. The body is straight where the
mind will; how much rather shall a sanctified soul, Eccles. 12. 7.
disburdened of the body, pass with speed to him that gave it.

Lazarus died, and was straight ways carried Luke 16. 22. Luke 23. 43. Acts. 7.
59. 60.
into Abraham's bosom. The thief upon the cross died, and was that very day
in Paradise. Stephen called and said, Lord Jesus receive my spirit: and shall
we doubt of his desire even then answered? Christ cried upon the tree, father
into thy hands I commend Luke 23. 46.
my spirit, and gave up the Ghost; not down the ghost; speedily, and without
delay: yea, and I am persuaded that it is with every Saint of God in his
particular death, as it shall be at the general doom, all shall be changed at
the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpe: for the trumpet shall blow, and
the dead shall rise; so all shall be changed at the last gasp, and even in the
twinkling of an eye, shall the body turn to earth Eccles. 12. 7.
from whence it came, and the soul to God that gave it. Nescit tarda moli^^^a
spiritus dei gratia. The gifts and graces of God, are without delay: no delay
in the creation: no delay in the redemtion: no delay in the coming of the
holy Ghost, for so dainelie it fell: and shall we surmise a delay after the 2.
Tim. 4. 7
dissolution; after we have fought the good fight, finished our course, and
kept the faith. No ^o, there is a crown of righteousness laid up for thee
Paul, and for all them that love his appearing; I mean Christ who stands
ready with a crown in his hand, over Revel. 2. 10.
the head of all his saints, even when the flesh is off, to put it on.

To go by the stream of all the Fathers, to wash out this error, would
carry me to a sea of matter, for the time impas^ible, and therefore I am
enforced of much to take a little, and of many a few, Leonem ex vnguibus.

Ignatius bath these very words truly Ignatius in h^^ 6. Epistle.
translated. Always reason requires that whilst we have space and time, we
should amend and correll our faults, whilst in this life we have occasion
given of repentance: for it is truly said, after death there is no place nor
time to confess our sins: whereunto accords that of Jerome. Whilst we are
in this Jerome in Gai. 6.
present world, either by prayer, counsel, or comfort, we may help one another:
but after, not Job, not Daniel, or Noah, shall obtain by any entreaty, but
every one shall bear his own burden.

Chryso^l^^e gives the reason of both: Chrysostom. in ^eb. cap. 2. hom. 4.
hoc eni^ cunaorum tempus est; illud vero coronarum, retributionum and
praemiorum; this is the time of swadles, bands, and bicke^ings: but that of
crowns, rewards and garlands.

Cyprian in his first treatise against Demetrian, does fully subscribe to the
same truth, where he says: that after we be once departed our of this life,
there is no more place of repentance: there is no more effect or working of
satisfactions: life is here either lost or won; everlasting salvation is here
provided for by the due worshipping of God and fruits of faith.

Augustine upon his first conversion, sauouring Aug. in se^mone de te^pore.
Ser. ^. 132.
of gentilisme, was doubtful and said of purgatory, it may be there is such a
place, and it may be there is none; but being further grounded in doctrine, and
confirmed in faith, is resolute at the last, and said. Let no man deceive
himself* there are but t^^ places; and as for any third p^^^^* there is no^
at all; he that reigns not with Christ* shall perish with the devil without
all ^^^^^. And in his Hypognosticon. li^. ^.
book Hypognosticon, he is yet more plain, morefull, more abounding in the
^^^ting back of that devised (...) be these. The first place the (...) by Gods
authority believes to be the (...) of heaven: the second place, the (...)
faith believes to be hell, where al runnagates and whosoever to without the
faith of Christ shall taste everlasting punishment. As for any third place we
utterly know none, neither shall we find in the holy Scriptures, that there is
any such.

And as if he would never off this ground, till he had built up the truth, and
removed all rubbish, he is yet upon that again and In his 18. sermon of the
words of the Apostle.
again. There be two habitations or dwelling places, the one in fire
everlasting* and the other in the kingdom that never shall have end.

There is no other place to correct our manners In ^i^ 54. Ep^s^le to
^acedon^us.
and conditions, but only in this life: for after this life, every man shall
have that that he has purchased unto himself in this world.

So then with these few, to shut up the stream of the rest, that still run
in the same current, and to close with their rectified spirits in trial of the
truth, I conclude with themselves. In quo quemque inuenerit Aug. in his 80.
Epist. to H^^ychius.
suus nouissimus dies, in hoc comprehende^ mundi nou^ssimus dies: quontam
qualis in die isto quisquis moritur, tales in die illo iudicabitur. And again,
vnusquisque cum causa sua dormit, and cum causa sua resurgit. Wherein every
man's last day shall leave him; therein Gods day shall find him; as we die, so
shall we be judged, and every man shall sleep and rise again with his own
cause.

As for that our adversaries straynd distinction, of good to heaven, bad to
hell; and meanly mannerd to purgatory: it is a heathenish help, and a Pan^^s
Poem found in the School of Plato, and there first forged upon the anuill of
error; who makes (by the report of Eusebius himself in his book of the
soul) three degrees of men. Some in the Elisian fields, who lived well and
virtuously: blessed souls, in blessed places. Others in Tartaro, whom he
calls (...), past hope of amendment, cursed souls in cursed places. But
(...), such as are curable and venial, he casts into burning floods, there
to make perfect their repentance, and after their purgation receive absolution.
Virgil describes it at large, in his sixth book of his AEneidos.

Alijs sub gurgite vasto, infectu^ eluitur scelus, Uirgil, Aeneid. 6.
aut exuritur igne:
Donec long a dies, perfecto temporis orb, concretam exemit labem etc.
Englished thus.

Some fleeting bin in floods, and deep in gulfes themselves they tire,
Till sins away be washed, or cleansed clear with purging fire:
Till compass^ long of time, by perfect course has purged quite
Our former cloddred spots, and pure has left our ghostly sprite, etc.
And hereat no doubt Augustine aimed August. de ciuit. dei lib. 21. cap. 13.
when he said, that purgatory was one of Platoes doctrines: as also some of
their greatest Clerks and Jesuits, who do not let to confess that purgatory
is found there.

And for conclusion of all these points of doctrine, controuersed betwixt us
and our adversaries; I say of popish pardons and indulgences, Pardon^ reach us
no^.
which lastly they plead, in relief of their dead, and ease of souls
departed, that rest should come by the^: I say, though they be nearest to their
true game, yet are they furthest from their due proof: as may appear by their
own Doctors, to too doubtful, yet doting upon the doctrine, ex ore tuo, etc.

Siluester Prierias has these very words* Siluest. Prierias contra Luther.
Pardons (says he) are not known unto us by the authority of Scriptures, but
by the authority of the Church of Rome, and of the Popes, which is greater
then the authority of the scriptures. Desinat in piscem mulier formosa superne.
A mild beginning, but a wild and woodie ending.

John Mayor is no less doubtful when he Io. Mayor. Senten. 4. distinct. 20.
quest. 2.
a^oucheth, that of pardons little may be said of certainty: for the
Scripture expressly says nothing of them. Touching that Christ said unto Peter,
Unto thee will I give the keys, etc. We must understand this authority with a
corn of salt.

Alphonsus de Castro in his eight book of Alphons. de castro. ^ib. 8.
indulgent.
pardons, says, There is nothing in the Scriptures less opened, or whereof
the old Fathers have less written then pardons: of pardons there is no
mention.

Let Bernard of Clunice blaunch the devise, Bernard, in Sa^a^ia.
and tell the truth of this toy. The devising of pardons (says he) is a godly
guile, a hurtlesse deceit, to the intent, that by a deuo^^ kind of error, the
people may be drawn to godliness. Much like unto many wantons in these our
days, who deem that divinity may go by the drum, whilst they urge pyping
to bring on preaching, and minstrilsie to grace our ministry, with multitudes
in the afternoones, of many our woeful and solitary Saboaths.

But to the matter in hand, and point of pardons; I say with Augustine: O
vanity, Aug. lib. 50. Homil. 36.
selling vanities, to them that will hear vanity: and vain are they that
will believe it. Nay rather believe your own Poets, who durst Mantuan.
freely say: If we have any thing from Rome, they be trisles: it receives our
gold, and deceives our souls.

Say with Veselus one of your own Doctors, Veselus.
Among us in Rome, Churches, Priests, Altars, Masses, Crowns, Fire, Incence,
Prayers, and Heaven are set to sale: yea, and God himself among us may be had
for money.

Say with Budaeus. The Popes Canons seem Budaeus in Pandectis.
not now to guide men's lives, but if I may so say, they rather serve to make a
bank, and to get money.

Say with Becket one of your own Bishops: Becket in Epist to the Bishop of
Mentz.
Rome our mother is become an harlot, and for money and reward lays her self
to sale.

If then for conclusion, my dear brethren, beloved in the best love that ever
was, which is of Jesus Christ: if Saints help not, for that they hear not: if
Purgatory case not, for that it is not: and lastly if pardons prevail not,
for that they reach neither quick nor dead: why do we listen to these
ungodly Sirens? who blacken the air with the fogge of their dearne divinity,
and drive away al comfort from distressed souls, with these woeful outcryes,
and doubtful voices. Help Saints: Purge fire: Pardon Pope. Away away, get you
hence, for Isai. 1. 1^.
who ever required these things at your hands, says my God?

Let only the price of the blood of my Aug. in 14. book upon 15. Psalm.
Lord, avail me unto the perfection of my delivery. He is my peace: he is my
rest: in life and in death Christ is to me an advantage. O death where is thy
sting? Hell where is thy 1. Cor. 15. 55
victory? Pope where is thy pride? Purgatory where is thy gain? Thanks be
unto God, who has given us victory, peace, and rest, thorough our Lord Jesus
Christ. And now who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen: it is God
that justifies, who shall condemn? it is Christ which is dead, yea rather
which is risen again, who is also at the Romans 8. 33. etc.
right hand of God, and makes request also for us. And what shall divide us
from his love? Shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword? shall life or death? In all these we are more
then conquerours, in him y^ loved us. And I am persuaded, that neither death,
nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, neither height nor depth, Pope, nor Purgatory shall be able to
separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Ven^endo
veniet. Peace shall come; they shall rest from their labors, every one that
walks before him.

Thus you have heard (I hope to your comfort) of peace after war, rest after
toil, life after death; and a blessed being after a miserable bondage, to all
Gods children, upon the last farewell, with this woeful 2. Part.
world. It now remains we come to the second 1. Observe the generality of
Gods gifts, ^et with limitation.
part, and declare out of the text, to your further comfort, who are partakers
of the blessing; even all such as are parties to the cause, and none but such
as have walked before him.

All have not faith; so says Paul. All have 2. These. 3. 2. Isai. 57 21.
not peace; so says the Prophet. Not every plant is for this Orchard. Not
every tree is for this building: each peeble stone may noy lie with the
Carbuncle, Topaze or Chrysolite, in the habitation of his holiness. For
without shall be dogs, and inchaunters, and Revel 22. 14. 15.
whoremongers, and murderers, and Idolators, and whosoever loves or makes
lies: But blessed are they that do his commandments, that their right may be
found in the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city.
Blessedness with the Apostle is to such as do his commandments; Peace and
rest with the Prophet, is to such as walk before him. Both absolute in the
promise of God: both defeaseable on the condition of man.

It is an ouerruled case in school divinity. Comminationes and promissiones
diuinae sunt hypotheticae, comminations and promises from God are conditional,
ever limited within the bounds of our obedience or disobedience.

Yet forty days and Niniue shall be destroyed; Jonah. 3 4.
if Niniue repent not: and I am persuaded, that yet not many years, and the
whole world shall be destroyed, if the world amend not. Excellent things were
spoken Psalm. 87. 3.
of thee, thou City of God: but now execrable things are done to thee, for
that thou art fallen from God. Bethel is become Bethauen, the house of God, the
house of iniquity. Heudomus antiqua quam dispari domino dominare! Thy ruins
are relickes of thy sin, and judgments of thy God.

God promised a Priesthood of continuance, with an eternal covenant: and said
he would never fail Solomon of a son to succeed in that throne of
government; if his 1. King. 9. 3. 4.
children would do right and walk in his ways: but when they failed in the
condition, the Lord failed in his promise, that they might know his promises
are conditional, and his mercies ever with limitation.

Ask and ye shall have; seek and ye shall Math. 7. 7.
find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you; so says Christ a merciful
Messiah: but with this implication; if ye ask not, ye have not; if ye seek
not, ye find not; if ye knock not, it shall not be opened unto you. And I
pray you what is implied in all the titles and dignities of Christ? where
either he says of himself, or others of him, that he is the way, the truth
and the life: but Ioh. 14. 6.
that we should walk in him, shine through him, and live by him: or what of
this? that he is the door, the shepherd, and the vine? but that we should
enter, be guided, and grow together in him. A Priest he is to please our God.
A Prophet to instruct our Heb. 7. 17. Acts 3. 22.
souls: and a king to conquer our enemies. All defeaseable on our behalf: if
we yield him no sacrifice; no care; no obedience; I 1. Tim. 6. 15. 16.
say, for conclusion, whatsoever Christ is to me, I am nothing to him; if
Eccho-like, and by reflection, I do not answer to his holy and heavenly
call, with my true faith and due obedience. Qui fecit te sine te, non saluabit
te sine te. He that made thee without thee, will never save thee without thee.
We Ephesians. 2. 10.
are his workmanship, created to good works, that we should walk in them.

In which walking I do further observe out of the text, that God is no
respecter of persons, but every one that walks shall have peace, and find
rest, whether Jew or Gal. 3. 28.
Gentile, circumcised, or uncircumcised, man or woman, rich or poor, bond or
free, master or servant, saint or sinner; if he believe, he shall have life;
if he walk before him: Peace shall come.

Nescit Religio nostra personas, nec conditiones hominum respicit: Our religion
takes no knowledge of persons, nor respects the conditions of men. Old
Simeon in Luke 2. 25. Luke 1. 41. 44.
the temple, young John in the womb, poor Bartimeus begging, rich Zacheus
climing, the hard hearted Centurion standing by the Mark* 10. 46 Luke 19. 4.
Math. 27. 54 Luke 23. 40.
tree, and the thief hanging upon the cross, confessing the truth, and
walking in the sunneshine of their Christ: all indifferently receive his die,
gain peace, and find rest.

This Peter saw in vision from heaven; and this he preached powerfully on
earth; when upon the sight he opened his mouth, and said, of a truth I perceive
now that God is Act. 10. 28. 33. 34. 35.
no respecter of persons, but in every nation he that seareth him, and works
righteousness, is accepted with him.

Again, I gather out of the text, that as God is general in his gifts; so
must we be particular in our receite. Every one shall 2. The particularitie of
our raceit.
be saved: but by his own faith. Every one shall have peace, and find rest:
but by his own walking. Another faith though never so precious, is not
sufficient: another walking, though never so righteous, is not available to
my rest. The just man Halac. 2. 4.
shall live by his own faith, so says Habacucke, 2. 4. Every one shall hear
his own burden: Gal. 6. 5. and 7.
and every one shall have his own honor. And as we sow, so shall we reap: not
another mouth to kiss; not another tears to wash; not another hairs to
wipe the feet of thy Christ: but thine own mouth; thine own tears; thine own
hairs, Luke 7. 37.
must kiss, wash, and wipe, with Marie, the feet of thy Savior.

All that thine hand shall find to do, Eccles. 9. 10.
doc it with all thy power: thine hand, not another hand: ^^y prayers, not
another prayers: thine hearing, not another hearing: thy feet, not another
feet, shodde to the Ephesians. 6. 15.
preparation of the Gospel of peace; yea, and thy communicating of Christ,
with all the benefits of his passion, not another, shall benefit thee, to
thine everlasting salvation. Quid tibi de alterius dono, si tu non dederis: why
art thou proud of another man's gift, and thou give nothing?

Another clothes will not warm me; another meat will not feed me; another
gold will not enrich me; another heart will not cheer me: no more say I, can
another faith save me. Only my faith in my Romans 13. 14.
Christ, whom I have put on, my walking, mine obedience; must warm me, must
feed me, must cheer me, must enrich me, and therefore I say with Thomas upon
Ioh. 20. 28.
mine own tuch: My God, my Lord. Not God in general, but my God in
particular; mine by promise; mine by stipulation: mine by oath: mine by free
gift: mine by purchase: mine by participation of gifts and graces: my Shilo:
mine Emmanuel: my Jesus.

Of this particular faith and application, spoke Isaiah the Prophet, when he
said, Razili Isa. 24. 16.
Razili. Secretum meum mihi, Secretum meum mihi: My secret to my self, my
secret to my self. And this is the spirit of application, by which the
children of God, both can and do apply the medicine to the malady: for what
is the sweetest balm, if it be not broken? The best receite, if it be not
taken? Or the soueraigndst plaster that can be devised by art or cunning, if
it be not applied to the wound or sore? From this spirit of application spoke
David, when he said, O God thou art my God: as Mary also Psalm. 63. 1.
in the garden, when she said Rabboni, my master: yea and John too, whose head
lay Ioh. 20. 16.
near his masters heart, even the Disciple whom the Lord loved, when he said,
We know that we are of God, though all the world 1. Ioh. 5. 19.
lie in wickedness.

But the sons of Beliall, and the reprobate from God, if you mark them well,
you shall find that they are seared with a brand, 1. Tim. 4. 1. 2
and so, as neither they ca^, nor do apply the mercies of God unto themselves.
Caine could make no use of it, when he said, My sin is greater then can be
pardoned. Nay Genesis 4. 15.
(says Augustine) not so: Mentiris Caine, mentiris, mayor est dei misericordia
quam omnium peccatorum miseria: Thou lie Caine, thou lie, the mercies of
God are above all man's miseries. Pharaoh was ^bdurate, Exodus 5. 2.
and could make no use of God either in majesty, or mercy, when he said, Who
is the Lord, that I should hear his voice, and let Israel go? I know not the
Lord. Judas that son of perdition, when he cast in the ^0. pence ( a Zach.
11. 13.
goodly price whereat he was valued) though he mourned much; yet had he no
help, for that he was hopeless, when he could not apply mercy unto his
misery: but said, I have sinned in betraying the innocent blood. Matthew. 27. 4
The innocent blood, not mine; as if he had no portion in his Christ.

And for the Devils, they are so far from challenging any good by Christ,
that they disclaim his mercies, person and all, whilst they say: Ah, what
have we to do with thee, Mark. 1. 24.
thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? Such disclaim be far
from you my brethren, and from all the Saints of God, both in life and death:
nay rather clamate prore vestra* claim your due, and say with blessed Paul,
Christ is become unto 1. Cor. 1. 30.
us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. Yea, and be bold to
say yet more: his body is in heaven, there shall I find it mine: his
divinity is on earth, there do I feel it mine: his word is in mine ears, to
beget him mine: his sacrament is in mine eyes, to confirm him mine: his spirit
is in my heart, to assure him mine: Angels mine, to camp for me: Prince mine,
to rule for me: Church mine, to pray for me: Pastor mine, to preach for me: All
mine, whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or
death, whether they be things 1. Cor. 3. 21. 22. 23.
present, or things to come, even all are mine, I am Christ's, and Christ is
Gods.

Of all this I infer and conclude with my text, that every one must walk, if
he will have peace; and who will be cured, must care to apply his sweet Savior
unto his sinful soul. Thine own gain must buy balm to bury thy Christ; nor
must thou send it, but bring it, with the devout Maryes, to the sepulcher. The
Queen of Saba (though a 1. King. 10. 1.
Queen) yet she sent not, but came her self to hear the wisdom of Solomon.
And the Matthew, 2. 1. 2
wisemen of the East, herein showed their wit, that after they had seen his
star, they turned not, but hasted to the place of the babes abode, with this
inquiry: Where is he which is borne King of the Jews? vidimus stellam eius in
orient, we have seen his star in the East, and are come to worship him:
venimus personaliter, we come our selves, we acknowledge our misery, venimus
adorare humiliter, we adore him our selves, we acknowledge his majesty, and we
worship eum singulariter, him alone: we subscribe to the Unity: and that there
is no name under Acts 4. 12.
heaven, whereby men must be saved, other then by the glorious name of Jesus
Christ. As and if they might say, we have seen in soul, we are come in body,
there is the star, O where is the babe? Care is in our hearts, and cost is in
our hands, here is our gold, let him be crowned a King: here is our
frankencense, let him be deified a God: here is our mirth, let him be buried a
man: all his by gift, all ours by grace: what he gave us, we give again; and
here we have it to bestow upon our blessed Savior: from a far country have
we followed him, and walked before him: and therefore now we feel peace, we
have found rest to our weary souls.

From the generality of Gods gifts, and 3. The proper object of our faith and
walking.
particularity of our receipt, come we now to the proper object of our faith
and walking, contained in these words, before him. By which indefinit speech, I
hold the holy ghost has reference to one Christ, the way, the truth, and the
life of all Christians. No way, but by him: no light, but from him: no life,
but in him. Him I say, nor is he expressed in plainer terms, for that his name
is s^^ret: and till Gabriel came from heaven, Luke 1. ^1. 3^. 3*
with his saving name Jesus, and statute of additions, Luke 1. 31. from the
first age to the latter days, I mean from Adam, until Shilo came, they but
hacked at it. God in Genesis 49. 10.
Paradise lapt up this secret in the seed of the woman. Jacob in Shilo, which
by interpretation Genesis 3 15.
is sent. Moses in this, Mitte quem miss^ruses: Exodus 4. 13.
Send him whom thou should send. Daniel thus, One of the Saints said unto
Dan. 8. 13.
a certain one. Jeremy thus, He that should call, Iere. 23. 6.
he is the lord our righteousness. The Lord in respect of his, to deliver his
Church: righteous, in respect of his doom, determinable upon the world: ours
in respect of grace, appeasing his father. What should I say more? Isai. 7. 14.
sometime they call him by the name of Emmanuel: sometime they call him
wonderful, Isai. 9. 6. 7.
Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting father, Isai. 8. 3.
the prince of peace. Maher-shalal-hashbaz, Make speed to the spoil, have to
the pray; with this pregnant prophecy of him, that a virgin should inuiron a
man. And nearer Iere. 31. 22. Luke 2. 25. 28 Luke 23. 51.
the days of Christ, they called him, Isreal's expectation, Isreal's
consolation, Isreal's redemption. And now that I have told thee, and thou have
heard all these speak, I ask with Solomon, what is his name? and what is
Prou. ^0. 4 Prou. 25. 1.
his sons name, if thou can tell? It is the gldrse of God to keep a thing
secret, but the Kings heart will seek it out. And it is an honorable seed
that fears the Lord, but a ^^clu^ 10. ^0.
more honorable seed that finds him. Elder times saw him a far off,
coming swadled in types, figures, shadows, and ceremonies: but we have seen
the truth, body, and substance of our Christ. We have him come^ and the ^^yle
of the Temple is Matt 27. 51
^ent from the top to the bottom, whereby we have ready passage into the
hol^est of holies, even Christ Jesus the Lord, whom the 1 ^^^. 1. ^2.
Angels desire to behold. We heard of him at Ephrata, and we have found him in
the Psalm. 131. ^.
woods, tied to the tree, and pierced through, with his body crossed, and soul
cursed, for the sins of all the world: and now sits in Romans 8 34.
heaven, a mediator and pledge of our inheritance, having le^t his spirit to
live by, and his word to go by: and this is he whom the Prophet meant in this
word him, the object of our faith, and way to walk in.

No man can ascend, but by him that did Io^ ^ 1^. Genesis ^^ ^^.
descend, and that is Christ: the ladder Jacob saw at Pinael: the clowd by day,
and pili^r of fire by night, which guided Israel in the desert; Exodus 13. 21 22.
the kings high way to heaven, and blessed hold of happy dwelling. No Paradise
without this tree: no perfume without this balm: no building without this
stone: no sacrifice without this lamb: I say, no God without Christ, in this
wicked world. The light of the day is conveyed unto us by the Matt. 11. 27
Sun in the firmament: so is the brig^^nes of heaven, by that Son of
righteousness: a Planet in the midst of Planets, to lighten all above, and all
below, as whom blessed Angels desire to behold, and blessed men covet to adore.
Life is conveyed from the ^art, through the veins to all the vital parts: so
is salvation from the Father through Christ to all his living members. Out of
Eden went a river to water the garden, being divided into four heads, it
compassed the whole world: Out of heaven flowed the stream of Gods mercy, in
and through our Christ, whose graces divided diversely, all the earth is filled
with his glory.

What should I say more? Christ is a mutual help: to the Father one, to us
another. Christ a mutual help.
An hand to the Father, by which he reaches us: an hand to us, by which we
reach him. The Fathers mouth, by which he speaks to us: our mouth to the
Father, by which we speak to him. Our God is a consuming Heb. 10. 19. 20
fire, and without Christ the veil, we cannot abide the brightness of his
glory: for what is our misery, to meet with his majesty, but in the temper
of his mercy? which mercy-seate, and all is Christ. As then our words, are
messengers of our minds, and semblances of our souls, to pa^ley with our
friends: so is the Christ, the son of God, the image of the Father, and mouth
to instruct his de^rest Saints: nor only a Ioh. 14 6.
mouth to speak by, but an eye to see by, and the foot way to go by, as it
is many text, Peace shall come, and rest shall ^e reserved for every one that
walks before him.

So then I dare avouch boldly, think what thou will, and without Christ, it is
an Ioh. 15. 5.
evil thought: say what thou will, and without Christ, it is an evil word: do
what thou will, and without Christ it is an evil deed: tread where thou will,
and without Christ, it is an evil way. Christ is the life of the world, and
heir of al things, without whom, ^^^. ^. ^ ^. C^r. ^. 5.
I can possess nothing that good is, either in grace, or in glory. He, he, is
the salt Elis^^ did throw in, to sweeten the waters of ^ericho, with these
words: Thu^ says the Lord, ^. Ki^. 2. 21.
I have healed this water: death shall no more come thereof, neither barrennes
to the ground.

This faith (my dear brethren) is right, for it hits the sovereign good, and
thus to walk, is to walk before him. None but he cares, none but he cares,
none but he guides, non but he saves: and he is but one Acts 4. 12.
as you here see, and will be alone in all his courses; without mixture,
^^thout ^edley; first, last, midst, and all, filling all; yet ^ined from all,
in the glorious work of our repair. None but he bare our sins: none but he
pleads our cause: none but he purchased our place: none but he traceth our
way; he has trod the wine press alone, Isai. ^3. 3.
and there was none is help. The cup of bitter affliction whereof he tasted,
agonizing in Luke 22. 42.
the garden, for no entreaty with his Father could pass from him to any other.

Oye Papists, at last (in the name of God) be wise, and warned; leave off your
mixtures; away with your medleys: and if you desire either peace to your
souls, or rest to your bodies, only walk before him. Meddle with no merit of
man, pardon of Pope, meede of Martyrs, or pride of your own works, unwisely
wrought. Make no mixtures of the sacred water and blood, which flowed from the
side of Christ, with the blood of Hales and Becket, or with the enchanted holy
water of an unhallowed Priest. Never match your triple crown of gold and
diamonds glittering, with the single crown of thorn piercing: And never
think the puri^ie of the word, will abide the mixtures of your traditions* the
text, your glosses; the Church, your Idols; the ark of God, your Dagon; nor
the poor priesthood of Christ, your papal pride and Popedom.

Look for none other, but that the body and soul of your religion, like the
image Nebuchadnezzar saw, p^tcht together of gold, silver, brass, iron, and
clay, will and shall Dan. 2. ^^, 32, 33, 34, 35
^inner, when the stone cut out without hands shall smite the same. Your coat
is of ^i^^ie Deuteronomy. 22. ^1
wool^ie, not for our wearing. Your family like Micha of mount Ephraim, and
not Judge. 17. 5.
for our dwelling: for as he had, so have you, an house of gods: an Ephod, and
a Teraphim: he would serve both God, and Idols; and so do you.

And as for us, who believe and look after better things, we say with the
poor Paralyticke, Ioh. ^. 15.
in disclaim of all others help, it is Jesus that made us whole. And we say
with Abraham when we go to sacrifice, thou servant Genesis 22. 5.
stay here, I and the child will walk alone. And now for conclusion by the
Lords command, that we are for Bethel, we have with Jacobs family, put away
the strange gods that were among us; we have cleansed our selves, and changed
our garments, plucked off our earings, and put all into the hand of our Jacob,
our Elizabeth, who faithfully for her God, and graciously for her people, has
buried Pop^rie, with it execrable things, under an oak at Shechem, Genesis 35. 1.
2.
never to be revived, never to be found out, Amen, Amen.

Lastly for an end, since the time is past, and I fear much I have wearied your
patience ouer-long: From the proper object of our faith and walking, come we to
the progress, 4 And lastly, a progress, and increase in religion.
and increase of both: contained in this word walks. Where you may see as in
a glass chrystaline, that a christian life is not a standing still, but a
walking on, and growth in the doctrine of faith, and practice of godliness.

The first blessing that ever God gave after the creation, was increase and
multiply, Genesis 1. 28.
which took it effect, not only in the creatures by propagation of kind, but
also in his gifts and graces, by renouation of minds, new birth, growth in
knowledge, true faith, and godliness. All the trees in Paradise did grow, and
all the floods in Paradise did flow; to teach us that we must not stand still
at a stay, lest either we be fruitles, and so accursed; or become puddle
water, and so unprofitable.

The finest cloth will wear, if it be not used; the purest gold will rust, if
it be not handled; the sweetest balm will corrupt, if it be not broken; and
the cleerest fountain will stincke, if it run not: So are the graces of God,
and doctrines of the beginnings of Christ, though of themselves pure as gold,
sweet as balm, clear as a fountain; yet in respect of us unprofitable, if
we proceed not further, but there stand still. Foundations they are I grant,
for the scripture has said it, Hebr. 6. 1. But what of that? and what is the
foundation, be it of Beryll, Topaze, or Chrisolite? if you build not upon it,
and proceed no further in the work.

In the first of Ezechiel, where the vision of Ezech. 1. 12. 17. 24.
gifts and graces are described, it is said, that the beasts, winds, and
wheels went as the spirit lead them, and they returned not when they went
forth: and if at any time they stood, they let down their wings as
unprofitable then, until the Lord had put power in them of further proceeding.
And in the same Prophet again, where the like gifts are described by another
vision, you Ezech. 47* 1 2 3. 4, 5, 6, 7, etc.
may find, that from under the threshold of Gods sanctuary, the waters issue
out, and they run East, West, North, and South* The^ma^ with the line
measured a thousand ^ubi^s, and the waters were to the anckles. Again he
measured a thousand, and they were to the kn^os: he measured again, and they
were to the loins: after he measured again, and it was a river impossible;
signifying that the graces of God should never decrease, but ever abound in his
Church. The fishers should spread out their nets from En-gedi, to En-egl^um.
The trees should grow upon the brinke of the river, on this side, and on that
side, with leaves not fading, fruit not failing* leaves for medicine, fruit
for meat, and fruit ever new, according to his moueths: As for the miry
places thereof, says the Prophet, and the maris^ies which stand still, they
shall not be wholesome, but they shall be made ^alt pits.

You may remember when Aarons Priesthood Numb. 17. 8
should be confirmed, all the tribes with their names cast their rods into the
mercie-^eate, and none blossomed, but Aarons. You are a kingly people, and a
royal 1. Pet. 2. 9.
Priesthood: o bud, bloome, blossom, and bring forth fruit worthy amendment
and newnes of life.

David said of his Saints, Ibant de virtute Psalm. 84 7.
in virtutem: they went from strength to strength; and from faith to faith, as
it is Romans 1. 17.
written: from the faith of the promise, to the faith of the performance: from
the faith of the letter that kills, to the faith of the spirit that gives
life: from the faith of Christ his humiliation in misery* to the faith of his
exaltation in glory: from the faith of the first resurrection from sin, to
the faith of the second resurrection from death: from the faith of the law
wounding, to the faith of the Gospel curing: from the faith of the Prophets
^owing, to yt faith of the Apostles Ioh. 4. 35. 36.
reaping: from the faith of the old sacrifice giving to God, to the faith of
the new sacraments receiving from God: in a word, from the faith of the old
covenant, wherein God speaks, to the faith of the new restament, wherein
Christ bleedeth. Of al which, I may conclude with Haymo, Ex side qua co^cipitur
cord, profertur ore, exhibetur opere, iustus viuit: By faith conceived in the
heart, professed with the mouth, and practiced with the hand, the righteous man
lives.

Paul is plentiful in this doctrine, and having once laid the ground of faith,
he urges nothing more then the increase of faith. He tells the Romans, That
by the Gospel, Romans 1. 16. 17.
the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith. He tells the
Ephesians, that they Ephesians. 4. 13.
must grow unto perfect men, even unto the age of the fulness of Christ: As
also, that they Ephesians. 3. 18. 19
must know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, and so be filled with
all fulness of God. He tells the Philippians, how he longs Philip. 1. 8. 9
after them from the very heart root in Jesus Christ: and in longing, falls a
praying: and what is the matter of his prayer? but that their love might abound
yet more and more in all knowledge, and in all feeling. With whom I will
conclude, and close with my text: As you have received Christ Jesus the Lord;
so walk in him, rooted, and built in Col. 2. 6. 7.
him, and established in the faith, as ye have been taught, abounding therein
with thanksgiving. Where observe my brethren, that not rooting, building,
establishing, teaching, nor abiding in the faith is sufficient, without
abounding: for frustra nititur qui non innititur: And he that continues not to
the end, shall not be saved.

Take heed then my brethren, and be not Prou. 3. 7.
high minded, but fear: you that are come out of Sodom, Remember Lots wife:
go not Luke 17. 32.
back, nay look not back: you are of Judah tribe, and have taken a profession
upon you; and be not like the children of Ephraim, Psalm. 78. 9. 10.
which being harnessed, and carrying bows, turned themselves back in the day
of battle. James said well, Ye ask, and have not, because Iam. 4. 3.
ye ask amiss: So may I say, many walk, and obtain not, for that they walk
amiss. Some in such idolatrous and superstitious heresies: some in such
clyming and presuming ambition: some in such greedy and insatiable
covetousness: some in such biting and gnawing usury: some in such swearing and
forswearing of themselves: some in such extrauagant and vagabond lusts of the
flesh: some in such rebellions and conspiracies of hearts and hands, as of whom
I may say (as I have told you often) and now tell you weeping, they are enemies
to the cross of Philip. 3. 18 19.
Christ, their end is damnation, their belly is their god, their glory is
their shame, and they but mind earthly things.

As for such as creep with the Crab, and slow it with the Snayle; I say they
walk amiss; for creeping Christians are no Christians: And cursed; ^ be that
does the work of Iere. 48. 10.
the Lord negligently. An Aldermans pa^e is too solemn for a Saint of God: O
that Iehu* his walking might be a mirror to all Magistrates, Ministers, and
people, how to walk, of whom it was said upon the sight, The marching is like
the marching of Iehu the 2. Kin. 9. 20.
son of Nimshi: for he marches valiantly* or that Caesar's faculty of
performance, were in the most of us, of whom Lucian thus writes: Caesar in
omnia praeceps, nil actum credens, cum quid superesset agendum. Lucian. 2.
Pharsal^a.


Instat atrox.

Which I may english thus: Caesar is forward to all good, and thinks nothing
well done, whilst any thing is left undone. And so for the conclusion of all:
Now way the fruit this tree benreth, and consider the crop this harvest
yields, I mean the blessing they gain, who are faithful to their Christ,
and walk before him.

Is it ^mperiall rule in this world? Is it wealth, riches, or abundance of
earthly happiness? Is it health, strength, or beauty? These have their times;
but they perish with the possessor: nor to this end came Christ into this woeful
world, that he might give to the faithful walkers, fading and vanishing
delights; but an abiding solace, even Ioh. 10. 10.
life, and life in abundance, with peace to the soul, and rest to the body; I
mean eternal blessedness to both, wherein is the auoydance of all evil, the
fruition of all good, the society of all Saints, the fulfilling of al desires,
with unspeakable glory, which never shall cease: whither God bring us, for his
Christ's sake, to whom be honor and praise both now and ever. Amen, Amen.

And now brethren beloved and longed for (I say now) that I have finished my
course, ended the text, and closed up the book, give me leave a little to
turn me to the dead, and to say unto you on her behalf, this Scripture is
fulfilled in your eyes and ears this day, Peace shall come; nay, Peace is
come. For she entertained in her heart the father of Heaven, which is the God
of Peace: and she loved Christ the King of Peace: and in braced in her soul
the Comforter which brought that Peace to her, that passes all understanding.
And for that I may say no more, I can say no l^sse; she kept the condition of
my text on earth, and therefore her estate is vndefeasable in heaven. She did
walk before him in life, therefore she has Peace: nor did she forsake him in
death, and therefore now has she found rest to her weary soul.

To walk in the word, is to walk with him; and to go by the light thereof,
is to walk before him. Let her painfulnesse in reading, and practice in
following, even from a child, speak to her commendation in that behalf. You
heard in the former Sermon, how eight chapters a day, was her task, each days
reading, a full week of Sabboths, to sanctify a Saint. ( So sanctify Ioh.
17. 17.
us good Lord with thy truth, thy word is the truth.) And to make good the
practice, I have credibly heard, that not eight, but many eights a day, have
been her sighs, sobbes, and gronings, for the breaches of the law (she read)
both by her self, and others; ever opening the book with these words: A good
God, a bad people, much mercy offered, little received; for every one seeks
his Philip. 2. 21
own, and few the things that are of Jesus Christ: And still clasping the
book thus: The glory of God is to conceal a thing secret; Prou. 25. 1.
but the Kings honor is to search it out. And what are we but a kingly
people; and a royal priesthood? Besides her private reading, I might here
speak of her private prayer, and much meditation, with Isaac in Genesis 24* 63.
Psalm. 119. 5^ 62.
the field: with David in the night. I might tell of her weekly repair to
hear the word, in the great congregation: of her monthly communicating with
his Saints there, with her feet ever shodde to the preparation of the Gospel
of peace; and never well, but when she was ^o walking before him.

But I leave her life and come to her death, whereunto (as I am told) she
walked, as Christ did to Caluary, with much Mark. ^5. 20 21.
care, and many agonies, compelled with Simon of Cyrene to bear his cross;
thereby to help out the sufferings of her sweet Savior, Coless. 1. 24.
and to bear in her body and soul, the marks of Christ Jesus, like spangles
of Gal. 6. 17.
gold, to grace her in her trial, whereby in the end she became more
glorious, both to God and man. It is said of the kings daughter that she is all
glorious within, and that Psalm. 45* 13.
her raiment was of needle work: peace within, but prickings without. Multi
vident punctiones, sed non vident vnctiones: Many see our crosses, but they
feel not our comforts; so said the Saints of old: and therefore to such as
think it a strange thing, that the Saints of God should have their fi^ie
trial in this world, by bickerings, ^. Cor* 1^. 7. 8. ^. Luke ^2. 31. 32. Luke
24. 25. 20.
buffetings, and winnowings of Satan. They are fools and slow of heart to
believe, like the two disciples who went to Emmaus, thinking still of their
Christ crowned, but never crossed, till the Lord had rectified their thoughts,
and laid a necessity of trial upon all flesh, beginning with himself thus:
Ought not Christ to have suffered Luke 2^. 26.
these things, and to have entered into his glory? Whereby I gather: no peace,
without war: no rest, without toil: no crown, without a cross: no
entrance, without suffering: no glory, without shame and shaking in this
woeful world.

But happily you will say, some be never broken in heart, nor yet have any
conflict with Satan, sin, or death: they are feared with no temptations, nor
do they grieve because of him whom they pierced. They have made a covenant
with the grave, and Isal. 28. 15.
a league with hell: of such I say, their case is desperate, and their
condition is no better then the beasts fat^ed up in the best pastures, reserved
for the slaughter, of whom Job speaks, when he says, The houses Job. 21. 9.
etc.
of the wicked are peaceable, without fear* and the rod of God is not upon
them: they spend their days in wealth, and suddenly they drop Job. 20. 9.
etc. Psalm. 73. 4.
down to hell. As also David, there are no bands in their death: they have no
knots, as it is in the original, they are not troubled like other men,

There be many in ye world, which would feign have a Church of sugar, or of
velvet, as one says: they would feed upon manchet, and tread upon Roses. I
mean in serving God, they would be freed from afflictions: they love Canaan,
but they loathe the wilderness: they like the crown, but they love not the
cross: Shilo runs sweetly, but Jordan is to too turbulent: all like
Zebedeus his sons, James and John, who Mark. 10. 35
sought to sit in the seat of honor, but not to drink of the cup of
afflictions. But the truth is, you may believe it, the way to heaven is not
strowed with flowers, but set with thorns: and happily you shall find it in
your experience true, that Whosoever will 2. Tim. 3. 12.
live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution.

Quater luctatus est Jacob: in vtero cum Esau; in via cum eodem; in Mesopotamia
cum Bernard. in Sentent. Genesis 25. 22. Gen* 32. 3. Genesis 31. 22. Genesis 32. 24.
Laban; in Bethel cum Angelo. Jacob wrestled four times: in the womb with
Esau: in his journey with Esau: in Mesopotamia with Laban: and at Bethel with
the Angel. To teach us, that if we will be the Israel of God, Gal. 6. 16.
we must arm our selves for all trials at all times, in all places, and with
all persons, retaining no longer the name of Jacob as supplanting our troubles:
but the name of Israel as prevailing with God, and never Genesis 32. 28.
leaving him without a blessing.

Excellent things are spoken of thee thou Church of God: A woman clothed with
the Revel. 12. 1. etc.
Sun crowned with the Stars, and treading upon the Moon; yet travailing in
birth, pursued with the dragon, and ready to be devoured both her self, and
her silly babe: But heaven sung her triumph, against the accuser of the
brethren, and he was cast down, which accused them before God day and night.
To be accused before men is much; but to be accused before our God is more. Now
and then to be accused is much: but night and day is more. And such are the
persecutions of Gods children in this world, they never have an end, nor ever
shall, till the world be without hatred: the devil without envy: and our
nature without corruption.

Think it not strange (my dear brethren) concerning the fiery trial which
did 1. Pet. 4. 12. 13.
befall this Gentlewoman, to prove her at her end, as though some strange
thing had come unto her; but rejoice rather, in as much as she has been
partaker of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall appear, she may be
glad and rejoice. Let him that thinks he stands, take heed he fall 1. Cor.
10. 12. 13.
not. There has no temptation taken her, but such as appertains to man: And
God was faithful, who would not suffer her to be tempted above that she was
able: and even gave the issue with the temptation, that she might be able to
bear it.

When the beholders thought the Whale Jonah. 1.
had swallowed up Jonah to kill him, he swallowed him up to save him. The Lord
hid his face from her, and she was troubled. But ye are witnesses, who were
present at her death, that his wrath endured but the twinkling of an eye, and
though heaviness Psalm. ^0. 5.
continued for a night, yet joy came in the morning, when you saw her fined
like gold, renewed like an Eagle; soring high into the bosom of Christ, with
this powerful speech, and godly ouation, at her end: Hear O Lord, and have
mercy upon me: Lord Psalm. 30. 10. 11. 12.
be thou my helper. Thou have turned my mourning into joy: thou have loosed my
sack, and girded me with gladness: therefore shall my tongue praise thee, and
not cease. O Lord my God, I will give thanks unto thee for euer-more.

Well she is gone, and now behold her seat is empty, and her grave is full:
and me thinks for the present, we feel her want on earth, whom God has
found in Heaven. Our prayers less powerful: our preaching less precious: and
our Psalms less melodious, on her behalf. For you all know, that there she
sat, and there she sung, there she read, and there she prayed, there she heard
the word, there she received the Sacraments, there lately she lived, and there
now she is dead: therefore may I say with the Prophet, All flesh is grass, and
Isai. 40. 6.
all the grace thereof as the flower of the field: But comfort your selves in
hope of a joyful resurrection; as also in respect of her holy life, blessed
end, and most happy state in glory: and since she is gone, let it be remembered
as a sacrament of her rest, that she went upon a day of rest, one of the
chiefest of Sabbaoths, and high feast of Pentecost: even then that she should
ascend, when the holy Ghost did descend, by which spirit, she was sealed up to
the day of redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30.


Worshipfully was she descended; but most honorably (may I now say) is she
ascended: yet behold, the husband mourns for that he has lost a wife: the
mother mourns for that she has lost a daughter: the brother mourns for
that he has lost a sister: which is (me thinks) not much unlike the mourning
of Hadadrimmon in the Zach. 12. 11.
valley of Megiddo. And yet this is not all; for we Preachers may mourn most,
for that we have lost an auditor; who heard with reverence, felt with passion,
and followed with perseverance. But beloved, what we have lost, heaven has
found, and the holy Angels rejoice at the gain: in the mean time the Lord of
Heaven, supply the want upon earth, and increase the number of faithful
professors. In Sionis gaudium and Anglo-Papistarum luctum. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.
A BRIEF DISCOVRSE OF THE CHRISTIAN LIFE and death, of Mistress Katherin
Brettergh, late wife of Master William Brettergh of Bretterghoult, in the
County of Lancaster Gentleman; who departed this world the last of May. 1601.

With the manner of a bitter conflict she had with Satan, and blessed conquest
by Christ before her death, to the great glory of God, and comfort of all
beholders.

Micha. 7. 8. Reiovce not against me, O mine enemies: though I fall, I shall
rise again: And when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a lig^^ unto me.
Psalm. 37. 37. Mark the upright man, and behold the just: for the end of that
man is peace.

LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston. 1602.

TO THE CHRISTIAN Reader, grace and peace in Jesus Christ.
WHen Achimaaz the son of Zadoc requested that he might be the messenger to
bring David word of Absoloms death, Ioab would not suffer him: Thou shall 2.
Sam 18. 19. 20.
not (says he) be the messenger to day, but thou shall carry news another
time, but to day thou shall carry none; for the Kings son is dead. He knew
David's affection was such, that the news of his child's death would be most
heavy to him, and the messenger himself not welcome for his message sake.

This is all our infirmity, no tidings more grievous to us then when we hear
of the death of those whom we love. The Parent bewayles his Child, the Husband
his Wife, the Friend laments the death of his Friend, and we think it the
loss of another friend to depart with this our grief. Jacob mourned for
Joseph his son, that he would not be comforted of a long Genesis 37 35.
season, but thought he would weep for him as long as he lived When the
Amalekites had 1. Sam. 30. 4.
burned Ziklag, and led away captive the men's wives and their children, David
and his company wept, till they could weep no more. When Lazarus dred, his
sisters Martha and John. 11. 19.
Mary were much discomforted for him. G^egory Nazianzen reports, that when
Basil the Moned. in Basil.
great died, even the wisest men in the city strove to exceed one another in
weeping and complaining for his death: And as for my self (says he) now I am
bereaved of the fellowship of such a man, what shall I do but either dye, or
live in misery? Which way shall I turn me? What shall I do? What counsel
shall I take, now I have lost him that was my comfort? So heavy a thing we see
it is to be severed for a time from those that are dear unto us. One only
thing there is, which is able in this case much to temper our affections; when
we see our friend to die in the Lord; that is, in comfort of conscience, and
assurance of salvation through Christ. And this his comfort he expresses
outwardly unto us, by performing those duties which are required of a man when
he dies, and so he makes a joyful and a holy end. When our friend departs
this life in this manner, we have just cause to take his death the more
comfortably. And thus it pleases God many times to stir up some (especially
such as in their life time have a care to pursue Religion, and to keep
themselves undefiled of the world) at their death to express wonderful
comfort of spirit, and to show forth such fruit of Religion, that we wonder at
it, and acknowledge the extraordinary work of Gods spirit in them. They
wrestle against temptations, they confess their faith, feel the assurance of
their salvation, condemn their sins, exhort the beholders, praise God, sing
Psalms, wish to dye, that in their death they are better Christians then ever
they were in their life.

This blessed departure God gives to many, for diverse good purposes. 1. That
the world may know that peace is the end of the just, and comfort in death is
the portion of the righteous. 2. That his eternal truth in our holy profession
may appear to be able to comfort us, not only in our life, but in our death
also, when all other comforts forsake us. 3. That our enemies may see our faith
is not in vain. 4. That the weak by their example may be encouraged to a holy
life, when they see it bring with it so happy a death, and that they may be
strengthened against the fear of death, seeing it is always comfortable to
those that lead a godly life. 5. and finally, that the friends of the
departed, by their heavenly departure, may be admonished not to mourn so much
for their death, as to rejoice for their life, and to thank God, that ever it
was their lot, in any degree, to be joined or matched with so blessed servants
of God.

This Gentlewoman, Mistress Katherine Brettergh was one of this number: her
life, as long as God continued it, was dear to those among whom she was, as
the life of a friend might be. Her husband, friends, kinsfolks, brethren,
sisters, and all the godly that knew her, inioyed a great blessing of God of
her: and her death (no doubt) was grievous to her husband, as the death of a
virtuous yoke fellow. And if worldly affection would have helped it, it was the
same in him that David's was to Absalom his son, when he mourned for his
death: O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom; 2. Sam. 18. 33.
would to God I had dyed for thee, o Absalom my son, my son! But sure her
death was such, her behavior in her sickness so religious, her heart so
possessed with comfort, her mouth so filled with the praises of God, her spirit
so strengthened against the fear of death, her conquest so happy over her
infirmities* that such as loved her most have greatest cause to rejoice in her
death, and by seeing the wonderful work of God in her, to learn to renounce
their own affections.

This is the thing I thought with profit might be presen^^d to the view of
others also that knew her not: for when I had for my own private use and the
use of my friends faithfully collected (out of the fresh memories of those that
were present, and eyewitnesses as well as my self) and set down the manner of
her sickness and death: I considered that the knowledge thereof could not but be
welcome to al those that desire to die the death of the righteous. And so the
same causes that moved me to collect it, gave me also occasion to publish it. I
remembered the saying of one, That it is great piety to set forth the Nazianz.
Monod. Basi^ ij.
virtues of the departed, if they have excelled therein; yea it is a means to
increase grace in our selves. I thought so great mercy of God showed to one
among us, ought not to be forgotten, but should remain to us and our children
an example, to teach us how good God is to them that love him, and to assure us
that he will never forsake us; but, in like manner as he did her, help and
comfort us, when we shall by death be called unto him. I considered the ungodly
and uncharitable tongues of the Papists abiding in our country, who, since her
death, have not ceased to give it out that she died despairing, and by her
comfortles end* showed that she professed a co^fortles Religion. Wherein they
bewray their malice and madness, and show themselves of what generation they
are, even a people (as the Prophet Jeremy says) which bend Iere. 9. 3.
their tongues like bows for lies: and (as David says) make ready their
arrows to Psalm. 11. 2.
shoot at them which are upright in heart. And lastly, when I remembered the
censure given by our Savior Christ of the woman, that poured costly ointment
on his head, a little before Matthew. 26. 7. ^. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13.
his Passion, though some of his Disciples unjustly blamed her for the same,
saying, What needed this wast? yet he himself did not only excuse her for that
fact, saying, she did it to bury him: but also commanded that wheresoever the
Gospel should be preached throughout the world, there also that which she
had done should be spoken of, for a memorial of her. Even so, seeing this
virtuous Gentlewoman has bin unjustly accused, by some popish persons, I
thought it sit, that she should not only be justly excused, and cleared from
their false and slanderous reports: but also that a true history of her holy
life, and christian death, should be annexed to those learned Sermons which
were preached at her Funeral, by two godly Preachers, and are now published in
print, that where soever they going before as the Gospel preached; there also
this brief history may follow after, to be seen and read for a memorial of
her.

These reasons moved me both to collect and publish this treatise, the doing
whereof I trust, as it will be acceptable to many, so can it be hurtful to
none, unless possible it be to the kingdom of darkness. If there be any
unsatisfied, and yet desire any other reasons, I tell them further, it is to
bury her, and the last balm that ever I can power upon her head: it is my
farewell, and the last duty which I can perform unto her; and therefore I hope
both excusable in me, and also profitable to others, because many things here
spoken of her deserve imitation. And this I assure the Reader, that howsoever I
may sometimes miss the for me of words which possibly the Gentlewoman used in
her speech; yet have I faithfully set down the substance of the matter, and
for the most part also faithfully related the words themselves, and reported
nothing but that which is most true, and testified by persons of good and
honest report, as they are named in the margent: out of whose fresh memories
the substance of that which I publish was presently set down. This I humbly
desire thee, good Christian Reader, to accept. I had no other odours wherewith
to imbalme her, I am but the penman, the thing it self was her own, wrought
in her by Gods spirit: and therefore not costly to me, though more comfortable
to me, and all that heard it, then I can now express: and I doubt not, but it
shall yield thee also the same comfort, and give thee occasion both to praise
God, and imitate her well-doing, which the Lord grant.

Amen.
A Postscript to Papists.
PEace and truth to as many of you as pertain to God.) I am moved in
conscience to deal with you, by this manner of writing, because of the false
and slanderous reports which (I hear) some of your faction have blazed and
diuulged abroad, concerning the death of Mistress Katherin Brettergh, a
Christian Gentlewoman, whose life indeed was holy, and death most comfortable.

It is no novelty, or new thing, to hear a lie from a Papist, but rather a
principle of your religion: Therefore if you plead antiquity, as a mark
infallible to know your Church by, for that point take it you: you have it from
the Devil your father by Job. 8. 44.
tradition diabolical, holding the same still in these succeeding ages so
succinctly, that (for ought I know) you will not leave it, till you be shut
forth of the heavenly Jerusalem, and cast into Tophet, which is prepared
Revel. 22. ^5
of old for liers and inchanters.

Yet it pities me to think of some of your poor silly seduced souls, how
simple they be in Gods causes (and yet malicious) for the most of my popish
neighbors (what others be I know not) fly but a very low pitch, being people
altogether void of learning, wit, and civility. The furthest drift of their
religion, is to say, the Pope is a good man: to say, it is safest to do in
religion as most do: to thump hard their breasts when they pray: to cross
them when they meet a Protestant: and to spit out when they name the Devil:
to gallop over a Pater noster, or Ladies Psalter upon their beads: and to say,
it was a good world when Mass was up, for then all things were cheap:
finally, some of them will say, I believe as my father believed (God baue
mercy on his sweet soul) and I hope to go to him when I die). This is the
very length, broadth, and depth of most part of Popery where I dwell: every one
can reach this mark, and few can go beyond it.

Another opinion of these sottish people, is to say: If a man dye like a lamb,
and pass out of the world like a bird in a shell, he is certainly saved,
although neither holiness were in his life, nor God in his mouth; grace in
heart, nor yet repentance, faith, or feeling at his death. Such blockish ends,
a reverend man does count fearful, saying, such men Master Greenhom in his
Sermon of humility.
(excepting their fetherbeds and pillowes) dye liker beasts, then Christians.
Again, if the violence of any disease stir up impatience in a mu^ at his
death, straight say our country-Papists, there is a judgment of God, serving
either to discover an hypocrite, or plague a wicked man (especially, if they
proteste the truth of Jesus Christ, as this Gentlewoman did) then they cry, and
shout; see the effect of this religion, see the end of these men: where Master
Perkin^ in his ^^ cause of ^^^ng wed.
as indeed the truth is far otherwise, as a learned writer does notably
determine.

It seems you Papists, or who else so ever do judge thus, are little
acquainted with Scripturos* nor yet were ever of Salomons mind* who speaking
of outward things happening to man, does say, The same condition Eccle. 9. 1.
is to the just, and to the wicked, both one to the pure and polluted. David
saw the wicked without bands in their death, noit^er were Psalm. 73. 4. 5.
they troubled like other men, and yet were they ropnobates, and the children
of Satan. But if you Bapists had David's spirit (which the Devil would not that
you had, for David's kingdom) you would judge more charitably of Christians
deaths (especially such whose lives were holy) notwithstanding any outward
accident that might happen: at the least you ought rather to mourn, and
conceal it, then to laugh and deride* the same: for when Saul was dead 1. Sam.
31. 4. 5.
in mount Gilboa, who was a notorious wicked man, and his death fearful
indeed, for he killed himself, what did David? rejoice, or lament? Though
Saul in his life time was always his deadly enemy, yet mourned he and wept
for Saul and Jonathan, saying, Tell it not in Gath, nor publish it 2. Sam. 1.
17. 18. 19. 20.
in the streets of Askelon, least the daughters of the Philistims rejoice, and
the uncircumcised triumph. This did David, which was a man after Gods own
heart, though you (as it should seem) rather delight to solace your selves
with the falls and infirmities of Gods children, then once to be touched as
feeling members of one body, with an inward sighing, and sorrow for the same.

But now touching the death of this Gentlewoman, whereat some of your Romish
faction have bragged, as though an oracle had come from heaven to prove you
Catholics, and us Heretics: Blessed be God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Devil and you are all deceived, and God, even our mighty Jehovah, has you in
derision, Psalm. 2. 4.
and shall laugh you to skorne, who has not only frustrate your fond
expectations, but made your folly manifest to all men. This Gentlewomans life
being more holy, and her death more comfortable, then possibly any of yours
can be, so long as you continue Papists. The truth whereof, I have
compendiously set forth in this present treatise following, as will be
testified by persons of honester note and condition, then any of your
generation. And thus for this time I end, praying God to forgive you your sins,
because you know not what you do, and to open your eyes, that you may see your
errors, and come out of Babylon.

Amen.
That by some taste of the truth of that which befell the undoubted child of
God Mistress Katherin Brettergh, in the time of her sickness near before, and at
the instant of her death, the mouth of the sclanderer (which was soon opened)
might be some deal stopped; the expectation of the godly in part satisfied,
and prejudice in all happily suspended; one both an eye and eare-witnesse
thereof, caused these few lines, as an Epitaph, to be fixed nigh her Hearse.

Id est.
Katherina, quia Christi sanguine mundata, igneaque te^tationum exploratione
Iun. 3. 1601. sepult. trices. primo Maij cum dormiuisset.
purgata; Mundis, eodemqus modo purgandis omnibus, tum quae passa est tum etiam
eorundem exitum testatissim. cupit.

TRue it is I strone: But 'twas against mine enemy.
Strongly I struggled; It was my strongest adversary.
Strongly, not in my self, but in my euer-helper strong:
Strongly; alas weak woman weakly strong:
Strongly, though faintly* which was fleshes infirmity:
Strongly, and doubtfully, through my soes lying subtlety:
Strangely (I grant) till strength it self in weakness was s^e^^ strong.
And Savior mine did in the battles throng,
Plainly display his banner-booke in open field:
Which seen, mine adversaries all, began shrink, fall, yield:
So Christ the victor searching the spoi^e, taking his pray,
Me found for him, took to him: So I past from you away.
Witness hereof my often'pplied faith's confessions:
Witness my prayers, plain^s, tearefull eyes, heart yearning meditatio^s:
Witness my sweat, strong trembling, thirst, my bi^ning ^ca^e,
Peace, joy, passage; and all hearts that present then with mine did beat.
But be all silent: One for me the truth will tell:
My witness, now, in heaven, with whom I crowned dwell.
And learn by me, with God and's word your childhood to acquaint,
Then aged, finally (though hap's at times) you shall not saint.
Si non testantis side, Monentis charitate Moueamini.
An^iphonic^s eidem.
It Is not unlike (Christ's dea^e) such conflict you endur'de:
The members must be like the head, we are assur'de.
'T was not amiss, you did so fi^rce hot sirie trial bide:
To have pure gold, some seven times is tried.
It were unmeet the servants better then their Lord should find:
The Captain pass the pikes, the soldiers stay behind:
'T is meet, for whom Christ drank off all that bitter cup,
They of the same with him a little dram should sup.
And though your life, your birth, your virtuous education,
Your holy course in Reading, Prayer, Meditation;
Meekenes, patience, pity, and religious chastity,
Both in your married state, and free virginity,
Did vvorthilie import you were the same
You did profess, and as did sound your Kathe^n.
name:
Yet that your death proved cleerer seven fold,
You t'he Christ's member, seruent, soldier, and gold.
Noutheticon.
Learn all by this and others more just Abraham's breed,
Borne in the Church, nursed of her breasts, begotten of immortal se^d.
Learn you that stand, have peace, feel joy, see light,
Partake God's spirit, tasting his grace and heavenly gift,
The time may come that you may fall, war rise, and peace seem strange,
You joy with anguish, light for deaths shadovv may exchange*
Satan may buffer, Gods spirit drive you to the wilderness,
The book mouth sweetning, be to your bellies bitterness.
Learn ye that in these heavy changing^ be;
God changes never, never do his graces die,
Graces fountain runs ever, it flows abundantly:
We do not always thirst, seeld called come: often drink we sparingly.
Learn you that in these blessed feelings have no p^^t*
Nor of the bitter changings feel the smart*
Your wretched state, who living are as dead withouten sense,
Who dead shall ever live tormented* going hence.
Learn all, judge not before the time: happy and blessed is he,
Who of the silly humbled poor does judge advisedly.
Edw. Aspinwall.

Katherina.
Pura: Christo qu^^^ purgata.
Vita, Christo praparata.
Morte, Christo dedicata.
Coelis, Christo coni^gata.
W. F.

The holy life and Christian death, of Mistress Katherin Brettergh.
THis Gentlewoman was borne in Cheshyre, the daughter of John Bruen of
Bruenstapleford Esquire, well descended, and of an ancient house. Her
education before her marriage was such, as became the profession of the
Gospel, in godliness and purity of life and Religion, and well beseemed the
house where she was brought up. The Stapleford.
Scriptures she knew from a child, and by reading thereof, gained such
knowledge, that she was able readily to apply them when occasion was offered,
as we may see at the time of her death, and that so fitly, and effectually,
that she seemed to have made them her daily meditation. For the things of this
world she was moderate, and sober, and by her Christian life and death, she
might teach many Gentlewomen, how vain the pleasures and fashions of this
world are, and how far unable to bring that peace to a distressed heart, that
the embracing of true Religion can.

She used not to gad abroad with wandering Dinah, to dancing greenes, markets,
Genesis 34. 1. 1. Sam. 1. 9. 12.
or public assemblies; but rather with Hannah did choose to tread upon the dust
of the sanctuary, and walk in the ways of Sion; yea, with David rather to be
a door keeper in Psalm. 84. 10.
the house of God, then to have society with the wicked, or to dwell in the
tents and Tabernacles of the ungodly. The Sabbath day was always dear and
welcome to her, what time she would not be without the word preached, though
many times she went far for it. Her delight was still to consecrate it
glorious to the Lord. And as it is said of Josiah, 2. King. 22. 19.
his heart melted when he heard the law; so may it be said of her, her heart
was so tender, and full of compassion, that oftentimes she was seen to hear
Sermons, read, pray, and meditate with tears.

She made conscience of all sin; yea, of the least sin, such as worldlings
count no sin: she never used to swear oath great nor small; nor yet to abuse
her tongue with vain or unseemly speeches; no not so much as a iest-lye, or
immodest word; neither durst she name the name of God, or take his titles in
her mouth, without great reverence. In private speech where she might speak
with profit, she did it so well, that her speeches might have been delivered by
a stronger vessel then her self: her words being so well seasoned, and
proceeding from such a sanctified heart, did always minister grace to the
hearers.

To read, to pray, to sing, to meditate, Psalm. 16. 3.
was her daily exercise; and her chiefest delight was in the holy society of
the Saints upon earth (which I say not for any cause, but only to show the
fountain from whence her godly end flowed, and that the world may see some
there be, which choose rather to be joined with the people of God, then to enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season; and Heb. 11. 25.
these I doubt not have chosen the better part.) Finally, the precepts of the
Lord were precious unto her, for from her childhood she feared God and walked
before him: both knowledge and sanctification did join in her, the fruits and
effects whereof did appear in her life, and was seen at her death, to the
glory of God, and comfort of all beholders.

She was not like the simple Popish women of our days, which are ever
learning, 2. Tim. 3. 6. 7.
and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth; but rather like the
noble men and women of Ber^a, which received the word Acts. 17. 11. 12.
of God with readiness, and were able to discern of Paul and Silas preaching.
But why do I speak of Popish women, whose understandings are darker then the
darkness of Egypt? Let us come and examine many other which seem to detest
Popery, and ask them a reason of their faith; they can tell you a tale of
their ruffes, and their pride, and their vanity; but for Religion, it is the
least thing they regard, or seek to know: which I speak not so much to solace
my self in the sins and simplicity of others, as earnestly desiring all
Gentlewomen, that either knew this holy saint of God, or hereafter shall hear
of her, instead of your glasses at home, wherein you prick and prune, and pin
your selves, to look into this glass before your eyes, that so her life, and
death, may be an example for you to follow.

When she was about twenty years old, (by the consent of her self, and her
friends) she was married to a young Lancashire Gentleman, Master William
Brettergh of Bretterghoult near Liuerpoole: one that likewise embraced
Religion sincerely, and for the same endured many grieuances at the hands of
Papists.

Two years and more she lived after she Anna Brettergh.
was married, and had issue only one daughter: during which time, this couple
lived together in such mutual joy and comfort, as well beseemed the children
of God, which make profession of his truth. And although this Gentlewoman came
from the habitations of Abraham, to dwell in Psalm. 120. 5.
Sodom, amidst the tents of Kedar, that is to say, among inhumane bands of
brutish Papists, enduring many temporal grieuancos from them; yet her
knowledge, patie^n^^* mild inclination, and constancy for the truth was such,
as that her husband was farther builded up in Religion by her means, and his
face daily more and more hardened against the devil, and all his plagu^^
agents; the Popish Recusants, Church P^pists, profane Atheists, and carnal
Protestants* which swarmed together like Hornets in those parts.

It is not unknown to Lancashire, what horses and cattle of her husbands were
killed upon his grounds in the night, most barbarously at two several times by
Seminary Priests (no question) and Recusants that lurked thereabouts. And what
a loss and hinderance it was unto him, being all the stock he had on his
grounds to any purpose* This fell out not long after she was married to him;
yet this was so far from dis^laying her, or working such passion* in her, as
are common to her sex, that she rather John VVrightint^n Esqu^er. Richard Orme.
Raph Heaton etc. and many more.
rejoiced, then sorrowed; turning it into matter of praising God, and
submitting her self to his good providence. Often she would have (...)* It is
good that such things be* but w^^ be to them that do them. It is good in God,
there by to chasten his children, and prevent some sin, which he saw us like
to fall into. It is good in respect of Gods Church; that the weak may be
confirmed in the truth, and that Papistrie may be disgraced, when the world
shall see such wickedness flow from it. It is good in God, that so the wicked
may be without excuse at the day, of judgment, when their consci^nc^ shall
tell them* that howsoever God suffers them to do such villani^ for some just
cause known to himself; yet they commit it only of malice and revenge.
Oftentimes also in these vexations, she would have said; the mercies of God are
infinite* who does not only by his word; but also by his justice, make us fit
for his kingdom. Little do our enemies know* what good by these things they
do unto us, and what wrack they bring to their own kingdom, while they set
forth the wickedness thereof. Many times she would pray that God would
forgive them, which had done them this hurt, and send them repentance: and she
would call upon her husband, that he would do the like, and bless them that
cursed him. And for Matthew. 5. 44.
fear least her husband should fail in that point through infirmity and
weakness, as it is said of Job, who offered sacrifice for his Job. 1. 5.
sons, least peradventure they should sin, and blaspheme God in their
hearts: so she never failed, but daily prayed unto the Lord to sanctific her
husbands thoughts, and direct his heart aright, only to seek Gods glory,
without either desire of revenge, or satisfying his own affections. So humble
was her spirit, so careful to avoid and prevent sin, both in her self and
others; and so mild of nature, that as Jacob with his mildnes Genesis 33. 3. 4.
softened the malicious heart of Esau his brother: and David by his kindness in
the cave, changed the fury of Saul, into ^. S^^. 24. 17. 18.
weeping and confessing that David was more righteous then he^so she by her
meekness, humility, and unspotted carriage in the world, forced some of the
adversaries to Religion, to speak well of her.

For her life, she was well reported of all that knew her. Pitiful and
bountiful was she to the poor, and slacked no opportunity to do good
wherein she could; but constantly held her course, and kept her times of
praying, reading, and meditating, (wherein she had plentiful gifts) and
continually used the same at such times as were fitting for her state, sex, and
calling. At the exercises of Religion, as prayer and instruction in her
family, she would not be wanting: besides private prayer, and meditation which
she omitted not but used daily, both in her chamber, as also abroad secretly
and solitarily in the orchard, garden, or fields, as Isaacs manner was. In
reading the Genesis 24. 63.
Scriptures she used evermore to task her self, eight chapters a day at the
least, and for the time which she saw evil or idly spent, without doing some
good, she used to call the time of temptation. Many times also she would read
some godly writer, or expositer of Scripture, or in the book of Martyrs; and
was seen to weep most bitterly, when either she had read of that which
touched her affections near, or of the cruel matyrdome, which the dear
children of God were put unto, by the cruel and wicked tyrants of former dai^s.

For Popery, she sa^ it ^o gross and foolish, Exodus 23. ^3 Psalm. 16. ^.
^^^es. ^. 3. Judges. 6. 3^ 3^. ^^^lus 4. 25 28.
that she would not one name it, except it were to argue against ^^, but never
for it: so zealous was she of Gods glory, and loved the truth so entirely,
that she would not once open her mouth to plead for Baal.

Sin above all things was hateful unto her, for there at she would have
grieved, as well when she had seen it in others, as in her self. O(...)or
two examples I cannot omit, wherein she bewrayed a worthy spirit, sanctified
by the spirit of God, and prepared for all the assaults of Satan. On a time, as
her husband and she were riding toward the Church, he was angry with his man:
Alas husband (quoth she)! fear your heart is not right toward God, that can
b^ thus angry for a trifle: And we^ping she said further* you must pray against
this your affection* and always be sure your anger be of God, (...) else how
dare you appear this day before his minister? And offer up your prayers in the
public congregation of the saints of God? Another time, a tenant of her
husbands, being behind with his rent, she desired him to bear yet with him a
quarter of a year, which he did: and when the man brought his money, with
tears she said to her husband: I fear you do not well to take it of him,
though it be your right* for I doubt he is not well able to pay it, and then
you oppress the poor. So great a compassion had she of other men's wants, that
all things being duly considered, and rightly weighed, me thinks I may say of
her, as Paul said of Timothy, Phil. 2. 20.
I know none like minded.

Thus after she was married, she continued in the things she had learned, and
held her profession with such sincerity, that the common enemies to our
religion (the very Papists) had nothing to say against her, but confessed her
life was vnreproouable. And as for the godly that knew her, they always
acknowledged that modesty, and virtuous carriage in her, joined with knowledge
and practice of all the duties of religion, that they had just cause to report
of her, as of a sound and faithful professor of the Gospel.

Two years, and something more she lived with her husband, till about
Whit^ontide, it pleased God to send her that sickness whereof on Whitsunday
1601* she died. A^^^ Dom. 1^^1.


Her sickness took her in the manner of a hot burning Ague, which made her
according to the nature of such diseases, now and then! to talk somewhat idly,
and through the tempters subtlety, which abused the infirmity of her body to
that end, as he oftentimes uses to do in many, from idle words, to descend
into a heavy conflict, with the infirmity of her own spirit; from the which,
yet the Lord presently and wonderfully delivered her, giving so joyful an
issue to the temptation, that she might well use the words of the Prophet, as
afterward she did, For a moment O Lord thou did hide thy face from me,
for a little ^^^^. 54. 8.
season, but with everlasting mercy thou had compassion on me. On Saturday
seuenight May. 23.
before Whitsunday, what time she sickened, she began to feel some little
infirmity and weakness of faith, more then she had wont to show, but she soon
overcame it. On May. 25.
Monday night it increased upon her, and the assault of the enemy began to be
sharp, and so continued till the next day at afternoon; what time God
delivered her, and sent her peace, and comfort of conscience, and so increased
the same in her continually till she died. The manner of her affliction was
this.

First, the severity of Gods justice, and M William Brettergh.
the greatness of her sins began to come into her mind, which much afflicted
her, M William Fox. M. Edward Aspinwall. M. John Brettergh. Mistress Maud
Brettergh.
and she would often speak of it. Then she accused her self of pride, that
she had delighted too much in her self, and her beauty. Afterward she
thought she had no faith, but was full of hypocrisy, and had not embraced
religion so earnestly, nor glorified God so worthily (especially with Mistress
Scholastica Fox.
her tongue, which often she repeated) nor loved him so sincerely, as she ought
to have done. Sometime she would ^ast her Bible William VVoodward.
from her, and say: It was indeed the book of life, but she had read the same
unprofitably, Elizabeth Challoner.
and therefore feared it was become to her the book of death. Sometime she
would say her sins had made her, a pray to Satan; a spectacle to the world; a
disgrace to religion; and a shame to her husband, kindred, and all true
Christians: and here she would weep bitterly. Sometime the original
corruption wherein she was borne, troubled her, and the sins of her parents,
and the common parents of all, the eaters of the forbidden fruit: as if that
had made her unworthy of God, and were then laid to her charge. Many times she
accused her self of impatience, bewailing the want of feeling Gods spirit, and
making doubt of her election, and such like infirmities. She wished, that she
had never been borne, or that she had been made any other creature, rather
then a woman. She cried out oftentimes, Woe, woe, woe, etc. a weak, a woeful,
a wretched, a forsaken woman, and such like pitiful complaints against her
self, with tears continually trickling from her eyes. She complained of
grievous thirst, such as all the water in the sea could not quench (and yet
when drink was given her, sometimes refused it, sometimes took a very little
of it): Sweat burst out upon her exceedingly, and sometime her body burned
extremely. So it seemed the sorrows of death hemmed her in, and the griefs
of hell laid hold upon her. Sometimes she was very dull in prayer, and once
when she should have said, Lead us not into temptation, she made a stop,
saying, I may not pray; I may not pray (being interrupted, as she said, by
Satan) and so showed much disco^fort: howbeit she was not left till she could
both pray, and make confession of her faith with special application to her
self. Besides these fiery darts of Satan, she was once or twice troubled with
vain speeches, as of her child, the killing of her husbands cattle, that she
thought she saw a fire by her, etc. But every one saw that these things
proceeded of weakness, emptines of her head, and want of sleep, which her
disease would not af^oord her.

These fits though they were for the time griouous to her self, and
discomfortable to her friends: yet were they neither long nor continual, but
in the very midst of the^, would she oftentimes give testimony of her faith,
striving and fighting against her temptations. Many times when the standers by
judged her afflictions at the sharpest, would she call upon God, lifting up her
eyes and hands to heaven, and desire him to give her strength against her
temptations. Many times with a cheerful countenance she would desire those
that were by not to faint, or give her over, but constantly to pray, and help
her against the tempter. Once in the midst of her temptation, being demanded
by Master William Fox* whether she did believe the promises W. Fox.
of God, nor no? and whether she could pray? she answered: O that I could* I
would willingly, but he will not let me. Lord I believe, help my Mark. 9. 24
unbelief: which she pronounced with a still low voice. And when he replied,
that if she had a desire to pray and believe, she did pray and believe, and
that so effectually, that hell gates should not overcome her, according to that
of the Apostle; God 2. Cor. 8 12.
accepts it according to that a man has, not according to that a man has
not: she was much comforted thereby.

Once after a great conflict with Satan, ^^. Bretterg^.
she said: Satan reason not with me, I am but a weak woman, if thou have any
thing to say, say it to my Christ; he is my advocate, my strength, and my
redeemer, and he shall plead for me. Sometimes when she was a^^ucted with the
accusation of her sins, and want of feeling Gods mercy, she would with many
a pitiful ^ob and much weeping, pray to the John Bretterg^.
Lord Jesus Christ to help and comfort her, a poor, woeful, distressed woman,
and request others to pray for her. And when she was moved to make confession
of her ^ath, she Ed. Aspinwall.
would do it oftentimes, saying the Apostles Creed, and concluding the same
with words of application to her self: I believe the remission of ( my)
sins, the resurrection of ( my) body, and eternal life ( to me) Amen. And
having done, she would pray God to confirm her in that says, ever concluding
with the Lords prayer, as devoutly and reverently as any that were present. A
Christian friend, who by his daily attendance William UUoodward.
on her, discharged the duty of a faithful Christian, standing by told her,
that no temptation had befallen her, but that which appertained to the child of
God, and that God is faithful and true, and had promised to give an issue with
the temptation: whereat she expressed great comfort.

Master Edward aspinwall, a faithful professor of the truth, and a true
Israelite, was much with her in the time of her sickness, and ministered much
heavenly instruction unto her, and comforted her at all times with apt places
of scripture, meeting with her temptations: and so put the sword of the spirit
into her hand. He propounded to her the most plentiful comforts of God unto his
Church, in the 40. 41. 42. and 43. Isai. 40. 1. 2. 28. 29. 30 31. Isai. 41. 8.
9. 10 13. 14. 17. 18. Isai. 42. 1. 2. 3. 4 5. 6. 7. 8. 13. 14. 15. 16 Isai. 43.
1. 2. 5 25. Math. 11. 28.
Chapters of Isaiah, uttered in such speeches and phrases, as might most fitly
answer her discomforts. Also he directed her to consider the Passion and
Prayer of our Savior Christ, for all his, John 17. Math 26. Luke 22. 23. But
specially did he often inculcate that sweet inuitation of our Savior: Come
unto me all you that travel and be heavy laden, I will ease you. But the
difficulty she had sometimes to apply these generals unto her own soul in
particular, made the case more full of anguish to her self, and fearful and
lamentable to the standers by: Albeit she acknowledged Gods majesty, mercy,
faithfulness, and truth; yet still complained she of her own weakness, and
unworthiness, and could hardly appropriate each thing to her self.

To help her somewhat herein (for properly otherwise, it is the peculiar work
of the holy spirit of God, to persuade the heart and soul of her particular
interest in these general promises) she was told that the Almighty, who was
merciful, as she had proved, and faithful as she confessed; intended all these
mercies to as many as he did call and make promise to. And that he called her
she must needs confess, both because that then she not only her self read,
but heard others read those blessed words of God unto her: and also for that
in former times, she had been touched with the love of God, and that his truth:
and had well profited in the detestation of sin, and imitation of her Savior
in a holy life. And for y^ proof thereof, she was wished to remember in former
times her Baptism, her frequenting of Sermons, and often receiving the most
comfortable repast of the holy Communion, her daily, and almost continual
exercise of reading, meditating, and praying, etc. Also he assured her, that
neither the present agony she was in, nor the speeches then in that distress,
tending to the signification of despair, extorted from her, were any just
causes, why either she, or any that heard her, should judge fearfully of her,
because all might see the fault was not in her will, as appeared by her
prayers, confessions, plaints, sighs, tears, and groans to God for mercy, and
full assurance in the blood of Christ; but in her judgment, not able at that
time to discern the ways of the Almighty: And therein (he told her) she was
made comformable, not only to many the holy Saints of God, Job, Jeremy, David,
and others more, but also to her head, our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, of
whom we read, that some have cursed the day of their Job. 3. 1. etc. I^^e. 20
14. Job. 6. 4 8. 9. Job. ^^. 9. I^m^n^. 3. etc.
birth, and called for their end, and darkness to cover them: They have been as
men without hope and swallowed up in despair: They have cried how the wrath of
God has torn them, and the terrors of the almighty have fought against them:
They have had no peace in their Psalm. 6. 3.
souls, nor comfort in their consciences, their prayers have been shut from
God, their sins have been terrible unto them, crying that their Psalm. 38. 4.
etc.
iniquities had gone over their heads, and were a burden too hea^^e for them to
hear: And they ^.
have thought themselves ^^^ ^^^les of shame and reproach, and ^s monsterr
v(...)* They were grieu^d for the sinn^s of their (...)nd complained that they
^ere (...), and most miserable and wretched ^n the world; yet for all this were
they still the d(...)ildren of God, as you ^^^ this day. Nay (says he) I pray
you consider, what ^orments God inflicted upon his dear Son on the Cross*
did he not cry out, My God my Matthew. 27. 46. Matt. 26. 38 Hebr. 5. 7.
God, why have thou forsaken me? He complained, that his soul was hea^y unto
death; yet was he heard in that which he feared, and God delivered him. After
this, he read unto her the 22. Psalm, wherein David complained partly of his
own, but principally of the most bitter anguith which our Savior Christ
endured, and suffered in body and soul, putting her in mind, that her case
was not so bad as David's, nor much unlike our Saviors, who endured all that,
and more for her; and therefore she had no cause to fear, seeing Christ had
obtained victory, and would undoubtedly be with her, deliver her, and eternally
glorify her with himself for evermore; and so continually he propounded to
her such comfortable places of scripture as might meet with her infirmities.
This greatly refreshed her, and gave her occasion many times to call upon God,
for increase of grace, and deliverance from her grievous temptations: The which
God of his accustomed goodness vouchsafed, on Tuesday, about three a clock in
the ^^aij. 26.
afternoon, what time she felt herself in very good measure delivered from
all her former fears and afflictions. But on Saturday next after, which was
the day before her death, she was wholly released, and filled with such inward
comfort, that it greatly affected us that saw it.

This is the sum of that temptation which she had, wherein what can any man
see that might give just occasion to report our religion comfortles, or the
Gentlewoman dyed despairing? This we are sure of, that to be without
temptation is the greatest temptation: as also, that nothing befell her, which
has not befallen the holiest of the children of God. And she that considered
her own corruption, which how great it is in the best of Gods Saints, I need
not say, and bethought her self of the punishment due thereto, if God in
justice should reward her; no marvel if she brake out sometime into heavy
complaints. I make no question it was the work of God in her, to suffer Satan
to accuse her, and afflict her for her sins, that so she might the better see
them, and consider the haynousnes of them, and before her departure repent her
of them, and betake her wholly to Christ for the saving of her soul. And if it
pleased God thus to make her possess her sins before she dyed, let those
which never yet knew the weight of their sins, be wise in time, and remember
that he shall never have his sin forgiven, which first or last does not
undergo a holy despair for it, and acknowledge nothing to remain in himself,
but matter of judgment and condemnation: and comfort and eternal life to flow
alone from Jesus Christ.

And as for those, which have learned to scoff at the terrors of Gods
children, and to censure such, as a^e at sometimes cast down with feeling the
anger of God against sin, let them consider the blessed ^s^ue that God gave to
the troubles of this Gentlewoman, and let them acknowledge his work in her.
And if they will not do this, but proceed to traduce the dead, then let them
call to mind, those of the Popish crew, and persons of greater note among
them, then this Gentlewoman was, which have dyed most fearfully indeed.
Cardinal Sadelot, For, Acts and Mon. page 190^ 61 page 1908.
Iacobus Latomus the Divinity Reader at L^u^^ne* Ho^me^ler the Friar,
Guardacus, Bo^elius, Crescent^^^ the Cardinal, Stephen Gardener Bishop of
Winchester, and diverse the bloody persecutors in Queen Mary's time, and some
of the Popes themselves, as namely, ^ran^^^ the (...) of the ^^^ popish persons
(...) down certain examples of the ^^sui^^ to this purpose.
Pope Sixtus Quintus of late years: all which died most fearfully and
miserably, and showed manifest signs at their death, that their popish
superstition was the condemnation of their souls. And if they will judge of my
religion by my death, let them acknowledge their religion is the doctrine of
desperation, and that the truth and faith which was able to fill the heart and
tongue of this blessed Gentlewoman at her death, with such heavenly comforts,
is the doctrine of Christ, revealed from heaven, that we might live and dye in
it.

From Tuesday, till Whitson-eeuen, her comfort still increased, and temptations
vanished away. See would the^ very cheerfully join with the company in prayer,
and singing Psalms, as occasion offered, and performed all such duties, as was
meet for her in that estate. One day, her brother (...) Esq^^er.
Master John Bruen of Bruenstapleford, came from his house in Cheshyre to visit
her, and William Brettergh. Will Fox, John Brettergh, William VVoodward*
John Holland, Ma^^d Brettergh, Scholastica Fox. 1. Pet. 4. 17. 18.
after some kind salutation passed between them, he said unto her: Sister, be
not dismayed at your troubles, but remember what the Apostle says, that
judgment must begin at the house of God: To whom the answered, as one that was
also very ready in the scriptures, with the very next words following, True it
is, and if it begin at us, and the righteous shall scarce be saved, where shall
the sinners and ungodly appear? After that, she prayed with him, and sung a
Psalm with him, as one that received great comfort by him, and acknowledged in
him, a heart set to seek the things belonging to the kingdom of Christ. During
this time, in the night with such as waked John Holland, William Brettergh*
William VVoodward.
with her, she would pray and rehearse for her comfort many texts of Scripture,
and namely, the 8. to the Romans, many times co^cluding and closing up y^ she
read, or repeated, with prayer, and most comfortable uses and applications
thereof to her self, with show of such joy and comfort, (...) John Holland,
William Brettergh* William VVoodward* VV^^l. Fox.
that the hearers rejoiced at it. When she received any meat she prayed God
not only to sanctify those creatures for her bodily sustenance, but also to
fill her soul with the waters of life, often repeating that of the Revelation,
To him that thirs^eth, will I give of the waters of life freely. Revel. 21. 6.


One true she took her bible in her hand, William Brettergh. V^. Fox. Psalm
119. 71. 72.
and joyfully kissing it, and looking up toward heaven, she said that of the
Psalm: O Lord, it is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I may
learn thy statutes: The law of thy mouth is better to me then thousands of
gold and silver.

Another time she called her Husband to William Brettergh.
her, and said* O Husband, beware of Papistry, keep your self holy before the
Lord. Yield not to the abominations of the wicked, least they rejoice, and so
you dishonor God, and destroy your own soul Again she said, Let my little
Mawd Brettergh.
child be brought up among the children of God, and in the true fear and
knowledge of his Majesty so shall I meet her in heaven, whom now I must leave
behind me on earth.

Again, sometime she would pray with William Brettergh. Rom 8. 15. Wid. Fox.
a low voice to her self, and that saying of Paul, We have not received the
spirit of bondage to fear any more, but the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry
Abba father, was much in her mouth: and the last words Abba father, she would
double oftentimes over. She would sing to herself the last verse of the 13.
Psalm.

I will give than ^^ unto the Lord, and praises to him sing:
Because he has heard my request, and granted my wishing.
Finally, in these and such like exercises and meditations, did she spend the
whole time of her sickness, after the Lord had once enlarged her heart, from the
temptations of Satan.

But upon Saturday about eleven of the Man. 30.
clock in the morning, the Lord disclosed himself in mercy, to her more
plentifully, then ever before, and as I may say, he dealt familiarly with his
hand-mayd: for from that time, to her very death, which ensued the next day,
the feeling of Satan's temptations seemed quite to be banished from her; so
that she made no show of them, her thoughts were not occupied with y^ world,
husband, child, or any thing else, to our thinking; neither was her sickness
troublesome to her, as before it had been: but as one raised from death to
life, or ravished in spirit, so seemed she to us that stood by: her countenance
joyful: her tongue flowing with the praises of God: and her voice as most
heavenly music and melody of peace, sounding praise, and honor, and glory
to God in a wonderful manner, as follows.

About eleven of the clock she began to tremble and quake a little, and
withal she asked her husband if he would help her with prayer to God against
the tempter, saying, William Brettergh. Maud Brettergh. Elizabeth Challoner.
will ye neither pray with me, nor bring some godly man that may put holy
things into my mind, whereby I may be able to resist Satan? Having thus said,
she uttered these words: O Lord God of my salvation, help my weakness, plead
thou my cause, O God of truth, for in thee do I trust. After this, they prayed
together, and she answered Amen to every petition. Then after this she required
him to read some part of the scripture: whereupon he read unto her the 8. to
the Romans, the 91. Psalm, and the 17. of John, the which as he read, and
came to the 4. verse, I have finished the work which thou gave me to do, and
now glorify me: She desired him to pause a while, and the^ said, Blessed be
thy name, O blessed Savior, perfect the work I humbly beseech thee which thou
have begun in me. Then as he read the 9. verse, I pray not for the world, but
for them which thou have given me, for they are thine: she interrupted him
again saying, O Lord Jesus do thou pray for me? O blessed and sweet
Savior, how wonderful! how wonderful! how wonderful are thy mercies! Read
on said she, the blessedst reading that ever I heard, the comfort whereof does
sweeten my soul. Then reading verse the 22. And the glory which thou gave
me, I have given them, that they may be one at we are one. With marvelous joy
she uttered the words of David many times over, I confess before the Lord his
loving kindness, and his Psalm. 107. 8. 9
wonderful works before the sons of men: for he has satisfied my soul,
and filled my hungry soul with goodness. When he came to the 24. verse,
Father, I will that they which thou have given me, be with me, even where I am,
that they may behold my glory which thou have given me. Stay, said she, and let
me meditate on the goodness of the Lord, for this is the sweetest saying that
ever came to my soul: for now I perceive and feel the countenance of Christ
my redeemer is turned toward me, and the bright shining beams of his mercy
is spread over me: Oh happy am I, that ever I was borne, to see this blessed
day! Praise, praise, o praise the Lord, for his mercies; for he has brought me
out of darkness, and the shadow of death: he has delivered my soul from the
snare of the hunter* and has taken me out of the den of Lions, even from the
jaws of Leuiathan, that piercing Isai. 27. 1.
and crooked serpent, and has set me in a place of rest, and sweet
refreshing: Oh praise the Psalm. 1^^. 1. 2. 3. 4.
Lord, O my soul, all that is within me praiseh: holy name: my soul praise
thou the Lord* and forget not all his benefits, which for gives all thine
iniquities, and heals all thine infirmities: which has redeemed thy life
from the grave, and crowns thee with mercy and compassion. This she often
repeated: And then again remembering the 21. and 22. verses of the 17. of John,
she said: O my sweet Savior, shall I be one with thee, as thou art one with
thy Father? And will thou glorify me with that glory which thou had with
the father before the world was? And do thou so love me (which am but dust
and ashes) to make me partaker of glory with Christ? What am I Psalm. 144. 3.
Psalm. 8. 4.
poor wretch, that thou art so mindful of me? Oh how wonderful! how
wonderful! how wonderful is thy love! Oh thy love is unspeakable, that have
dealt so graciously with me! oh I feel thy mercies, and oh that my tongue and
heart were able to sound forth thy praises as I ought, and as I willingly would
do! oh that you all would help me to praise the holy one of Israel, the God
of all consolations! And thus for the space of five hours together at the
least, she continued praising and lawding the Lord, with such a gladsome and
heavenly countenance, testifying such inward joy, from a comfortable feeling of
the mercies of God in her soul, and using such sweet sentences, and s^gred
phrases of perfect and holy eloquence, as the truth thereof, if it could have
been taken, were admirable, continuing so many hours together; some part
whereof was this.

O my Lord, oh my God, blessed be thy name for evermore, which have showed me
the path of life. Thou did O Lord hide thy face from me Isai. 54. 8.
for a little season, but with everlasting mercy, thou have had compassion on
me: And now blessed Lord thy comfortable presence is come, yea Lord, thou have
had respect unto thy handmaid, and art come with fulness of joy, and abundance
of consolations: O blessed be thy name o Lord my God. Then she repeated part of
the 16. Psalm. 16. 5. 9 11.
Psalm, saying: The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, wherefore my
heart is glad, and my tongue rejoices: Thou will show me the path of life* In
thy presence is fulness of joy, and at thy right hand there are pleasures for
evermore: oh that I could therefore praise the Lord, as he is worthy to be
praised! I will sing to the Lord, I will sing to the praise of the God of
Israel: come, come (says the) and help me, Judges 5. 3.
o help me to praise the Lord. And with y^ she began to sing the third Psalm,
and continued to the end of the Psalm, as perfectly, and with as sweet a
voice, as ever she had before in her health; and concluded with the 49. verse
of the 106. Psalm.

The Lord the God of Israel, be blessed for evermore:
Let all the people say Amen, praise ye the Lord therefore.
And after this she said, O praise the Lord, for he has filled me with joy
and gladness of heart, and brought me from the gates of hell, and of death:
repeating that of the 16. Psalm, Psalm. 16. 6.
My line is fallen unto me in a pleasant place: yea I have a saire heritage,
for the Lord is the portion of mine inherita^^^: The place where I now am, is
sweet and pleasant: oh how pleasant is the sweet perfume of the place where I
lie! It is sweeter then Aarons composed perfume of Exodus 30. 23
principal spices: how comfortable is the sweetness I feel! It is like that
odor that proceeds from the golden censor, that delights my soul. Revel. 8.
4.
The taste is precious: do you not feel it? Oh so sweet it is! yea sweeter
then mirrh, the honey, or the honey comb. Let me therefore sing again, and
again unto my Lord, and my God. Then she did sing the 19. Psalm, beginning at
the 7. verse, how perfect is the law of God, etc. and so on to the end of the
same. And after y^ spiritual rejoicing, in singing of Psalms, she then prayed
unto God faithfully, and praised the Lord again joyfully. And being still full
of these, and such like heavenly consolations, she did sing again most
heartily, unto the praise of God the 136. Psalm, Praise ye the Lord, for he is
good, for his mercy indureth for ever, etc. In which Psalm, for his mercy
indureth for ever, is 26. times repeated. A christian friend coming in at
Master Will. Fox.
the same time, which was about six of the clock in the evening, marueiling to
see her exceeding joys, and heavenly harmony, wherein she continued with such
words and phrases, that were so spiritual, prayed for the continuance of the
same unto the end: whereupon she then burst out, relating William Brettergh.
VV. Fox. William VVoodward.
further of her joys, saying: Oh the joys! the joys! the joys! that I feel
in my soul! oh they be wonderful! they be wonderful! they be wonderful! And
after that, she prayed for increase of faith, and that God would strengthen her
against temptations, with continual craving of remission of sins, ever
meditating of heavenly matters, as by her sudden and often breaking out into
heavenly speeches, and praises, did appear: for the same evening she lying
still and silent for a while, one prayed her William Fox.
to remember the Lord Jesus, and that she would in her heart, pray for
constancy in her joyful course; whereunto she answered with a delightsome and
cheerful countenance, and comfortable voice: Oh (said she) so I do, for the
Lord is my light, and my Psalm. 27. 1. 3
salvation, whom then shall I fear? Though an host pitch against me, yet my
heart shall not be afraid, for the Lord has said, I will not leave thee, nor
forsake thee. Indeed, I should verily Deuteronomy* 4. 3^.
have fainted, but that I believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land
of the living. Psalm. 27. 13.
And now my heart is readit my heart is ready Psalm 108. 1.
and prepared* yea it pants after thee O God: as the Heart brayeth after the
rivers of water, Psalm 42. 1. ^
so pants my soul after thee O God: my soul thirsts for God, even for the
living God. When Lord, when shall I come and appear before thy presence? etc.
Saying then further, Lord, since it has pleased thee to prepare my William
Brettergh.
heart, whether to life or death, thy will be done, dispose of me to thine own
glory, I am thine Lord, work thy blessed pleasure and good will upon me. And
after this she fell into a short slumber, and awaking said, as the spouse said
unto Christ in the Canticles, Oh come kiss C^nt. 1. 1.
me with the kisses of thy mouth, for thy love is better then ^ine! Oh how
sweet the kisses of my Savior be? Then one said unto her, alluding VV. Fo^e.
to that place of S. John, Revel. 3. 8. and praying that the Lord would anoint
her, with the eye-salue of his grace, that she might see and behold his glory.
To whom she answered, Mine eyes are opened, mine eyes are opened, though for a
while they were closed up, and shut; yet now I thank my God, mine eyes are
opened, and I do feel and see the everliving mercies of my Christ: saying then
further as it is in the 27. Psalm. Thou said, seek my Psalm. 27. 8. 9
face: my heart answered to thee, O Lord, I will seek thy face. O hide not
therefore thy face from me, nor cast thy servant away in displeasure, thou have
been my succor, leave me not, nor forsake me, O God of my salvation. And being
willed to commit her soul into the William Breuergh. Psalm. 31. 5.
hands of Christ, she said: O Lord Jesus, thou have redeemed me, plead thou my
cause, for into thy hands alone do I commit my spirit, O thou God of truth.
And then feeling more joy to abound, one praising God with her William
VVoodward. Mat. 11. 25.
for his great mercies showed toward her, she further said: I give thee thanks
O father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the
wise, and men of understanding, and have opened them unto me thy poor
handmaid, which am but dust and ashes. O how merciful and marvelous gracious
ar^ thou unto me! yea Lord, I feel thy mercy, and VV(...). ^o^e.
I am assured of thy love, and so certain am I thereof, as thou art that God
of truth, even so sure do I know my self to be thine* O Lord my God; and this
my soul knows right well, and Psalm. 139. 14
this my soul knows right well* which speech of her assurance, she often
repeated. Presently after this sitting up in her chair, she sung the fourth
Psalm; and then being laid down again in her bed, she confidently William
Brettergh. Job. 19. 25. 26. 27.
spoke these words: I am sure that my redeemer lives, and that I shall see him
at the last day, whom I shall see, and mine eyes shall behold: and though after
my skin, worms destroy this body, yet shall I see God in my flesh with these
eyes, and none other.

Then came in to see her toward evening, Master William Harrison the Preacher,
praising M. William Harrison. William Brettergh. William Fox.
God for her continuance, in that her joyful and most happy course: and
persuading her to an holy perseverance in the same, she thanked him, and
desired him to rejoice in Christ with her, and to praise John Brettergh.
God for his mercies to her, and said. Oh William VVoodward.
Master Harrison, my soul has been compassed about with terrors of death,
fear within, and fear without, the sorrows of hell were upon me, knots and
knorres were upon my soul, (which twice or thrice she repeated) and a roaring
wilderness of woe was within me; but blessed, blessed, blessed, be the Lord my
God, who has not left me cofortles, but like a good shepherd, has he brought
me into a place of rest, Psalm. 23. 2. 3
even to the sweet running waters of life, that flow out of the sanctuary of
God, and he has lead me into the green pastures, where I am fed, and
exceedingly comforted: yea, he has restored my soul, and lead me into the
plain and easy paths of righteousness. The way that now I go in, is a sweet
and easy way, strowed with flowers, and as a fine sandy way; yea, it is more
easy and soft then the sand, for I go and tread upon wheat, even upon the
finest flower Psalm. 147. 14
of wheat: Oh blessed be the Lord; O blessed be the Lord, that has thus
coforted me, and has brought me now to a place, more sweeter unto me, then the
Garden of Eden. Oh the joy! the joy, the delight some joy that I feel! Oh how
wonderful, how wonderful, how wonderful is this joy! O praise the Lord for
his mercies, and for this joy, which my soul feels sulwel, praise his name
for evermore. And these praises of God, she sounded forth, like David's
harmony, being endued with David's spirit, to William Brettergh. William
VVoodward.
the praise of the eternal and merciful God, continuing all night in such
like prayers and praises to God, except some small time, that she was silent
and quiet. Master Harrison prayed twice with her that evening, as also in the
morning ( being Whit sunday.) After he had prayed once with her, going then
toward his public charge, she sent for him, to pray once more with her before
he went, which he did; to the joy and gladness of heart, both of her, and all
that were present; and so he took leave of her, and departed.

Another faithful man or two came presently in that morning, and diverse other
M. Edward Aspinwall. William Fo^e.
well affected, who were with her at the time of her death, and often prayed
with her that forenoone, she still abounding in William Brettergh. John
Brettergh.
spiritual comforts and consolations: sometimes as one awaking out of sleep,
she would say, the Lord was her keeper, and deliverer. Again, one saying unto
her, the William VVoodward. Mistress M^ud Brettergh.
Lord bless you: Yea (said she) and the Lord Jesus bless us all. And so
seeming to sleep a little while, and awaking again she said: Lord I trust in
thee, have mercy upon me, give Mistress Scholastica Fox.
me strength to praise thee: defend and preserve me in the hour of temptation,
and lay no more Elizabeth Challouer, and diverse more.
upon me, then thou will enable me to bear. Afterward being asked, if she
would have them join in prayer together again with her. O yes (said she) for
Christ's sake I desire it: saying thus to her self: Hear O Lord, and Psalm. 30.
10. 11. 12.
have mercy upon me: Lord, be thou my helper: thou have loosed my sack, and
guarded me with gladness: therefore will I praise thee, O Lord my God: I will
give thanks to thee for evermore. With that, all that were present did join
in prayer with her, and in conclusion using the Lords Prayer, which she said
with them, to thine is thy kingdom; her strength then being gone, her tongue
failed her, and so she lay silent for a while, every one judging her then to be
near death, her strength and speech failing her: yet after a while lifting up
her eyes with a sweet countenance and still voice, said: My warrefare is
accomplished, Isal. 40. 2. Psalm. 7^. 25. 26.
and my iniquities are pardoned. Lord, who^ have I in heaven but thee? and I
have none in earth but thee: my flesh fails, and my heart also, but God is
the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. He that preserves Jacob,
and defends his Israel, he is my God, and will guide me unto death: guide me
O Lord my God, and suffer me not to faint, but keep my soul in safety. And
with that she presently fell a sleep in the Lord, passing away in peace,
without any motion of body at all; and so yielded up the Ghost, a sweet
Sabboaths sacrifice about four of the clock in the afternoon, of Whit
sunday, being the last of May 1601.

This was the death of that virtuous Gentlewoman, happily dying in the Lord,
and reaping the benefit of a holy profession: wherein we cannot but
acknowledge and reverence the mercy of God, who in our greatest infirmity
makes his grace to shine most clearly. A sure testimony of the truth of our
profession, serving to encourage us therein, and to move us to a godly life. It
must needs be a divine Religion, and a truth coming from God, that thus can
fill the heart and mouth of a weak woman, at the time of death, with such
admirable comfort. And a wretched conceit, and mere antichristian is that
religion, which so hates and persecuteth this faith, which is thus able to
lead the true-hearted professors thereof, with such unspeakable peace unto
their graves.

Her funeral was accomplished at Childwal Church on Wednesday following, being
the third of June 1601. And now for conclusion, seeing this blessed Gentlewoman
is taken from among us, and received into the holy habitations of the heavenly
Jerusalem, there to remain in joy, glory, and blessedness for evermore; let
us lament for our loss, but rejoice for her gain: and let us pray, that in
heart we could as willingly wish to be with her, as she is now unwilling to
be with us.

Solomon says, The memorial of the just shall be blessed: but the name of the
wicked shall rot. Prou. 10. 7.

FINIS.

