A WATCHWORD TO ALL religious, and true hearted Englishmen.

By Sir Francis Hastings, Knight.

Deuter. 31. verse. 6. Pluck up your hearts therefore, and be strong: Dread
not, nor be afraid of them: for the Lord thy God himself does go with thee;
he will not fail nor forsake thee.

AT LONDON, Printed by Felix Kingston for Ralph Iackson. 1598.

To the Christian Reader.
THE raging hearts of Rome and Spain being set on fire, with all force and
fury to set upon England; I hold it the part and duty of every true
Englishman, to be prepared inwardly with loyalty and courage, and outwardly
with all necessary provision and furniture, as his bounden duty is in the
one, and his ability and purse will reach in the other. And to this end J have
been carried in the true loyalty of my heart to set my thoughts on work, not
only how to prepare my particular self in all readiness, to do all services
enjoined and commanded to me, and to add anything of my self, that the
strength of one poor man can afford: but also how I might incite and provoke
others to carry the same mind. To my self I have set down this law, that
shall never be repealed, that for the liberty of my conscience, the safety of
my dear Sovereign, and the peaceable prosperity of my country, if my wealth
were millions, if I could bring thousands of fighting hands to the field, and
if my life were ten thousand lives; wealth, strength, life and all shall go,
to be spent, hazarded, and ended for my God, my Queen, and my Country,
against that Antichrist of Rome, the ambitious tyrant of Spain, and all foreign
forces, and home-borne traitors whatsoever; else should I think my self
unworthy to live. To stir up others, I have presumed to give an attempt in
these few leaves following: wherein if I have erred in any part of the matter,
let my want of experience excuse me: if I have erred in the form, let my
ignorance excuse me: and if I have erred both in matter and form, yet let my
faults in all be excused; because my zeal to religion, my loyalty to my dear
Sovereign, and my love to my native Country, has enforced me to make this
adventure, rather choosing to bewray my simplicity and wants, than that I
would defraude my countrymen from being put in mind of matter so needful for
them (in my conceit) not only to think of, but to be thoroughly resolved in;
that with confidence, boldness, and assurance of the goodness of our cause, we
might with heart and hand be pressed and ready to take our places, and to march
on to the field, when our Sovereigns authority commands, and there to set
forward with a swift foot against these enemies of God, our Queen Elizabeth,
and our Country, whenever they shall dare to show their faces against us.

F. H.

A VVatch-word to all religious, and true hearted Englishmen.
IF I should take upon me to enter into the enumeratio^ of all the benefits and
blessings, that from the almighty have been powered upon this little Island of
England, by, and under the government of our most gracious sovereign Lady,
Queen Elizabeth; I might both forgetfully lessen the number too far, and
ignorantly pass over many things notable, and worthy to be observed, and
remembered. And if I should adventure to aim at the particular injuries her
Highness has received from foreign malice, and home disloyalty; and the
particular dangers that have followed her thereby, to the hazard of her
safety in person, and the good estate of her whole kingdom; I might guess at
very many, and come short of the number; and I might point at very great wrongs
and dangers, and yet miss those that be far greater. And therefore for the
benefits we have received by her most happy entrance to sit in this regal
seat, as the anointed of God, to be the sovereign co^mander under him, over
us his people of England, I will only tie my self to one, as the fountain and
wellspring whence all the rest (being an infinite number) do issue and flow.
And for the injuries and dangers depending thereupon, to her person and
kingdom, I will tie my self to no number, but aim at them as I can; and they
shall be such all, as from which also do spring whatsoever has been offered,
or intended against her sacred person, and this peaceable, and flourishing
Commonwealth.

It is not unknown to many yet living, neither can it be altogether hidden
from the younger sort that live with them, what a dark mistie cloud of
ignorance (which brought in Popish idolatry, and al manner of superstition) did
ouer-shadow the whole land; whereunto was added, and wherewith was mixed all
bloody and savage cruelty against those that desired knowledge, and were any
way enlightened (by Gods grace) with a glimmering, or small insight into true
religion. For though it were but only a desire to read upon the holy book of
God, either the old, or new Testament; then Heretic was his title, heresy was
his fault; and for this was he called before the Romish Clergy, to receive
their censure: and such never departed from their clutches, till they had
branded them to the slaughter. But because the Romish synagogue persecuting
Christ in his members, may mask under the Jewish veil persecuting Christ
himself, who thirsting after Christ's blood, yet would seem to spill no blood,
crying, It is not lawful for us to put any man to death: therefore the civil
Magistrate must be their butcher to execute their bloody decree, and to the
stake they must go to be consumed with fire. Of this their blood-thirstie
humor how many hundreds have tasted, stories do record, and many yet living
can in part remember.

In these dark and clowdy days, least the Sunshine of knowledge should
disperse the mists of ignorance, and give light to the dim of sight, whereby
they might be able to discover the iugling and falsehood, which in that time of
darkness they used; this position was set down for their Maxim, or rule
infallible, that Ignorance is the mother of devotion: And that sacred word of
God, which was given from God to be a lantern to all our feet, and a light
unto all our steps, was forbidden to the lay sort (for so they called them) as
matter unfit for them to look into. By which means they kept them blindfold,
admitting them none other guides but themselves, being as stark blind as
beetles in all Christian and true religion: and when the blind do lead the
blind, both are in hazard to fall into the ditch.

When they thus had settled this blind course to keep the people from
knowledge, and had devised to fill their eyes with dumme shows to gaze upon,
and their cares with bare sounds of words, far from their capacity to reach
unto, or profitably understand: (much like to Caligula, who bidding many
guests, caused to be set before them golden dishes, and golden cups, and bad
them eat.)

Then they offer another position, that it was not for lay men to meddle with
matters of religion, that belonged wholly and only (as a privilege) to the
Priests; thereby making them secure and careless of God, and all godliness. Only
if he came diligently and devoutly to hear Mass, and once a year to confess
his sins to his ghostly father (how slenderly so ever his said Confessor
were furnished with gifts of the holy Ghost in himself to instruct him) all
was safe: and he that so did, was reckoned as religious a man (secundum vsum
Sacru^) as could be wished. And though he were tainted, and to be taxed with
the grossest sins, Rome, by the authority from their Vicar general, had a
trick to hale the^ into the rabble of their saints, and so to canonize him; as
we have example of Thomas Becket in Henry the thirds time, whose treasons to
his Prince were apparent and manifest: and yet after his death was he canonized
a saint by the Pope, and an holy day was commanded for him.

These two irreligious and profane grounds being laid, they proceed to a
third, and set it down for a popish ground, that it was a dangerous and deadly
sin for any man to disobey the Pope, and his Clergy, in any of their orders
enjoined and commanded. In such reverence and regard must he and all his
Clergy be had, that the meanest Mass Priest (coming with authority from
him) must be obeyed, under pain of damnation; though he command that which is
blasphemous before God in Christians, or disloyal to men in subjects.

And having thus made an open passage (without stop) to the mark and matter he
aimed at, and so hemmed them in, as they could not see which way to escape
danger, but by them that had laid the snare for them; they propound unto them a
means of delivery from all dangers, (even when they sinned immediately
against God) which is, A pardon from his holiness, and absolution from his holy
priests. But if the decrees and ordinances of their Romish synagogues were
transgressed, hardly any mercy was to be had.

Thus have you the blind course they sought to breed us in, by debarring us
the clear light of the holy written word of God, and the carelesnes they
sought to settle in us of all religion, by making it a thing impertinent to us,
as though we had no souls to care for; or the narrow way that leads to
salvation were so easily found out, as we need no light to guide us, or no
furniture to arm us with defense against the dangers of our passing. And yet,
Search the scriptures, is a watchword to all that desire to be the servants
of God: and, Put on the whole armor of God, is a direction to all the true
children of God here upon earth: the several parts of which furniture, and to
what use all of it must serve us, you shall easily find, if you will take
pains to look into and read the place. And further you fee the terror and
fear they cast upon us, if we offend the Pope and his Massing priests: and
then the end is, our absolution and pardon must come from themselves, which
money must purchase: and so the best purse (by their rule) did speed best in
their religion. Yet our Savior Christ tells us, that It is as easy for a
Camel to go through the eye of a needle, as for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of heaven. But the fattest purses are fitter for the Popish synagogue
than the poor in spirit. And yet, Blessed are the poor in spirit (says the
holy Ghost by the Evangelist) for they shall see God. And, Godliness is great
riches (says the Apostle) if a man be content with that he has. But as it is
beyond my reach to decipher and disclose all the gross corruptions of the
Romish religion: so it is no part of my meaning to search curiously into the^;
they are already (through Gods favor and goodness) by many learned, more
sufficiently handled, discovered and confuted, than I can, and to their learned
works I refer you; I only touch those few, that by these you may see the
black darkness and gross ignorance we were brought into, by such as sought
more their own pomp and enriching, than to set us in the right way to saving
health and salvation, of which they sought to bereave us.

And having given you this taste of those miserable times, and dangerous estate
we were brought into by them, I hasten to put you in mind of our most blessed,
and happy deliverance out of this spiritual pit, and thraldom of Popery and
superstition, whereinto we were deeply plunged: for which we owe all dutiful
and hearty thanks to our God, as the author; and all reverence, love, and
loyalty to our most gracious Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, as the
instrument: whose peril and danger, before she came to that ability to
perform this holy work amongst us, I may not pass over. For by Gods goodness
only and wholly she was preserved, her life being maliciously, and with great
cunning shot at by the Romish Clergy, then in place of credit. For Gardener,
that most proud and bloody monster, left no corner of his wit unsought (being
wise enough to work mischief) but set all his skill and cunning on work to
shorten her days, and to prevent her (by bloody slaughter of her sacred
person) from ever being our Queen. And no reach of man can yield me a reason
of her deliverance, but the mighty God in power, and most rich God in mercy,
did (beyond all expectation of popish malice) deliver her from many dangers,
and preserve her, to free us from all the most bitter thraldom of this Romish
Pharaoh, and to bring us into the sweet and sincere liberty of Christ's true
religion and Gospel: even as he did miraculously preserve Moses (being
destined to destruction) to deliver his people of Israel from the miserable
taxes and torments they sustained under the Egyptiacall Pharaoh.

Thus you see that these their bloody practices would take no place: but that
the God of Israel (who never fails his) has brought this his religious
handmayden, our dear Sovereign, to the royal throne of this flourishing
kingdom: and, by her happy entrance into this seat of government, has
banished the Popish ordinances and decrees, which held us in slavery of
conscience: and in stead of this, has brought home unto us the clear
Sunne-shining light of his glorious Gospel, and restored us into the liberty
of conscience long wished for, and often prayed for by all his Saints and
children. He has also established a course of teaching by learned ministers
and pastors, by whom the glad tidings of salvation is pronounced and published
to his people, her subjects, whereby they may be trained up in all true
knowledge and understanding. And surely the most simple now may learn to point
out the vanity of that superstitious religion, which was sent, and brought to
us from Rome; and may see and feel how sweet the Lord Jesus is in the voice of
his Gospel: which is a blessing that many have longed for, and have not yet
attained unto. For this and all the rest we owe our continual thanks unto
God, and are bound (every mothers son of us) to pray to him for our
Sovereigns life and reign long to continue; and with all hearty willingness
to show the loyal love of our hearts to her Majesty, by yielding our lands,
goods, and lives, to be sold, spent, and hazarded for her defense. For of how
much more precious account the soul is than the body, of so much greater price
and estimation ought we to reckon this spiritual deliverance out of this
spiritual bondage, brought upon us by popery and superstition, which we have
obtained by her Majesty's most happy entrance, and enjoying this seat of
government; in which I pray God she may long sit, to his glory, the quiet and
profit of her people, both in spiritual and earthly things, and the
everlasting comfort to her own soul and conscience.

But when this our dear Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth was fully possessed
of this her princely place, and had received the royal Diadem and Crown,
with the applause and liking of al true hearted Englishmen, both Nobles,
Clergy and Commons; (as a due by right belonging unto her) then began Satan
to rage, and his ministers to fret and chafe; in so much as even in the first
Parliament holden after her most happy coronation, Doctor Story, that
blood-sucker, who had bathed his hands in the blood of sundry Gods saints,
doubted not, without blushing, openly in that most honorable Senate and
Council, to bewail that his counsel was not followed; and that they had
omitted the right course of stopping us from seeing, and beholding these
Halcyon and blessed days; which he said to be, the not striking at the root
when time served; meaning, the not bereauing of our dear Sovereign of her
life. A bloody speech of a bloody traitor, who would not contain to utter
out the poysonfull conceived malice of his heart to her Majesty, though it
were when his malice could not reach (praised be God) to do her the least
harm.

In this arch-traytor there is offered a most notable observation of Gods
justice and judgment. For even this Story passing over the seas after this,
without touch, and there exercising his lewd wit to invent all slanders
against her Majesty, and the whole state; and (boiling in the bloody malice
of his heart) did burst out into all practices that he could, whereby to
disturb our peace, and to endanger her person; it pleased our God to assign
the time when he should enter into an English ship, deuoid of all fear to be
intrapped, and without all hope in the owner of the ship that he should carry
home such a guest. Yet finding (by certain intelligence) whom he possessed,
and the wind (by Gods providence) being prosperous to take way for England,
he hoysed up his sails, and tarrieth for no better fraught, arriueth with
good speed in England, and presents this his merchandise to the honorable
Lords, by whom he was committed to the place most fit for him, and shortly
after being indicted, arreigned, found guilty, and condemned, he received his
judgment at the seat of justice, and was executed accordingly, as he had well
deserved, at Tyburne: and so may they al speed that wish to Queen Elizabeth,
as he did.

After this then comes out the thundering Bull of excommunication against her
Majesty, and her whole land, from that impious Pope Pius Quintus, wherein her
Majesty is not allowed the title of lawful and rightful Queen, but is
termed The pretended Queen of England; and all her subjects are absolved from
the oath of obedience which they had taken, and by right is due from them unto
her.

And from this Bull bellowing out these monstrous sounds, as out of another
Trojan horse, by which all Troy was betrayed) all the troubles, rebellions, and
treasons plotted against her Majesty have proceeded. Hence the Northern
Rebels did take their warrants and grounds, though it were before the setting
of it up by Felton, at the Bishop of Londons gate by Paul's Church, as shall
appear plainly. For by this Bull these Rebels thought themselves to have a
strong immunitie and freedom from all danger, when such a plackard was
published from Rome: and therefore doubted not to become traitors to their
Prince, betrayers of their Country, and to offer it for a spoil to forrenners
and strangers. As though it were in the power of any one mortal child of man
to dispose of kingdoms, to depose Princes, or to dispense with subjects for
not only disobeying, but rebelling against their lawful Sovereigns. In deed
that worthy Doctor Saunders, the Popes Legate, to comfort the Rebels of
Ireland, doubts not to defend this Bull of excommunication to be just and
lawful, in his book entitled, Of the visible Monarchy. And to prove that
this Bull was ye encourager of our two unfortunate Earls, Northumberland and
Westmerland, to take arms against their lawful Sovereign and liege Lady.
This Saunders affirms that Doctor Morton was sent to solicit such English
Noble men as he could, that Elizabeth, who then was in possession of the
Crown, was an Heretic, and for that cause to have fallen from al dominion and
power, and that she may be had, or reputed of them as an Ethnicke, and they are
not to be compelled to obey her laws and commandments.

A noble embasey and message to be sent from a Pope, very fitting for his
fatherhood; and this old doting Mass Priest was a very fit ambassador for
his turn, who doted so much upon his Mass and Mattens, upon his Dirges and
Trentals, and such other trash (whereunto his corrupt heart was inclined) as he
did forget how far it was against the law of God, Nature, and Nations, to
stir subjects to rebel against their rightful Sovereign: and he was so
besotted with his holy Dad, sitting as Peter's successor in his pontisicalibus
at Rome, as neither law of God, Nature, nor Nations, could withhold him from
satisfying the Popes holiness, in this his unholy and most devilish direction
and errand; far contrary to our Savior Christ's direction to Peter, whom he
commanded to put up his sword into his sheath.

And if it were reckoned a fault in Peter to strike off the high Priests
servants care; how shall it not be a fault in Peter's successor to strike at the
head, not of a servant, but of an anointed Prince, only because she will not
forsake Christ and obey Antichrist.

If Doctor Morton had never read so far in Gods book; or had lived so long
as to forget that he had read; the Lord from heaven commanding this to all men
on earth, that every soul should be subject to the higher powers: for there is
no power but of God; and every power is ordained of God: yet he could not but
remember himself to be an English man borne, and that Queen Elizabeth was
the rightful owner, and possesser of the Crown of England, by right of birth,
by right of inheritance, and by right of succession: and therefore by the law
of Nature, and Nations, there was obedience and loyalty due unto her from him.
But he was so bewitched with the Popes primacie, and supreme authority over
kings and kingdoms, as he thought the Pope might depose when he would, and
dispose Crowns and kingdoms upon whom he would; as if he had quite forgotten
himself to be an English man.

Whence this privilege over kings and kingdoms should come unto this proud
Priest of Rome, I cannot find, unless he fetches it from that spirit, that
brought our Savior Christ unto the top of an high mountain, showing him all
the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, and said, All these will I
give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me: having as much authority
to dispose of them, as Popes have to depose Princes.

But you see what was committed and commanded to this doting Doctor Morton by
the Pope; and how faithfully Morton performed his faithles errand, to the
prejudice of his Prince, and danger of his Country. I wish with all my heart
the two Earls had been more wise, than to be misled by so wicked a messenger;
and more loyal, than to be miscarried into rebellion by so treasonable a
message. Notwithstanding they so embraced the messenger, and so far followed
the direction of the message, that they fell into flat rebellion, and marched
under the ensign of traiterous subjects: for which the one received his
condign punishment, and the other escaped by flying, remaining a fugitive from
his Queen and country, and not daring to show his face in his own native
soil, for that he had disloyally rebelled against the one, and unnaturally
sought the destruction of the other.

I find some blushing in some of this popish crew. For a Romish discourser, in
a book published, and printed against the execution of Justice in England for
maintenance of public peace; seems to wish that Saunders and Bristow (which
both do defend, and maintain ye Popes Bull against Queen Elizabeth to be
lawful and just) had spared to speak so much in defense thereof. And yet he
doubts not to affirm that these two learned men, of great zeal and
excellency, had their special reasons to do so; which he will neither defend
nor reprove.

He further labors to smooth over this fault of theirs, by a kind of
retractation in both: the one leaving this out of his book in his second
edition; and the other by suppressing to his lives end, A very learned book
made in defense of Pius Quintus his sentence against her Majesty. Mark the
Epitheton he gives to it. For he calls it a very learned book: so as
neither his reproof, nor their retracting does condemn the matter (which is
the maine point) but some other reasons did move a moderation in them, and all
the rest of our nation (to use his own words) which was neither their
condemning the seditious Bull, nor their approving of her Majesty's right to
the royal seat she sat in, which the Bull sought to impeach both amongst
forrainers and home subjects.

The ground and cause of the moderation spoken of by this Popish politic
discourser, appears by the suite made by Campion and Parsons, unto Gregory
the 13. then Pope; wherein they desired that this Bull of excommunication might
not reach to touch the Catholics for performing obedience to her Majesty,
which was granted to them; and the very words of the dispensatio^ are these.
Where in the Bull of Pius Quintus all her subjects are commanded not to obey
her; and she being excommunicated, and deposed, all that do obey her, are
likewise innodate and accursed: (which point is perilous to the Catholics: For
if they obey her, they are the^ in the Popes curse; and if they disobey, they
are in the Queens danger:) therefore the present Pope, to relieve them, has
altered that part of the Bull, and dispensed with them to obey, and serve her,
without peril of excommunication: which dispensation is to endure, but till
that it please the Pope otherwise to determine. And these good fathers (so
called by this popish discourser) are justified and commended, and thought
worthy of great thanks, both of the Queen, and country: and yet you see
that even in this dispensation, as well as in the Bull, our Sovereign is
continued by this Pope excommunicated, and cursed, as far as the hand of such
a cursed creature can reach; and so are all her true hearted subjects. But by
this they do discover their gross cunning.

This discourser would feign persuade that this was done for the Queens good,
both for the safety of her person, and quiet of her country. Notwithstanding
reverend father Saunders could, after this, be the Popes Legate, to incite,
and comfort Irish subjects to rebel against her Majesty: where, if the
mighty God had not given a courageous heart, and a strong hand to that most
virtuous and valiant gentleman, the noble Lord Arthur Gray, then her Highness
Deputy in that place, Saunders persuasion had made a strong party; and
Spaniards had settled too strong a footing for us to recover in haste.

Further to discover the treacherous hearts of all these confederates, the
conspiracy of Babington, Barnewell, Titchborne, and the rest iumping together
in one mind, and combining together to perform one bloody action, which was,
to lay violent hands upon Gods anointed: whence came it, but from Rome, and
Rhemes, following the impious rules of Pius Quintus in his cursed Bull? Besides
this, who set Parry on work to come hither with an impudent and shameless face,
and here to court it; to be one of the high Court of parliament; and to
intrude himself into the houses, and to the tables of her Majesty's chiefest
Counselors; yea very often to her Majesty's own presence, and too often, and
too near, with allowance and liking; having with her Highness large discourses,
and long conferences, but that fisher of Rome? who fisheth not for men's souls,
as Peter did, to win them to God; but after kingdoms, and segniories, that
they may be tributarie to him, and that he may have authority to dispose of
them at his pleasure. For from this, Parry came reconciled, and, forsaking his
obedience to his rightful Sovereign, became subject to him; and from those
parts he came over with this bloody purpose to kill our dread Queen, To
assure this, he gave his word to sundry to undertake it; he received the
Sacrament to do it; and he confirmed his bloody promise with his hand, in a
letter sent to Rome, desiring therein his holiness allowance for the doing of
this unholy act, and craving full remission for all his sins: which was
performed to him by this holy Vicars commandment, in a letter sent to him
from a Cardinal in Rome, wherein his purpose was said to be honorable, the
fact meritorious before God; and kind requitals are promised to him for
undertaking the matter, and for his care had in the business.

Therefore notwithstanding the fine smoothing of this discourser, who would
bear the world in hand, that after this Bull published, the peaceable
government of our gracious Queen was not by any disturbed; you shall find it
most false and untrue. For if I should stand to reckon up all the stirs, that
troublesome, and traiterous spirits (as the vipers brood) would have raised in
the bowels of their native country, I should ouerloade you with too many
odious and loathsome examples.

For what moved Frauncis Throckmorton to enter into a new practice? What was
the cause of Charles Pagets going out of England? of the two unhappy Earls
commitment? the one being arraigned, and tried by his Peers, and (being
condemned) spared to live by the wonderful mercy of her most mild Majesty:
the other preventing his trial, by laying violent and bloody hands upon his
own person: was not all this, and much more than this, to depose, or (some way
or other) to dispatch our most gracious and lawful Queen? And yet, after the
publishing of this Bull of Pius Quintus (says our discourser) our Catholics
(committing nothing against her Majesty, or her laws) remained quiet, and did
all acts of homage and honor unto her. But, to prove this his own clearing of
them not to be so clear, he says presently after, that the most part of all
sorts of Catholics, both in England and Ireland, have done this; only a very
few Nobles of both countries taking arms for their defense: so as to an excuse
of all he adds an accusation of some; and, if the matter of this excuse were
liked of by himself, and allowed; he must needs condemn these some, that
were so rash headed to take arms against their Queen, and country; and if he
allowed these same in thus doing; then his great pains taken to excuse all
Catholics to be free from stirring disloyallie, was but a Popish flourish of
dissimulation.

He proceeds to excuse all the preests, and students beyond the seas, and all
such as came over, and faith, that al of them since that censure of his holiness
(to use his own words) did use all reverence, and respect to her Majesty,
uttering in no preaching, speech, or book, no not at the hour of their death,
and martyrdom (as he calls it, though he shall never prove a traitor to be
a martyr) nor ever before in any their confessions to the Magistrate, any
disloyal word against her Majesty. But for many proofs against this, take
one for all, to disprove him; and this one proof being from such a one; as the
whole pack of them did highly reverence, and regard, being a Cardinal; and
Cardinal Allen it was.

This English traitor, though he were a Cardinal at Rome, has sent us from
thence many slanderous, and seditious pamphlets. Amongst the rest he
undertakes the defending of that false faithles Gentleman, Sir William
Stanley, in his treasonable part played against her Majesty, in delivering up
the town of Deuenter, contrary to the trust reposed in him; and in that book
he blusheth not to set down these words, that, since her excommunication, and
deposition by the Pope, she has no just title, or interest to her crown, and
kingdom; and that no act done by her authority since the publishing of that
excommunication, and deposition, has been, or can be lawful by the law of
God, or man. And therefore that no man may lawfully serve her in any action, be
it otherwise never so just. From which he rusheth into an earnest persuasion to
reuolte, to withdraw her subjects from her service; and to exhort them to the
service of the Romish catholic party, and her enemies.

Now let Master Discourser tell me, whether this be to utter in no preaching,
speech, or book, any disloyal word against her Majesty? And if he will be
silent, because he dare not speak the truth, to contrary, and control his
former lie; yet let all true hearted Englishmen tell me whether this iugling
companion (the discourser I mean) be not an impudent, and shameless
dissembling liar, in persuading us by a printed pamphlet, that all Catholics
were sorry that Saunders, and Bristow did write in allowance, and defense of the
Bull, and wished that such an offensive matter had never been touched, (they
are his own words) and that all Catholics, both Preests, students, and
others, did conteyne themselves from all disloyal speeches, or actions; when
as Cardinal Allen, their Archprelate, (on whose judgment all the English
Papists living did rely as resolutely, as the Heathen could possibly upon the
Oracles sent from their Gods) durst, like an Archtraytor, thus villanously
stuff his book with blasphemous slanders, devilish persuasions, and impudent
lies against her Majesty.

There is no end of this humor in them; their practices are pestilent, their
persuasions perilous, and their platformes traiterous; and to serve their
turn, they want not cunning to execute all: so violent they are in their
villainies, and treasons; and so shameless they are in their falsehood, and
dissimulation.

I have dwelt long in this unsavory, and unpleasant argument of treacheries and
treasons, and in the enumeration of our godless, and unnatural traitors:
wherein I have touched many matters, and poynted out many persons: yet could I
very easily add many more: but I hold it needelesse, because the purpose of
my labor is only to give a taste to my dear countrymen in this stirring
world, wherein Rome, and Spain, and Hell it self; are set on fire against our
rightful Queen, and her kingdom; that by this taste they might see the
brutish villainies of our bastard countrymen, and might understand what just
cause there is for them to detest both the traitors, and treasons. And surely
the traitors themselves (if God justly had not blinded them) by many stories,
and examples might know, that proditio placet, non proditor, though it light
upon forreyners against a nation.

We read of Mahomet, who intending to besiege Constantinople, a rich, but
seditious Citizen, goes to him, and promises to procure the gates to be set
open for him, if he would promise to give him his daughter in marriage with a
rich dowry. Mahomet agreeing, the other performed his devised treason. And
coming after to demand his wages; It is but thy due, says Mahomet; and so
commanded a great mass of treasure to be laid before him: But because thou
requirest my daughter (says he) thou being a Christian, thou must put off thy
old skin, that thou may be fit to company with a wife of a new, and
strange religion to thee; and withal commanded him to be flayed, and hot
imbers, and salt to be cast upon the raw flesh, and so to be laid in a bed,
till a new skin might grow; where he ended his miserable life, with a just and
righteous punishment for his treason.

At home, and amongst our selves, Earl Edrick, to settle this kingdom in the
hands of the Danes, sets on his son by some traiterous plot, or other, to
dispatch king Edmunde, surnamed Iron side, out of the way. Which he indeed
shortly performed, murdering the king, as he for necessities sake was sitting
in a secret place. The father, with good hope, but ill speed, hastes to
inform Canutus the Dane, of this exploite performed for him. But as was his
work; such was his wages. Traiterous was his act; and a shameful death was
his end; even by Canutus appointment, abhorring the traitor, though he got the
kingdom by his treason. Much more ought we to be ince^sed with a detestation
of our traitors; the treason being against England; and the traitors being
borne English. For in such a case what true hearted Englishman can brook
either? I will now hasten to those, to whom the treason was, and is pleasant;
and that is, the ambitious Spaniard; whose mind is never quiet from aspiring,
nor never will be satisfied with less than the possessing of an whole world
of kingdoms; whose ambition has touched upon many dominions, and territories;
and where they prevail, and can once set a co^quering foot, they govern not
in the mildenes of a rightful king, but rule with the cruelty of a bloody
tyrant. Examples hereof there are many; and sundry printed books amongst us
do publish, and discover particulars of it.

This proud Spaniard was backed with all the aid that possibly Rome and all
the Romanists could afford him, and encouraged to go on with great hope of
success; and offers an invasion upon this little Island of England; and
strengthens himself to this purpose with as great choice of shipping and
me^, as possibly he could; the ships being huge, great, and strong; the men,
both soldiers and mariners, well chosen; the guides, both for land and sea,
of great skill; the furniture strong, and good; the munition for powder and
shot plentiful; the victual sufficient, and seasonable, and all the provision
fit and necessary for such an exployte undertaken. And in this Navy such
trust was reposed by Rome, by Spain, and by our home-borne traitors, that it
was called The invincible navy. Yet they found that it had been good counsel,
that Ahab gave to Benhadad, Let not him that girdeth himself with his armor,
boast, as he that puts it off. For when flesh and blood will brag of his
greatness, glory in his strength, and vaunt of his victories before hand; there
is a God in heaven that watches over his chosen; and, when the wicked mean
most mischief against his anointed, can disappoynt their purposes, and
overthrow them in their own turn.

So fell it out to this ambitious Spaniard, who promising to himself a
victorious conquest over England, was conquered himself, without any blow, or
not many blows stricken; the Lord of hosts setting the boisterous winds, and
surging seas to fight against him; by which many of them were dispersed and
drowned: not unlike unto the victory of Theodosius upon the Alps, for whom the
story says, that the great winds were sent from God to sight, and he had a
great victory; whereupon Claudeanus writes these verses: O nimium dilecte
Deo, cui militat ether,
Et coniurati veniunt ad classica venti.
And so may we say to our Queen in her victory against this boasting proud
Spaniard.

O blessed of God, for whom the sky it self does fight,
And boisterous winds against thy foes do band to show their might.
He is taught hereby what it is to fight against God, though he think never so
basely of Englands strength, or respect never so little of the ability thereof
to encounter and resist him. For was not this his overthrow almost matchable
with that, that young Agesilaus gave to the Arcadians? For they made war
against the Spartans, when Archidamus was aged, and not able to go into the
field, and he did send his son Agesilaus against them, who overthrew the
Arcadians with small loss, or none at al; and it was called The teareles
battle. And, with praise to God be it spoken, he had cause (to his sorrow and
shame) to think that our mild and maiden Queen wanted not ships, mariners,
and soldiers to encounter him; nor yet noble, and valiant conductors; to stop
his attempt, and resist his fury; and (I trust) she shall ever be able to man
out shipping to master his malice, and to abate his pride; and I rest assured
of it, because his, and the Popes malice to her, is not because she is daughter
to King Henry the 8. and sister to Queen Mary; but because she has banished
the Pope, that Antichrist of Rome, and has yielded her self to the obedience
of Christ Jesus, in the voice of his Gospel.

Hence it is, that the Pope rages, and bestirreth himself with his curses,
and sends his pupills abroad amongst us, to draw christians from Gods truth,
to his false religion; and to withdraw subjects from obedience to their lawful
Sovereign; a work well beseeming Antichrist, and all his adherents. Against
whom the heathen shall rise in judgment, and shall condemn them; who thought
it dishonest, and vnhonorable, not only to plot, and devise treasons, but even
so much as to hearken to any treason offered them, though never so much for
their benefit. For in the war between Fabricius the Roman, and Pyrrhus;
the physician of Pyrrhus did offer for a sum of money to poison Pyrrhus, that
so Fabricius might get the victory: but Fabricius was so far from accepting
the offer, as he sent back the traitor to Pyrrhus, and bad him take heed how
he entertained such traitors so near him. But the king of Spain deal not so
with the Queen our mistres, when her poysonfull Portingall physician Lopus
would have poisoned her. For, from such hopes he takes heart, and has
already offered to invade us; and has been, and is still busied with us in
Ireland, and did carry a full purpose this last spring, to try the uttermost
of his strength to get footing here, had not her Majesty most prouidently
foreseen in her princely wisdom how fit it was to speak with him at his own
home, thereby to divert his forces from his intended invasion upon us, to
defend him self; and to that end she sent out a royal nauye under the
conduct and command of two honorable Generals; who dividing themselves the
one to keep the seas, and the other to set foot upon the spaniards sail. He
that desired to land, left his honorable companion with the greatest part of
the fleet, and himself hastes with the companies agreed upon, to the shore,
and with the extraordinary forwardnes of a General, he stayed not the
entrance of many before him into the town, but to the encouragement of all,
both before him and behind him, he showed little to respect the safety of his
own person; and more regarding the honor of his Sovereign, his country, and
himself, then his own life, he entered the town with a small number at the
first, and would not be daunted or driven back by the fiery fury of Spanish
shot, settled in every house to annoy him: but continued his course, till he
possessed the Market place, where he proceeded in his most valorous and
victorious attempt, to the winning of the town: which done, he joined himself
to his most honorable companion again, who no doubt was pressed and ready to
perform what belonged unto his place, if occasion had been offered. And all
England has just cause to praise God, for this blow of dishonor given to
Spain, and for the safe return of both the honorable Generals again: who so
speedily by their diligence, so prouidently by their government, and so
forcibly by their courage arrived upon his coast, approached an attempt, and
followed it with such magnanimity, as (by the goodness of ye Almighty) they had
most prosperous success, without any great loss of men, or shipping; and
returned safe home, by the assistance of ye same God, being as ready to defend
us from invasion, as they have showed themselves forward to offend him at his
own door. And no doubt this biting blow, lately given him by these two noble
Generals, has no whit abated his anger, but ince^sed him more: so as we are
not to doubt, but that he will no longer stay from offering a revenge upon us,
than he can furnish himself strongly to his liking. And herein shall he not
want the help of al his popish confederates, both foreign, and at home. For I
do not hear that the Popes holiness is so purged from ambition, or so
reconciled to religion, as he means not to continue his claim for the
Supremacy: or will cease to settle the dregs of his poison, and superstitious
doctrine amongst us. I cannot conceive that the thirst of Parsons, and his
pew-fellowes is yet quenched, from seeking the blood of our dear Sovereign,
and (in her) the destruction of us all; the cause remaining still, for which
heretofore they have sought it; neither can I be persuaded ye Spaynes malice to
England is yet abated, but that the Queen our mistress, and her kingdom, is
accounted with him a pray worth the enjoying. Therefore I doubt nothing of ye
Popes malicious forwardnes to incite it, and to add all the strength he can to
it; nor of our English traitors hearty disposition to further it; nor of the
Spaniards ambitious desire to take it in hand, and his willingness to do the
worst he can. And his worst let him do. For the God of heaven is with us, who
is a just defender of all those that have a just cause: and as it was said of
Constantius: Et causaque valet, causamque tuentibus armis: So may we say of our
Queen: Her cause is better that she takes in hand;
Her force more strong, Spaynes malice to withstand.


For whether we respect ye Pope, the fugitive, and home-traytors, or the King
of Spain; our cause is most just. With the Pope we stand for Gods sacred and
sincere truth, against his superstitious and Idolatrous falsehood. With the
fugitive and home-traytor, we stand for our Sovereign, and country, against
barbarous, unnatural, and most monstrous bloody hearted treasons. With the
ambitious King of Spain we stand for our rightful Queen, against an
usurping tyrant. And therefore there is no Christian heart so senceles, that
will not stand for God, against the Devil; for Christ, against Antichrist; for
truth, against falsehood: neither is there any true English heart so void of
loyalty to his Sovereign, and love to his country, but that he will stand
for both, against practices and plotformes of fugitives, against the fury, and
madness of home-traytors; and against the inuading humor of a bloody tyrant.

Now, dear countrymen, you have a taste of the black darkness, that this our
native, and natural country was in, when the Popish clergy carried the sway
amongst us; and what a blessed change did befall us, when the mighty God from
heaven allotted our most dear, and rightful liege Lady, to be his sovereign
substitute, to govern over us, his children, and her naturally borne subjects
of England; by whose happy entrance into this seat of government those dark
and cloudie days, dangerous both to soul and body, were turned into a
clear sun-shyne of comfort, to all, that had any taste, and savor of the
woeful blindenes they were held in; or had any fence, or feeling of their
countries misery. And lastly you have heard of the manifold dangers, that
this our dear sovereign, and supreme governor (under God) was in; both in
the time of her sister, Queen Marie; the bloody purposes, and practices
against her by the Romish clergy; as also after she was possessed of the
royal authority, due to her in this flourishing kingdom, by foreign malice,
and home treason; by which the peace of our land has been disturbed, her
precious life mischieuously, and many ways short at; and our whole country
sought to be runiated, and overrun by invasion from the ambitious tyrant of
Spain. And all these devises against her, and us, were plotted at Rome; from
whence that man of sin (the Pope I mean) has incited and encouraged
home-borne subjects to become rebels, in raising men, and carrying arms
against their rightful Queen; and to become bloody traitors in conspiring the
death of her, whose life is most precious unto us, and should have been most
dear unto them. But our never failing God has cut the throat of all those
platformes, and practices, by disappointing the purposes of all these rebels,
and traitors; and preserving the life of our gracious Sovereign Lady, beyond
the reach of all policy, and wit of man: for which we can never be
sufficiently thankful to this our good God, for that in the contynewing of her
life, (which the Lord still long continue) true religion, the lives of us all,
and our countries liberty, and tranquillity is preserved, and prolonged.

This bloudye monster of Rome does not stay here, but having already stirred
up Spain to set upon us both in Ireland, and in England, does still whet them
on, by his unholy prouocations, to invade; and Spain being enraged at his
former ill success when he was here, and the sharp blow now given him, will
not disobey his holy father at Rome; nor refuse to give a new attempt upon us,
to try whether he can speed better. For Romish malice is not easily abated;
and the thirst of a kingdom will hardly be quenched.

To meet with this proud popish champion, our careful Sovereign, and her
provident Council consult daily, and command daily. They consult of the best
means to resist him, and defend us; and they command all things necessary
to be provided by us, that we may stand strongly for God, for Queen, for
country, eue^ for the life, and liberties of our selves, and all belonging to
us. It behooves us therefore to be careful in our places also, that as her
Majesty, and her honorable Council consult, and command for the best; so we
should obey, and provide for the best.

It is said of a learned man, that the felicity of a Commonwealth consists
in well commanding, and well obeying. For if the commanders do their parts,
if obedience fail, their commanding is vain: but if well commanding be
answered with dutiful obeying, then is religion safe, the Queen is safe, the
Commonwealth is safe, and we are all safe. For Xenophon in his time says,
that, Quae hoc tempore habemus bona, ob nullam aliam causam adepti sumus, quam
ob praestitam obedientiam principi. So sacred and holy a thing is obedience to
Princes, before God himself, who commands us to obey: nay whom in this point
none can disobey, being a true Christian; and so reverend a thing was obedience
to such as knew not God, who were drawn thereto by the light of nature, and
by experience of their own feeling the sweet thereof. Now herein we have an
advantage above them: for we have both knowledge of God, who commands us to
obey, and him we may not disobey; and we have no less cause to feel the
benefit of godly and Christian obedience to our Christian prince, than ever
had, or has any nation of the world: and to show our selves senceles of
this, were to resist Gods ordinance, to be ungrateful to our dear Queen, and
to shake off all care to continue the peace and prosperity of our country;
and consequently to neglect our own private good.

I hold it a sound ground, and not to be controlled, that every Christian
ought to strive to keep these three things sound within his breast; his
conscience before God, his loialtie to his Prince, and his love to his
country. All which three for my part I account so nearly conjoined each to
other, as they cannot justly be severed. For in vain do we speak of
conscience to God, if we be short in loyalty, and obedience to her Majesty:
in vain do we brag of loyalty to her Majesty, if we carry not a love to
our country: and in vain do we protest love to our country, if we perform
not all love, loyalty, and obedience to our Sovereign, and labor not in some
measure to satisfy the duty of a good conscience to our good God.

Our conscience cannot but tell us, that all obedience is due to the sovereign
Magistrate. For we are taught it out of the book of conscience, the holy
Scriptures; which teach us that we must submit our selves to all manner of
ordinance of man, for the Lords sake; whether it be unto the King, as unto the
superior, etc. Our loyalty should tell us, and teach us, that the safety of
her Majesty consists in loyal, and true obedience from her subjects: for
obedience proceeds of love; and Amor ciuiu^ est regi inexpugnabile
munimentum, says Seneca. And our love should tell us, that the Commonwealth
is most happy, where obedience is most heartily performed. For, as one says
very notably, Nihil est, quod regnum aliquod reddat potentius, firmins,
serenius, aut durabilius, quam obedientia subditorum. Whosoever therefore has
any conscience before God, any spark of a loyal heart to her Majesty, or the
least sound love in his bosom to his country; he cannot but embrace this
obedience, every way in himself seek to express it, and with others
earnestly labor to persuade it.

Notwithstanding we have some, and too great a sum of those amongst us, that
shake off this obedience, and are so vehemently carried with a preposterous
blind zeal to popish Idolatry, that the Romish Antichrist challenging to be
Christ's Vicar upon earth, (though it be plain that in stead of Christ his
simple and naked truth, he sets up his unchristian, and carnal forgeries,
and untruths) is had in more reverence and regard, by those recusant
English-borne subjects, than is our most Christian, and most rightful Queen
Elizabeth. For although the commandment be given from God, that we should
obey her: yet dare they cover and cloak their disobedience under the
colorable name of conscience: whereas it is nothing else, but a vain, and
superstitious conceit, wrought in them from Rome, besotting them with a blind
love of their dregs, and making them (like to the foolish Israelties) to
prefer the leekes and onyons of Egypt, before the sweet Manna, wherewith the
Lord fed them from heaven. So that in them the old verse is fully verified:
Quisquis amat ranam, ranam putat esse Dianam.
The fool that to a frog his fa^cy ties,
As fair Diana thinks it in his eyes.


Now conscience must be grounded upon knowledge; and knowledge to guide the
conscience must be fetched out of the sacred and holy word of GOD; the
trial whereof they can no more abide, then can the owl the light.

I note three things in this kind of people, worthy to be known and
observed. First, the hurt they continually do: secondly, the hurt they would
do: and thirdly, their deep dissimulation. For the first, it would ask a
large discourse to discover all the hurts done by the^, they are so many and
manifold; I will only touch some. My own experience tells me, that where
the gentleman, and man of wealth refuses to come to the Church, and is in any
sort borne withal; there the meaner sort receive infection, and draw back from
obedience. For, A boue maiori discit arare minor.
Of elder ox the younger steer does learn.


If the men come to Church, and their wives refuse (which is a cunning trick
much practiced of late years) the^ is yt household, both children and servants,
in danger wholly to be corrupted. And sure it is, that the wives of the
meaner sort are infected greatly by them; and the night crows persuasion
prevails much; and in mint own knowledge, within these three years, many of
the meaner sort are fallen away, and do fall away daily: Impunitatis spes,
magna peccandi illecebra.

Touching the hurt they would do, who doubts but they would gladly have up
their Mass again, and banish the sincere worship of God? Their whole
catholic government and religion, I am sure, they long for. And yet, to
pronounce these men to carry hollow hearts to Queen Elizabeth, is thought to
be an uncharitable sentence. But I pray you tell me, Can God and Mammon;
Christ and Boliall; the table of the Lord, and the table of devils agree
together? Scripture says they cannot; and it becomes us to believe it, no
more can the Popes authority, and Queen Elizabeth's stand together: and yet
must I believe that these men carry loyal hearts to our Sovereign, though
they obey the Pope, and disobey her. For my part I see no reason at all to
believe them; and I wish all my countrymen to beware of them, for they are a
dangerous breed; and the more dangerous, because many of the^ show to have a
good outward civil carriage in civil matters. But let not that possess you
with too great a regard of them: and to deliver you from the danger of such
deceitful baytes, I must assure you that this is a true position, that,
without the true fear of God there can be no true religion; and unless the
religion be sound, the face, and show of civil honesty (seem it never so
glorious in the eyes of flesh and blood) is but a deceitful visour upon a
crabtree face, covering the most vile, and cankered parts of a most deceitful
heart; and so I come to their dissimulation.

These civil honest men, that under pretense of conscience rebel against God
in religion, and refuse to yield a loyal obedience to their liege Lady, and
Sovereign (as in religion, and policy they ought, in her most just, and
christian laws and commandments) seem to carry a most lamentable
resolution lurking in their bosoms, against Queen, Country, and us all, when,
they will seek the life of their, and our Queen, the thraldom of their, and
our country, and the ruin of us all, that profess the gospel, to have their
popish priesthood, and massing sacrifice up again; and if this be conscience,
I know not what conscience means. And yet this conscience they fetch from
Rome; and, by the plain profession of them that are fled the realm, and
have, (because they thought them selves out of reach) showed them selves in
their colors, we may justly doubt the affection of those, that remain with
us; how demurely so ever they will show to behave them selves. For they are of
the horseleach kind; and seem to expect when they may glut themselves with
the blood of Gods saints: without which they cannot have their Dagon up again.

The Recusants of our age cannot profess, nor make greater show of loyalty,
and love to our dread Sovereign: neither can serve her outwardly with greater
appearance of faithfulness; nor can protest more deeply by words and oaths,
their true and good meaning to her, than did Gardener, Boner, and Tonstall, to
her noble father, and brother; which they did confirm by printed books. For
Gardener he wrote his book De vera obedientia, and Boner added his epistle
before it; And Tonstall published a flat treatise against the Pope. But when
these two noble Princes were called to their last, and everlasting home, and
kingdom in heaven, and Queen Marie possessed the government of this kingdom
upon earth; then Gardener did tear off his glorious visour, and showed him
self in his right colors, and shape. For he, and his accomplices neuea rested,
till they had brought in the Spaniard, and had matched him in marriage with the
Queen; by which they betrayed God, her, and the whole realm.

This bloody intention by this linck thus strengthened, then comes Gardener
out publicly in pulpit with this sentence, Hora est iam nos e somno surgere:
perverting the sacred scripture most profanely, and blasphemously to his
bloody purpose; and what hauock he, and Boner, and the rest made of Gods
saints, and our dear brethren, and countrymean, stories make mention. Yea
further, as before I have set down, this bloody monster Gardener did put hard
at the life of our dear Sovereign, and mistres, by whom (next, and immediately
under God) we all live in peace, and safety, both of soul, and body; praised
be the almighty for her deliverance, and long may she live, to rule and
reign over us, to the wasting of popery to the least dram of that religion
(or rather superstition) amongst us; and to the rooting out, and utter
ruinating of all treasons, and traitors; and let all, that truly fear God,
carry loyal hearts to our dear Queen, and love their country unfeignedly, as
faithful christians, loyal subjects, and true hearted Englishmen, say Amen.

As for the rest, such of them, as are to be converted, I wish them true, and
speedy conversion, with all my heart; otherwise, rather than Gods true
religion should be darkened, her Majesty's least fingerake by treachery, and
treason; or my country sustain the least harm by their unnatural practices,
I wish their speedy confusion, and overthrow. For we may well say of them, as
Tullie said of Catiline the conspiratour, in one of his orations, In all, or
most of these happy years of her Majesty's most prosperous, and peaceable
government, there has been no traiterous practice against her person, or our
country, but it came always from them, and by them; whom neither shame of
their villainies, nor fear of punishment, nor any sound reason out of Gods
book, or the rule of true christian policy could withholde from pursuing
their traitorous purposes, and practices. And to see, or hear, that the royal
person of our Sovereign Lady was in danger, was pleasing to them; as
contrariwise, the news of her happy escape, was yrksome; so that, where there
is only the bare sense of a true English heart, these Popish Recusants cannot
bewitch, or deceive with their hypocritical holiness, or civil honesty: and
so I leave them.

Now my dear countrymen, to you, whom God has seasoned with a better spirit
of knowledge, and whose hearts he has taught to honor, and love your rightful
Sovereign, and Queen; and whom nature it self has instructed to hold your
native soil and country dear unto you; and to have a sensible feeling of
many miseries threatened against yourselues, your wives, and children; pluck up
your spirits, and be courageous in the Lords quarrel, in the Queens quarrel,
in your countries quarrel, and in your own quarrel; know, and acknowledge this
common quarrel of GOD, Queen, and Country, to be your own quarrel in deed.
For in this busy bending of devilish wits together to conspire; and this
ioynt-banding of huge, and strong forces to execute; your souls are hunted
after, that they may be imprisoned in the dark dungeon of Popish Idolatry
(which is the ready way to prepare them for the cheines of darkness for ever:)
your bodies are hunted after, to be exposed to their savage, and intolerable
torments; and here with your wives to be deflowred, your daughters to be
ravished, your sons to be made slaves, and all of you to be tied to a
lingering tormenting life, or a bloody cruel death; your lands and goods are
hunted after; not for ransomes to be accepted for your deliverance out of
their ciuell hands, but for prays, and rewards to the tormenting Soldier, and
proud tyrannical Spaniard.

Let us therefore labor to be instructed daily more and more in the
knowledge of Gods truth, that our consciences being grounded upon true
knowledge, we may be armed against all the subtle sleights of Satan, and his
Romish instruments; and with courage, and with boldenes stand to Gods
infallible, and eternal truth to our lives end; that when the time of our
dissolution comes, we may enjoy the crown of eternal glory; propounded to,
and prepared for all those that make a blessed entrance into the profession and
practice of true religion; continue therein with a christian proceeding; and
hold on with perseverance to the end.

Let us with all willingness strain our selves to our uttermost habilities, to
fight for God, for Queen, for Country, and for our own selves. For, what
benefit shall we receive of our wealth, if the ravening Spaniard catch hold
on us? And what comfort shall our wealth yield us, though we possess it, if
our bodies be in bondage? And what pleasure can we take of our lives, if we
see our wives, and daughters ravished, and defloured, and our sons tied to
perpetual slavery.

For although the ground (in show) of the Spaniards coming to invade us, is
his care to obey the Popes commandment, to reduce this land to his obedience,
in taking hold of, and receiving his Romish religion, and government; and our
simple Recusants rae so sottish, and so bewitched with the inchauntments of
Popish superstition, as they believe this to be true; and the rather, because
one of our Arch-runnagate traitors, sworn to the Popes pantable, published a
seditious pamphlet, before the last invasion, to persuade it; yet if you will
give me leave to call to your rememberance the manner, and meaning of his
coming into England, when he came, not as an inuader, to conquer; but as a
friend, to fasten a strong league of amity by a marriage, I doubt not to
discover the treacherous cruelty of his heart.

For this marriage was sought for, and intended also in show only to
strengthen the hand of the Queen of England, to bring in the Romish religion,
and government into this land; and to establish it with continuance, with
purpose, and meaning to add strength to all the corners of christendom, to
continue popery where it was; and to bring it in, where it was not; that so
the Archprelate of Rome might hold the scepters, and power of all princes, and
potentates of christendom in his hand, to dispose at his pleasure. But the
plots, and practices, laid, and pursued by the Spanish King, had made a woeful
proof to England of a further mark shot at (which was discovered in a
letter to some of our nobles from a true hearted Englishman in Spain) had not
God almighty, in his rich mercy, prevented their purposes, and defeated them
in their determinations; as it shall appear hereafter, if I first remember to
you that it is recorded of the Spaniard, that in diffimulation he surpasses
all nations, till he have attained to his purpose; and when he can once
prevail, he goes beyond them all in oppression, and tyranny; also that he
disdayneth all other nations; and that in pride, and carnal voluptuousnes no
nation comes near him, and these be his qualities.

Now to proceed to lay open the right mark, that in deed he shot at,
though when he made way to join in marriage with Queen Marie, he made
semblance of great conscience to Catholic religion, and great care to bring
the whole land into the obedience thereof; and seemed to glory much, when it
was brought to pass; as his letter to his holy father at Rome written out of
England does make show: wherein he expresses what a worthy work he had
done, when he had drawn the nobles, and commons of the land to submit them
selves to his holiness, as their chief (those are the very words) yet little
did the nobles, and commons know what was intended toward them by this
Catholic child of Rome. For under this colorable name of Catholic religion,
was hidden the ambitious humor of a most proud usurping tyrant; whose
resolution was, upon mature deliberation, and consultation with his
Machiauellian counselors, to seek, by all the possible kind means he could,
to win the principal of our nobles to affect him, and in their affection to
possess him of the crown, and so to establish him in an absolute power over
poor England; and to bring this to pass, he decreed to spare neither cost,
nor kindness.

If once he had obtained the crown, and regal power into his clutches, then
(as in yt letter of discovery is laid open,) own, with out wronging the
inferiors; the inferiors to live under the nobles, with all love, reverence,
and duty, the rich to dwell amongst ye poor without oppression; the poor to
dwell with the rich without disorder; the offenders to be punished without
partiality; and the well disposed to be defended, without respect of persons.
This the law of the land does offer unto us, to our comfort; and from this he
purposed to make an exchange to his Spanish laws; which being no better than
his Spanish Inquisition (as in deed they are not) we could not (out of
question) receive great comfort by the exchange. For the Inquisition
conuenteth without known cause; compels to accuse without reason;
condemns without proof; commits to the torture without color; and
finally never ceasseth till heart blood be sucked out of such, as make their
woeful appearance. Which unholy Inquisition he did most sauagely settle in most
parts of his dominions; and this bloody Inquisition would he not have failed
to bring into our land, with all other his laws, and ordinances suitable to the
same. Their intolerable taxes also we must have been pestered with; being such
(as my author reports, who knew them well) as England (thanks be to God)
was never yet acquainted with, neither, I trust, ever shall be. A taste whereof I
will give you, as, that for every chimnie, and other places to make fire in,
as ouens, fornaces, smithes forges, and such others, a french crown was yearly
paid to him. He had also powling pence for all manner of corn, bread, beef,
mutton, capon, pigges, goose, hens, ducke, chickin, butter, cheese, eggs,
apples, pears, nuttes, beer, wine, and all other things whatsoever the
people feeds upon. Yea no farmer, yeoman, or husbandman durst eat a capon in
his house, if his friend came to him. For if he did, it must cost him six
shillings eight pence though the capon was not worth twelve pence and so ioties
quoties. These be the benefits, and blessings, that this Catholic king
sought to bring in hither by this absolute authority sought for.

My author does further unfold his treacherous purpose toward this land,
Rome: wherein he showed a very conscionable regard of their souls health, and
salvation, by killing them, before he sought to convert them; or by sending
them where no instruction was to be had for them.

And, to make up the full measure of al impiety, the faster to settle his
crown upon his head from removing (if he had gotten it) he laid his plotte
to destroy out dear sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth: having decreed with
himself, that neither she nor any of that cursed nation (so he termed it,
and yet the Popes holiness had absolved it) should govern England any more. But
blessed be God, who has blessed us with the life, and reign of our blessed
Queen; who, (I trust) shall live to give him such a deadly blow, as neither
his cursed self, nor any of his cursed nation, (justly so to be called,
because the Pope, that cursed man of sin, has blessed them) shall ever see
the day to rule in England.

Whiles this plot was laid, and the practice was in hand, to set the crown
upon the Spaniards head, the Spaniards them selves did, in my authors hearing
(as he reports) often curse the time, that ever their king married Queen
Marie, unless they might get the crown; but if that might be brought to
pass (which was meant by making of the marriage) they should then do well
enough. Thus you see yt under the color of this marriage, salvation of souls
seemed to be sought for; but in deed destruction both of our bodies and souls
was pursued: Love to the nobles, and our whole nation, was manifested in show,
but in substance, the ruin both of nobles, and nation was intended: Strength
was said to be added by this match to our kingdom; but it is apparent they
sought to strengthen them selves, by weakening us, and our kingdom. For
without regard of sex, age, or degree, all were destined to slavery, and
bondage at the least; howsoever they escaped with life. To knitt up this; If
marriage (the strongest bond of amity to a true religious christian heart)
could not draw the least spark of true love from him to this noble Queen,
who so lovingly made choice of him to be her husband; nor the honorable
acceptance of him by the nobles, could work any sound love in him toward
them; nor his coming in terms of love to our country, could yield better
fruits, but to seek the ruin, and destruction thereof; what shall our dear
sovereign Queen Elizabeth, her nobles, and all her people look for now at
his hands, coming in open hostility, with banner displayed, ships manned,
swords drawn, ordinance charged, minds fully bent to root out Queen,
nobles, and people; and to make this flourishing kingdom a pray to his
ambitious bloody desire?

I look for little soundnes from those, that are fugitives of our nation; but
I could wish all English home dwellers should be so far from all senseless
feeling of their countries misery (wherein their own share is, of what
profession so ever they be) as to be not only free from treacherous combining
with the enemy; but also forward to stretch forth their hands to resist his
force. I would have none of Metius Suffetius his mind amongst us; who being
required by Tullus Hostilius, to aid him in his war against his enemies, he
promised to come (because he durst not deny him) but he stood a loofe off, and
beheld the fight, forbearing to join to either party, till he might see what
way the victory would go. But Hostilius perceiving his cunning, and
falsehood, caused him to be drawn in pieces with wild horses. You may read
also in the book of Judges, that Meroz was cursed for not helping in the war
against Sisera; and Jael, for her forwardnes therein was blessed. And surely
the curse of the Almighty must needs light upon al such Englishmen, as will
either by falsehood betraye their Queen, and country, for love to Rome and
Spain; or be cold in prayer to God, or faint in courage against the enemy,
or pinching in purse, to make all requisite provision for the defense of their
Sovereign, and country, against Rome, and Spain. Neutralitie, in matters
concerning christianity; or loyalty, sauoureth neither of a true hearted
christian, nor subject. And Solon made a law, that in any stir, or tumult,
all the Citizens should stand on one side, or other; he would have no neuters
amongst them.

Our Sovereign, and Country has been assaulted many ways; and they both
(through Gods great goodness) have escaped many dangers; And surely it behooves
us to know, and understand, that a danger past requires hearty, and continual
thanks to be given to the author thereof; and a peril depending, exacteth
both prayer, and providence. It is true, that we all, every mothers child of
us, are very slack both in prayer, and thanksgiving. Yet we are more ready to
beg of God those things we want, than to give him thanks for that we have
already received. Notwithstanding, as Augustine says, Non est dignus dandis,
qui non est gratus de datis. We are easily entreated in sickness to pray for
health; in danger to pray for deliverance; and in any adversity to cry for
help; but how soon sickness is forgotten, when health is restored; How easily
dangers fall out of memory, when deliverance is obtained; How little
adversity is thought of, when help is once granted; many examples do prove.
It is recorded for our learning, and warning, that ten Lepars were cleansed by
our Savior Christ; but only one came back, to give thanks. Again we read
that the Israelites were in miserable bondage under cruel Pharaoh; and whilst
the cross was upon them, they cried hard for help, and deliverance; but being
released of their misery, and delivered from the intolerable burdens of Egypt;
they are so far from being thankful to God, that they fall to murmur against
God; and in steed of serving him, that had saved them, they fall to Idolatry,
and false worship.

Let this warn us to beware we be not slack in thankfulness to our God, who
has bestowed so many blessings and benefits upon us, and has freed us from
many perils, by so many strange deliverances. For thankefulnes for a benefit
received, draws on a new blessing. And if ever this thankfulness were needful
to appear in us, it is now, when, beyond the policy and wit of man, the life
of our gracious Queen has been sundry times preserved; and in her Gods true
religion, our own lives, and our countries liberty both in soul and body
prolonged. Let us know for truth, that our God has not bound himself to
continue a God of favor, and defense to us, unless we continue thankful to
him. Therefore with the holy Prophet David let us say, Benedictus Dominus, qui
non dedit nos in captionem dentibus eorum. But is this enough? surely no. For
if our thankfulness come from a feeling heart, as it ought, it will not only
sound in words, but will also show it self in action; and that in our
continual care, and endeavor, both by practice and pains to seek the glory
of God, and the good of his Church. The prosperity and welfare thereof ought
to be more dear unto us, than our own lives. For no Commonwealth has promise
from God of peace, and tranquillity, but in the flourishing of religion, and
true beauty of the Church: and in deed hereupon the salvation of our souls,
and the safety of our Queen does depend: and it is most certain, that if
the Queen be in danger, we cannot look to sit safe.

I find amongst the learned, that sincerity of religion, and love of the
people, are two especial props and pillars of the state of a Prince. For
sincere religion teaches to love soundly; and sound love quenches all sparks
of disloyalty. Therefore I hold it for certain, that religion, and the Queens
safety cannot be severed. For if religion flourish, the Queen must needs be
safe: and, if the Queen be safe, religion must needs flourish: and, as I
think them to deal unsoundly, that seek to settle her safety, without care
of religion; so must I deem them to deal hypocritically, that speak much of
religion, without care of her safety. For he that shall carry a right and
sound care for Queen Elizabeth's safety, must first love religion, and fear
GOD: according to that, which Constantius the Emperor said, who (grieuing at
his peoples revolt from true religion, upon trial that he made of them)
plainly protested, They that will not be true to God, can never be true to
man. And therefore such of them as had any office, he puts them out; such of
them as were near about him, he displaced, and freed himself from the danger
of such hollow-hearted subjects, and servants.

Religion then is the true guide to every man's conscience, and holds every
man's conscience within the compass of true obedience; and this obedience
contains every good subject within the limits of true love and fear: and
where these two meet together, they make a sweet harmony in the heart of
every true subject. For love nourishes all care to please, and obey; and such
fear expels all disposition to offend; and both join together with a
feeling consent, to yield continual thanks to the almighty, for delivering
our Sovereign from danger, and to pray daily and hourly to his majesty,
that he will in mercy protect us still.

This peril depending, it behooves us to be provident. For as war is
denounced, and threatened from foreign parts; so conspiracies lie and lurk
closely at home in our own bosoms. Foris they prepare; intus they conspire,
and all to give a deadly blow to the state we live in; and to the person, whom
(next under God) we live by. For I say it again, and I cannot say it too
often, these preparers abroad, and these conspirers at home, shoot al at one
mark: our religion they would alter, and thereby bring our consciences into
thraldom: our government they would change, and thereby bring our bodies into
slavery: and, to effect these the more easily, the life of our sacred
Sovereign they would shorten, and thereby bring all misery and mischief upon
us.

These be high points, and of great consequence. For who would not rather dye,
than lose the liberty of his conscience? Who would not depart with any thing
that he has, to prevent the bondage of his body? and who would spare the
best blood in his body (much less his purse) to redeem all danger from his
religious, loving, and lawful Sovereign? I doubt not (dear countrymen) but
that you are men of wisdom, and can easily conceive what danger we stand
in, by that has bin set down before. You are men of judgment, and therefore
can easily consider, what furniture is fit for the strengthening of us, to
prevent such a danger (knowing treasure to be the finewes of war) and you
are men religious, loving, and loyal; and therefore will not refuse to strain
your purses far, rather than the religion of our God, the liberty of our
Country, and the person of our Sovereign shall be exposed to the desire of
Popish Idolaters, Spanish tyrannies, and bloody traitors.

It is no time for us now to plead poverty; the cause requires liberality;
and we must be liberal; the life of religion, of Queen, and country, is at
the stake. He that is sick of a dangerous disease, looks not into his
ability what he can spare; but looks into the necessity of his case, what
he must spare, to work himself recovery. And in this case he that would
spare any cost, al men would hold him a very savage, and unnatural miser. I
hope therefore being faithful Christians, loyal subjects, and true hearted
Englishmen; the religion, and truth of God, the liberty of our country, and
the safety of our Sovereign is of greater price with us, than ten thousand
lives; and none of us will make dainty to spend the last drop of blood in our
bodies, to ransom any of these; much less therefore will he spare to ransacke
the bottom of our purses, to add strength to prevent the danger. Penny thirst
in this case may bring pound peril: and (to speak plainly) with what comfort
can a religious Englishman live; I say, a religious man: for I speak not of
the superstitious Papist, the godless Atheist, nor the schismatical Brownist)
when he shall lose the liberty of his conscience? with what joy shall a man
enjoy his substance, when he is brought into bondage and slavery? and what
safety can there be to a right Englishman, when Queen Elizabeth is in danger?

Seeing then they seek to bring their Popish Idolatry to us again from Rome,
we must seek to entertain, and hold fast the religion of Christ Jesus sent
to us from heaven; and seeing they seek to tie us again in the chains of
superstitious Romish bondage, we must seek to hold fast, and increase the
liberty we enjoy, in the sincerity of Christ his gospel; seeing Rome, and
Romanists seek enuiously, and traitorously the ruin, and overthrow of our
Queen, and country; we must seek religiously by obedience, and assistance,
to uphold, and maintain the right, quiet, and prosperity of both.

It is not in us, or our power, to effect this; but it becomes us to show our
forwardnes, and willingness to effect it; our lands, goods, and livings must not
be respected, in regard of this; all prayer, all providence, and all endeavor
that can be, is little enough to follow, and finish so holy, and heavenly a
work; and this is our special comfort, the Lord himself is on our side, for
it is his own cause, who is of power sufficiently able to defend us; who in
his mercy is forward, and willing to defend us: and if we can call upon him in
faith, and will walk before him in fear, and trembling, he will never fail
us. For The Lord is nigh unto all those, that call upon him in faith, and
verity.

2. Chro. 15.
The same, that Azariah said unto Asah, and al Judah, the same may be said
unto our Sovereign, and unto all England; that the Lord is with her, and with
us, whilst we be with him; and if we seek him, he will be found of us; and
if we forsake him, he will forsake us. Which being uttered by this Prophet to
them, they make speed to turn from their evil ways; they haste heartily to
call upon the Lord; both king and people turn; both king and people pray; and
they all join in offering the sacrifices allowed, and looked for in those
times, and make a covenant to seek the Lord God of their fathers, with all
their heart, and with all their soul; and a law is set, that whosoever will
not seek the Lord of Israel, shall be slain, whether he were small or great,
man or woman; and they take a solemn oath to perform this to the Lord with a
loud voice, with showting, with trumpets, and with cornets: and it is said in
the text following, that all Judah rejoiced at the oath. For they had sworn to
the Lord with all their heart, and sought him with a whole desire. The blessing
also that followed this harkening to the Prophet, (bringing forth so religious
an obedience to his words) is set down. For it is said, The Lord was found of
them, and gave them rest round about. Here is a blessed watchword word from
the Prophet; a blessed obedience both from king and people; a blessed comfort
sent from God; and this happy issue followed; namely, the overthrow given by
Asah to the Ethiopians, who was set upon by Zerah of Ethiopia with an host of
ten hundred thousand, and three hundred chariots (as it is recorded in the
former chapter) and it is there said, that Asah did go out before him, and set
his battle; and Asah lift up his voice unto the Lord his God, and said, 1.
Chro. 14.11.
O Lord, it is nothing with thee to help with many, or with no power: help
us, o Lord our God; for we rest on thee, and in thy name are we come against
this multitude. O Lord, thou art our God, let not man prevail against thee.
And the text says, that The Lord smote the Egyptians before Asah, and before
Judah, and the Ethiopians fled.

Here is a lively pattern of our state and cause. Asah destroys Idolatry,
and banisheth false worship: he is maligned by the Idolatrous Ethiopians, who
send out forces against him; he prepares, and sets out against them; he
puts his whole and only trust in the Lord; he prays unto him; the Lord
hears him; the Lord scatters his enemies, and gives him the victory. Is
not this the very cause of our liege and Sovereign? who has banished Popish
Idolatry, and has established the true, and sincere worship of God; and for
this is maligned by the Antichristian Pope, by the ambitious King of Spain,
and by all the popish confederates of Christendom. And did not Spain man out a
huge Navy by sea upon England, as the Ethiopian did send out an army by land,
to set upon Judah? They prayed, and we prayed; the Lord heard them, and the
Lord heard us: the Ethiopian army the Lord of hoasts discomforted, and the
Spanish Navy the Lord of hoasts did disperse and overthrow. Upon this victory
the Prophet Azariah warned Asah, and all Judah; and both king and people
hearkened and obeyed: and since our victory, the Prophets and preachers of our
time have often warned us; and it becomes us to hearken and obey: which if we
do, then must we make the like covenant with our God that they did; join in
the like oath that they did, and joy when we have done it, as they did. Then
shall the same blessing be promised and performed unto us, that was unto them;
The Lord will be found of us, and will give us rest round about us. And if the
Lord for his own glory, and our trial, give a way to Rome and Spain, to set
upon us again (as they brag, and threaten that they will) let us believe
with Asah, that the Lord is of power sufficient to overthrow great and huge
armies with a small number; and let us pray to him with Asah, that he will stand
with us, and for us, in the day of battle; and then, no doubt, neither
Spain, Pope, nor Devil shall have power to prevail against us.

I find it recorded, that King Henry the 8. her Majesty's most noble father,
in the 19. year of his reign, (before the Lord had touched the eyes of his
heart, and pulled away the scales that darkened his spiritual sight) showed
such zeal to that superstitious religion of Rome, which in the time of his
blindness he professed, that upon war threatened, and pursued by the Emperor
against Rome, for the sacking thereof, he suffered the Cardinal to inioyne his
whole land and kingdom, that solemn Processions, and fasts should be
solemnly held (after their blind manner) for the deliverance of Rome from his
ruin intended toward it; in so much as this one Article specially is added to
their Letanie, Sancta Maria, etc. ora pro Clemente Papa.

Verily I could wish that not only commandments, and examples Canonical out
of the book of God, (whereof we have plenty) should of conscience move us to
such holy exercises in these times, because our sins have provoked the
judgment of God; but also that this zeal without knowledge in a false
religion, should even for shame incite, and stir us up with seruent zeal to
seek the glory of our God; and by such godly religious necessary exercises
to humble our selves before ye throne of his majesty, to beg either release of
these troubles threatened against us, and hastening upon us; or his arm of
assistance to defend us from the fury, and deliver us from the danger.

For if they could be drawn in a superstitious blind zeal, to fall to their
superstitious prayers for a priest; I see not how, with a good conscience, we
can be slack to fall to religious and hearty prayers to our God, for our
Christian religious Prince. If they could be so forward in England to fall to
prayers for an Italian stranger; much more ought we in England for our
naturally borne Sovereign. If they were so ready to pray to God for him, to
whom they could not subject themselves, and continue in a true, and holy
obedience to their God; much more should we haste to run to power forth our
prayers to the Almighty for her, to whom we ought to perform all obedience;
unless we will show our selves to rebel, and wage war against God himself.

I will enlarge this no further, but leave it to ye religious care of such as
carry the chief place in our Church, who (I doubt not) will play Azarias part
in warning our Asah; and I assure my self, our Asah will hearken to it, and
her whole people will follow with willing and most joyful hearts: which God
grant, that so this extraordinary attempt threatened, may have such
extraordinary exercises of fasting and prayer, as were (with the fruit of a
blessed success) used in the year 1588. when the Spaniards last attempted
invasion; and those not formal, but zealous; even such as may instruct the
conscience, to humble the heart, to acknowledge the sins committed, to meet
the Lord by repentance; and then no doubt the Lord will hear us, and our
victory will follow.

God give us repentant hearts for our sins, careful and sincere hearts to
our Sovereign, loving hearts to our country, and charitable hearts one toward
an other. No doubt then, out religion shall flourish, our Sovereign shall live
long, and our country shall ever prosper, maugre the malice, and practices of
all Tyrants and Traitors. For this ought we all to pray; and for this all,
that truly fear the Lord, and sincerely affect his truth, and gospel, will
daily, and heartily pray. But for this the superstitious papist has no will to
pray; and the scorning Atheist knows not how to pray. From the malice, and
madness of both these, God almighty deliver her Majesty, and this flourishing
kingdom; that God, and his truth may be wholly, and only reverenced, and
regarded; and such, as oppose them selves against him, either by corrupting his
religion, or flatly denying him, and al religion, may either by severity of
law be corrected, and reformed, or else by christian justice be removed from
amongst Gods people; that our English soil may not be stained with blasphemous
Papists, or profane Atheists.

Thus having adventured to make this rude collection of a matter most
necessary to be understood, and thought of, by all true christian hearted
Englishmen; I will knit it up with this earnest request to al my countrymen,
that my endeavor may be accepted, beause I have undertaken it of love; that my
defects may be borne withal, because my heart carries a good meaning; and
that the truth of the matters herein contained may receive no discredit through
my particular rudenes in the collecting; nor the cause it self (requiring a
special, and great regard) stand subject to any disgrace by want of good
method in me to dispose it. This obtained, I desire no more, but wish the
growing of Gods truth, and religion amongst us, by mighty increases; the
prolonging of our dear Sovereigns days with bodily health; and home quiet,
and the preservation of this little Island of England from Popish ignorance,
foreign invasion, and home treason.

God only can work this; and to God only I pray for this; and unto God alone
I commend his own cause, which is, religion, the safety of his anointed (by
whom, as the mean, Religion standeah with us) and the defense of our
Country, which, without religion, and her Majesty's safety, cannot long
prosper.

August. in Sermon. 210. de tempore. Non quisquam tibi potest nocere, si damnato
scelere diuinus in te germinauerit cultus.
FINIS.

