THE Solace for the Soldier and Saylour: Containing a Discourse and Apology
out of the heavenly word of God, how we are to allow, and what we are to
esteem of the valiant attempts of those Noblemen and Gentlemen of England,
which incur so many dangers on the seas, to cut off or abridge the proud
and haughty power of Spain.

By Simon Harward.

AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Orwin for Thomas Wight, and are to be sold at his
shop at the great North-doore of S. Paul's Church. 1592.

Ad Reuerendissimum in Christo patrem D. Johannem Cantuariensem Archiepiscopum,
totius Angliae primatem, and metropolitanum, Serenissimae Reginae asecretis
consilijs, and Honoratiss. virum D. Georgium Comitem Cumbriae, Dominum
Westmerlandiae, etc. Nobilissimi garteriorum ordinis equitem autatum, Dominos
suos colendissimo^.
CVrita grassentur? curtanta diutius Anglis
papicolae cur tot dira pericla ferant?
Hispanae cur sic inuicta class phalanges
conentur Christi tradere membra neci?
Cur pede foedi frago terram premat hostis Hybernam
perfidus? vsque and adhuc cur noua bella paret?
Cur mercatores, cur sic Jnquisitor illos
indignis tractet turba cruenta modis,
Quos pia, pacis amans nostra Jllustrissima princeps
misit saepe, sui foederis ipsa memor?
Cur Gallos reddat rabies Hispana rebels?
cur vicinorum depopuletur agros?
Cur male non pereant quos and Regina Britannum
insidiatores senserit esse truces?
Cur Christi spoliet Babylonica bellua caetum?
cur vinum stupri porrigat vsque sui?
Cur fulcrum papae viuat? Cur proruat vltra
in pecudes Christi sanguinolenta cohors?
Pe^^^ bonis ergo auspicijs o Nobilis heroes,
perge inuicte Comes, perge bonis auibus.
Sic charo sine fine suo gaudebit alumno
antistes primas Nobilis Angligenum,
Qui comitem teneris hunc enutriuit in annis,
o faustum talis cui moderator erat.
Vos (precor) omnipotens pariter conseruet vtrosque
perpetuusque simul pectora iungat amor:
Hic multos annos alter laetetur vt altro,
Reginae sum fidus vterque suae,
Et post longaeuae quam plurima gaudia vitae
stelliferum tandem scandat vterque polum.
Amplitudini vestrae deuotissimus, Simon Harwardus.

The preface to the Christian Reader.
THERE are three causes (good Christian Reader) which have provoked and drawn
me to the publishing of this rude and slender pamphlet. The first, for that I
have been thereunto requested, by certain godly and valiant Captains and
Ship-masters, with whom being on the spanish seas, under the conduct of the
most noble Earl of Cumberland, that they might with better confidence call
upon God, I labored sundry times, as well by private conference, as also in
my public Sermons so often and so far forth as my text would give me
occasion. The second, for that sithence my return home I have heard sometimes
of the obloquies and reprochful speeches of many, which have not stickt to
affirm, that these my voyages upon the seas have been some blot and
discredit to the doctrine which is or shall by me be delivered upon the land.
And thirdly, for that England has (I doubt) many seditious malcontents, which
being weary of their own welfare, do repine against those means whereby our
prosperity is preserved, as may plainly appear, as well by their unnatural
refusing to help their country, who had rather waste great sums in ungodly
suites of law, then to yield one mite toward the maintenance of the soldier
and the public affairs of the common wealth; as also by their unthankful
murmurings and unkind grudgings, which cannot afford a good word to them that
willingly undergo so many deadly dangers abroad, to procure the^ peace and
quietness at home: for the satisfying of all which parties, I have here taken
in hand, by the infallible word of the eternal God, to discuss and examine
that argument now so much in question, which howsoever at the first it will
seem strange, and as it were a paradox in divinity, yet being read with
indifferent judgment, I hope it shall in some part resolve and remove the
scruples and doubts in the hearts of the weak, if not stop the mouths of the
wilful and obstinate. And thus least perhaps, perceauing too large a preface
to so compendious a treatise, as the Cynick Philosopher saw a wide and stately
pair of gates to a poor and beggarly City, thou should begin to cry with
him, viri Myndij claudite portas, I briefly end, referring thee to that which
follows, which as I have penned for thy benefit, to encourage and cheer up
those which must be ready always to endanger themselves for thee and thine,
so I wish thee to read it with as friendly and welwilling affection. Jdib.
Oct. Anno. 1592.

Thine in the Lord Simon Harward.

The Solace for the Soldier and Saylour:
AS nothing is more comfortable to any man in whatsoever affairs he bestow
his travail, then to have the testimony of a good conscience in the things
that he takes in hand: for this will be unto him, as witnesses Solomon, Prou.
15.15. Prou. 28.1.
as good as a continual feast, and make him bold and confident in all his
exploits: so there cannot be a greater grief and torment to the mind, then in
conscience to condemn that which by our attempts and deeds we make profession
to allow: For if our heart condemn us, Romans 14.22. 1. Ioh. 3.20.
God is above the heart. Therefore for the solace and comfort of those valiant
Soldiers, which do often incur so many dangers on the blustering seas,
whose attempts I am bound ever to favor and honor, as being eftsoons an
eyewitness of their noble and courageous prowess, I have thought good here
to set down out of the heavenly word of God, the fountain of all true solace,
in this brief discourse and Apology, the causes wherefore, the limits how
far, and the manner in what sort their endeavors are to be allowed, and also
what affections they ought to carry, and what comfort and confidence they may
have in the lawful practice of Military profession. First therefore generally
of the lawfulnes of war and force of arms against the professed enemies of
Gods truth, and then more particularly of the voyages now commonly used on the
seas, against that grand vassal of the Pope the King of Spain, together with
the answer to those objections, which either the fanaticall Anabaptists, or
the seditious Papists, English men by name, but Spaniards in heart, do usually
make against those valiant and noble enterprises, so behouefull and so
beneficial for the sauegard and maintenance of this our Church and Christian
common wealth. Lawfulness of Military profession.
The lawfulness of Military profession is both in the old and new testament
sundry ways confirmed unto us. Abraham the father of the faithful, Ioh. 8.39.
a man truly mortified, and whose works our Savior Christ does propound as
an example to be imitated of all the children of God, to reskew his kinsman
Lot, gave the onset upon his enemies with three hundred and eighteen valiant
youths, and recovered Lot with all his substance. And when he had gotten many
rich prises and spoils of his adversaries, Genesis 14.18.
Melchizedeck the most lively type and figure of Christ, not only allowed his
exployt, giving to him and his men bread and wine to comfort him, but also he
received tithes of the said spoils, as the Priest of the most high God, which
is both a comfort to all those Ministers that serve in time of war, that the
first tithes that ever were spoken of in the Scripture, were paid of prizes
taken in war: and also it is to all other soldiers a very manifest
approbation of their profession, for that God accepts the tenths of the
spoils obtained by them. Deuteronomy. 23.18.
For that most just God which utterly abhors those that offer the price of
an harlot, Matthew. 27.6.
and does expressly forbid the price of blood to be cast into Corban, that
Lord would in no wise have received the tenths of soldiers spoils, unless he
had also allowed their profession to be sacred and holy. The wars which are
lawfully taken in hand against the open enemies of the Church of God, are
indeed, as they are called, not the wars of men, but the wars of the Lord
himself. When the Israelites fought against the mighty host of Sisara, there
was a city Meroz which would not take part with the people of God: but Deborah
inspired with the spirit of God, does curse them for that (as the Prophetess
said) they did not take the Lords part. Judge. 5.23.
Iehosaphat was encouraged not to fear the multitude of his adversaries, for
that the wars were not his, but the wars of God himself: for so said the
Prophet, Fear not, 2 Chro. 20.15.
it is not your wars but the wars of God. What heart and conscience David
carried in his wars, does evidently appear by that his humble thanksgiving,
Psalm. 144.1.
Blessed be the Lord my strength which teaches my hands to war, and my
fingers to fight. At the reedifying of Jerusalem, when Sanballat and the
Arabians with others, had made a cursed league against it, Nehem. 4.14. and
verse. 20.
Nehemiah exhorted the Jews to fight for themselves, and for their brethren,
for their wives, and for their children, and then said he, our God will fight
for us. The Lord by his own mouth does very apparently allow war, when he
makes laws and statutes for the right use thereof. Deuteronomy. 20.2.
As that when the people go to war, they should take the Priest with them to
use exhortations for the strengthening of their faith, that they may be fully
persuaded that the Lord goes with them to fight for them against their
enemies. Deuteronomy. 20.10.
And further, he commands that before they set upon their enemies with sword
and fire, they should first offer peace: For although war be a lawful
remedy against the professed enemies of the Church of God, yet is it the last
remedy, War the last remedy.
and then only to be used when no other means can prevail. It may well be
compared to the fawing off and fearing of the festered and rotten lims of a
man's body, which remedies are then only to be put in ure, when the case is so
utterly desperate that there is no hope of doing good by any other means. And
for this cause says the Lord, let them first offer peace, and yet therewithal
allowing against the rebellious and obstinate, to destroy them with the edge of
the sword. When the soldiers came to John the Baptist, demanding what they
should do, he showed them how they should live justly and lovingly among
themselves, but in no case did he bid them to forsake their profession: nay
rather in flat words he allowed their vocation, Luc. 3.14.
when he bad them be content with their wages. Shall the forerunner of Christ
allow to the soldier his ordinary pay, as the Apostle Paul seems also to
grant, when he makes the demannd, Who goes to warfare at any time at his
own cost? 1. Cor. 9.7.
And do they not also therewithal permit him in the body of the Common
wealth, to put in ure that function and office whereby he is lawfully
maintained? A Christian Common wealth does very well resemble the body of man:
The head in government next under Christ is the Prince and sovereign
Magistrate, the arms are the Knighthood and Chieualrie, the soul is the
professing and true embracing of the Gospel of Christ, the legs are the
Commons and husbandry, whereby the whole body is sustained and vpholden: and
every of these have their several lawful duties, according as the necessity
of the body shall require. The Centurion in Capernaum, Luc. 7.9. Act. 10.2.
and 48.
and Cornelius in Caesarea were soldiers and Captains of several bands, yet
the one of them is commended to have such faith as was not to be found in
Israel: the other is renowned for his prayer and alms and zeal to the truth
of God, both of them are received into the bosom of the Church of Christ,
neither of them is any way exhorted to renounce their former vocation, neither
did the outward warfare hinder, but that inwardly they both continued the
faithful soldiers of Jesus Christ against sin and wickedness.

Yea say some, Objection against piety in Soldiers.
if that holiness were now in our men of war, they were the better to be liked
and allowed: but where are such devout men now to be found? what are they now
but swearers and ruffians? what are they but thieves and robbers? so ungodly
and so greedy of pray, that they spare neither friend nor foe, all is fish
that comes to the net, and whatsoever is gotten by them is not employed as it
was by the Centurion and Cornelius, in building a Synagogue for the maintenance
of Gods service, and in relieuing the poor distressed members of the mystical
body of Christ, but in upholding and frequenting most filthy brothell houses
and benches for Bacchus in every corner.

Respons.
I must needs confess, that as in all other callings iniquity does more now
abound then ever it did, because the devil does now rage most, Revel. 12.12.
knowing that he has but a short time to raygne: so also of Soldiers many
horrible abuses are committed. And yet I doubt not, but that the Lord has
still amongst them many Cornelies and Centurians his true and faithful
servants. Abuses of war ought not to abrogate the lawful use thereof.
But howsoever among the most part iniquity does now prevail, yet the abuses
of war ought in no wise to abrogate the holy and lawful use thereof. What
blessing can possibly be more abused then is now the peace of the Church and
common wealth? Peace has increased plenty, plenty has wrought pride, pride
has hatched disdain, and disdain has brought forth such strifes and debates,
such suites of law, such quarrellings and contentions as never were heard of in
any age before us. Shall we therefore conclude that peace is not to be
allowed, or that peace is not the good blessing of God? God forbid: Let us
seek rather to lament and amend our own most wicked abuse of this bountiful
gift of God, and pray continually for grace, that we may hereafter use it more
rightly to Gods glory and our comfort. So is it in Military discipline, what
power and strength we have therein, is the holy handy work of God, though of
many it be shamefully abused, yet no abuse ought to make us to condemn the
good and lawful ordinance of God. Saint Paul when he had showed the Romans
that higher powers are ordained of God, Romans 13.2.
Verse. 4.
he declares that one end of their ordinance is to take vengeance on the^ that
do ill, and not to bear the sword in vain. The Anabaptists which utterly
deny al magistracy, affirm that the apostle speaking higher powers does
signify such heathen tyrants as were the^ the Roman Emperors; for them to
bear the sword to torment and punish others they confess is a thing well
sitting and beseeming for them: But Christians must be all one, for them to
have or be Magistrates (they say) it is in no wise tolerable. If these
fantastical spirits would consider more deeply the doctrine of the Apostle,
they should see that he allows Magistracy especially amongst Christians;
for he requires such rulers as under whom we may lead a godly and peaceable
life. 1. Tim. 2.2
Under heathen tyrants the Christians may indeed live godlily: but how is it
possible that they should live peaceably? The Apostle does will us to pray for
such Magistrates as under whom we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life, in
all godliness and honesty: When the Apostle Peter said to our Savior Christ,
behold here are two swords, our Lord Jesus answered that they were enough,
allowing the having of them, Matthew. 26.
but he reproved such striking with them, as whereby Authority might seem to
be impugned. That monstrous Pope Julius the second, who made as it were a
pastime of the blood of man, by whose cruel practices there perished with the
dint of sword more then two hundred thousand persons, An. Dom. 1512
he made a jest and mockery at the Apostles carrying of swords: for matching
once out of Rome with his Army, and his sword by his side like a valiant
Champion, in a furious rage he cast Saint Peter's key into the river of Tyber,
crying out, as a Spaniard does report the history: Pues que la llaue de pedro
ya no vale, valga la espada de pablo. Seeing that Saint Peter's key will do no
good, let the sword of Paul take place. But the holy Father, Saint Augustine,
does reverently and in the fear of God make better use of the Apostles having
a sword, to wit, that it is lawful for Christians to bear the sword; but that
then only we are to use it when we are either commanded or permitted by the
superior power so to do: for these two limits does he make of the right and
wrongful use of the sword: He unlawfully takes the sword, August. lib. 22.
contr Faustum Manichaeum. cap. 70.
Qui nulla superiore and legitima potestate vel iubente vel concedente in
sanguinem alicuius armatur, which no superior and lawful power either
commanding or permitting is armed against another man's blood. Many there are in
our time which go not so far as the Aanabaptists to deny and utterly take
away the sword and Magistracy from Christians: they will allow them to be used
against malefactors at home, or against the heathen, War against the Spaniard
how to be allowed.
Turks and Infidels abroad, but in no case against the Spaniard, professing as
they say, the same GOD with us, holding the same articles of Christian faith,
members of the same Church, partakers of the same baptism, and living in the
same hope of life everlasting. We see in the holy Scripture that when Israel
was once separated from Judah, and revolted to Idolatry, Judah was enjoined no
otherwise to account of them and no otherwise to deal with them, then with the
professed enemies of Gods truth. 2. Chron. 19.2.
Iehosaphat was reproved of the Prophet, for that he gave any aid to Achas
king of Israel against Ramoth Gilead: and he was likewise condemned afterward
for that he joined friendship with Ochosias king of Israel to make ships to go
unto Tharsis. 2. Chron. 20. v. vlt.
Amaziah hired succor of Israel against the Idumeans, 2. Chron. 25.6.
but he was willed rather to lose the money then to have any thing to do with
them. 2. Chron. 22.5.
Ochosius was condemned for helping Ioram the son of Achab against Hazael
king of Syria. What was the cause that the people of Israel might not so much
as be helped against the heathen? men, and therefore indeed accounted worse
then heathen? Were they not the posterity of Abraham after the flesh? Did not
they retain, as well as Judah, the name of the Church of God? Had not they the
same law amongst them as Judah had, and received the same seal of Circumcision
with them? 2. Chron. 21.13
No doubt they pretended all these things: but in the mean time they committed
Idolatry, and therefore they were utterly cut off from the Church of God.
Boast they might of vain titles, but they were in no wise to be counted the
people of God: nay rather so long as they continued Idolaters, they were to be
reputed and taken as open and manifest traitors against the high Majesty of
the eternal God. The Lord condemns for Idolatry not only the worshipping
of any heathen God, or the resemblance thereof, but also all such visible forms
and pictures as are made, either in them or by them to worship the true God.
When the people of Israel did worship the golden Calfe, Exodus 32.
they were not so sottish and senseless as to think that the Calfe which they
had made was truly God. That which they thought was this, Exodus 32.4.
that the honor which was done to the Calfe was done to GOD. The feast which
they kept was called a feast to Iehoua, and they cried out, these are thy Gods
O Israel which brought thee out of the land of Egypt. Psalm. 106.16.
So David says, that they turned the glory of God into the similitude of a
Calfe that eats hay. This was the Idolatry of Jeroboam and the Children of
Israel, to make visible representments to worship in remembrance of the true
God. And this is the best that the popish rabble can make of their Idols and
pictures, that they worship not them, but God in them Al is one and comes to
one and the self same point, and either of them is condemned for Idolatry,
that is, high treason against the Majesty of God, to seek to thrust him out
of his throne, and to place in his stead the works of their own hands. Besides
their other most horrible Idolatry in the Mass, where they erect and worship
their wheaten God Maizim, ascribing that to the creature which is due to the
creator only, whose name be blessed for ever and ever. Howsoever the Spaniards
bear the name of Christians, they are nothing less then what they pretend,
they may be in the Church, but they are not of the Church, and they are so much
worse then the heathen Infidels, as a rebel and traitor within the walls is
more pernicious then a foreign or outward enemy: whatsoever punishment then
may be inflicted on our professed foes, the same or much greater may justly be
laid on them: although indeed there is no more professed foe to the kingdom
of our Savior Christ, then they which by all means uphold that man of sin,
2. These. 2.4.
that son of perdition, which does fit in the Temple of GOD as God, boasting
himself that he is God: Apoc. 17 9.
that Babylonian strumpet, Apoc. 14.8.
which sitting on the City that has seven hills do give all nations to
drink of the cup of the wrath of her fornication, which therefore bears the
name of Antichrist, as the most bitter and professed enemy of the kingdom of
Christ, chalenging to himself all those offices which of right and duty do
only appertain to our Savior Christ: for how is Christ our only King, if
the Romish Bishops have power to give the holy Ghost, and to forgive sins,
John 15.21.
and so consequently to create faith and repentance, and to renew the inward
man, without which graces there is no remission of sins? Heb. 10 14.
How is Christ our only Priest, if they have power to offer up the body and
blood of Christ as a sacrifice for our sins? No mortal man, no worm of the
earth, no sinful creature, no nor yet any Angel in heaven was fit to offer up
the sacrifice of the body of Christ, but one higher then the heaven of heavens,
even Jesus Christ himself, he was the Priest, he was the sacrifice, Heb. 7. v.
vlt.
he offered himself once for all. How is Christ our only mediator, if they may
erect so many new intercessours and advocates, 1. Tim. 2.5.
joining them in commission with Christ, Heb. 1.1.
for whom Christ shed his blood? Romans 1.16.
How is Christ our only prophet, if they may establish decrees and traditions
to supply the want of the Gospel of Christ, as though they had an office
appointed to make up that perfect and absolute, which our heavenly Prophet
Jesus Christ should leave raw and imperfect? How may they be said to hold the
same faith with us, which are as far from us in every chief article, as light
is from darkness, or Christ from Belial. We hold and acknowledge that our Lord
Jesus to satisfy the justice of God, took truly flesh of the Virgin Marie,
like unto us in all things, Heb. 2.16.
sin only excepted, as the Apostle witnesses to the Hebrews: Christ took
not the nature of Angels, but he took the seed of Abraham: As if he should
have said, it had bin no justice that God should have punished the sins of
man in an heavenly or angelical nature; but as truly as man's flesh did
sin, so truly it was requisite that the flesh of man should pay the
punishment. And therefore Christ to answer that justice of GOD, Heb. 4.15.
took not an angelical, but a true natural body, like unto us in all
things, sin only excepted. And we believe further, that our Savior Christ,
1. Cor. 15.20. Col. 1.18.
as the first fruits of them that slept, and the pledge of our inheritance,
rose again in the same humane nature and ascended into heaven there to take
possession for us, and thereby to assure us, that as he being our head is gone
before, so we the body shall in due time follow after. What affinity has
this our true faith in Jesus Christ, with that monstrous doctrine of the
Antichristian Catholics, which attribute unto Christ a fantastical body,
and many bodies, and an infinite body, and therefore indeed no true natural
body; which does expreslie contradict two of the chiefest articles of our
Christian faith, and as much as in them lies, undermine and cast down the
principal bulwark of man's salvation. Moreover we are assured by the holy word
of GOD, that the Lord does give unto us in and through his Son Christ, full
remission and pardon of all our offenses, both from the guilt of sin, and
also from the punishment thereof: for the Lord in respect of his infinite
justice will not forgive a trespass, and afterward exact the danger of it, and
in respect of his unspeakable mercy he must needs give a sound and a perfect
benefit. Thus does the word of God teach us, that there is no accusation at
all or any laying of any thing to the charge of Gods elect, Romans 8.33.
that there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1.
Psalm. 32.2.
that the Lord will no way impute their sins unto them, that the Lord will
remember their sins no more, Psalm. 103.12.
but cast them from him as far as the East is from the Weast, Mich. 7.19.
or, as the prophet speaks, bind them in a bundle and cast the^ into the
bottom of the Sea. They teach that the guilt of sin is forgiven by Christ, but
that the punishment thereof must either be paid by straight penance and
afflicting our bodies here, or else after this life by the pains of Purgatory,
and therefore flatly against the word; that there is an accusation, there is a
comdemnation, there is an imputation, and there is a remembrance of sin after
the remission thereof, then which doctrine nothing can be more derogatorie and
blasphemous against the price of the blood of Christ, which as Saint John
says, does purge and cleanse us from all our sins. Furthermore, 1. John. 1.7.
we profess and are persuaded, that as in all the whole life of a Christian
there should be truth and fidelity, so especially in truces and leagues of
kingdoms and common wealths: as the scripture teaches us, that loyalty and
leagues are to be kept even with heathen men. There was a league made betwixt
the Israelites and the heathenish Gibeonits, Joshua. 9.15.
above four hundred and four score year after the league was broken, the
Lord was so offended at it, 2. Sam. 21.4.
that he sent three years famine, and seven sons of Saul were hanged up as
a token of Gods judgment against truce breaking even with heathen men. 2. Reg.
25.7. Iere. 39.1.
Zedechias promised loyalty to the heathen king the king of the Caldees, he
brake his league, the wrath of God was so kindled against him, that being
vanquished he was compelled to fly, in the flight he was taken, his own
sons were slain before his face, his eyes were after thrust out, and he was
bound in chains and led prisoner into Babylon. In truce-breaking the Lord
punishes even the children and offspring, to testify his wrath and severe
judgment; as the French men have in verse, God grant they may have it ever in
mind.

Bien que le dieu du oiel ne piluit pas sur l' heure
Le perfide (...) sto^^^ de ^a^^^^ and periure,
Il n' escappe pourtant sonire qui i'en flamme
Et destruit a la fin luy see enfans and femme.
Though for a time the Lord of heaven
do spare the perjured wight,
Yet at the last on him and his
Gods burning ire shall light*
K of Spain.
But this Foedifragus the Hannibal of Spain, as he is taught and does profess,
Fidem non esse seruandam cum haereticis, that whomsoever the Church of Rome
does condemn for heretics, there ought no says to be kept with them: so he
has showed it in sufficient proof, both in practicing secret conspiracies
against out whole realm, as was found out by the dealings betwixt Mendozza and
Throgmorton, and also in his sending of troops of armed men to invade Ireland,
to bereave her Majesty of a part of her imperial Crown and dignity. And
finally in casting about to surprise and entrap the whole Fleet of the English
Merchants, her Majesty's dutiful subjects, when they meant him no harm: but
under the hope of the performance of his league, did traffic without fear:
For I speak not now of any thing that he has done fithence he has showed
himself our professed enemy. But (think they) the Bishop of Rome may
dispense with all disloyalty, he may dispose Kingdoms at his pleasure, he
has taught us that no faith is to be kept with heretics, this is our anchour,
this is our hold. Luc. 4.6.
The Evangelist S. Luke sets down the words of the devil to our Savior
Christ, when he showed him all the kingdoms of the earth and the glory of
them: All these (said he) are mine, and I can give them to whomsoever pleases
me, He lied most blasphemously, as he could not but lie, being the father of
lies and a liar from the beginning: Ioh. 8.48.
says the eternal wisdom of God, By me Kings reign, Prou. 8.15.
and Princes decree Justice. Matthew. 8.28.
The devil has not so much as power of swine, without the permission of Jesus
Christ: And as the devil did most untruly challenge to himself the power and
authority due to God only, to give and dispose all the kingdoms of the earth:
so his eldest son Antichrist does inherit the same untruth, he may bestow al
kingdoms as seems best to him, he may give England to the Rebels in the
North, Ireland to Stukely and others, France to the Leaguers, the Indies to the
Spaniards, to be made two fould worse the children of hell then they were
before, and all the kingdoms of the earth how and to whomsoever he pleases.
K. of Spain.
So also his grandchild the King of Spain does imitate very well the steps
of his forefathers, he may deal how he will in all kingdoms, against league,
against right, and against truth, how and in what sort soever pleases him.

Thus ye see then how the Popes children and sworn soldiers in Spain, first
partly by their Idolatry, and partly by their damnable heresies, do utterly
deface the true worship of God: secondly, they wickedly usurp the offices and
dignities of our Messiah, our anointed King, Priest and Prophet: thirdly, they
fight against the truth of the humane nature of Christ, and the verity of his
ascension; the most noble fortresses of our salvation: fourthly, they seek to
obscure and ouerwhelme the fruits, effects, and merits of the passion of our
Savior Christ. And last of al, they are such as in no wise may be trusted,
being not only workers and permitters, but even professed patrones of all
treachery, falsehood and disloyalty. And therefore greater severity is to be
showed upon the confederates of this so dangerous a conspiracy within the
walls of the Church of God, then is to be used to any foreign foes of the
heathen whatsoever. To beat down this devilish pride and falsehood of the
Antichristian band, all true Christians which are armed with the authority of
the Magistrate, Revel. 19.15.
ought to go on courageously and cheerfully to tread the Winepresse of the
Lords wrath, as S. John speaks, Reu. 18.6. and 9
to reward the whore as she has rewarded others, and to let the smoke of her
burning ascend for evermore. But here, me thinks, I hear some say unto me,
That Antichrist and his confederates are to be beaten down and destroyed, Of
war to be proclaimed.
we make no doubt nor question: but this should be done in war openly
proclaimed, and not in such privy intrapping and laying in wait, and rather
should their whole realm be set on, then the Merchants surprised, which labor
truly and painfully for the relief of themselves and their families. To the
answer of which objection we are first to be advertised, that whatsoever the
enemies of the grace of God do possess, howsoever they have toyled for it and
obtained it with the sweat of their brows, yet is their possession no better
the^ the possession of brute beasts, which as we see by the ox, horse, and
mule, do travail in their several kinds for that wherewith they are
sustained. There is no lawful possession indeed but where the faith of Christ
is embraced and received. 1. Cor. 3. verse. vlt.
S. Paul says, That all is ours as we are Christ's, and Christ Gods. The world
was made for the faithful. Howsoever the enemies of Christian faith do
painfully travail in their several trades of life, yet are their goods not so
their own, but that if they fall into the hands of the army of the Lord under
the authority of a lawful Magistrate, it may be said of them as it was said
by the Psalmist, Psalm. 105. verse. 44.
The Lord has brought forth his chosen with gladness, and given them the
lands of the heathen, and they took the labors of the people into their
possession. The people of Canaan might labor painfully, but the gain and
profit of their labors was the strength and maintenance of their princes and
rulers, as also now the wealth of the Spanish Merchant is the might and power
of the King: for as the Merchant grows more and more in wealth, so does he
build and fortify his ship stronger and stronger, and at the last the King
commands both his ship and him. And therefore as the people of Israel did then
under Joshua, so may we do under our Christian Magistrate now, even so far as
God shall lead forth his chosen with gladness, weaken the powers of the
governors, Psalm. 105.44.
by taking the labors of the people into our possession. Moreover, there are
many things which are in no wise lawful in private men, that are allowed and
tolerated in those which are armed with the authority of the public
Magistrate, against the professed enemies of the Church of God: It is said to
the one, Romans 12.19. Matthew. 5.39.
Avenge not your selves: if they strike thee on the one cheek, turn to them
the other also: It is said of the other, that they are the ministers of GOD
even for this purpose, Romans 13.4.
to take vengeance of evil doers, and not to bear the sword in vain. It is
commanded the one to forget injuries, Matthew. 18. verse. vlt.
and as fully to forgive as they hope to be forgiven: It is enjoined the other
by express words to remember the injuries of Amalec. Deuteronomy. 25.17.
Remember (says God) what Amalec did unto thee by the way when ye were come
out of Egypt. And remember we may how the bloody Spanyard has fought at
sundry times by most dangerous conspiracies, to rent our nation asunder.
Remember Amalec: Remember how many godly English Merchants their Inquisitors
have most cruelly tormented and spoiled. Remember how hardly they have dealt in
evil entreating such Ambassadors as have been sent from our most gracious
Sovereign. Remember how injuriously they sent to invade her Majesty's Realm
of Ireland. Remember how they attempted with their invincible Navy at once to
swallow us up. Remember Amalec. Deuteronomy. 23.20.
Whereas the law in Deuteronomie forbids the Jews to commit any usury
amongst themselves, and yet allows it them to be used toward strangers, S.
Hierom does by strangers understand the public and professed enemies of the
people of God. His reason is, for that their goods are not their own: they
usurp so long as they are destitute of the truth of God. The like may be said
of guilefull policy: It is not to be allowed in Christians amongst them
selves, who are to use that simplicity of Doves, Matthew. 10.16.
which wants all manner of guile and harm: And be as S. Peter says, Like
newborn babes: 1. Pet. 2.2.
or rather as the Greek word signifies, like now borne babes void of all
fraud and deceit. Yet dare I not condemn that policy of Joshua, who besieging
Ai, Joshua. 8.4.
placed thirty thousand strong men behind at the West side in a privy ambush,
making a show himself as though he would fly before the townsmen of Ai,
only to entice them out, that his men who were privily placed behind might
suddenly oppress and make havoc of them. Neither dare I disallow the policy
of Iehu, 2. Reg. 10.
which by making a pretense that he would do sacrifice to Baal, did thereby
assemble the Priests of Baal, that he might the better at once dispatch them:
For as Hierom witnesses, Hieron. vt citatur decret. causa 22. quaest. 2. cap.
vtilem.
he had no so good a way with so little blood to take speedy vengeance of Gods
enemies. The Apostle bids no man to oppress or defraud his brother: for the
Lord is an auenger of all such things. Luc. 3.14.
And S. John the Baptist wills those devout soldiers which came to be
instructed of him, not to offer violence one to another: yet may we not
condemn David, who made a spoil of the Amalechits, 1. Sam. 30.26.
and sent part of the prises which he had gotten, to the Elders of Judah, Ramoth
and Bethel, with this notable salutation and greeting, Ecce vobis spolia de
inimicis Domini: Behold ye the spoils of the Lords enemies. Psalm. 24.1.
The earth (says David) is the Lords, and all in the same contained. God is
the chief Lord of all: we have nothing lawfully but what we hold of him in
capite. The professed enemies of the Lords Church do hold no tenure of GOD in
capite, being cut off from the head Jesus Christ: whatsoever then they enjoy
they possess it as thieves and robbers: and therefore the bereauing them of it
is not theft, but as David does term it, a spoil of the Lords enemy. Or if
it be theft, as it pleases our secret Papists to term it, yet is it such a
robbery as by the mouth of the Spaniards themselves is allowed: for they have
a verse and common proverb in Spain, Quien hurta al ladron
Cien dias gana de perdon.
He which robs a thief always
Has pardon for a hundred days.


Libr. 2. de bello vandalico.
Procopius witnesses, that in Numidia in the city of Tingit, in two Pillars
of Marble, these words are graven in the Phoenician tongue: Nos Maurusij sumus
qui fugimus a facie Iosue filij Nun praedonis, we are Moors which fled once
from the face of the thief Joshua the son of Nun. Thus was Joshua the true
servant of GOD accounted and termed a thief when he did lawfully conquer and
take spoil of the Lords enemies. But here some may say: Goods of Papists that
live with us.
what shall we esteem of the goods of those Papists that live amongst us? Have
they no lawful possession of that they have? Is it lawful for us to spoil
and bereave them of their possessions? Aug. lib. 22. contr. Faustum Manichaeum.
cap. 70.
Surely there is nothing wanting but that which Augustine does name as the
ground of all wars, legittma superior authoritas aut iubens aut concedens, A
lawful superior authority either commanding or permitting. The Magistrate only
must judge who offend of weakness, and who offend of wilful obstinacy, and
without the Magistrate nothing may be done: no not so much as amongst the
heathen men be the subjects never so faithful Christians, and be their Princes
and governors never such heathens or Infidels, Romans 13.2.
it is in no case lawful for the subject to rebel against his Sovereign
Prince. All superior powers are ordained of God. Ier. 27. v. 6, 7.8.
Nabuchadnezzar so long as he bare rule is called the servant of God: I have
given all these lands, says God, to Nabuchadnezzar my servant, and all nations
shall serve him and his sons until the time of his land be come also. And
that people that will not serve him I will visit with the sword and with famine
and with pestilence: I could never read that God did long prosper any rebelling
against their Sovereign, but he has often blessed strangers when they have
sought to deliver their neighbors from tyranny or Idolatry. Genesis 14.4.
When five Princes who had sworn loyalty to Chedorlaomer as their Sovereign
and were twelve year subject to him, did afterward rebel against him, they
and all their power were quickly discomfited. But when Abraham a stranger came
but with very small might, the Lord sent unto him a most noble conquest. Genesis
14.17.
Both under, Christian Magistrates, and under heathen, no subject may rise up
in armor without or against the authority of the Sovereign Monarch. As for a
governor that is elected conditionally, and only with power to maintain the
ancient liberties and privileges of the Aristocratie of the country, as is
the pre-eminence which Philip may perhaps lawfully challenge in the low
countries: if he then seek against covenant to turn the Aristocratie into an
absolute Monarchy: this is undoubtedly such a tyranny, as may lawfully be
withstoode of them which neither by conquest nor lawful right were delivered
into his hands; for as to seek to bring in an Aristocraty where is an absolute
Monarchy established, were manifest rebellion, so also to bring in a Monarchy
where is an Aristocratie established, is manifest tyranny. But Joshua, whose
wars the inhabitants of Tingit accounted as theeueries and robberies was both
an absolute governor of Gods people, and a stranger no way in subjection to
the Princes of Canaan: and therefore what as a private man he might not do, that
might he lawfully do as a public Magistrate. As to give another instance, it
is not lawful for private men to curse, that is, 1. Pet. 3.9. Math. 5.44.
to pray for the destruction and subversion of their enemies: bless, says the
scripture, and curse not. Yet how often does David, and no doubt lawfully, pray
for the overthrow of the public enemies of the common wealth of Israel? Psalm.
83.14.
Make them (says he) O Lord as a wheel, and as the stubble before the wind,
Psalm. 52.11.
let fire consume them, cast them out in the multitude of their ungodliness, for
they have rebelled against thee: Pay them O Lord according to their deserts,
and according to the wickedness of their own inventions, Psalm. 28.3.
break the arm of the wicked, let them be as chafe before the wind, Psalm.
10.4.
and the Angel of the Lord scattering them: Psalm. 35.5.
be not merciful to them that offend of malicious wickedness, Psalm. 59.6.
with many such other prayers some of David as the Lords anointed; some of the
people as under and indefence of their Magistrate, but all in the fear of God.
And it is out of all controversy, that whom we may lawfully take up weapon
against, for their overthrow, we may lawfully pray unto God, and we may as
lawfully seek their subversion by all such means as may be with the least
bloodshed and spoil of the people of God. Antonius Pius showed a good mind
when he often used the saying of Scipio, se malle vnum ciuem seruare quam mill
hosts perdere: that he had rather save one Citizen, then destroy a thousand
enemies. Iosu. 8 4. 2. Reg. 10.
If Joshua and Iehu had not been armed with the law full authority of the
sword, they might in no wise have politically dissembled with the inhabitants
of Ai, or with the Priests of Baal: but now being placed as public persons for
the defense of the Church of God, and going against them, as to whom they are
bound neither by league of confederacy, nor by duty of loyalty, they are no
further to bewray or proclaim their intent then best may serve for the speedy
and safe accomplishing of the lawful conquest of the Lords enemies. But (say
some) the hostility and open enmity betwixt us and Spain ought first to be
proclaimed before any wars ought to be taken in hand, Was not (I pray you)
that huge navy of Spain which came even to make an end of us upon earth, a
sufficient herald openly to proclaim the hatred and hostility of the Spaniard
against us? And I think his ships and treasure houses do meetly well tell him,
that out fleetes and ordinance upon the Spanish seas have been a reasonable
herald to proclaim to them what they are to look for at the English man's
hands. If our most gracious Sovereign (whom the Lord long bless and preserve)
have upon causes not known to us, thought good as yet, no other way to
proclaim the war, we are not to busy our selves in examining the said
causes which perhaps may privately concern her Majesty her self. But as when
Moses and Iethro met together, having kissed each other, Exodus 18.8.
rogarunt alter alterum de prosperitate, and postea ingressi sunt tentorium
ipsius: they asked one another of their health, and so they went into his tent:
so let it suffice us to talk of those things which concern our selves and our
own posterity, let it suffice us that for our own warrant we have learned by
the word of God, both the causes of our war to be allowed as just, and the
manner also thereof confirmed as lawful: and let us not doubt, but that as many
as thus with a resolute heart and trust in God proceed in these affairs, the
Lord will so bless and prosper their labor, as shall be most for the praise
of his holy name, and for the quiet and peace of our Church and Common wealth.

Many think that they have condemned these wars sufficiently, if they can
point out a few that have been hindered or have sustained losses thereby. But
as we may not judge ill of the sacrifices and prayers which Job made daily for
his children, Job. 1.19.
because those children were taken away by fearful and sudden death: or
rather as we may not condemn the voyage which the children of Israel made to
conquer the land of Canaan, Numb. 26.64.
because they so dropped away in the voyage, that of six hundred thousand
there came but two into the land of promise: no more may we condemn our
practices against the Idolatrous Spanyard, because amongst many, some have had
but heavy and hard success. Others affirm, that they could like of these
wars well enough, if the adversaries were thereby plucked down: but these
dealings (say they) do not to any purpose weaken the enemy. I doubt not but
if the Lord do still continue his holy hand over us, they will be found with
the enemy shortly to be somewhat. Per lo primo colpo non cade la querria:
(says the Italian) An oak is not fallen down at the first stroke. Many
littles make a mickle. It is something that we have all their Merchandises will
they nill they, as plentifully as ever we had, and more freely from the
clutches of the bloody Inquisitors: and something it is that we do a little
disease the enemy, and trouble his patience in his busy providing for the new
invincible Navy: and something also it is, that we have hereby many able and
expert Soldiers and Mariners to keep the enemy occupied at home, which
otherwise with greater danger of stirring up rebellions, would attempt as he
has done to make invasions upon us here. Scipio had no better way to set his
own country Italy free from Hannibal, but to invade the Territories of
Hannibal in Africa. He said unto the Senate, Titus Liuius in 28. ab vrbe
condita.
Castra Romana potius Carthaginis portis immineant, quam nos iterum vallum
hostium ex moenibus nostris videamus: Let rather our Roman Camps pitch before
the gates of Carthage, then that we should see our walls besieged of our
enemies. The very place where war is, endures many calamities. Africa sit
belli seeds, illic terror, fuga, populatio, etc. Let Afric be the seat of
the war, let there be the terror, the flight, and the spoiling. And a little
before he says, Plus est animi inferenti periculum quam propulsanti: In
lawful dangers there is more courage in him that sets upon the enemy,
then in him that defends. In sua terra cogam pugnare eum, and Carthago
praemium victoriae erit: I will make Hannibal fight in his own land, there
will be somewhat to be gotten, Carthage will be the price and reward of our
victory. The Senate granted him a convenient power, he invaded Africa, it
came to pass as he expected, he removed the forces of Hannibal out of Italy,
and he did that by his policy in a short time, which by all the Roman power
could not be brought to pass at home in many years. I make not this example
of the heathen any ground for us to build upon, only we may profitably
consider how far the light of nature did show it self for the defense of
native soil, and we may learn sometimes wisdom of the children of this
world, who are more wise in their generation then the children of light. Luc.
16.8.
Our ground that we are to rest upon, is first the equity of the cause of our
war, which I hope has been sufficiently declared by the word of the eternal
God, and by the practices of such Magistrates as the holy scripture does
propound unto us. Secondly, the power and mercy of God, who of the one is
able, and of the other is willing to effect and bring to pass whatsoever we
shall take in hand in his fear. Joshua going against Idolaters had many and
mighty enemies, Joshua. 11.4.
Iabin the King of Hazor, the King of Madon, the King of Shimron, the King of
Achsaph, the Canaanits, Amorits, Heth its, Pheresits, and Iebusits, who were
said to be like the sand of the sea shore innumerable: yet when he used his
forces and policies in the fear of God, the Lord granted unto him many most
noble co^quests. Zerah the Ethiopian came against Asa with a most huge army,
even ten hundred thousand, 2. Chron. 14.9.
and three hundred chariots: Asa in comparison had but a small power, yet
knowing on the one side the equity of his cause, and on the other side the
power and mercy of God, he cried out and said, O Lord it is nothing to thee to
help with many, or with no power, help us O Lord our God, for we rest only
upon thee, and in thy name are we come against this multitude. O Lord thou art
our God, let not man prevail against thee. The Lord sent to Asa a most
glorious victory, and his people drove away Sheep and Camels and exceeding
great spoils. 2. Chro. 14.14.
The Lord overthrew that mighty Captain Sisera, by the hand of a weak woman
Iael the wife of Heber. 1. Sam. 17.
David with a sling brayned Goliath, Samson with a iaw bone slew a thousand.
Judge. 15.15.
There is no power so small but the Lord is able to strengthen it sufficiently
against the enemies of his truth: and all helps whatsoever are nothing without
the handie work and blessing of the Lord almighty. Policies are of great
force in war: and therefore David prayed especially, 2. Sam. 15.31.
Lord I pray thee turn to foolishness the counsel of Achitophel. This
Achitophel was so wise, so politic, and so prudent, that his counsels were
counted like the Oracles of God: yet when he used his policies against the good
Prince David, what became of him? he was intrapped in his own devises, and
being miserably confounded, at the last for want of a hangman became a hangman
to himself. There is no wisdom, Prou. 21.30.
there is no policy, there is no counsel against the Lord. So likewise
horses, ships, munitions, ordinance and such like, are good helps and stays
for the Common wealth, but there is no hope or confidence to be placed further
in them then God shall follow them with his blessing The horse is prepared for
battle, Prou. 21.31.
but the victory comes of God. We should make the same use of the power and
mercy of God, Psalm. 61.3.
as David did when he said, Thou Lord have bin my hope and strong tower against
the enemy, I will dwell in thy tabernacle for ever, and my trust shall be
under the shadow of thy wings. As if he should have said, I have had O Lord
heretofore good experience of thy goodness and might, I know thy love is
immutable, and thy mercy endures for ever: therefore I will repose and rest
my self wholly upon thee, who wilt never fail them that put their trust in
thee. If man do help his neighbor, he will sometimes upbraid, and sometimes
wax weary, Iam. 1.17. John 13.1.
because man is inconstant and variable, but with the Lord there is no change
nor shadow of change: whom he loves he loves to the end. And therefore
whatsoever deliverances and benefits we have received at Gods hands, we must
make them so many arguments and proofs to confirm and strengthen our trust in
God hereafter during life.

Has the Lord so miraculously discovered, and in a manner without any blood on
our parts, and prevented so many and so dangerous conspiracies and treasons,
which so treacherously have been often devised against her sacred Majesty?
Psalm. 7.15.
Did the Lord in his mercy to us ward tumble down the wicked headlong into
the same pit that they dug for others, when that cursed crew had fortified
themselves to bereave her Majesty of her noble Realm of Ireland? Did the Lord
confound their devilish purpose when they had as it were set down their
staff, and cast anchor with their huge Armadoes, as it were to reign like
Kings and Lords on our English Seas, driving them that had so richly furnished
themselves into those bare and barren coasts, where their gold and silver
could nothing benefit them? when by sorceries and witcheries they have
attempted to annoy her Majesty has the Lord so happily discovered them and
so mightily confounded them, that as the Rebels have had no force, so the
Prince of rebels Lucifer himself, has had no power against her? Has the Lord
made a speedy dispatch of all those Popes and cut them off Pope after Pope,
which by their bloody bulls and ranging reconcilers have sought her Graces
overthrow, and granted her still to remain (as many good years may she
continue) a happy and triumphant Queen? Has the Lord made our ships of
England such a terror to that mighty kingdom, that on their own coasts and
in the mouths of their own harbors they will not come out ten to one,
unless they may have together their whole invincible navy? Let us then assure
our selves, that if we can be thankful unto him, and put our trust wholly in
his goodness, loving his truth and living in his fear, he will still so succor
and defend us hereafter, that we shall be safe for ever under the shadow of his
wings.

Another thing that did greatly comfort David in his battles against his
enemies, was for that his enemies were also the enemies of God, and therefore
that the Lord would most certainly subvert and overthrow them. 2. Sam. 17.36.
This made him say, that as he had slain the Lion and the Bear, so the
Philistine also should shortly be destroyed, because he had railed upon the
host of the living God. Verse. 45.
And afterward, Thou (says David) come against me with a sword, and a
spear, and a shield; but I come against thee in the name of the Lord of
hoasts, the GOD of Israel whom thou have blasphemed. Surely GOD will wound the
head of his enemies, Psa. 6^. ver. 21
and the hayrie scalpe of every one that continues still in wickedness.

Consider then I pray thee what enemy thou do encounter with when thou
go against the Spaniard: First, he is, as ye have heard before, an Idolater,
a pillar and prop of Antichrist, an open enemy to the faith of Christ and a
professed patron of truce breaking, falsehood and disloyalty. He is also a
greedy tyrant of insatiable covetousness, that seeks nothing else but to
swallow up even the whole world. When the Sovereign dignity in the low
countries was offered to our most Christian Prince franckly and freely, her
Grace refused it, being contented with those kingdoms which God, and blood,
and nature has heaped upon her: but this monster of Spain is never satisfied:
Navarre, Naples, the Indies, will not serve, but he must gripe in also the Low
countries, and devour up all their ancient liberties. The Low countries will
not content him, but he must pluck in also Portugal. Portugal is nothing to
him unless he may also obtain France, and then also he gapeth for England. But
I hope that as the Lark being mounted to the highest does suddenly fall down,
and as the tide when the water is at the furthest has his recourse back
again: So the Lord will now grant to his swelling pride such a time of
downe-fall, that as swiftly he shall fall away as ever he mounted up. He
pretends the Catholic faith to be the ground of all his wars: but that is
nothing but as the Italians speak, Coprire con legiadro mantello iniquissimi
dissegni, with a fair cloak to cover most filthy pretenses. Did the Earls of
Eghmont and Horn find any favor in the Low countries for that they were
Romish Catholics? Were they not put to death bearing crosses in their hands
and shriuen of the Priest? Have the Portingales now any favor for that they
profess the same faith with the King? No truly, they are made the miserablest
slaves in all the whole world. If the poorer sort of them be taken captives
abroad, he will not give a half-penie for their ransom. He will part with great
sums for a Spaniard, but with nothing at all for a Portingale. As for the
Nobler and richer sort he suffers them to be murdered and spoiled at home.
He is content to be king of them, and to receive the kingly revenues: but he
will in no case have any kingly care of them. He suffers the Spaniards to
come daily amongst them to abuse their wives and daughters, that their
children may be doubtful: and indeed does seek nothing else but to bring the
same upon them which he has brought upon Naples and the Indies, and other
places where he has set in foot, that is, utterly to dispeople them, to
murder and make hauock both of Nobles and Commons, and utterly to make an end
of them, that they should be no more a people upon earth. They pretend Religion
till they can prevail: but as soon as they come to bear rule, all their
doings declare what was the mark that they chiefly aimed at. I know the
miscreants of the Popish crew do term the government of our most gracious
Sovereign, to be bloody and cruel, for that sundry (as they say) Catholics
have bin at several times put to death since the continuance of her Majesty's
reign. But there is none, unless he be wilfully blind, but must needs
confess, that their absoluing of her Majesty's subjects from all loyalty and
allegiance, their practicing of secret conspiracies against the whole Realm,
and their withdrawing of the obedience of the people from their Prince, whom
God and blood, and the law has set over the^, to give it to a foreign prelate
a Priest of Rome, were such dangerous treasons as might in no wise be spared.
And yet of the authors and procurers of such heinous trecheries, to some her
Grace has given their lands to remain to their posterity: to some also their
lives, when they have deserved a thousand deaths, with such mercy and clemency
as was never heard of in Prince before. Her lenity in government has not
only bin mild, but even mildness it self: the Lord grant that her days may
be as the days of heaven, and the Lord give grace to those her rebellious
subjects, once duly, and to their bettering to consider the kind and
bountiful mercies of so loving and gracious a Sovereign. The enemy may mutter
what he will, of tyranny and cruelty, to obscure this her mildenes in
government, but the beams of her glory in this virtue do shine so bright,
that no cloud of evil speeches can ouerwhelme or darken them. As the fame of
Queen Elizabeth for wisdom is spread as far as with it she is worthy to
govern, that is, over the whole earth and as also for knowledge in all the
languages of Christians and good literature, she is, and may be a mirror to all
Princes or ever: so likewise for mercy and clemency, she is, and maugre the
despite of all slanderous speeches, must be renowned so long as the world
shall continue. But the Spanish Inquisition which is drunken with the blood of
GODS Saints, does not proceed against rebels, but against those that do most
chiefly abhor and derest all rebellion and treason: for the obedient and
dutiful Christians whom they torment, do believe and profess, that every
soul ought to be subject to the higher powers, even every soul, be he
Prophet, Romans 13.1.
be he Patriarch, be he Apostle, be he of what condition or vocation soever,
that they ought to be subject to Kings and Princes: and they desire nothing
more then that their King might be delivered from rebels; I mean those
Cardinals, and Abbots, The difference of the English government, as it is now,
from the Spanish. In the English, the rebel dies, and the subject lives: In
the Spanish the subject dies, and the rebel lives.
etc. which detain the King in slavery and bondage: for the popish Clergy in
Spain have all, and do all; they are the King, they are the Merchant. The
travails and pains (as many of their mariners upon their own coast,
confessed unto me often) be indeed of the seafaring men, but the goods and
wealth, of this and that Cardinal, and this and that Bishop. They have gotten
al into their own hand, they make what laws seems good unto themselves: in
a word, they do both with King and people what them list. These most certainly
are rebels most dangerous, and if any duetiful subject do but open his mouth
against these, they by and by prepare for him most exquisite torments. Besides
their tyrannical cruelty in seeking to oppress and dispeople all nations
about them, whom our gracious Prince in all pity and mercy does favorably
relieve and succor.

It may be said of the Spaniard, setting all countries about him on fire, as
the Spanish song goes of Nero, Mira Nero de Tarpeia
A Roma como se ardia
Gritos dan ninnos y vieios
Y el de nada se dolia.
From Tarpeia Nero does behold
Rome hard by burns:
Though cries be made of young and old
He nothing mournes.


By dismissing of late many English men francke and free, he would seem now to
make show of some favor unto England, that he does not bear that bloody
mind against us as commonly is surmized. But I hope we shall trust him never
the better. He was a black devil before, and now he is as white as that
devil that does turn himself into an Angel of light. 2. Cor. 11.14.
With honey is often times conveyed deadly poison, and under the greenest herb
may lurk a hissing serpent. His imbruing his hands in the blood of those that
profess the same faith with him, does sufficiently admonish us what we are to
look for at his hands. The reverend father, Master Nowel, showed one of these
knives to diverse Noblemen of England.
The butcherly knives which they brought with the^ when they came in good
earnest to invade England, with this poesy graven upon them; An absolution for
the heretics of England, do tell us plainly that the mercy which they pretend
now, is but in jest, or rather in deep dissimulation, and that if we come
under their blessing, we must look for no other absolution, but cutting of
throats.

The cause why he so earnestly seeks the conquest of our neighbors about us,
is that thereby he may the better work his purpose upon us: we are to assist
them in respect of themselves, or else were we very unjust: for as says the
Orator, Iniustitiae duo sunt genera, Tul. Offic. 1.
vnum eorum qui inferunt, alterum eorum qui ab ijs quibus infertur non
propulsant iniuriam. Qui non obsistit sipotest injury, tam est in vitio quam
si pare^tes, aut amicos, aut patriam deserat. There are two kinds of
injustice, the one of them which do injury, the other of them which do not
defend from injury. He which does not withstand injury, if he be able, is in
as great a fault, as if he should forsake his parents, his friends, or his own
country: their houses can hardly burn, but ours must be in danger to smoke:
and therefore especially we are to labor to prevent the end, that is, the
slavery and bondage which they intend to bring upon our own nation, (...).
Xenophon.
It is a noble thing, says Xenophon, to fight for the avoiding of bondage. And
it cannot but be as noble to fight for the eschewing the Antichristian yoke of
popish Idolatry: for howsoever the Spaniard would seem to be a defendour of
the Catholic faith, let his filthy Idolatry, his pestiferous heresies, his
truce breaking, his greedy covetousness, his swelling ambition, and his bloody
cruelty be sufficient testimonies to us that his faith is not true and
Catholic, but devilish and Antichristian.

Well he may make a show of devotion and of the service of God, and of liberal
contribution to maintain the Church of God: But all their offerings (as ye
have heard) are of goods wrongfully possessed, and therefore they do but
according to their own proverb, Hurtan el puer as darlos pies por amor de
dios, steal the swine and bestow the feet for the love of God: and all their
outward glorious profession is but to have as their own by word goes of them,
Vnnas de gato y habitas de beat^,
la cruz en los pechos yel diablo en los hechos.
The claws of a catte and a Saints weed,
the cross on their breast and the devil in their deed.


It is but an outward show to cloak and cover their covetousness and
hypocrisy: and therefore going against him, we go against the Lords enemy:
and we may conclude to our own heart with the confidence of David; Psalm. 68.21.
Surely GOD will wound the head of his enemy, and the hayrie pate of him that
continues still in wickedness.

The Frenchman that has answered all the Maximaes gathered out of the works
of Machiauel, is in this point too short, who concludes generally, that there
ought to be no wars against Gods enemies in cases of religion, only upon
this ground: Par. 3. max. 1. page 346.
Puis que toute religion consiste en vne approbation de certains points qui
concernent le service de dieu, il est certain que tell approbation pend de la
persuasion qui en est donnee aux hommes. Or le moyen de persuader vne chose a
vne person ce n' est point de prendre les arms pour le batreny de le
menasser ains de luy remonstrer par bonnes raisons and allegations, qui le
puissent induire a persuasion. Seeing that all religion does consist in the
allowing and yielding to certain points which concern the worship of God, it
is certain that that allowing does depend upon the persuading of men. Now the
mean (says he) to persuade any man, is not to take up weapons to beat him,
nor to menace and threaten him, but to make demonstration to him by such
reasons and good proofs as may lead him to persuasion. What persuasion, I
pray you, can be used with them which will not suffer a perswader to live
amongst them? who if a teacher come to them, do put him straight to the fire
or sword: or if the holy scriptures or any godly instruction be brought unto
them, they burn both the book and the bringer, who are not content to live
under Antichrist, but do with all tyranny and bloodshed uphold the kingdom of
Antichrist, which are not weak but wilful, not blind but obstinate: which are
not content themselves to bear the mark of the beast, Revel. 13.17.
but do fight for the beast, and seek to bring all nations under the yoke of
his bondage. If the Spaniards were no otherwise enemies to us the^ the Indians
were to them, who were most of them meek and obedient, and willing to be
taught and governed: if we should then have spilt the blood of so many infinite
thousands, as they have done, then might the Papist justly have opened his
mouth against us, and we should have had great occasion to fear that which now
hangs over them, even the vengeance that the Prophet speaks of, one stone
to cry against another, Abac. 2.11.6.
and one beam to cry against another, woe be to him that builds of blood.
1. Sam. 17.3
As the blasphemy of the Philistine made David more courageous, so these huge
iniquities of the enemy ought to make us expect the vengeance at the last to
light the more heavier upon him.

Another comfort and solace had David in all his troubles, that even for the
Churches sake the Lord would destroy his enemies: and for this cause he says,
Psalm. 7.6.
Arise O Lord in thy wrath, and lift up thy self against the rage of mine
enemies, so shall the congregation of the people compass thee about: for their
sakes therefore lift up thy self again, the Lord shall judge the people, etc.
We must needs confess, that in respect of the most part of our selves in the
Realm of England, both by our contempt of Gods holy word, and by our
unthankfulness for his manifold blessings, we are so far off from being
worthy to have out enemies subdued under us, that we have deserved much rather
to be long ago delivered as a pray unto their teeth. But we know the Lord has
his Church amongst us, he has committed unto us his holy word and Sacraments,
he has also his number of his elect and chosen: and we may say with the
Prophet Esaias, Except the Lord of hoasts had left a remnant to us, we had been
as Sodom and Gomorrah. For that little remnant, that number of the elect which
God has amongst us, the Lord has hitherto extended so many blessings upon us,
and we hope that for their sakes he will still lift up himself again. God
promises for ten good men to spare all Sodom. Genesis 18 32.
David had in his army Ioab a most wicked manquellour, who had most
trecherously and wilfully murdered Abner the son of Ner, 1. Reg. 2.29. 2.
Sam. 3.27.
General of the army of Israel, and Amasa the son of Iether, General of
the army of Judah, men (as the scripture says) better then himself. This
wicked Ioab was David's Lieuetenant of all his army, 2. Sam. 10.7.
and the Lord sent unto him many noble victories for his good Prince David's
sake. We have many English Soldiers and Mariners of most wicked and dissolute
life, and such as in their wars have no respect to the glory of God and the
benefit of his Church, but only seek to take somewhat together for
themselves, which they may afterward lavish out on prodigal riot and
filthiness of life. And it may be said of many of them as is in the Poet:
Lucan.
Nulla fides piet asque viris qui castra sequuntur,
Venalesque manus, ibi ^as vbi manima merces.
No faith, no godliness, no good
in those that follow Soldiers train,
They set their hands to sale for blood,
all is right with them that yields gain.


Though I say many of them be thus profane and wicked, yet our hope is, that
as often heretofore, so hereafter still, for the good Princes sake the Lord
will bless the labors of Ioab. Deus operatur per malos non in malis: God
works by the evil, though not in the evil. When wicked Pharao exalted godly
Joseph, Genesis 41.40. 1. Reg. 18.3.
when Achab maintained that good Obadiah, when Daniel was advanced by
Nabuchadnezzar, when many Saints were in the house of Nero, Phil. 4.
GOD wrought by the hands of the wicked a benefit unto his children, he
wrought by the evil, but not in the evil. Howsoever many Soldiers and
Mariners have not their affections sanctified, yet those that truly fear God
ought not to be discouraged, 1 Thessalonians 5.11.
but rather to strive by their godly exhortations and good examples to reform
the imperfections of them, and to seek by all means so to increase the number
of the true repentant, that for their sakes also some mercy may be showed to
Sodom. Genesis 18.32.
We may lawfully enjoy the spoils of the Lords enemies, as did David, Asa, 1.
Sam. 30.26. 2. Chro. 14.14.
and others: we may also lawfully desire to maintain our selves by our
vocation, as Paul says, 1. Cor. 9.7.
Who goes at any time to warfare on his own cost? But our chiefest intent and
purpose ought to be to promote the glory of God, to do good and acceptable
service to our gracious Sovereign, to procure peace unto Sion, to break or
weaken the power of Antichrist, to turn aside that course of the Indian
fountain of gold, the nurse of all those wars and troubles that are now
amongst our neighbors and confederates in France and Flanders, to take the
sword out of the mad man's hand, and to pluck down that lusty Nimrod, that
so eagerly hunteth for the kingdoms of the whole earth; which affections if we
carry, then no doubt the Lord will so bless our labors, that living, we shall
be most profitable members of our Christian common wealth: and if death do
take us away, we are assured that ending our lives, either in, or for the faith
of Jesus Christ, we shall be partakers of a far more blessed estate in the
world to come, even of that immortal crown of glory, which Christ Jesus has
prepared to all that love him, and to those that for his sake have not loved
their lives unto death.

God save and preserve our most noble Sovereign Lady Queen ELIZABETH, and
grant unto her many joyful and happy years. GOD govern all her Majesty's
most honorable privy counsel with the grace of his holy spirit: God
preserve amongst us the ministry of his holy word, and continue his Gospel
and truth to us and to our posterity for evermore, God defend the Realms of
England and Ireland from all dangers of their enemies, as well foreign as
domestical: God bless and prosper all her Majesty's forces and munitions, as
well by sea as by land: God convert the hearts, or confound the practices of
all her adversaries: God break the power of Antichrist, and give an utter
overthrow unto all his sworn soldiers, and namely the Spaniard; even GOD for
his Son Christ Jesus sake happily and speedily confound him, that he never
may be able to lift up himself against the Lord and against his anointed:
and let all English hearts that do fear GOD and love his truth, even heartily
and faithfully say, Amen, Amen.

Imperet, and viuat, regnet, vincatque, triumphet,
Emineat, vigeat, floreat, Elisabeth.
A Prayer for the Soldier and Saylour in time of service.
O Most merciful God and gracious father, we humbly praise thy glorious name
for all thy unspeakable mercies, which of thy bountiful goodness thou have
hitherto vouchsafed to bestow upon us thy poor and unworthy servants, as well
on our souls as on our bodies: and namely, for that thou have not only
allotted unto us thus to be daily sustained by a lawful vocation agreeable to
thy blessed ordinance, but also do mercifully preserve us in the same from
all those dangers which in thy judgment thou might justly lay upon us, and
into which others of our brethren oftentimes have fallen. O Lord we have heard
of, and partly seen and known of diverse whom thou have suffered to be
overwhelmed with tempestuous winds in the gulfes of the outrageous seas: others
pinched with extreme famine and penury: others taken captives and led to most
miserable thraldom: others brought to their end by loathsome diseases and
sundry kinds of death. We acknowledge, O Lord, that our sins are as huge as
theirs, and our iniquities as grievous. Those Galilaeans whose blood Pilate
spilt, and those eighteen on whom the tower of Silo fell, were not greater
sinners then the rest in Israel: and those on whom in our time thou have showed
thy heavy judgments, seeing that we have followed them and overtaken them in
their sins, we had deserved rather to have been made examples unto them then
they unto us. But it is thy mercy, good Lord, thus to spare us, and to give us
a larger time of repentance. We confess our selves, O blessed father, to be
unworthy the least of all thy benefits, if we consider our own deseruings:
we have so manifold ways transgressed thy most holy commandments by our
unclean thoughts, by our ungodly words, by our unrighteous deeds, that we
are not only become worthy to be deprived of all thy gracious benefits and
blessings: but also we have deserved to have all thy judgments in full measure
to be powered upon us, not only in this world, but also in the world to come.
But O Lord, we appeal to thy throne of mercy, beseeching thee to look upon
us, not as we are in our selves polluted and stained with sin and
wickedness: but to behold us in the face and person and obedience of thy dear
son Jesus Christ, accepting his death and passion as a full recompense for
all our transgressions. Good Lord clothe us with his righteousness, ingraft us
truly as lively members of his body, and for his sake continue all thy
mercies and loving kindness, which so many ways we have tasted of from our
tender youth until this present day. O Lord increase our faith daily more and
more: grant that we may be fully persuaded of thine eternal election, that thou
good Lord of thy infinite favor and goodness have elected and chosen us to be
saved before the foundation of the world was laid: give us that applying faith,
whereby we may be assured that we are of the number of them for whom Christ
dyed upon the Cross: give us that justifying faith, whereby thy spirit may
speak comfortably to our spirits, that all our sins are forgiven unto us:
give us that sanctifyng faith, which may bring forth all good fruits of
amendment of life and true repentance. O Lord pardon our huge and grievous
sins which we have heretofore committed against thy divine Majesty: let our
former wickedness be no hinderance to thy mercy. Lord remember not the
iniquities and offenses of our youth, but according to thy mercy think upon us
in thy great goodness. Remember not how unthankful we have been unto thee for
thy manifold preseruations and benefits all the course of our life. Thou have
been rich in mercy toward us, but we have been poor in thankfulness to thee
again. Lord pardon all our former unthankfulness, and make us daily more and
more thankful, not only in word, but also in holiness of life, that we never
be found to be of the number of those which confess thee with their mouth, but
deny thee with their works. In all our affairs of our outward warfare, Lord
grant us grace especially to be zealous in our inward combat against sin and
wickedness, that we may mortify the root of our carnal and corrupt
affections, that we may have the true strife of the spirit against the flesh,
wrestling against all sins, but especially against those whereunto we find
our selves most inclined. Aid us good Lord especially in our spiritual battle
against the world, the flesh and the devil: put upon us the sword-girdle of
truth and the breastplate of righteousness. Arm us with the shield of faith,
whereby we may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked, and so deliver to us
and guide in us the sword of thy spirit, that we may overcome and triumph by
the blood of the Lamb, and the word of his testament. And for as much as the
events of our estate and vocation are sundry and variable, O Lord we pray thee
so govern us with thy good grace, that in all our travails we may joyfully
say, Thy will be done and not ours: that neither our prosperity do cause us
to forget thee, nor adversity do provoke us to murmur against thee, that with
contented minds we may cast all our care on thee: for thou carest for us, that
in troubles we may assure our selves that thou do not plague us as a judge,
but correct us as a father, and that in every good success we may humbly
acknowledge thee the author and giver thereof, and never lift up ourselves to
account it the work of our own hands. We that thus go down in ships, and
occupy our business in great waters, do daily see thy manifold works and thy
wonders in the deep, how thou liftest up the waves of the sea, and have made
the Leuiathan to take his pastime in them, with innumerable beasts, as David
speaks, both small and great. Lord grant us always to make true use of
these thy creatures, that we may learn thereby to acknowledge thy Majesty,
to reverence thy power, to fear thy judgments, and to trust in thy mercies.
Thou have promised that those which cry unto thee in their trouble, thou will
deliver them from their distress, Psalm. 107.30.
and bring them to the haven where they would be. Thou only art he that
commands both the winds and the seas: Lord so govern them both in these our
attempts against the professed enemies of thy truth, as may be most for the
glory of thy name, for the benefit of thy Church, for the good and welfare of
our native soil, and for the sauegard and honor of our most gracious
Sovereign. Bless our labors, prosper our voyage, let thy enemies so fall
before us, as that thou may have all the praise, and we all the comfort.
Teach our hands to war and our fingers to fight: cover our head in the day of
battle: give us thy holy angels to assist us: grant us to be true and
faithful amongst our selves, obedient to those whom thou have placed over us,
and courageous against thy enemies: hold thy holy hand over us, sanctify our
affections, that we may not so much seek our selves, as endeavor to do that
service which may be most agreeable to thy holy will, and most for the
prosperous estate of our Prince and Country, whom we beseech thee, O Lord, to
bless and protect now and ever. We know, O Lord, that the obtaining of
victory does not consist in number of men; it is all one with thee to save
with many, or with no power: in the defense of thy truth we go against the
open vpholders and sworn vassals of Antichrist, good Lord let not thy
adversaries prevail against us, let not the wicked say, where is now their
God? Strike a terror into the enemies: let the shield depart from them:
confound that proud and haughty power of that Haman, that does so insolently
oppose it self against the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Go before our army, good
Lord, and be our buckler and shield to defend us from all dangers both of
body and soul. Lord remember thy wonted mercies and loving kindness which have
been ever of old, and for thy Churches sake, even for that remnant which thou
have amongst us, let it be thy merciful pleasure to bless our endeavors:
grant us to repose our trust and confidence steadfastly upon the experience of
thy power and goodness: give us such assurance of faith, and such continuance
in true mortification, that we being thy children, and our lamps of repentance
always burning, death may never be sudden unto us: and when it shall be thy
good will to take us out of this vale of misery, be it in or out of those
battles which to our profession do appertain, we beseech thee, O Lord, that
our souls may so fight a good fight, and finish their course with joy, that
they may be partakers of the crown of everlasting triumph in the world to
come. These and all other graces needful for us, and for thy whole Church and
every part and member of the same, we crave at thy hand in the mediation of thy
son Jesus Christ our only Savior, in that prayer which he has taught us in
his holy Gospel. Our Father, etc.

FINIS.

