Two godly and learned Sermons, preached at Manchester in Lancashire, before a
great Audience, both of Honor and VVoorship.

The first, contains a reproof of the subtle practices of dissembling
Neuters, and politic worldlings.

The other, a charge and Instruction, for all unlearned, negligent, and
dissolute Ministers: And an Exhortation to the common people, to seek their
amendment, by prayer, unto God.

By Simon Harward, Preacher of the word of God, and Master of Art, late of
New College in Oxfoord.

Si Deus nobiscum quis contra a nos?
Homo Deo, lutum figulo.
Imprinted at London by John Charlewood, and Richard Ihones. 1582.

The Preface to the Christian Reader.
FOr as much as the profession of a Christian, 2. Tim. 4.7. Ephe. 6.11. 1.
These. 5.8.
is in the holy Scriptures oftentimes compared unto the life of a soldier,
because we are as it were sworn in the Sacrament of Baptism, to fight
manfully under the banner of Jesus Christ, not only against the vain and
wicked entisementes of the flesh, whereby we are drawn to the abominable
lusts and pleasures of voluptuous living and against the dangerous assaults
of Satan the Prince of this world, which seeks continually to devour us,
and to drown us in the pit of desperation and confusion; but also against the
subtle snares of the world, which either by riches and the glory ^hereof,
does provoke us unto coue^ousnesse, or else by slaunderings, reui^nges,
injuries, and oppressions, does ^rre us up to impatiencie, hatred, envy and
malice: we are therefore to call to remembrance co^tinuallie, that notable
property, and quality of a Christian Soldier, to arm our selves with
patience against the day of trial, that we may as Saint Paul says to
Timothy; Suffer affliction, ^. Tim. 2.3.
as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ. And this does our Savior teach us in the
Gospel after the Evangelist Saint Luke, Luke 14.31.
when he asks the question. What King going about to make war against an
other King, does not sit down and take council, whether he be able with ten
thousand, to meet him which comes against him with twenty thousand?

Whereby he does admonish us to ponder and weigh our strength and ability
beforehand, and not rashly and carelessly to enter into the battle. And
therefore, as that Captain is greatly to be condemned, which will not provide
for any help and furniture, until the time do come, that the onset must be
given, and the strokes begin to fly about him. And as that Soldier shows
him self very careless and negligent, which will never think upon his
armor and weapons, until the time do come that he must enter into the
combat. Even so that christian is overmuch given to carnal security, which
being a Soldier in the Spiritual warfare of Christ, vvherin the victory
brings no earthly triumph, but the incorruptiple crown of glory: and the
loss, is not the death of the body only, but the casting of both body and
soul into hell fire: will not yet once sit down to take council aforehand
of his ability, nor once remember his weapon of patience, nor once by prayer
make provision for it, until the hour do come, that even now the trumpet
does cry alarm, and his enemies fall upon him. Of which sort of Soldiers, I
am afeard there are very many in the Realm of England, which because the
Lord has given us many, happy, plentiful, and peaceable years, under our
gracious Princess Elizabeth (the Lord long preserve her Majesty, and give us
grace so to repent and amend our sinful lives, that for our wickedness and
unthankfulness, her days be not shortened:) do therefore loathe to hear the
preaching of the armor of patience, and not once remember to pray unto God for
the obtaining of the same. But rather they seek by their policies, to join
them selves in league with the enemies of Christ, that if trouble and
affliction should come, they may avoid the danger, not by patience in
suffering for the name of Christ, but by a traiterous shrinking from their
Lord and savior. And these may well be compared to the Ostridge, who when
there was a battle, between the four footed Beasts and the Birds to please
the Beasts, showed forth his hoof, and to make the Birds believe that he was
of their side, he put forth his byll and wings and so prete^ding to take part
with both, was in deed traitor to both.

And therefore, whereas of late, being appointed by my very good Lord, the
Bishop of Chester, I preached a Sermon at Manchester in Lankashire, as
concerning the bold and constant confessing of the Lord Jesus, and the patient
suffering of affliction for his names sake: I have thought good to publishe the
same in writing, to the view of those Christian Soldiers, into whose hands it
shall please God to send it, that thereby they may learn both the
faithfulness, which they owe unto their grande captain Jesus Christ, and the
provision which they ought to make in time for the armor of patience, and also
be admonished, how they shall sit down and take council, and make their
accoumpts of the charges which are required to a Christian man's profession. And
this our savior does reach us by an other similitude, taken of the wisdom
which ought to be in a builder: Which of you (says he) being minded to
build a Tower, Luke 14.28.
does not first sit down, and count the costs and charges, whether he have
sufficient to perform it or no? least that after he has laid the foundation,
and is not able to finishe it: all that behold it, begin to mock him,
saying. This man began to build, and was not able to make an end.

Even so all we which build our selves upon the foundation of the Prophets
and Apostles, Jesus Christ him self being the head corner stone, must first
sit down and cast our accoumpts, whether we be able to perform it or no. In
what manner must we reckon our charges? First, whether we be fully resolved to
show forth the fruit of our profession, in our lives and conuersations. For
otherwise, unless with hearing, we join doing, and with professing,
expressing: Our savior shows us, Math. 7.27.
That we build not upon the rock, but we are like unto the foolish man,
which builds upon the sand, where the rain falling, and the floods running,
and the winds blowing, do beat down the house, so that the fall thereof is
great.

And secondly, we must count our charges, whether we be thorowlie determined
by the grace and assistaunce of God (whom we call upon continually for help,
strength, and succor) constantly with the mouth to confess the Lord Jesus,
and with patience to take up our cross and follow him, so that, Neither
father nor mother, nor wife nor children, nor brother nor sister, nor farms
nor Oxen, nor land nor living, nor gold nor silver, nor worldly promotion,
nor tribulation nor anguishe, nor persecution, nor famine, nor nakedness, Romans
8.35.
nor peril, nor swoorde, nor life, nor death, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor deapth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from
the love of GOD, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Argolandus, the Prince of Africa, ^ganne to lay a foundation, when he came
to Charles the great, the king of France, and was purposed to have forsaken
his Heathenish superstition, and to have embraced the true Religion of Christ.
But when he saw thirteen poor folks, simply arrayed, to be set at meat
before Charlemaigne, he asked him what he meant to entertain such simple
wretches in his presence?

The king made answer: These be they whom I keep always before me, in
remembrance of my master and his friends. And being demanded, of what
master, and of what friends? He said. Of my master Christ and his twelve
Apostles, who lived in poor and base estate here upon earth. If the case be
so (said Argolandus) that your master uses his friends no better, I care not
greatly for his freendship, neither do I mean to be any of his friends. And
so the Heathen Prince refused to become a Christian, because he did not
consider, that the Cross was always a companion of the Gospel of Christ, and
that the children of God, were to be judged and measu^ed, not by outward
prosperity, but by inward graces, and therefore with shame ^he gave over his
building, so that it might justly have been said unto him. This man began to
build, and was not able to make an end. But we must consider, that the
charges of a Christian building, is not to imagine, that we shall lead a
soft, easy, quiet, rich, delicate, and pleasant life: in honor, ^itches,
dainty fare, pride, and pleasures of the world. But we must sit down and so
make our accou^pts: That we must be content to forsake all we have, Luke 14.33.
for the name of Christ: and patiently to submit ourselves to all troubles
whatsoever, for the bold and open confessing of the Lord Jesus our savior.
For so does our mai^er Christ foretell his Disciples: when ^e says unto them.
Beware of men, Math. 10.1^. John. 16.^.
for ^ey will deliver you up to the councelles, and scourge you in their
Sinagogues. They shall excommunicate you, yea, the time ^all come, that
whosoever kills you, shall think he does God good service. If ye were of
the world, John. 15.19. and 16.20.
the world would love his own, but because ye are not of the world, but I
have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you: Ye shall weep
and lament, but the world shall rejoice.

Now therefore that we christian Soldiers, may in time be careful for
sufficient furniture against the day of trial, and think upon our harvest
before the hour do come, that the strokes shall light upon us, and learn
aforehande, what duty we owe unto our chief captain Jesus Christ, and how
we may in all things please him, for as Paul says. No man that warreth, will
entangle himself in the affairs of this life, 2. Tim 2 4.5
because he would please him which has chosen him to be a Soldier, and if
any man strive for a maisterie, he is not crowned, except he strive as he
ought to do.

That we may therefore endeavor in time, to know how we ought to strive, and
as wise builders, sit down and cast our accoumptes, before we ^ake that
work in hand, to be professors of the Gospel of Christ: I trust that this
Treatise, will be some thing auayleable to provoke us thereunto, if the Reader
thereof will not so much respect, and look for any ^urious and artificial
handeling of the same, as ponder and lay up in his ^eart, the proofs and
reasons, which ^re simply and plainly therein contey^ed.

I was purposed also to have pen^ed the second part of this Text, which I
handeled in the same place, ^e next morning following.

But because I shall have occasion to ^treate more at large of that article ^f
Justification, in an other work which I am determined by Gods as^taunce
hereafter to publishe: I ^ue thought good now to omit it, ^d in steed
thereof to join an other Sermon which I made too, before in the same place,
the last time that Ministers were there ordained. That, as in the first Sermon
generally, all me^ may learn how to strive, and how to cast their accoumpts
in their Christian profession: so in the second especially, Ministers may
learn the same: which are as it were captains and chief builders, under our
Lord and savior Jesus Christ. It may peradventure seem unto you a tedious
thing, that so large a Treatise should at once be uttered unto the people: but
you may easily consider, that the matter which we had then in hand, was not to
be posted over with quick speed and celeritie, but that even as in the
Apostles time, Ministers were appointed with fasting and prayer: so it was
behoouefull that I should at that time with continuance in preaching and
prayer, keep the people occupied longer then the wunted manner, and withdraw
them from their accustomed diet. And again, if now in penning the discourse,
I have in some places enlarged it, I trust you will not deny, but that the
waightinesse of the matter, does greatly require it.

The Lord give grace, both to me which have uttered this doctrine out of his
holy word, and also to you which shall read the same, that being watered
with the dew of his holy spirit, it may so reform us, renew us, and build
us up into the perfect building of Christ: that we may every one of us,
discharge our duties in our several vocations, and let our light so shine
before men, that they may see our good works, and glorify our Father in
heaven. Amen. Farewell in Christ Jesus: from VVarrington, the. 8. of May.
Anno. 1582.

Yours in the Lord, Simon Harwarde.

A godly and learned Sermon, against the subtle practices of dissembling
Neuters.
Romans 10.19. (...) thou shall confess with thy mouth, the Lord Jesus, and
shall believe in thy heart that God raised him up from the dead, thou shall be
saved.


THe holy Apostle S. Paul, the elect vessel of God, the servant of Jesus
Christ, and the Doctor of the Gentiles, writes this Epistle ^o all that were
in Room, beloved of the Lord, and called to be Saints, which were ^o
instructed before by Andronicus, Iunia Vrbanus and others, that their faith was
published throughout all the world: In which Epistle, as I declared unto you
yesterday, after that he has saluted them in (...) Lord, he first proves
unto them: That ^o man can be saved by him self, and by ^is own merits, but
that both Jew and Gentile were in themselves condemned. The Gentiles were
condemned by the ^nowledge which they had by ye creatures (...) God, because
by the creation of ye world ^ey knew yt there was a God, and ther^re, if they
did not fear him as God, they were left all excusable. And secondly, by the
law of nature which God has ingrafted in their hearts, their own consciences
either accusing or excusing them. The Jews he condempneth by the written law
of God, which they read and heard continually, and yet not withstanding, were
daily transgressors of the same, so that they which were without the law,
did perish without the law, and they which were under the law, were judged by
the law: and therefore that both Jews and Gentiles were all sinners, and
deprived of the glory of God, and were justified freely by grace, through the
redemption that is in Christ Jesus, which he proves both by ye ensample of
Abraham, who about fourteen years before he was circumcized, was counted
just only by faith: and by the sentence of David, who pronou^ceth, That man
only blessed, whose iniquities are for given, whose offenses are covered, and
to whom the Lord does not impute his sin. Afterward he makes a comparion
of Christ with Adam, of Death with Life, and of the Law with Grace. In the
sixth Chap. he descends from Justification to Sanctification, showing them by
an argument taken of Baptism, That they which were baptized in Christ, were
baptized into his death: And therefore, as Christ was raised up from the dead,
by the glory of God the Father, so they also should walk in newness of life,
not giving their members servant, to uncleanness and iniquity, but making
them servants to righteousness and holiness of life. Which that they might ye
better do, he shows them in the next Chapter of the right use of the Law,
and of the bent ready will, which every Christian ought to have to the
uttermost of his power to perform the law of God, and with the virtue of his
spirit, to strive against the flesh. And then he sets down the conclusion
of the first part of his Epistle, next after his salutation: to wit, That there
is no condempnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, which walk not after the
flesh but after the spirit, because the spirit of adoption which they have
received in their hearts, whereby they cried, Abba, Father, does so seal in
them the hope of everlasting life, that nothing ^s able to separate the^ from
the love of God which is in Jesus Christ their Lord. Now in the three Chapters
following, the.9.10.^.11. He disputes, Of the just rejecting of the Jews, and
of the free calling of the Gentiles. Wherein after that he has in the last
Chapter, laid down the foundation thereof in the free election and purpose of
God, Who will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardens, and does of the same lu^pe of clay, make some vessels of honor,
and some of dishonor, some vessels of mercy, to show forth his goodness,
and some vessels of destruction, to be glorified in his power. Now in this
tenth Chapter, least God should seem unjust, in rejecting those whom he had
ordained to be vessels of wrath: He shows an other second cause of the
casting away of the Jews, because they were ignorant of the righteousness of
God, and went about to establish their own righteousness, and would not submit
them selves to the righteousness of God. And because the Apostle S. Paul did
long for nothing so much, Romans 10.3.4.5.
as that Israel might be saved, so yt for their sakes, he desired to be
separated from Christ, for his brethren which were his kinsmen according unto
the flesh. He therefore begins here to instruct them in the faith of
Christ, teaching them, That Christ was the end of the law, for righteousness
unto al believers. And showing them, that the promise of God in Deuteronomy.
Deuteronomy. 30.14.
The word is very near unto thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart for to
do it. Was it therefore spoke? because they were not able of them selves to
perform the ^awe of God, and to obtain righteousness thereby, but that in that
place God does signify the word of faith, which we do preach, which is
near unto thee in thy mouth, and in thy heart, for, If thou shall confess
with thy mouth, the Lord Jesus, and believe in thine heart, that God raised him
again from the dead: thou shall be saved. In which piece of Scripture, we have
two things to consider: first, That we are justified only by faith, in the
death and resurrection of Christ Jesus. Secondly, That we must show forth the
fruit of our faith, to confess him with our mouths. But because the
confession of our mouths is first set down in this place, as well in the
sentence of Paul, and also in the words in Deuteronomy. The word (...) near
unto thee, even in thy mouth, and ^n thy heart. I have thought it best at this
^me to follow the same order, which the ^oly Ghost does use in this place,
and to speak first, Of the fruit of confession. And secondly, Of the tree of
faith, rooted and grounded upon the death and resurrection of Christ.

Romans 10.9.
If thou shall with thy mouth confess, the Lord Jesus, etc. The Apostle
begins here, first with the Mouth, because the Tongue is one of the
principallest parts of man's body as S. James says. If a man sin not in
word, he is a perfect man, and able to bridle the whole body. For if the
tongue be well used, he compares it to a little bit, which rules the Horse be
he never so fierce and untamed: and to a rudder, which though it be small, yet
it governs the huge Ships, being tossed and assaulted, with many blustering
storms and tempests. But if it be ill used, he says, It is a world of
wickedness, it defiles the whole body, it sets a fire the course of nature,
and is it self set on fire of hell. And therefore Anacharsis the Philosopher,
being asked, What was the best and wholsomest part of any thing, and what the
wurst and most unwholesome. When it was thought, that he would have made answer
of two several parts, to a double question, he answered in one single
word, saying: The Tongue. Because being well used, it is of all parts of
man's body the best, and on the other side being ill used, the wurst: and
therefore if we imagine ye case ^o be thus, that we should carry about with us
two boxes, whereof, the one conteyneth most deadly Poison, and the other a
sovereign Remedy against all diseases: what great heed would we take unto
them, least if the one of them should run out, we should be most dangerously
infected, or if any of the other should be spilt, we should loose so precious a
Jewel? In the Tongue there is both, there is venomous Poison, and there is
also a sovereign Medicine for all infirmities and maladies: and therefore what
great care ^ought we to have, least either by abusing it, we be infected, or
otherwise by out negligence, loose the right use thereof? To rehearse all the
poisons of the Tongue, as, Railing, vain babbling, filthy talk, lying,
slaundering, cursing, swearing, and blaspheming the name of God: It were a
matter too long and tedious, and likewise, the time will not suffer me
discourse, of all the sovereign virtues of the Tongue, as, Blessing, and
praising the name of God, calling upon him by prayer, instructing of our
brethren, reproouing wickedness, setting unity and concord amongst men, and
confessing of the Lord Jesus. But here we are only to consider the cheifest
virtue of ye Tongue, which is, With the mouth to confess the Lord Jesus: And
ye cheifest poison, which is, To deny, and renounce our Lord and Savior. The
Apostle here requires of every Christian, That he shall with the mouth
confess the Lord Jesus. Because, as all the body is made to glorify God, so
especially, the tongue is (as Paul says:) Let every tongue confess that
Jesus Christ is the Lord, Phil. 2.11.
to the glory of God the Father. Hebr. 13.15
Let us offer the sacrifice of praise always to God. That is, the fruit of
the lips which confess his name: and this the Prophet Hosea does call the
calves of our lyppes. Hose. 14.2.
David says: I believed, and therefore I spoke. Psalm. 116.10.
Signifying thereby, that, There can be no true belief in the heart, unless the
tongue delight to talk of the same. Math. 12.34.35.
For of the abundaunce of the heart, the mouth will speak. A good man out the
good treasure of his heart, brings forth good things: and an evil man out
of the evil treasure, brings forth evil things. About what thing soever
the heart of man is occupied, the tongue will most commonly be talking of the
same. The Ship man will talk of his winds, the Soldier will reckon up his
wounds, the Shepherd will be telling of his sheep, and the Plowman of his
Oxen. If a man ^elight in Hawks, Horses, Hounds, or any pastime whatsoever,
his talk will be according to his delight: and how can it ^hen be, but that if
our hearts and souls delight in the Lord, our tongues should also praise him,
confess him, and glorify his holy name? Shall the knowledge of Christ have
less obedience of our tongues, then the vain and transitory desire of
worldly pleasures? Shall worldly things have our tongues at commandment, and
shall the glorious name of Christ have no portion therein? This can not be
(dear brethren) that there should be any true says in the heart, except it
draw the tongue to the confessing of the same. Our bodies are called the
temples of God: Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, 1. Cor. 3.16.17.
and that the spirit of God dwells in you? If any man defyle the temple of
God, him will God destroy, for the temple of God is holy, and that are ye. And
therefore it is Sa^riledge and Church-robbery, to pluck our tongue, or any part
of our body from God. For we are Temples and Saints, conse^rated and sanctified
unto God. And for ^his cause does Paul beseech us for the tender mercy of
God: That we offer up not only our souls, 1. Cor. 6.19.20.
but our bodies also a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God And
tells us, that, Our body being the Temple of the holy ghost, we are not our
own, but are bought with a price: And therefore we should glorify God, both in
our bodies and in our souls, for they are Gods. They are Gods, That is, God
made them, and Christ Jesus redeemed them, and bought them with a price, not
with silver, nor gold, but with his own most precious blood. God made not
only soul, but body also, and our Lord and savior Christ, gave his body,
and shed his heart blood upon the Cross, not only for soul, but for body
also, and not only soul, but body also shall live for ever in the world to
come: then seeing that God created both body and soul, and Christ with his
body and soul, did pay the ransom, both of body and soul, and both body
and soul, shall be partakers of everlasting glory in the world to come. We
must, as Paul says: Glorify God both in body and in soul, for they are
Gods. 1. Reg. 19.18
The Lord says unto Elias: That he has reserved unto him seven thousand
people, which never bowed their knees to Baall, nor kissed him with their
mouths. He does not say: Which have not believed in Baall in their hearts.
But, Which have given, neither knee nor mouth, nor any part of their body, to
any other, but to the Lord God of Israel.

Nabuchadnezzar, required nothing of Shidrach, Meshach, and Abednego, Dan. 3.19.
but that, They should in body fall down and worship the golden Image. But
there chose rather to be cast alive into the boat fiery Furnace.

The Kings Commissioners, required nothing of Mattathias: But, 1 Match. 2.19.37.
That he should outwardly do Sacrifice unto the Idolles at Modin. But he
would rather dye, then consent unto it.

God is a ielous God, and therefore will suffer no part of our body, to be
given to any graven Image, nor to any other but him alone: as he says in his
commandment, Thou shall not bow down to them nor worship them, Exodus 20.5.
for I the Lord thy God am a ielous God.

Whereby you see that no part of our bodies ought to be given from God, but
that we should with every part of us, glorify God our creator, and Christ
Jesus our redeemer, and the holy Ghost our sanctifier: which has made our whole
bodies holy Temples unto the Lord. And as with every part of our body, we
must set forth the lawde and praise of God: so especially with our tongue,
Phil. 2.11.
That every tongue may may confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, to the glory
of God the Father. David seemed to be in better case, when he was in the house
of Achis, or in the land of Jorden, or in Hermonim, or in the mount Mizar, then
if he should have been in ye Temple of God, in the midst of Saules boast and
all his enemies, Psalm. 42.4.5.
yet he says him self: I powered out my very heart, because I had gone with
the multitude, and led them into the house of God, with the voice of singing
and praise, as a multitude that keeps a feast. Why art thou so cast down, O
my soul, and why art thou so unquiet within me? O my God, my soul is cast
down within me, because I remember thee from the land of Jorden and Hermonim,
and from the mount Mizar. When David was in the land of Jorden in Hermonim, or
in the mount Mizar, no doubt, he prayed unto God, and gave him thanks for all
his benefits. Yet because by reason of his enemies, he could not come to the
Temple of God, to glorify God, as well in body, as in soul. He therefore
cries out, with grief of heart: Psa. 84.1.^.^
Why art thou so cast down O my soul, and why art thou so unquiet within me?
And in an other place: O Lord of hoastes, how amiable are thy Tabernacles? My
soul longs, yea, and faints for the courts of the Lord, for mine heart and
my flesh rejoices in the living God. The sparowe has found her a house, and
the swalowe a nest for her, where she may ^ay her young: even hard by thine
aultars, O Lord of hoastes, my King and my God. Where the Prophet David is
grieved, that the sparowes and swalowes had more access to the Church of God
then he had. There are many now a days which will say, that they bear as good
a soul toward God, as they which resort so often to the Church, and that they
can serve God as well at home, as in the Church.

But these must learn of the Prophet David to praise God, not only at home,
but in the assemblies also, as he ^ayteh unto God. Psa. 68.26. Psa. 22.22.
I will declare thy ^ame unto my brethren in the midst of ^he congregation, I
will sing praises unto thee. For otherwise, if we do not seek to ^et forth
the glory of God, as well publicly in the assemblies, as pruiuatly in our
Families, our hearts are not aright before God. Here then they are condemned
which being Land-Lordes, and Men of Worship, do disdain to come into the
Congregation of God, to confess Gods name unto their brethren, and in the
midst of the assemblies to sing praises unto him, but will have the Service
of God done priuatlie in their Chambers and in their Closets. These are far
unlike to the holy Prince and Prophet David, the anointed of God, Psalm. 42.4.
who led the people into the house of God, and accoumpted nothing so dear unto
him, as openly in the assemblies to confess the name of God unto his brethren
And therefore he says: Psalm. 26.8. Psa. 27.4.
O Lord, I have looued the habitation of thine house, and the place where
thine honor dwells. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I will
require, even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord, all the days of my
life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to visit his holy Temple. For
although that cannot, but be most true, Math. 18.^0
which our savior says, that, Whersoeuer two or three be gathered together in
his name, he will be in the midst of them, and whatsoever they ask, they shall
receive. Yet this private prayer ought not to take away public prayer, but
much more establish it. For if God will ^are ye prayers of.ij. or.iij. being
gathered together in his name: how much more will ^e hear a whole congregation,
Romans 15.6.
when with ^e heart and one voice, they shall glorify God ^e father of our Lord
Jesus Christ. If ye prayers proceed from a faithful heart, God ^ill hear,
Ezechias, in his bed: Hoster, in ^er chamber: Job, upon the dunghill: Daniel,
Isa. 38.2. Hest. 4.16. Job. 2.8 Dan. 6.16. Jonah 2.1. Exodus 15.1. Iosu. 10.12.
1. Reg. 17.20 and. 19.8.9. Acts. 10.2. and. 30. Luke 6.12. Math. 27.46
^n the den of Lio^s: Jeremy. in the prison: Io^s, in the Whales belly: He
will hear the people of Israel, in the land of Egypt: Mo^s and Aaron, in the
wilderness: Joshua, in ^is wars: Elias, in the house of the wid^ow of Sarepta,
and in a Cave of the mount Noreb: Cornelius, at home in his own ^ouse: Simon
Peter, in the house of Simon ^he Tanner: Paul, in the Ship, and on the (...)
bank: and our savior Christ on the mountains, in the fields, in the garden,
and ^n the Cross. So that in every place the lord is nigh unto all ye call
upon him, I ^y, unto all that call upon him in truth. Psalm. 145.18.
notwithstanding, this does God especially ^quire of every christian, yt we
should all together publicly in ye assemblies make ^en confession of our
Faith, in the Lord jesus, unto the land and praise of God.

And therefore miserable is their blindness, and intolerable is their
arroga^cie, which think they may serve God sufficiently in their houses, and
do therefore abstain from public prayer, and from the open confession of
their faith in the Church of God, wherein first they rob God of his honor, and
commit Sacrilege, in keeping back their tongues from the public confessing,
and their bodies from the open glorifying of the name of the Lord Jesus.

Secondly, they cut them selves off from the mystical body of Jesus Christ,
for Christ is the head, Ephe. 1.22. Ephe. 4.15.25.
and we are the body, one head has but one body. And thus as Paul says: We
are all members one of an other. And therefore as one body, we should be all of
one faith, all agree in one truth, and all with one heart and one voice, lawde
and magnify the name of God, and who soever by schisms and deuisions does
separate him self from his brethren, and cut him self off from the Church,
that man does cut him self off from the mystical body of Jesus Christ.
Thirdly, they show intolerable pride and arrogancy, for what proud wretches
are they which take upon them, to condemn the congregation of Christ, which
is assembled together in his holy name, and to accoumpt them he^tiques, for
whom Christ shed his ^ood? and how vilie do they think of ^eir brethren,
Psalm. 22.22.
which will not vouchsafe (...) pray, and to make confession of their faith
^gether with them? They are wurse a ^reat deal then the Phariseis, for they
^though they were proud and hautie, and ^d above all others disdain the
Publi^nes, yet they did not refuse to come to ^e Temple, because the Publicans
re^rted unto it. For S. Luke shows how ^e Pharisey and the Publican, Luke
18.10.
came both (...) the Temple together: And therefore ^ey which deny or
disdain to come to ^e Church, either they make us wurse ^en Publicans, or else
they them selves ^e wurse then Phariseis.

Fourthlie, they give great offense unto ^hers, by their ill ensample,
especially: Psa. 42.4.
(...) they be such as should lead the people to the house of God. I mean
Land^des, and Gentlemen: for if they pray ^elie at home, the poorer sort say
straight ^ayes within them selves, why may not ^e pray also at home, seeing we
have all ^e Lord, and Master in heaven? for in^riours are called Apes of
superiors, Herodian.
^cause whatsoever they see done of them, they think that they may do the
like, Seneca.
and Graauissimus morbus est qui a capite diffum ditur: That disease is most
perilous, which comes from the head. And therefore, Woe be to him by whom
offenses come, Mat. 18.6.7.
it were better for him that a myll stone were hanged about his neck, and that
he were drowned in the bottom of the sea.

Last of all they which refuse to come into the Congregation of God, Psalm.
22.22.
to confess the name of God amongst their brethren, they condemn and despise
the holy ordinance of God: For God has ordained, and in holy word
commanded, That his people should come together, to make public confession
of their faith, in the blood of Jesus Christ, to pray for things necessary to
hear the sacred and blessed word of God, to be thankful to him for all his
benefits, to receive his holy Sacraments.

And he which slieth from these things, which are so often commanded by the
Lord God, in flying from the Church: he flies from the Celestial Jerusalem, he
flies from his own salvation, he flies from God him self. What caused the
Jews to lament so pitifully to weep, by the Rivers of Babylon, and to hang
their Instruments upon the Willowes, Psa. 137.1.2.3
saying: How shall we sing the song of the Lord, in a ^traunge land? If I
forgette thee O Jerusalem, let my right hand forgette to play. ^f I do not
remember thee, let my tongue leave unto the roof of my mouth, if I ^oo not
remember Jerusalem in all my mirth?

No doubt, when they were captives ^n Babylon, they prayed unto the Lord, ^ut
therefore they wept by the waters of Babylon, because they could not visit the
Temple of GOD in Jerusalem, there to make public confession of their Faith,
and openly to magnify the name of the God of Jacob. And in the same place,
the Rulers envying that Daniel should be set ^uer them, caused the King to
confirm and seal a decree, that, Dan. 6.7.10.
Whosoever should ^ke any peticio^ of any other God, saving ^nly of the King,
for the space of thirty ^nyes, he should be cast into a den of Lio^s. (...)
man might think it to be but a small ^ffence to abstain from praying openly
or the space of thirty days, Daniel might ^r so short a time have prayed to
God in ^eart only, or he might have prayed se^retlie in his bed and in his
Closet.

But he knew that his whole body was made to glorify the name of God, and
therefore, when the decree was published, he went into his house, and his
window being open in his Chamber toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his
knees three times a day and prayed, and praised his God as he had done
aforetime. He opened the window toward the City, that all men might see,
that he served the Lord his God, not with heart only, but with the tongue,
the knees, and the whole body.

Peter denied his master in mouth: But no doubt, Math. 26.70
in heart he believed in him, and he denied him not for fear of loosing his
worldly goods, but for fear of present death, not willingly and of set
purpose, but through the infirmity of his flesh, because he saw his Master
forsaken of his friends, and taken of his enemies, and therefore could find
out no other way to save his life, but in heart he still believed in the Lord.
Here some peradventure may judge this fault of Peter to be somewhat excusable.
But most certainly it was a wicked and an heinous offense, and unless the
Lord had looked upon him, whereby he went forth and wept bitterly, no doubt
it had been to his utter condemnation and destruction, both of body and
soul. Math. 10.33.
For our savior says: Who soever shall deny me before men, him will I also
deny before my Father which is in heaven. And it is not sufficient not to deny
Christ, unless we do in all places openly confess him, and freely reprove
those which blaspheme his holy name: For we are not ^orne to our selves, but
first to the glory of God, as Christ commands us, To let our light so
shine before men, Math. 5.16. 1. Pet. 2.12. and. 4 11.
that they may see our good works, and glori^ie our father in heaven. And
secondly, to, ^he edifying of our Brethren, and to win them unto Christ, as
Paul says: Ex^ort one another, and edify one another. 1. The. 5.11.
And Saint James says: If any man has ^rred from the way, Iam. 5.19.
and some man has converted him, let him know, that he which has converted a
sinner from going a stray out of his way, shall save a soul from death. This
is the law of God in Leuitticus: Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine
heart, Leuit. 19.17.
but thou shall plainly ^ebuke thy neighbor, and suffer him not ^o sin.
Where the Lord does accoumpt ^t, the extreemest hatred that can be, to ^atter
our neighbors in their sins. We are commanded by the word of God, that,
For as much as we are all members of ^he same body in Jesus Christ, we should
be charitable one to an other, and do good one to an other by all means
possible.

Now if it be accoumpted charity, to feed the body, how much more is this
charity to feed the soul, with holy admonitions and godly instructions. And
if we be bounden by the law of God. Exodus 23.4.
That when wa see our enemies Ox or Ass, going astray, we shall bring it home
again. How much more ought we, when we see the soul of our brother going
astray, to seek by all means possible to bring it home again? Saint John
wills us, That if any man bring not the doctrine of Christ, 1. Ioh. 2.10.11.
we receive him not into our houses, neither bid him God speed: for he that
bids him God speed, is pertakar of his evil deeds.

And therefore, if thou hear or see a man which holds any wicked opinions
and heresies, if thou do not instruct him to the uttermost of the power, but
suffer him to continue in his error and blindness, and biddest him God
speed, thou art partaker of his wickedness. And if thou hear any man
blaspheme the glorious name of Christ, if thou do not say unto him. Exodus
20.7.
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain. Eccl. 23.11.
A man that uses much swearing, shall be filled with wickedness, and the
plague of God shall never depart from his house. Thou art partaker of his
iniquity, and the same plague which hangs over him, for his blasphemy in
speaking, the same is due unto thee for thy silence in hearing. For if thou do
not confess Christ: thou do deny him, as our Savior says: He that is
not with me, is against me, Luke 11.23.
and he that gathers not, he scatters.

And therefore we must every one of us, in such manner, confess the Lord
Jesus with our mouths, that by our confession, other may be edified: and the
greater that the assembly is, the more boldness should be in our confession.
There are many of us, which before one or two will paraduenture rebuke a
swearer, which blasphemeth the name of Christ. But if it be in a Feast, or in
a Banquet, or otherwise before many, then we are very mannerly and civil,
we dare not speak for fear of offense, we accoumpt it a point of modesty, to
bear with their wickedness.

But what is this else, but to keep the honor of God for holes and preeuie
corners and to offer up sacrifice openly to the devil? John. 12.43.
What is this else, But to love the praise of men, more then the praise of God?

Thou art peradventure ashamed to seem holy before a company and great
assembly, but the holy Scripture says, Mark. 8.38.
that, Whosoever shall be ashamed of Christ, and of his words, among this
adulterous and sinful generation, of him shall the son of man be ashamed
also, when he comes in the glory of his Father, with his holy Angels.
Thou art afeard least thou shall be mocked and scorned of wicked worldlinges: I
answer with the Apostle, that, If thou seek to please men, Gal. 1.10.
thou can never be the servant of Christ. And therefore, whosoever for
fear of man does hold his peace in such offenses, the word of God does
testify against the thoughts of his heart, that he looueth the praise of man,
more then the glory of God, and who soever for fear of danger ensuing, does
refuse to confess the Lord Jesus with his mouth, he has his damnation
pronounced, that the son of God shall never confess him before his father,
and before his holy Angels in Heaven. And therefore, 1. Tim. 6.12.
^f ever we look to fight the good fight of faith, or to lay hold on eternal
life, we must also profess a good profession before many witnesses.

A carnal man may think it a small offense to dissemble with the mouth, and
that a man may so dissemble with the tongue, that notwithstanding, the heart
may be kept faithful unto God. But we must take heed that we deceive not our
selves, nor suffer our selves to be deceived with such fond imaginations.
There are many sins, which seem unto us to be of ^mall weight, because
either we have no faith, to believe the word of God, or else we judge of them
according to the corrupt affection of our flesh, but if we could judge
according to the judgment of the spirit of God, we should find that those
sins which we esteem light, are most grievous and abominable in the sight
of God. We must take heed, least the subtle Serpent ^eceyue us, as he did
Adam and Eve, 2. Cor. 11.3.
who ^hought it could be but a small offense to ^ste of the fruit of a Tree:
but in the end ^hey proved the contrary, for they were ^r this their
disobedience, cast out of Pa^dize, a place of all pleasures, into all misery
and mischief, which they and we, and all posterity, may for ever rue and
lament. We must especially take heed of the beginning, and first entrance of
sin: for if we do a little give place unto it, it will shortly after take
further possession of us. We must take heed of giving the bridle unto the
flesh, for if it once catch the bit into the teethe, and feel the bridle
loose upon the neck, it will carry us headlong into all sin and wickedness.
Deuteronomy. 5.32.33.
We must take heed of going out of ye way, although it be never so little, for
if we once miss our way and go astray, the further we go forewarde, the
further we go out of our way, and the more hardly shall we return into the way
again. We must retire from the Rivers of sin, for if we go up and down
carelessly, in the stream of wickedness, we are likely at the last, to fall
into such a whirlepoole, and bottomless pit of mischief, as whosoever is
plunged therein, can not be recovered. We must take heed, not only of
touching sin, but also of approaching near unto it: for it is a plague so
infectious, and a venim so pestilent, and a disease so dangerous, that
although we fly from it as far as we can, it can not be but that ^e shall be
some thing infected therewith. Ephesians. 5.7.11.
^e must draw no acquaintance with ^ne: For if we once join our selves in
^itie and freendship with sin, it will (...) come so familliar unto us, that
we shall ^rdlie dispatch our hands of it: and ther^e, if with our tongues and
speech, we con^nt unto Idolatry and wickedness, and so af^r a sort draw
acquaintau^ce with it, it ca^^ot be, but that we shall afterward grow ^to
greater familiarity with it, and so run ^eadlong into greater mischief. Isa.
1.21. Iere, 3 1. Eze. 15.15.
But that (...) may show you an ensample to teach you (...) give, neither your
tongue, nor any part ^f your body to Idolatry, to commit spiritu^ll fornication
against God: consider I pray ^ou, by what means an harlot does come (...) the
uttermost degree of her infamy and ^bhomination.

She does not become a common stru^pet at ^he first day, 1. Tim. 2.9.
but first she begins to pas ^he limits and bonds of that shamefastnes and
modesty, which ought to be in a virtuous ^oman ye fears God: 1. Cor. 15.33
then she delights ^o hear, and to utter lewd and unchaste ^alke, and to
sing filthy Rimes of ribau^rie. Afterward, she takes pleasure in ^auncing,
and to be conuersau^t with lusty ^onkars, Eccl. 9.4.5.
to feed both her eyes with their iestures and countenaunces, and her ears
with their lascivious and amorous speeches. And when she has thus abandoned,
her tongue, her eyes, and her ears, she is no more chaste nor holy. Math.
5.28.
For true chastity must consist in the heart, in the soul, yea, and in every
part and member of the body.

After that the tongue, eyes, and ears, are thus possessed of Satan: then
there follow touchinges and contractions, which do more defile her body, and
more inflame her unto wickedness. And when her chastity is thus cracked, and
violated hitherto: then shortly after, it does perish altogether by most
abominable and filthy fornication. Notwithstanding, at the beginning, she has
some shame left, and she deals as secretly as she can, to keep it close
from the sight of men, but in process of time, and by long custom of sinning:
this shame also falls away by little and little, so that at the last, the
secret strumpet, becomes a known common strumpet, and has no regard,
reverence, nor fear, either of God in heaven, or of men in earth, or of the
deuilles in hell.

Even so it is also in spiritual fornication: A man does not become an open
idolatours at the first, but by little and little. first, ^. Tim. 3.3. and
4.3.4.
he delights to hear the blasphe^ies of wicked men, wherewith they ^aspheme
the truth of God, and lays ^s ears open to their lies and forgeries, ^en he
gives his tongue to slaundering, and giving at the profession of the Gospel,
and to maintain gross errors for dispu^ations sake.

Afterward, he delights his eyes with ^he glorious show of gylded Crosses,
pain^ed Images, goodly Tapers, precious Or^aments, Coapes, and Vestments, and
all ^he superstitious iestures used at ye Mass, ^s masking and mumming,
turning and ^alfe turning, some times at the right side ^f ye Altar, some
times at the left, some ^imes crying out, some times whispering ^oftlie, some
times looking up, some times ^owking down: besides all their other ^oyes and
foolish iestures, as twinck^ing with the fingers, kissing the Altar,
breathing upon the Host, crossing the bread and cup, shutting the eye, and
counterfeyting a sleep, striking the breast, and ^yfting up the Host betwixt
two false ^andes, even as Christ was crucified betwixt two Thieves.

When the eyes are thus carried away, then the other senses do follow after*
The smelling is delighted with the sweet odours and perfumes of the incense and
Frankencense, the ears are tickled with the sound of Organs, and of Belles,
and with the chaunting and bleating of Himnes and Anthemes, in an unknown
tongue. And when the tongue, the eyes, the ears, and all the senses of the
body, are thus by little and little carried away from God, then is the heart
lulled a sleep, it is stolen away from worshipping the Lord in spirit and
truth: it is drawn to worship Idols and Images, it is drawn to honor the
whe^ten God, Romans 1.25.
ascribing that unto the Creature, which is due unto the Creator: whose name be
blessed for ever and ever.

And thus if we first commit Idolatry in the temples of our own bodies,
which Christ has consecrated and sanctified to be the temples of the holy
ghost: then we will not stick afterward to commit Idolatry in the Temple and
Congregation of the Church of God, and that we can not avoid the evil, unless
also we avoid the occasions thereof. Genesis 34.1.
Dina the daughter of Jacob, which was ravished by force of the son of Hamar
the king of Siche, did not in har^ consent unto that wicked act, and yet
notwithstanding, she was not free from the ^rime of whordome: neither was she
to ^e reputed for any thing but a strumpet.

For if she had tarried at home within her Fathers house, and not strayed
abroad to see the Daughters of that Country: she might have avoided the great
inconvenience whereby she fell into so great dishonor and shame. And therefore
Paul commands us, To abstain, 1. The. 5.22.
not only from evil, but also from all occasion, and all appearaunce of evil.
And we are commanded by God himself, Isa. 48.20. and. 52.11. 2. Cor. 6.17.
that we come out of Babi^on, and sly from the Caldaeans. Depart ye from
thence, and touch no unclean thing, go out of the midst of her, and be ye
clean, ye that bear the vessels of the Lord.

Now there are three kinds of coming out of Babylon: The first is in body
only, the second is in heart only, the third is ^othe in body and in heart:
And this is the safest and surest way for every Christian.

Of the first sort which are come out of Babylon in their bodies, and yet have
their minds still in the midst thereof, I am afearde least there are many of
them at this time here present amongst us, which have drawn their bodies out
of Egypt, and yet have not utterly forsaken the manners and fashions of the
Egiptians: and for this coming out, they are never the better, it is an
occasion of their damnation, and not of their salvation. For it were far
better to be^e Israelite, and to worship God purelie in the land of Egypt,
then to be an Egiptian, and an Idolatour in the Desert, and in the land of
Canaan: Exodus 32.6.
and there to woorship golden Calves, and to long for the Onions, Number. 11.5.
and Garlike, and fleshpottes of Egypt. It were far better to call upon God
in Egypt, and to bear patiently the tyranny of Pharao, Exodus 2.23.
then being out of Egypt, to murmr against God, and to blaspheme his truth,
as did the ancient Idolatours, Israelites by name, but Egiptians in deed,
having their bodies without Egypt, and their hearts with in it: and as many
do now which being delivered from the bondage of Pharao, do long for the
flesh-pottes of Egypt, and loathe the sweet Manna, the word of the everliving
God. The second sort, is of them: Which come out of Babylon in heart, but not
in body: which can very hardly be in any Christian, for where the heart is,
there will the body be also.

And it can not be that the heart should ^e truly turned unto God, but it
must ^eedes draw the obedience of his will. But ^e safest and surest, and the
only true ^ay for a Christian, is to come out of Ba^ilon, both spirituallie
and corporally, both in heart and body, Ephe. 5.11.
and to have no fellowshippe with unfruitful works of darkness. For, What
fellowshippe has righteousness with unrighteousness? 2. Cor. 6.14
What Communion has light with darkness? what concord has Christ with
Be^all? what part has the believer, with the ^nfidel? or what agreement has
the Temple of God with Idolles? wherefore come ^ut from among them, and separate
your selves, (says the Lord) and touch no vn^leane thing, and I will receive
you, I will ^e your Father, and you shall be my sons and daughters: says the
Lord almighty.

There are some, which to prove that a man may come out of Babylon, in heart,
although he do not come out in body: and that a man may dissemble with the
tongue, and yet have a true faith in Christ, do ^lleadge the exsamples of
Naaman the Sy^rian, of Saint Paul and of Nicodemus. 2. Reg. 5.17. 1. Cor.
9.22. John. 3.2.


Of Naaman, because when he was converted to the true God of Israel, he said
to Elisieus. Thy servant will from henceforth, offer neither burnt Sacrifice
nor offering, to any other God save unto the Lord. Herein the Lord be
merciful unto thy servant, that when my Master goes into the house of
Remmon to worship there, he leans on my hand, and I bow my self in the
house of Remmon: when I bow down my self, I say in the house of Remmon, the
Lord be merciful unto thy servant in this point.

Elisaeus seems to grant thus much unto him, for he does not reprove it,
but faith, 2. Reg. 5.19.
Go in peace: As though he would permit it to be lawful for him, to enter
into the house of Remmon, into the Temple of Idols, and to be present at the
sacrifice of the Heathen people, so that he worshipped the Lord God only in
his heart. But we must consider, that Naaman was Captain of the host, and
Seruitor to the King of Aram: and he was in his Masters company, not to
commit Idolatry with him, or to allow his Idolatry, but according to his
duty, to do him service in his necessity: and therefore he does not require
of Elizaeus, that he might have leave to bow down to worship the God Remmon
in body, and notwithstanding, ^o worship in heart the true God of Israel. But
he requires yt for a time he might do ^eruice unto ye Heathen Prince, who was
^ount to kneel before the God Remmon. And because the King, when he bowed
down, did always lean upon his serui^our, and he could not lean upon him,
unless ^e bowed also, therefore he asks leave to bow down, not to worship
ye god Re^mon: but as he says him self, that his Master might lean on his
hand, and so he might serve the King according to his office. As godly Joseph
served wicked Pharao: Genesis 41.42 1. Reg. 18.4. Phili. 4.22.
and virtuous Obadiah, served the Idolatrous Achab: and there were many Saints
in the house of Nero. And thus does Naaman require yt he might for a time do
service to ye King of Aram, to how down that he might ^leane on his hand, 2.
Reg. 5.17.
but otherwise he prouou^ceth plainly, that he will offer sacrifice to none,
but unto the Lord God of Israel. And for a sign and seal thereof, he
requested to have two Mules, loaded with the earth of Israel, to carry with
him into the land of Syria, to be a witness, and as it were a public
confession, that he worshipped none but the Lord God of Israel, and yet
notwithstanding, he does not instifie this his service to a heathen Prince,
but does acknowledge it to be a fault, and therefore desires the Prophet to
pray for him, that this sin may not be laid to his charge: And Elisaeus
does not deny, but that it was a fault, but he byddeth him, Go in peace:
rather bearing with his infirmity, then any ways allowing it: and howsoever
Elisaeus would not press him too sore, because he was a Nouice, and newly
converted unto the true Religion of God, yet it does not follow, that we
Christians, which have received more aboundaunt knowledge of the truth, being
confirmed with the death and passion of Christ, and witnessed with the blood
of so many Martyrs, should of a particular exsample, gather a general
doctrine, to cover our dissembling in Religion, and renouncing of our Lord and
Savior.

And last of all, the answer of Elizaeus, Go in peace: because it is the
common phrase, whereby the Hebrews, do bydde a man farewell, to say, Go in
peace: it must not be referred to the last words which Naaman spoke, of the
bowing down in the Temple of Remmon, but generally to all the words which
were before spoken betwixt them: For their talk being ended, Eccl. 23.11.
he vade him farewell, saying, Go in peace, and so departed: whereby ye see
plainly, that this place does nothing allow any dissembling in Religion,
neither by the words of Naaman, nor yet by the words of the Prophet.

An other ensample there is of Paul, 1. Cor. 9.20.
who amongst the Jews became a Jew, and amongst the Gentiles, a Gentile, and
became all things to all men, to win some. This place is abused by many, to
cover their flesh with a mask, and to transform their Satan into an Angel
of light, whereby they do great injury to the holy Apostle of Christ: For
because he became amongst them which were without the law, as being him
self without Law, shall we therefore think that amongste drunkerdes, he
became a drunkerde, or amongste thieves, a thief, or amongste Idolatours, an
Idolatour? When he was at Ephesus, or at Ciprus, or at Athens, did he do any
worship, or offer any Sacrifice to Diana, to Venus, Acts. 17.32. and. 19.24.
and 21.28. and. 24.28.
to Minerua, to Jupiter, to Neptune? Nay, did he not so freely reprove, and
condemn their Idolatry, and preach unto them the Lord Jesus, that they
persecuted him every where, and moved insurrection against him? and sought by
all means possible to dispatch and to murder him? Acts. 16.3. Acts. 18 18.
and. 21.24.
Unto the Jews in deed, Paul became a Jew, he went into the Temple at
Jerusalem, to purify him self, and to offer Sacrifice: he made a vow, and
caused his head to be shaven, he circumcised Timothy. But why so? because these
Ceremonies of the Jews were commanded of God him self, and therefore it was
lawful for all men to use them to edification, according unto Christian
liberty, until Jesus Christ was fully made manifest, and by his death and
passion had utterly taken away all the Jews Rites and Ceremonies, and also
until the Jews were perfectly advertised of their liberty in Christ, and of
the abrogation of their Ceremonies. But afterward, when Paul saw that some of
them did confirm them selves in superstition, and required Ceremonies as
necessary unto salvation: then he cried out against them, and openly
condemned them, and when he saw that some false brethren came to spy his
liberty, Gal. 2.3. Gal 5.2.
he could not Circumcize Titus, as he had Circumcized Timothy. But he
accoumpted it damnable, and taught men plainly, that if they were Circumcized,
the death of Christ could nothing profit them.

So also among the Gentiles, Paul became a Gentile. But how? Not in allowing
their Idolatry, but in obeying their civil Laws, and pollitique customs,
and in agreeing to all their deeds, which were not repugnaunt to the word of
God. He obeyed also their Princes and Rulers, Act. 16.19.38 and. 22.25. and.
26.32.
and being a Citizen of Room, appealed unto Caesar, and used Heathen
Magistrate for the defense of his cause, in that they were the Ministers of
God: But otherwise he never applied him self unto their false Religion and
Idolatry, neither did he by holding his peace, allow any thing in them, which
was contrary to the word of God.

But what shall we say to Nicodemus? John 3.2.
He stole to our Savior Christ in the night, he durst not confess him
openly in the day: was he therefore condemned, because he durst not openly
with his mouth, confess the Lord Jesus? I answer, that although Nicodemus
came to our savior Christ in the night, it does not therefore follow, that
he did blaspheme him, or deny him in the day. And although in the beginning,
his incredulity and infirmity, could not be excused, John. 7.50.
yet afterward he became so zealous and constaunt, that he resisted his
companions the Phariseis, and thought nothing too precious, John. 19.39.
to be bestowed upon the honoring of his Lord and Savior. He declared him
self, with Joseph of Aramathia, to be one of his Disciples, when all his
Disciples had forsaken him: he made then a public confession with the
greatest danger that might be, and when there was more occasion to fear, then
ever there was: then they demanded the body of Pilate to bury it, and
Nicodemus bought Myrhe and Aloes mingled together, about an hundred pound, and
wrapped the body of Jesus in Linen and sweet Odours, to bury it.

And thus ye see, good Brethren, that these exsamples, do nothing serve to
color and cloak the infirmity of our flesh, howsoever they seem at the
first, to make some thing for us yet, if we examine them thorowlie, they are
utterly against us.

But it fares with this flesh of ours, as it does with a quarrelling man,
whose delight is only to trouble his neighbors in suites of Law. He goes to
seek the advice of some Counselors and Attorneyes: and if he light upon such
as have good Consciences, and tell him the truth of his case, and bydde him
give over his suite, for his matter is not good, then he goes away angry, and
chafing with him self, and accoumpteth them but fools, dastardes, ignorant
beasts, and men of no judgment in the Law: because they have told him the
truth, and forthwith he seeks other Advocates and Procters, which shall
better satisfy his honor.

At the last, be lyghteth upon such a one as has no conscience nor fear of
God, neither serves any other God, but gold and silver. He seeeth that the
man is wilfully bent to be revenged of his neighbor, whatsoever it cost him,
and to d^ him a displeasure: he follows his affection, and tells him that
his case is good, although it be the shamefullest matter that can be devised.
Then is he glad, that he has found such a one as he would have, and he
accoumpteth him the learned, and the wisest man in the world. But what
comes hereof in the end? when the matter is come to be tried, the sentence
of judgment is given, not by the advocate, nor by the Procter, nor according
to the affection and appetite of the plaintiff: but it is given by the Judge
him self, according to equity and law. And when the man is overthrown,
master Procter goes his way, and leaves him in the myer, he has his
desire, he has plucked the goose, he has his money paid: and then he has no
more care, neither of the Client, nor of the cause, and so the man has lost
his will, and also his pains and charges.

Even so it fares with this corrupt flesh of ours, in matters of Faith and
Religion. If we hear any reasons, which flatter us in our sins, we are
straight way ready to embrace them, and we accoumpt them forcible learned, and
profound arguments. But if we hear any reason which tends to the beating
down of this flesh of ours, then we let it pass by our ears as the wind, we
judge it to be but a foolish argument, and to no purpose, and we make no
accoumptes thereof, not considering that the Lord, the righteous judge, at the
last day, when the secrets of of all hearts shall be opened, shall not
pronounce the sentence of judgment, according to the reasons which we have
framed as procters to cloak and cover our sins, nor according to the corrupt
affections of our flesh, but according to the equity and justice, of his most
holy and blessed word: as Christ shows us that the word which he speaks
unto us, John. 12.48.
shall judge us in the last day: For if we would call to mind the justice and
equity of the righteous judge, it could not be that we should so foolishlie set
our affections upon the flattering reasons of such wicked procters.

Let us take heed then, that we do not cloak or cover our sins with the
examples of Naaman the Sirian: of Paul, or of Nicodemus, being wrasted
against the truth: but let us see what is evidently and plainly commanded us
by the word of God, and there we shall find that a lively faith and open
confession, are inseparable in a true Christian.

As the Soul and life, as fire and heat, as the Sun and bryghtnesse, can
not be separated, so can we not separate a true Faith, from the confessing of
the Lord Jesus. For if we believe in the heart, then Christ does dwell in
our hearts by Faith, Ephe. 3.17.
and if Christ be there, it is not without his holy spirit, and therefore
Paul says: That if any man have not the spirit of Christ, Romans 8.9.
he is not of Christ. Now where the zeal of the spirit is, there must
needs be confession. For how is it possible that God should be in the heart,
and the Devil in the tongue, the hands, and the other parts of the body, which
take their life from the heart, and are governed thereby? Saint James speaking
of the nature of the tongue, says: Iam. 3.9.10.
That out of the same fountain, there can not come sweet water and bitter,
nor out of the same mouth, blessing and cursing By the tongue, we bless God
the Father, and by the same we curse men, which are made after the Image of
God. How can this be so: Even so may I say also, by the tongue we confess
that we are redeemed by the blood of Christ, and with the same we blaspheme
his most holy and blessed name. How can this be so? It cannot be, that faith
in the heart should be constaunt, unless the tongue also do constantly
continue in confessing, praising, and glorifying the Lord Jesus. For faith is
not a dream, or an idle fancy, or a light imagination conceived in the
brain: but where soever it is, it shows it self accordingly, as appears
notably in the exsample of Jeremy, who was weary of forbearing, and could not
forbear, as he says: I am had in derision every day, and every one
mocketh me: Iere. 20.7.9.
for since I spoke, and cried out of wrong, and proclaimed desolation, the
word of God was made a reproach unto me, and I was had in derision daily:
then said I, I will make no more mention of him, nor speak any more in his
name, but his word was ^n mine heart, as a burning fire shut up in my bones, I
was weary of forbearing, and ^ould not forbear.

If then the word of God, be as a burning fire shut up in our bones, how
is ^t possible, but that it should send forth ^he light and heat of open
confession? (...) speak not this, good brethren, to favor and allow a number
of rash and enraged ^pirites, which without wisdom and dis^retion, will
counterfeyt them selves to be ^ealous professors of the Gospel, which will
cry out against, they can not tell what, without keeping any measure, without
searching the occasions, without con^dering the circumstaunces, which do
^nelie serve to trouble and offend the weak, and to hazard, and put in
daun^er those which truly serve God. And ^o color their frenzy and
furour, they allege the zeal of Jeremy, which was weary of forbearing, and
could not forbear.

But these are more like the glorious Elihu the Buzite, then the zealous Jeremy
the Anatothite: for Elihu the Buzite, one of the comforters, or rather
discomforters of Job, cries out. Behold, I am full of matter, Job. 32, 18.
and the spirit that is within me, compels me: behold, my belly is as the
wine that has no vent, and like the bottelles that burst: therefore will I
speak that I may take breath. etc.

Even so many now are like the new wine, which must break the vessel,
unless it have issue. But we must learn, that as the spirit of God can not
be idle in the heart of man, so does it not compel any man to pass the
lymittes and bonds of Christian modesty. It does not allow the zeal which
is without knowledge and spiritual wisdom: Romans 10.2.
And therefore the Apostle says, That the spirits of the Prophets, are
subject unto the prophets. 1. Cor. 14.32.
As he him self showed by experience: for although he was most excellent in
the gifts of God above all other, yet he always submitted him self to the
judgment of the Church, and never despised the council of his Brethren, as
appears by that which he did in the Church of Damascus, of Antioche, Act.
9.19.26. and. ^^.18.
of Jerusalem, and of Ephesus. And when he was in the City of Athens, waiting
for Silas and Timothy, when he saw that City so given to Idolatry, the
spirit was inflamed within him.

But how did he show forth the zeal thereof? He disputed openly in the
assembly, with all which came unto him: he did not cry out in the streets a
mad man: he did not make an exclamation without reason: he did not run
rashly to burste any thing in the Temples, nor to pluck them down: He made
it no matter of conscience, to enter into their Temples, and to behold their
Aulters and Idolles, not to do any Sacrifice with the Idolaters, or to please
the Atheniens: Acts. 17.23.
but he went thither to find occasion to draw them from their Idolatry and
Superstition, which he condemned by his public testimony, but not without
great reason and wisdom, and Christian modesty.

And as I do not allow the preposterous zeal and frenzy, of some without
discretion: so I can not but condemn the over much discretion and policy of
others, which are afeard to show forth any shadow or smoke of their faith,
least the sparkles should appear, and so they should come into some danger
for the name of Jesus Christ.

There are many which make this excuse, that in heart they think well,
although for policy they speak otherwise. But it is a common saying: He that
swears by craft, by craft he is forsworn. And if the tongue be forsworn,
the heart can not be free from perjury.

Even so is it also, in Faith and Religion, the heart can not be true, unless
the tongue be true also. 2. Cor. 11.2. Isa. 1.21. Eze. 16.15. Iere, 3.1.
The Church is called the Spowse of Christ, and if she go a whoring after
false Gods, she is called in the Scriptures, an harlotte. Now ye know that
the duty of a faithful spowse, is to be true to her Husband, not only in
heart, but in body also. And if any wife should come to her Husband, and say,
Husband, although I was content for a time to give my body to an other, yet I
always kept my heart faithful unto you, will any man take this excuse? Exodus
20.5.
Much less, will God which is a ielous God, suffer our tongues, our knees, or
any other part of our bodies, to serve or to worship any other but him alone.

If a man have put away his Wife for suspicion, and take her again, he will
^ooke that she should afterward avoid ^he company of them, with whom she was
suspected. Iere. 3.1.
But thou (as God says by the Prophet) have not been only suspected, but
thou have playde the harlot, in deed, with many loouers, Yet return thou
again unto me, says the Lord.

There is none of us all, which has not committed most filthy Idolatry: Some
of us have prayed to Saints, Math. 6.24. Ephesians. 5.5. Phil. 3.19.
and so made more Gods then one: some of us have been greedy and covetous, in
heaping up money, and so made Mammon our God: ^ome of us have been given to
gluttony and drunkenness, and so made our belly our God.

And now the merciful Lord, in steed of justly diuorsing us, has freely
reconciled us by repentance and faith in the blood of Jesus Christ. How much
then are we bound, not only to abstain from going a whoring after strange
Gods again, but to avoid even their company, and all suspicion thereof? And
therefore S. John says, in the end of his first Epistle: 1. John. 5.21
Little Babes, keep your selves from Idolles. He does not say from
worshipping of Idolles, but he will have us to abstain from the Idolles and
Images them selves, and to abhor the presence of them, and in no wise, either
to delight in them, or to incur any suspicion thereof.

The devil is content some times with one part, when he can not obtain the
whole: for so he requires of Christ, not that he should believe in him in
heart, but that he should outwardly do him homage. I will give thee, all these
kingdoms of the world, Math. 4.9.
if thou will fall down and worship me. But the Lord our God is a ielous God,
he will have the inward man, and the outward, both heart and body, belief
and confession, whole or no part, all or none. What then shall we say, of
these Ambidexters, Iackes on both sides, or rather Newters, and Nullifidians,
which will profess nothing with their mouth, but stand indifferent unto all
opinions? I say unto them, as Elias said unto the people of Israel: 1. Reg.
18.21
How long will ye halte between two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow
him. But if Baall be he, then go after him. If thou believe, that thou art
redeemed, and saved only by the precious blood of Jesus Christ, through true
faith and unfeigned repentance, then confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus.

But otherwise, if thou think that thou can be saved by Masses, Dirges,
praying to Saints, going on Pilgrimage, Popes Pardons, Indulgences, and such
^ke villainies devised by man: It were as good for thee to stick to them, as to
stand indifferent unto all opinions. For God does threaten, that of all men
in the world, he will most of all vomitte out luke warm Soldiers. I know thy
works, Apoc. 3 15.
that thou art neither cold nor hot, I would thou werest either cold or
hot. But because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, it will
come to pass, that I shall spue thee out of my mouth.

Hereby then is condemned the policy of many, which in Religion, have not
so much respect unto the true service of GOD, as to their own private gain,
which care not how God be served, so that they may live in wealth and
prosperity, which would go every Sunday in the year to a Communion, if they
might gain a halpeny by it: and every Sunday to a Mass, to gain a penny by
it, and for two pence, resort to neither of them both.

Of which Religion, a certain Atheist did council his friend to be, when he
bade him to be always of the Princes Religion, as a man standing under an old
tree, not to near the tree, least the tree should fall upon him: and again,
not too far off, for then he could gather no fruit.

As many in these our days, that they may reap some commodity, that they may
be Justices, and Sherifes, and bear a countenance in the world, they will
pretend some forwardness in Religion, but they are afeard of being too
zealous, they will not stand too near the tree, for fear least the tree fall
upon them.

An other sort of men are of a contrary policy. They will always be of a
Religion contrary to their Prince: in Queen Mary's time, they were
Protestauntes, and now they are Papists, that by this means they may not
only seem unto the world, to be holy, devout, and singular men: but also if
any change should come (which God forbid) they might happily hereafter live
of the spoil of their Brethren, and so come to some preferment and Promotion.
These may well be compared to Gedeons Fleece, which, Iud. 6.37.
when the ground was wette, it was dry, and when the ground was dry, it was
wette.

So these men, when they are among Protestauntes, they are Papists, and when
they are among Papists, they are Protestauntes: and thus they seek always to
be singular, when in deed they are wurse then nothing, I say wurse then
nothing before God.

Others there are, which are of an other policy, they will always be of the
same Religion, with the company wherein they are present. As I have heard of a
certain Astronomer, which on a time to deceive the eyes of the simple people,
walked up and down in the Streets, looking up into the Skies, as though
he were some learned and profounde Doctor: when one asked him what weather it
should be, he said, foul weather: when an other asked him in the next
street, he answered, fair weather. On the next day, when the weather proved
in deed to be foul, then came he to him, to whom he had foretold that it
should be fair, and said: Master Doctor, you were deceived yesterday, you
said it should be fair weather, and now it proves contrary. The Astronomer
answered, Oh I did but jest with you, but ask what I said to such a man, in
such a street.

Even so, these pollitique Religious men keep always two tongues in their
heads, that which goes against them, that is in jest, and that which brings
any profit to them, that is in earnest. These are like their graundfather the
devil, 2. Cor. 11.14
which to deceive an other, can turn them selves into Angels of light.

When they come into any danger, then will they say, we are conformable men,
we come to the Church, we receive the Sacrament, we observe our Princes Laws,
we obey Injunctions, we follow orders, we are as good Subjects as any can
be. But if they come amongste their fellows, and others of their own crew.
Then they stomach and skorne at the preaching of the Gospel, they gybe and
scoff at the dooinges of the godly and learned, they whisper of strange
news, and gape for their golden day, they deride and mock the simpler sort
of the professors of Gods word, they defend and maintain their gross
errors, and superstitious opinions, they cry the Popes day again in every
corner.

These may peradventure deceive the eyes of men, but God is not deceived with
any Sophistry. These are like Camaelions, which can turn them selves into
every color, saving white, and be all things, but what they should be.

These carry two faces under one hoode, like Ia^s: two hearts in one body, like
Magus: two tongues in one head, like Judas.

These are the children of this world, Luke 16.8. Math. 10.16
which are wiser in their generation, then the children of light. They are not
as Christ would have them: Wise as Serpents, and simple as Dooues, which
have godly simplicity, joined with their wisdom: but they are subtle
Serpents, 2. Cor. 11.3.
of the old Serpent the Devil: they are not as Paul would have them, wise to
that which is good, Romans 16.19.
but simple to that which is evil. But as Jeremy says, Ier. 4.22.
To do mischief, they are wise enough, but to do well, they are stark
fools.

These confess the name of Christ, as the Herodians called him Master, but
they hold on their purpose, Math. 22.16.
to seek to snare him, and persecute him in his members: they seem to be
desirous of the knowledge of Christ, but it is with the mind of Herod, who
said to the wise men, Go and search dilligentlie for the Babe, Math. 2.8.
and when ye have found him, bring me word again, that I may come also and
worship him: When as the Fox did purpose nothing else, but to devour the
child Jesus, and murder our Lord and Savior.

Mark. 10.17.
The young man which came running unto Christ, confessed him to be his Master,
when he said, Good Master what shall I do to possess eternal life: But he
would neither obey his commandment, nor take up his Cross and follow him.
Judas confessed Christ with his mouth, when he said: Master, Master, Mark
14.44.45.
and kissed him. But with the same mouth, he said: He it is, take him and
lead him away.

But the confession of a true Christian, Math. 15 8.
must proceed from a pure and constaunt heart, not openly to confess the
name of Christ, and secretly to betray him: 2. Tim. 3.5.
not to honor him with our lips, our hearts being far from him, not to
have a show of godliness, and in deed to deny the power thereof.

There are many of these, which bear a show and countenance for a time, which
if the day of trial do once come, will either forsake the Apostle, and
embrace this present world with Demas: 2. Tim. 4.10.14. Genesis 4.8. Luke 22.5.
or work Paul much evil, with Alexander the Coppersmith, I pray God they
do not murder with Caine, or sell with Judas.

There are an other sort of pollitique and worldly wise men, which will
profess no faith at all, but keep their Religion secret unto them selves.
But they must learn out of this text of saint Paul, to cast away all care and
desire of worldly promotion, and also all fear of danger, loss, death, or of
any trouble whatsoever, and freely with the mouth, to confess the Lord Jesus.
For otherwise, howsoever they think it a praise to be close men, and to keep
their Religion secret unto them selves, yet where they think, they hide them
selves most: there they lay widest open their shame, and where they endeavor to
keep it unknown of what Religion they are, this their dissembling and close
dealing, does proclaim louder then with the blast of a Trumpette, that they
are of no Religion at all before God.

The last kind of pollitique men, are such, as will in deed confess openly,
of what Faith and Religion they are, and yet notwithstanding, they will keep
company with the enemies of the Gospel, and join them selves to them in the
league of amity and freendship, in hope that hereafter, if any trouble or
pesecution do come, they may receive some comfort by them. And thus the wise
wicked ^oward hops to be entertained of them, which have consented with him
in his unrighteous dealing not in robbing a earthly Master, of a few measures
of Oil or Wheat, but in robbing the Lord of heaven, Luk 16.4.5.
of his honor and glory.

But these are commanded by the Apostle Paul, Romans 16.17
to avoid those which hold any doctrine, contrary to the word of God: and by
Saint John, 1. Ioh. ^.
not to receive them into their houses, nor to bydde them God speed, much
less to join them selves in any league or amity with them, or to suffer such
to have any dealing under them.

Abraham refused to take of the King of Sodom, so much as a thread, Genesis 14.23.
or a sho^ latchet, least he should say, E^dr. 4.3.
I have enritched Abraham. Zerobabell would not suffer the Samaritanes, to lay
lyme and stone in the building of the Lord. 1. Reg. 13.16.18.
The young Prophet, for eating bread with the wicked old Prophet, was
denowre^ of a Lion. Euse. lib. 4. Cap. 14. Nicepb. lib. 3. Cap. 14. Euse in
vit. Constable lib. 1 Cap 11.
John the Evangelist, would not tarry in the same house, with the heretic
Cerinthus. Constantinus, to try his men, commanded, that all which would not
do sacrifice to Idolles, should be thrust out of his service: and when many
for fear obeyed the commandment, he put them all away: Psa. 110.6.7
for he would suffer none to serve him, which would not also serve the Lord:
and he knew, that they could not be faithful to men, which were unfaithful
unto God.

Theo. lib. 2. Cap. 6.
Liberius, going into banishment, refused all the gifts of the Emperor and his
wife, saying: Let them give those things to Auxentius and Epictetus, their
Arrian heretics, Ephe. 5.11. 2. Cor 6.14.
we must have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, nor any
way yoke our selves with Infidelles. Leuit. 19.19.
We are commanded by the law of God, not to plowe with an Ox and with an
Ass, nor to sow our ground with diverse seed, nor to make our garments of
Linsey wolsey. Wherefore, we must avoid all mingling of contraie Religions,
and in no wise join our selves with the wicked, but endeavor our selves that
we may say with David. Psalm. 110.6.7.
Mine eyes shall be unto the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with
me, he that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me. There shall no
deceiptfull person dwell within my house: he that tells lies, shall not
remain in my sight. O Lord, do not I hate them which hate thee? Psa.
139.21.22.
and do not I earnestly contend against those, that rise up against thee? yea,
I hate them with a perfect and unfeigned hatred, as they were mine utter enemies.

But what is the cause, why these pollitique worldly wise men, do so
familllarlie join them selves with the wicked, and so many ways withdraw
them selves from the true confessing of the Lord Jesus?

Surely, this is only the cause, for that they are afeard, least a change
should shortly come, whereby they might be compelled, either with shame to
turn their coats, or else incur great danger of suffering for the name of
Jesus Christ. Saint John shows, Ioh. 12.48.
how many of the chief Rulers believed in Christ, but because of the
Phariseis, they durst not confess him, least they should be cast out of the
Sinagogue, for they looued the praise of men, more then the praise of God.

As many there are now, which would gladly profess the true faith of Christ,
and yet because they are either Tenau^ts to such Landlordes, or Servant to
such Masters, as are backwarde in Religion, and frowardlie bent to
superstition, or else because they are afeard of afterclaps, and perilles which
may hereafter ensue, they dare not with their mouth confess the Lord Jesus.

These do not consider that which our Savior Christ says: That who soever
will be his Disciple, Math. 16.24 Luke 14.27.
must take up his cross and follow him. Nor that which the Apostle says:
That we must through many afflictions, Acts. 14.22.
enter into the kingdom of God: and that they which will live godly in Christ
Jesus, must suffer persecution. Neither do they consider, 2. Tim. 3.5.12.
that trouble and affliction is profitable, yea, and necessary for the Church
of God: For whom the Lord looueth he chasteneth, Pro. 3.11. Apo. 3.17. Hebr.
12.6.7.8.
and scourges every Son that he receives. If ye endure chastening, God
offers him self unto you as unto sons. For what Son is he whom the
Father does not chasten: If therefore ye be without correction, whereof all are
partakers, then are ye bastardes and not sons.

Psa. 119.67.71.
Before I was afflicted (says David) I went astraye, but now I keep thy
word: it is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy
statutes.

John. 15.2.
When the Vine grows out of order, it must be husbanded, pared, and dressed:
when the body abounds with evil humors, Eccle. 2.5. 1. Pet. 1.7.
it must be purged. Gold must be tried in the fire, before any precious work
be made thereof. Stones must be hewed, and Timber must be squared, before we
can raise up any buylding. Corn must be thresht, and Grapes must be pressed,
before we can have either bread or wine. And all this is wrought in us, by
trouble and affliction: for affliction is the sickle, which does pare and
dress the branches, it is the purgation which does purge our souls from our
former wickedness, and drive us to repentance and amendment of life: it is
fire wherein the Gold is tried, it is the tool whereby we are hewed and
squared, and made sit for the building of the Lord: it is the instrument,
whereby we are thresht and pressed, and made as pure spiritual wheat, fit for
the Garner and storehouse of everlasting joys.

And therefore Ignatius said, when he was brought to be cast into the den of
Lions: Thus it behooves me to be ground with the teethe of Lions, that I may
be made a sweet manchette for the Lord. The Faith of a Christian, is compared
to Camamill, which the more it is tread upon, the more it does florishe, and
the better it does prosper, as Paul shows: How the outward man must
perish before the inward man can be renewed, 2. Cor. 4.10.16.
and we must bear in our bodies, the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life
of Christ may be made manifest in us.

And what is the cause now, why many do live so carelessly and carnally,
setting their minds wholly upon the glory and riches, and vain pleasures of
this world, and having no care at all, either of the honor due unto the name
of the immortal God, and the setting forward of the glorious Gospel of
Christ, or of the salvation of their own souls? Surely, the cause is only
this, for that they are drunken with too much prosperity: the outward man does
not perish, they do not carry about in their bodies, the dying of the Lord
Jesus: For I am fully persuaded, that there are a great number in England,
which now do show them selves carnal and careless, which if GOD should
lay upon them his rod of correction, would become much more holy, and
far more zealous for the truth of God.

Our Lord God has two ways to bring his people home to repentance and
ame^dme^t of life, the one is by the loouing countenance of his mercy, the
other is by therod of correction proceeding from his justice, if the one will
not serve, he must must needs put in ure the other. The Lord give us grace to
return truly unto him, that we may be brought to amendment of life, rather by
the mildnes of his mercy, then by the rigor of his justice. And the Lord long
preserve our gracious Princess Elizabeth, that she may have a long happy and
prosperous reign over us, that we may a long time in peace and tranquillity
enjoy the glorious gospel of Christ, and under her lead a quiet and a
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty: and the Lord confound all the
bloody interprises of traiterous Rebels, and as he has always hitherto
discovered and prevented their devises, so the Lord of his mercy, discover them
and prevent them heareafter. But dearly belooued, whatsoever troubles do
happen unto us, let us always remember that saying of our Lord and Savior.
Mat. 10.28.
Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul. But
rather fear ye him which is able to destroy both body and soul and to cast
them both into hell fire, fear him.

Luke 14.26 Mat. 10.37
He that looueth father or mother, or wife or children, or brethren or sisters
or land or living or his own life more then me, is not worthy of me. If any
man will be my disciple, let him take up the cross and follovv me. But here I
think I hear some of you say a mong your selves, it is an easy matter to
talk of constancy, in bearing the Cross and suffering affliction for the
name of Christ, but it is not so easy to perform it indeed.

There are many of you of the ministry, which exhort to constancy in the
profession of the Gospel, which if any trouble should come, are likely to
turn your coats as soon as any other. What we should do in the like case,
2. Cor 3.5 Phil. 2.13.
God only knows, who is the giver of all strength and without whom we are
not able to think a good thought, but it is God which woorketh in us, both to
will and to perform.

It may be that some which make the greatest brags, and say with Peter, though
all men in the world should be offended by thee, Math. 26.33.35.
yet will not I be offended, though I should dye with thee, yet will not I
deny thee. Ioh. 13 37
Lord why can not I follovv thee now? I will lay down my life for thy
sake.

It may be I say, that they shall be the first which shall deny and forswear:
but good people the question is not what I or be, or any other particular man
shall do, but the question is what ought to be done of every Christian, and
therefore we must every one of us pray unto God continually that he will
vouchsafe to account us woorthye to suffer any thing for the name of Jesus
Christ, and that he will give us patience to endure whatsoever his merciful
hand shall lay upon us.

Some may paraduenture think that this doctrine of patience to suffer for the
name of Christ is not needful to be preached at this time, when all things
are in quiet. But is not he a foolish Soldier, which will never think upon
his weapons and armor until the hour come that he must hasten into the
feelde? And how unwise then is that Christian which will never think upon
his armor of patience until the time come that the Cross shall suddenly be
laid upon him?

Let us think upon our weapon in time dear brethren, let us pray for it day
and night, that so we may find comfort in the day of trial, 1. Pet. 1.7
that the trial of our faith being much more precious then gold, may be found
to our praise and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ. Let us set before our
eyes the example of our Lord and Savior, 1. Pet. 2.21.
who as Peter says, did suffer for us, leaving us an example that we should
follow his steps. Let us look unto Jesus the author and furnisher of our
faith, Heb. 12.2
who for the joy that was set before him endured the Cross, and despised the
shame, and is set at the right hand of the throne of God. The scholar is not
above his Master, Mat. 10.24 Ioh. 13.16
nor the servant above his Lord, nor the ambassador greater then him that
sent him, wherefore if they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how
much more will they revile them of the household? If they have called the
Master Christ himself a glutton and a drunkarde and a companion of Publicanes
and sinners, Mat 9 34 and 11.19.
and a caster out of Devils, through the Prince of the Devils, how much more
will they give reprochefull words unto the scholars? If they have cruelly
entreated the Lord himself with haling him about from place to place, with
blasphemous lies and false accusations, with whips and scourges, pricks and
thorns, buffets and blows, mocks and mowes, cords and ropes, scoffing and
spitting, railing and reuiling, nails and gibbet, thirst and vinegar, reed
and spear, and lifting him up betwixt two thieves, leaving no drop of
blood in all his blessed body, how can the servant look for any better? let
us also call to mind the joy which is laid up in heaven for those which suffer
any thing for the professing of the Lord Jesus, as he says Blessed are ye
when men revile you, Mat 5.11
and persecute you, and falsely speak all manner of evil against you for my
sake. Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven, for so they
persecuted the Prophets before you, Mat. 23.35.
even from the blood of Abel the righteous, unto the blood of Zacharias, the
son of Barachias whom they slew be-tweene the temple and the Altar. 2. Cor.
11.25. Romans 8, 18
S. Paul was most cruelly persecuted, stoned beaten with rods, imprisoned, yet
he counts all his afflictions not worthy of ye glory which should be revealed
unto him. Blessed is the man which endures temptation, Iam. 1.12.
for when he is tried he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord
has promised to them that love him.

Last of all let us call to remembrance the heavy judgments of God, which
from time to time have been showed upon them which have not continued constant
in the confessing of the Lord Jesus. Julian the Emperor, who for his most
wilful renouncing of his Lord and Savior, Hilar.
is called the Apostata, was counted at the first a gracious and religious
Prince. But afterward being drawn away with the vain intisements of
Philosophy, he began to account the Gospel of Christ to be but foolishnes, be
persecuted the professors of his name, with many scoffs and tauntes, saying
that they must do good for evil, and love them which hated them, and bless
them which curssed them, and in all his life he made a mock of Christ and
called him the Carpenters son, and the man of Galily But what came of it in
the end? when he saw his death at hand, he cried out with a desperate mind.
Vicisti Gallilaee, O thou man of Galiley, thou have gotten the victory. Ioh.
4.25.
The Jews saw manifestlye that Christ was the Messiah, Act. 3.6
the son of God, which was promised, they saw the power of his Godhead, by
all the miracles, Ioh 8.46 and 7.40. and 2.9
which were wrought not only by him self but by his Apostles in his name they
saw the innocencye of his life, the majesty of his word, the certi^nde of his
prophesies, they saw his mighty omnipotency, by turning the water into Wine,
Mat. 14.19
by feeding so many thousands with a few barlie loves and a few fishes, Mar
4.39
by commanding the Sea and Wind, by giving sight to the borne blind, by
making the deaf to hear, the dumb to speak, the lame to go, the dead to
rise, Luke 8.30. and 17.14. Ioh. 4.18.
by clensing Lepers, by casting out devils, by telling them the very thoughts
and cogitations of their hearts. They saw all things fulfilled in him, which
the Prophets had foretold them, as Zachery, Zach. 9.9
of the King which should come poorly and riding upon an Ass, Isa. 53.3.10
Esaias of the laying down of his soul an offering for sin, David, of his
feet and his hands bored, Psa. 22 16 18
of the thirst and vinegar, and of the casting lots for his garments, and also
which Moses had foreshadowed unto them by his sacrifices upon the Aulters, Number.
21.9. Ioh. 1.29
and by the lifting up of the brazen Serpent. They heard John Baptist a
Prophet and more then a Prophet, not declaring in word, but poynting out with
his finger. Mat 27.51.45. Luc. 23.45.
The Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world. They saw how at
the time when he was crucified, the veil of the Temple burst, and darkness
ouershadowed the earth. They saw how gloriously the body of Christ was risen
again out of the grave, Mat. 27.65. Math. 28 4.5.
and they knew well enough that it could not be stolen away by unarmed
Disciples, from so many harnised Souldiars as they had placed to keep ye
grave. Act 1.11. and. 2.3 and 5 41. and 7.60
They saw this his wonderful resurrection, witnessed by the testimony of men,
Women, and Angels. They perceived the gifts of the holy ghost, which after
his visible ascension he powered out most plentifully, upon his Apostles and
Disciples. And they saw also his Apostles and Disciples, which were always
conuersaunt with him, so steadfastly to believe in him, that they did not only
suffer great tribulation for the professing of his name but also endured most
cruel death, sealing their profession with their own blood, as with a most
certain testimony, Col. 2.9.
which surely they would never have don unless they had seen the godhead to
dwell corporally in him.

All these things the Jews saw well enough, and yet notwtstanding all these
testimonies of me^, of Angels, and of God himself, saying from heaven. This is
my well belooued son, Math. 3.17. and. 17.5,
in whom I am well pleased. Notwithstanding I say, all these things, confirmed
with so many witnesses, beholden with so many eyes, and as it were handled with
their own hands, yet they would not confess the Lord Jesus to be their
Messiah, but obstinately renounced their Lord and Savior, but how did the
Lord plague them for this their offense? even with ye plague which is
threatened by the Prophet, Isa. 6.9 Mat. 13.14. Romans 11.8
that their hearts should be made fat, and their ears heavy, and their eyes
blind, least they should see with their eyes, or hear with their ears, or
understand with their hearts and be saved.

They mocked and scorned our Savior and his Disciples, and now they themselves
are made a scorn and a laughing stock unto others, living in miserable
slavery and bondage, and being lamentably scattered abroad over the face of
the earth, so disdained and hated, that unto this day the very name of a Jew
is odious, thoroughout all the world.

They will not confess the Lord Jesus to be their Messiah, but they look for
an other Messiah. But look they do and look they shall, and they shall never
see him until the day of vengeance, and then they shall see him whether they
will or no, but as a judge and not a Savior.

To descend from the Jews to examples of latter time, God has showed
sufficient tokens of his judgments, even in man's memory, to terrifye us all,
and to teach us what a horrible thing it is to renounce the true faith of Jesus
Christ. Fraunces Spera, after that he had in Citadell professed the Gospel of
Christ, after ward by the threatening of the Popes Legate in Venis, and by the
desire which he had of worldly riches, he renounced and openly recanted his
faith and religion. but he was by and by stricken with horror, desperation,
and confusion, he felt the torment of hell in his conscience, he desired to be
in the place of Judas and Caine, ^e looked for Beelzebub to call him to a ^aste,
he cried out that he was a repro^te from the beginning, and that the ^eath and
passion of Christ could nothing ^uaile him. He wished that he might re^aine
ten thousand years and more (...) the flames of hell fire, so that at the
^ste he might conceive some hope of an ^de, but that he could hope for nothing
^ut everlasting destruction, both of body and soul, he cried out alas that
curssed ^ay, alas that curssed day, that ever he renounced his Lord and
Savior, and at ^he last in a desperate mind, he stranged himself, and so
ended his wretched ^se with a most miserable death.

So also Stephen Gardener, Act. and mo. page 1992
when there ^ame a Bishop unto him, lying on his death Bedde^, and put him in
remembrance of Peter's denying his Master, answered again that he had
denied with Peter, but that he could not repent with Peter.

So also one Rockwood, at the point of death, staring and raging, said that
^he was utterly dampened, and being willed to ask mercy, cried out all all too
late, all to late. I might rehearse also the death of diverse others as Hales,
Thorneton, Smith, and many others, of whose death we may not judge, but commit
judgment to him to whom it belongs, but most certainly it was horrible and
fearful in the sight of man. I might also declare the grievous plagues
wherewith God has punished the persecutors of the^ which have professed the
name of Christ. Herod sought by all means possible to root out the name of
Christ, and to destroy the babe Jesus, but in the end, he was plagued with a
desperate mind, so that he would have stickt a knife into his own heart,
Josephus de antiq. li. 17. cap. 8
if Achiab his kinsman had not with houlden his hand: and yet he did not so
escape the vengeance of God, for he was stricken with Feauers, with wonderful
swellings, and last of all with Woormes, to devour him, most horribly to
behold.

John. 19.22 Suppl. cron Eutrop. lib. 7. cap. 7. Euse. lib. 2 cap. 7
Pilate unjustly crucified Jesus of Nazereth, whom he could not but confess
to be the King of the Jews, but within a few days after, he was driven to
hang himself. Nero, a blood thirsty Tyrant, persecuted, imprisoned, and
murdered Paul and many other Christians in Rome, which professed themselves to
be the servants of the Lord Jesus. But in the end. ^e was most grievously
plagued for the ^ame, for being wonderfully troubled with terrors and tears,
and fearful ^reames, he would have had some freende ^o have cut off his head,
he could not get so much freendship, he would have drowned himself in the
river Tibris, but that ^he was holden back by one Phaon, and at the last he
thruste his knife into his own throat.

And thus we see that they which persecute the confessors of the Lord Jesus,
rather then they shall want a hangman, they shall become hangmen unto
themselves. I might rehearse also diverse others, Emperors of Rome, which
although they were of great might and power in the world, yet did they in
vain kick against the spur, when they persecuted the professors of the
Gospel of Christ. Valerian the Emperor was a blody persecutor of the
Christians, his reward was to be carried away in a Cage, Act. and mon page
30.31 59.75.86.89.
by Sappores the King of Persia, who brought him to such slavery, that he made
of him a block to get up upon his Horse Maxentius, Maximinian, and
Dioclesian, being Emperors of Rome, they cruelly murdered the Saints of
Christ. But escaped not Gods vengeance, volat. lib. 23
when one of them fell of a bridge with his Horse and harnes, the other was
plagued with lice and vermin, gusshing out of his entrals. And the last was
driven to this extremity to poison himself.

Sundry other examples I might recite unto you of latter years, but that ye
time will not suffer me, and these may be sufficient to testify unto us all,
what a horrible thing it is, not only to renounce the Lord Jesus our selves
but also to speak by any means whatsoever to compel others thereunto. And
now therefore that I may draw to an end, let us consider in a word or two
whom it is whom Saint Paul will have us to confess with our mouths, we must
confess with our mouths the Lord Jesus, that is, we must confess Christ
only to be our Savior, and that we look for salvation in none other, for
this is signified by the name of Jesus, Math. 1.21
as the Angel says to Joseph, thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall
save the people from their sins, and Peter when he was examined by what
means the impotent man was made whole, answered. Act. 4.10
Be it known unto you all and to all the people of Israel, that by the name of
Jesus Christ of Nazereth, whom ye have crucified, whom God raised again from
the dead, even by him does this man stand before you whole. This is the stone
cast aside of you builders, which is become the head of the corner, neither is
there salvation in any other, for among men there is given none other name
under heaven, by whom we must be saved, but only by the name of Jesus of
Nazereth. Then as often as we hear the name of Jesus, we must call to mind
how God the father which cannot lie, has commanded by an Angel from Heaven,
that the name of Jesus, that is a Savior, should be given to his Son, being
made manifest in the flesh, and therefore that he will most certainlye save
us full and perfectlye both in body and soul. And we must call to
remembrance the sweet promises of the Gospel which lay hid under this
name of Jesus, that he by his merrites has saved us from our sins, and by
his virtue and power, does daily mortify the Relics of sin in us, and
quicken us with his holy spirit, and keep us unto salvation, 1. Pet. 1.5.
which is prepared to be showed in the last time, as Paul says, While we were
yet sinners, Romans 5.9.
Christ died for us much more then being now justified, we shall be saved from
wrath through him. For if when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by
the death of his son, much more being reconciled we shall be saved by his
life. Esa. 53.5
And therefore does Christ bear the name of Jesus, because by his stripes we
are healed, because by him we have redemption through his blood, Ephe. 1.7 2 Timothy 1.10 Heb. 2.14
even the forgiveness of sins according to his rich grace, because by his
death, death is destroyed, and he that had the power of death, that is the
Devil.

And therefore for our cause he bears that excellent name given him of his
Father from Heaven, to wit Jesus a Savior, that he might indede effectually
show forth the truth of his name in my salvation and in the salvation of all
believers. 1 Cor. 10.13
He is faithful which bears the name of Jesus, and therefore, Hebru. 10.2^
2. Tim. 2.13.
as he is called a Savior, so no doubt, he will indeed show himself a
Savior unto us: he is also able to save us, for to him is all power given in
heaven and in earth, seeing that God has highly exalted him, and given him a
name above every name, that at the name of Jesus, every knee should bow, both
of things in heaven, and of things in earth, Phil. 2.9.10.
and of things under the earth, and that every tongue should confess that
Jesus is the Lord, to the glory of God the father. And this cannot but be a
great comfort to the heart of every Christian, that the Lord Jesus is true: and
therefore, as he is called a Savior, so will he show himself indeed, he is
also omnipotent, and therefore able to perform it to the salvation of all
believers: Romans 4.21.
so that we may bouldly say with Paul. 1 Cor. 15.55.5^
O Death where is thy stinge? O Hell where is thy victory? Thanks be to God
which has given us the victory thorough our Lord Jesus Christ: Iam. 1.6. 1.
Pet. 1.13. Heb. 10.22. 2. Tim. 1.12.
Whosoever then does doubt of his salvation, being like a wave of the Sea,
which is rossed about with every wind, and does not fully persuade himself
that he is of the number of them, for whom Christ dyed upon the Cross, and
whosoever does put his trust in any other thing but only in the death and
passion of Jesus Christ: these do both deny and renounce their Lord and
Savior, they profess they know God, Titus. 1.16.
but in their works they deny him, 2. Pet. 2.1.3.
and therefore Saint Peter does call them Heretics, which deny the Lord that
bought them: which Heretics, Paul does bid us reject and avoid, after once
or twice admonition. Titus. 3.10.
The Papists do teach this doctrine very earnestly, that Heretics ought to be
avoided, and for this cause with their reasons of refusal, and their Popish
shauelings, creeping from place to place, they persuade me^ to absent them
selves from the church, teaching them that it is a damnable thing to
commmunicate with Heretics. Then in this point we agree both in one, that,
Heretics, if they can by no means be reclaimed, must be rejected. But here
only lies the question, who are they, which by Gods word, are condemned for
Heretics? Tertull.
Quodcunque aduersus veritatem sapit, est Haeresis etiam vetus consuetudo:
Whatsoever does savor against the truth, if it be obstinately defended, it
is an Hearesie, although it be never so ancient a custom. But the Apostle
Saint Peter, ^. Peter. 1.3.
does more perfectlye discribe an Heretic, by two marks and propertyes.
There shall be (says he) false teachers among you, which shall hring in (...),
damnable Heresies: first, (...), denying the Lord that has bought them: and
secondly, (...), they shall for lucres sake, make Merchandise of you, with
feigned words. Now who sees not that these two points are plainly and fully
accomplished in our adversaries? for first they deny that the Lord has bought
them: they call the Lord Jesus their Savior, and they confess that he dyed
upon the Cross, but they deny that he bought them with his death, for if he
bought them with his own most precious blood, what need they to be bought
again with Popes Pardons, Indulgences, Man's Merits, Masses, Dirges, Trentals,
or any such paultrie devises, and lewd inventions of man?

And who knows not that all these things are nothing but subtle practices
too pick men's purses, and too make Marchaundise of Souls, for coueytous
Lucre. Then, thease are the Hereticques, which we must avoid, which deny the
Lord that bought them, which to inritch themselves defend such monstrous
opinions as do all derogate from the death and passion of Christ, Titus. 1.16.
which profess that they know God, but in their works they deny him. Our
Savior Christ is anointed of God, to be our King our Priest, Luke. 1.33.
and our Prophet. Our King as the Angel said to Marie, he shall reign over
the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom shall be no end. Psalm. 110.4.
Hebr. 4.14, and 7.26.
Our Priest, as the Prophet says, the Lord has sworn and will not repent,
thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedec. And our Prophet,
Luke. 4.18. Math. 17.5. John. 1.18. Hebr. 1.2.
because, the spirit of the Lord has anointed him to preach the Gospel
unto the poor, and he is the belooued son of God, whom only we must hear,
who being in the bosom of the Father, has declared him unto us. Then
whosoever do teach us that any man can rule the hearts of men, Psalm. 2.9.
Math. 9.6. Colos. 1.13. Psalm. 110.1. Romans 16.20. Romans 6.6. Mich. 7.19. 1. Cor.
15.55. 1. Peter. 1.3.
or forgive sins, or destroy the power of darkness, or make his enemies his
footestoole, or tread down Satan under his feet, or kill the old man, with
all his concupiscence, with the power of his spirit, or raise up the new man,
in holiness and righteousness, or vanquish sin, Hell, Death and damnation,
or establish in us a hope of the inheritance of everlasting life, but only our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: that man denies the kingdom of Christ. And
whosoever does offer Sacrifice for the quick and the dead, but only the Lord
Jesus, who being the last Priest, and the Priest for ever, did offer himself
once upon the Cross, for the sins of all mankind, as the Apostle says.
Heb. 9.2^.
He appeared once to put away sin, by the sacrifice of himself, and, Heb.
10.10.14
Sanctificati sumus per oblationem Jesus Christi, semel factam: we are
sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once made, for with one
offering has he consecrated for ever them that are sanctified, he denies the
eternal Priesthood of Christ, and whosoever affirms that any mortal man
can dispense with the word of God, or that the Bible ought to be locked up,
and that our faith ought to be grounded upon the Popes decrees and decretales,
or upon any Dunses or Doctors, or Fathers, or Counsels, whatsoever, he denies
our Savior Christ, Math. 17.5.
to be our Prophet, the welbelooued son of God, whom only we must hear, and
therefore the Papists, howsoever they have the name of Jesus often in their
mouths, 2. Pet. 2.2.
yet indeed they deny the Lord that bought them, and therefore, Titus. 3.10.
are such Heretics as are to be avoided. But we must confess our Savior
Christ, to be only our king to govern the hearts of his elect people, with
the virtue of his holy Spirit, and as for the wicked, Romans 8.14.
to crush them with a Scepter of Iron, Psalm. 2.5.
and to break them in pieces, like a Potters Vessel: only, the Priest, which
offered himself without spot to God, Hebr. 9.14,
to purge our consciences from dead works to serve the living Lord, and
(only) the Prophet by whom in these last days, Hebr. 2.2. Deuteronomy. 18.18.
the Lord does speak unto us, and whom God promised to Moses, that he would
raise him up among his Brethren: whom, who so ever should hear, Genesis 3.15.
and 12.3.
should not be destroyed.

We must confess, that, he (only) is the seed of the woman, which has
bruised the Serpents head: Isa. 7.14.
the seed of Abraham, in whom, all the Nations of the world should be blessed:
The Child, which a Virgyn should conceive and bear, and call his name
Emanuell, whom many kings and Prophets have desired to see: we must confess
him to be our Jesus, by whom we are saved, and that under Heaven, there is no
other name given, nothing in Earth, nothing under the Earth: nothing in Heaven,
nor in the Heaven of Heavens: Acts. 4.10.
no virtue, no power, no strength, no name else that is named in which or by
which we can be saved, but only by the name of Jesus of Nazareth. Math. 3.17.
John. 1.1. 2. Cor. 4.4. 1. Cor. 1.24. Acts. 3.15. Hebru. 2.10. and. 12.2. 1.
Cor. 2.8. John. 10.11 14
We must confess him only to be the welbelooued son in whom the Father is
well pleased, the word of God, the Image of God, the power and wisdom of God,
the Prince of life, the Prince of salvation, the Prince of faith, the Lord of
glory, the Heir of all things in Heaven and earth. We must confess him to be
the only good Sheepeheard, by whom we must be gathered, John, 10.7.
and brought home upon his shoulders, the only door by whom we must enter,
Math. 9.12. Math. 17.5. John 1.4. and. 5.26. 1. Cor. 3 11. Ephe. 2.10.
the only Physician to cure our maladyes, the only Master whom we must
hear, the way, the truth, the life, the light, the foundation, and chief
corner Stone, on whom only we must build our only hope, and consolation,
our wisdom, justification, Math. 12.21. 1. Cor. 1.30. Math. 11.27. Ephe. 2.18.
1. Tim. 2.5. John. 4.10, and. 7.38.
sanctification, and redemption, the only Mediator and Advocate betwixt God and
man, whose blood only does purge us from all our sins. We must confess
him to be the only giver of the warer of life: whereof whosoever tastes,
shall never thirste, John. 6.51.
but it shall be in his belly as a Fountain springing up to eternal life,
the only bread of life which came down from Heaven, of whom whosoever eats
shall live for ever: Romans 13.14. Gal. 5.16.
the only riches whereby our poverty must be relieved, the only raiment
wherewith our nakedness must be covered. The victorious Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, Genesis 49.10. 1. Cor. 15.55.
by whom all our enemies are subdued, the Diuil unchained, Hell gates
destroyed, death swallowed up in victory, Ephe. 2.16. Colos. 2.14.
the wrath of God slain, the law crucified, sin vanquished and abolished,
and we our selves made partakers of the everlasting Crown of glory. Ephe.
2.22. and* 4.15. 2. Cor. 11.2.
We must confess him to be the only head of the body, the only husband of
his dear Spouse the Church. The Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending,
which was and is to come, even the almighty, for ever the holy and true, Apoc.
1.8. and 3 7.
which has the Key of David, which opens, and no man shuts, and shuts
and no man opens, who by his incarnation, nativity, circumcision, exile,
Baptism, fasting, temptation, doctrine, miracles, agonyes, bloody sweat,
paynefull passion, Math. 16.27. Luke 24.52. Hebr. 8.1. and. 10 12. 1. ^hes.
4.16.
death, resurrection, and ascension, overcame all our enemies, and now sits
at the right hand of God the father almighty, making intercession for us, and
shall come at the last day to judgment, in the twinkeling of an eye, with the
blaste of a trumpet, and sound of an Archangell, to judge both the quick and
the dead. If we thus confess the Lord Jesus here in earth, Math. 10.3^.
then have we a comfortable promise, that he will likewise confess us before
his ^ther which is in Heaven: Hebr. 2.11,
he will not be ashamed to call us brethren, he will give us this honorable
title, to be called Heirs of God, and fellow Heirs with Jesus Christ. Romans
8.17.
And thus much of the first part, how every Christian must with his mouth
confess the Lord Jesus. Of the second part, which is, that we must believe in
heart, that God raised him up again from the dead, because it conteyneth the
Article of justification, a matter large and weighty, not lightly to be posted
over, but requiring a longer discourse, as being the cheifest principle of
Christian Religion. I am therefore purposed (God willing) to entreat thereupon
to morrow at the first morning prayer: In the mean time, let us meditate upon
this, which we have learned already, that not only our souls, but our whole
bodies, are made to glorify God the Creator, 1. Cor. 6.19.
Christ Jesus the Redeemer, and the holy ghost the sanctifier, and as all the
body, so especially the tongue, Phil. 2.11.
that every tongue should confess, that Jesus is the Lord, to the glory of God
the Father: we have heard also where we must confess the Lord Jesus as in all
places, Psalm. 22.22.
so especially in the midst of the congregation, and amongst our brethren,
because we are not borne to our selves, 1. Pet. 4.11. 1. These. 5.11.
but first to the honor and praise of the name of God, and then to the
edification, instruction and comfort of our brethren, Ephe. 6.4.
and last of all to the godly bringing up and releeuing of our selves and our
familyes, in the fear and nurture of the Lord. We have heard all, those
reasons answered, which are drawn from the example of Naaman, Paul and
Nicodemus, to cloak and cover that dissembling in religion, which is flatly
and plainly condemned by the word of God, because that if Christ do dwell in
our hearts by faith, Ephe. 3.17.
it is impossible that the Devil should be in the tongue, and the other
members of the body, which have their life of the heart, and are governed by
the heart, and also because God being a iealious God, Exodus 20.5.
will suffer no part of his Spouse to be given to any, but to himself alone:
we have heard also, the sundry sorts of ye policies of worldly wise men, which
are all contrary to the true and constant confessing of the Lord Jesus, and
therewithal the manner how they must repent and amend, which is by casting
away all respect of fear or favor of me^, or of the loss of land, living,
yea and of the life it self, and constantly with the mouth to confess the
Lord Jesus, and so much the rather, because if any trouble or persecution
should come, Romans 8.28.
yet all things will work for the best to those that love God. We have heard
the plagues and heavy judgments of God showed all upon those which for any
worldly respect have renou^ced the Lord Jesus as also upon the^ which have
sought by violence to enforce others thereunto. Titus. 1.16.
And last of all we have heard the manner how we must confess him, not only
in word but also indeed, that he is our Jesus that is our Savior, and
therefore will save us, and is also able to save us, being the heir of all
things in Heaven, and in earth: and therefore that without all wavering, Acts.
4.12.
we hope assuredly to be saved by him, and look for no salvation in any other:
and if we thus confess him in this world he will also confess us before his
father, Luke. 12.8. Hebr. 2.11. Romans 8.17.
and before his holy Angels in Heaven, he will acknowledge us to be his brethren
and fellow heirs, when he shall pronounce ye joyful se^te^ce. Come ye blessed
of my father inherit you the kingdom prepared for you from the foundations of
the world. Then shall we be with the Lamb, and go whether he goes, then shall
we make an other ioyefull confession, with heavenly Harmony, and most
pleasant melody, when we shall accompany the Archangels, Thrones, Powers,
Dominions, Cherubins, Seraphins, Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs
Virgins, Confessors, Angels, Elders, and innumerable thousands of Saints, and
with a new Song, for ever glorifying our Lord Jesus: saying. Apoc. 4.8. and.
5.11.
Thou Christ which was slain, art worthy to receive power and riches, and
wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing: Holy, holy, holy,
Lord God of Hoasts: glory be to thee O God most high. To the which heavenly
company and confession, the Lord hasten us all, for the merits of his
welbelooued son Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the holy ghost, be
all praise and dominion for ever and ever.

(...).

Romans 16.27. A GODLY and Learned Sermon Containing a charge and Instruction for
all unlearned, negligent and dissolute Ministers:

And an Exhortation to the common people, to seek their amendment, by Prayer,
unto GOD.

Preached at Manchester in Lancastershire, before a great and worshipful
Audience, by occasion of certain Parsons there at that present, appointed (as
then) to be made Ministers.

By Simon Harwarde Preacher of the word of God, and Master of Art, late of
New College in Oxforde.

Hilar. lib. 8. de Trinitate. Non statim boni atque vtilis Sacerdotis est, aut
tantummodo innocenter agere, aut tantummodo scienter praedicare, cum and
innocens sibi tantum proficiat nisi doctus sit, et doctus sinc doctrinae, sit
authoritate nisi and innocens sit, vita cius ornetur docendo and Doctrina
viuendo.

A learned Sermon of Instructions to the Ministry.
Luke 10. verse 2. The Harvest is great, but the laborers are but few: pray
therefore, the Lord of the Harvest to send forth Laborers into his Harvest.


THE occasion of these words of our Savior Christ (right reverend and
dearly beloved) is that which is set down in the verse last going before,
how the Lord appointed. 70. Disciples, and sent them two and two before him
into every city and place where he himself should come: wherein we have
first to consider, how all the dooinges of our Lord and Savior, were not only
fore-toulde, by the Prophesies, but also fore-shadowed by the deeds of the
Patriarchs and holy Prophets of God. For, as, the posterity of Jacob had the
twelve Patriarchs, Apoc. 21.14. Genesis 46.27. Number. 11.16.
as the chief fountaynes, from the which their offspringe was derived, even
so, has Christ sent forth his Apostles to the foundation of his church, and
as Jacob went down into Egypt with seventy souls and as God commanded Moses
to choose out seauentye of the Elders of Israel to bear the burden of the
people with him: which government was in a manner afterward renewed, when the
people were returned from Babylon: for they had their (...) which was
afterward corruptly called Sanedrin, consistinge of 71. Seniors, which had the
hearing of most weighty affairs: eue^ so, our Savior Christ, Colos 2.16. Heb.
10.1.
does here se^d forth 70. disciples before him, into every city and place
where he himself should come: and thus is our Savior become the truth of al
figures and the body of all shadows. Genesis 2.22.
He is ye second Adam which was as it were cast on sleep for a time, when he
lay in the Sepulcher, until the Spouse his church was framed out of his side.
He is ye Abraham, Gen 13.16.
whose seed is as the stars of heaven and as the dust of the earth in number.
He is ye Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedec. Psalm. 110.4. Exodus
12.13.
He is ye pascal lamb the lamb of god, John. 1 29. Na^. 21.9. John. 3.14. Genesis
28.12.
slain from the begi^ning of the world. He is the Brazen Serpent, which was
lift up upon the cross, to cure all our maladies. He is ye Ladder which Jacob
saw, whereby only, Genesis 1^.17. and. 22.9.
we must asce^d into heaven. He is that Isaac which being born against the
course of nature, was sacrifised upon the Alter of the Cross, Genesis 37.28. and
43.30. and. 45.3
and yet remained safe and sound. He is that pitiful Joseph which was soulde
of his Brethren, and yet so lovingly affected, that he afterward being
advanced in glory, was not ashamed to confess his Brethren: John. 1.13.
He is that valiant Joshua, which leads us into the Land of Canaan, flowing
with milk and honey. He is that David, which being persecuted by Saul and his
enemies became a worm and not a man, Psalm. 22.1.14.15.16.18.
a very shame of men, and the contempt of the people, whose heart was molten
like wax in the midst of his bowels, and his strength dried up like a
potsharde, whose hands and feet they pierced, and cast lots upon his
garments, so that he was compelled to cry out, my God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? 1. Reg. 10.23. Iud. 16.30.
He is that wise Solomon which rules his people with peace and tranquillity.
He is ye courageous Sampson, who by his death overthrows all his enemies.
Number. 11.17.


And here he is that careful Moses, which for the profit and comfort of his
people, does choose out seventy Disciples, to bear the burden with him, and
sends them out two and two, into every City and place, where he himself
should come.

Here also, we have to learn the unity and loving agreement which ought to
be amongst the Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel of Christ. Our Savior
sedeth sorth his Disciples by two and two: signifiyng unto them, the mutual
agreement which they ought to have one with another, how they ought one to aid
and assist another and in all their dooinges, to go as it were hand in hand
together. So the Evangelist Saint Mark shows how Christ sent forth his
Apostles also by two and two, Mark. 6.7.
and when he chose his Apostles, he called them two and two. For, first, he
called Simon Peeter and Andrew his Brother. Mat. 4.18.
And going a little farther, he saw two other Brethren, James the son of
Zebedaeus and John his Brother, mending their Nets in a Ship With Zebedaeus,
their Father, and he called them. Whereby we are admonished of a Brotherlye
love which ought to be (as amongst all me^) so especially amongst the
preachers of the Gospel of Christ. Let us then of the Ministry, learn here
to lay aside al hatred and malice, not to envy or malign our fell^w brethren,
not to seek to supplant one an other, not to divide our selves one from
another, with vain and unprofitable contentions, as many do, to the great
slander of the Gospel, but to go all as it were hand in hand together, with
one heart and one voice to glorifye God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Let
us say one to another as Abraham said to Lot: I pray thee, Genesis 13.8.
let there be no strife between thee and me, neither between my Heardmen
and thy Heardmen, for we are all Brethren. We are all Brethren, Brethren by
nature, Brethen by calling, Brethren in Religion: all made by one God, al
redeemed by one Jesus Christ: all called to the same office and ministry, all
branches of one vine, all sheep of the same sheepfold, all members of the
same body, all fellow servants of the same household, all partakers of the
same baptism, of the same faith, of the same hope of everlasting life, and all
shall be judged at the last day of the same Judge without respect of persons: And
therefore, let there be no contention among us, we are fellow-seruantes, we
are Brethren. David compares Love to the precious ointment, which was powered
upon Aarons head, Psalm. 133 2.
running down upon the Bearde, and from thence unto skirts of his clothing.
Signifiyng thereby, that love can never be in the borders of the Garment, that
is in the common people, unless it first be in ye heads, yt is in ye
Maiestrats and Ministers, and therefore yt it ought first to be powered upon
Aarons head, upon the Rulers of the common wealth, and upon the Ministers of
the Church of God, least the heads being infected, the whole body be the
worse for it, we especially ought to take heed that we agree one with
another, comfort one another, assist one another, and as it were go hand in
hand together in the work of the Lord. Again, in that the Disciples were sent
out by two and two, we are to consider the equalytie, which ought to be in the
Ministers of the word of God. Christ grants to none of them any prymacie or
supremacye, but sends the^ forth with equal authority, two by two. Apoc.
21.14.
The Church is said to have twelve foundations, the twelve Apostles, of the
Lamb, where Peter is made no head corner stone, but all the Apostles equaly,
Ephesians. 2.22.
foundations, as Paul says, Ye are built upon the foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner Stone. And our
Savior seems to signify an equallity when he says, Math. 19.28.
that they shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel.
And a little after when the rest of the Apostles began to disdain James and
John, he reproved the^ saying. Math. 20.25.
The Lords of the Gentiles have dominion over them, and they are great and
exercise authority, but it shall not be so among you, but whosoeur will be
great among you, let him be your servant: and whosoever will be chief among
you, let him be your Minister, even as the son of man came not to be served,
but to serve, Mat. 28.19.
and to give his life for the ransom of many. And when he gave unto them the
commission and authority of their Apostleship, he gave it equally and
generally to them all saying. Go therefore and teach all nations, Baptizing
them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy Ghost. And
Saint John says, Ioh. 20.19.22.
that Christ stood in the midst of his Disciples and said. Receive the holy
Ghost, who so euers sins ye remitte they are remitted, and who so euers
sins ye retain, they are retained.

He leaned not to Peter, nor to James, nor to John, but stood in the midst of
them, neither did he give the authority of binding, and loosinge
(particulerly) to Peter, but (generally) to them all: and when the holy Ghost
came down in cloven tongues, Act. 2.3.
like fire, the Text says, It sat upon each of them, and they were all filled
with the holy Ghost, and began to speak with diverse Languages, even as the
same spirit gave them vtteraunce. It has bin taught in times past, that the
absoluing of sins did consist in the worthynesse of the person: a simple
Priest might absolve but certain small sins, other greater, did belong to the
Bishop, the Archbishop claymed an other higher sort, but the greatest and
fowlest sins were reserved to be forgiven only by the Pope and his
Cardinals: But this division was brought in by their greedy coueitousnesse, to
enrich them selves, and not by any warrant of the word of God. For we know
assuredly, that the authority of binding and loosing by the word of God, the
administration of the Sacraments, and the efectuall operation of the spirit by
the preaching of the Gospel is equally committed to all Ministers, whether
they be Archebyshops, or Bishops, or Pastors, by what name or title so ever
they be called. Ministers have better knowledge and vtteraunce, some, then
other, but their Ministry is of equal dignity: And therefore, the
Privileges and superiorities which Bishops have above other Ministers, are
rather granted by man, for maintaining of better order and quietness in common
wealths, then challenged by the office of their Ministry. They may have some
thing in commission from the Prince, which we are bound to obey, not for
fear, but for Conscience sake, and how so ever, for the avoiding of disorder
and confusion, there may be some Bishops and Superintendents, as it were
particular heads of certene congregations, yet this does nothing prove, 1.
Pet. 5.4. Ephesians. 1.22, and 4.15.
that any man may challenge to him self the name of universal Bishop, or head
of the whole Church which is only proper to our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ:
And therefore, whosoever does arrogate to him self this name or title, he must
needs be that lying Antichrist, 2. Thesa. 2.4.
which as Saint Paul says, Does exalte him self against all that is called
God, or that is worshipped, so that he does sit in the Temple of God, as God,
showing himself, that he is God: Greg. Mag. Epist. 30. ad mauritum Imper.
and therefore it was well said of Gregory, Ego confidenter dico quod quisquis
se vniuersalem sacerdotem vocat vel vocari desiderat in elatione sua,
Antichristum proecurrit, quia superbie^do se coeteris praeponit. In that our
savior Christ does send forth seauentie Disciples, where as before he sent
forth but twelve, we have moreover to consider that the multitude of Ministers
is bound to no certain number. Some affirm, that there ought to be no more
Ministers then there are Congregatio^s: and indeed, to have any vacabound
Ministers, to wa^der about without charges I find it altogether repugnaunt to
the word of God: yet notwithstanding, seeing that the Congregations and
Parishes in this Country, are so unequally divided, that some may be better
governed by one, then others may be with ten, it is necessary that many
pastors amongst us should have many assistants, and therefore good people
marvel not though there be many Ministers at this time to be ordained before
you, to who^ I am now to give their charge, but rather seeing that there are
none admitted, but such as are called to their several flocks, as I my self
dare avouch being oculatus testis, and having seen the same testified by the
Letters of diverse worshipful, who as my Lord is persuaded, will in no wise
abuse him. I beseech you pray to god together with us that he will prowre upon
them, the dew of his holy spirit, and so bless them with the heavenly gifts
of knowledge, with wisdom, zeal and vtteraunce, that they may become
profitable laborers in the Lords Harvest: for the Harvest is great, and the
Laborers are but few.

Moreover, in that Christ did send forth his seaue^tie Disciples before him,
into every City and place, where he himself should come, it appears, that
our Savior did not show himself like these corner creepers, 2. Tim. 3.6.
these Howletes and Night Birds, which do creep into Houses and lead
captives Women laden with sins, but he would have his coming to be openly
known to all the Country.

Omnis qui perverse agit, odit lucem. Every one that does evil, hates the
light: neither comes he to the light least his deeds should be reproved: but
he which deals truly comes into the light, Vt manifesta fiant facta ipsius
quod secundum Deum fiant, That his deeds might be made manifest, that they are
wrought according unto God. And therefore, if there were nothing else to
condemn these popish shauelings, which being disguised, do creep about from
place to place, to persuade the people to withdraw their obedience from their
natural Sovereign, to whom it is due, and to give it to a foreign Prelate a
Priest of Rome: this one thing were sufficient to bewray them and to discredit
their cause, for that they are ashamed to show their faces, and do use such
hard shifts, such subtle practices and sleightie devises, to keep them
selves close, that they may not be called to their answer, whereas most
certainly, Truth seeks no corners: as here you see how our savior Christ
does send his seventy Disciples, as it were forerunners to make proclamation
of him in every City and place, where he himself should come, which though
it were perilous, for, according to the words of our Savior, in the third
verse, It was nothing else, but to send Lambs among wolves, Luke 10.3.
yet was there more respect to be had of the truth, then of any danger of
death what so ever. When our Savior has thus sent forth his seauentie
Disciples before him into every City and place where he him self should
come, he begins now their charge, in these words which I have read unto
you, The Harvest is great, and the Laborers are but few, pray therefore, the
Lord of the Harvest, to send Laborers into his Harvest: which piece of
Scripture might fitly be divided in two parts: the first is, An exhortation
to prayer, that we pray to the Lord of the Harvest, to send forth Laborers
into his Harvest. The second contains, The reasons of the Exhortation,
which are two: first, because, the Harvest is great, and secondly, because,
the Laborers are but few. But I think it best at this time not to inuert the
words of our Savior but to entreat upon them orderlye, as they lay in the
text: First, of the greatness of the Harvest. Secondly, of the small number of
the Laborers. Thirdly, of the means whereby that small number shall be
increased, if we performed our duty to pray unto the Lord of the Harvest to
send forth Laborers into his Harvest.

First, our Savior Christ, tells them, that the Harvest is great, whereby
he signifies, the number of the faithful, which hunger and thirst after
righteousness, and have an earnest desire to hear, to receive, and to embrace
the heavenly treasure of his most holy and blessed word. And thus does our
Savior, often name the Congregation of his faithful people, by the name of
Harvest, Ioh. 4.35.
when he saw the Samaritanes coming to him out of Sichem, he said: behold,
lift up your eyes, and look on the Regions, for they are white already unto
the Harvest: Math. 9.37.
And in the Gospel after Saint Matthew, he says, Surely the Harvest is great
etc. where he does use the self same words, which he does in this place,
although to another purpose. For, there he has especially respect unto the
people, on whom he had compassion, when he saw them dispersed and scattered
abroad, as it were Sheep having no Shepherd, and therefore he said: Surely
the Harvest is great, but the laborers are but few, pray, etc. But here he
has respect, not so much unto ye flock as unto the Disciples themselves, that
although they saw but few among the Jews which favored his doctrine, and
therefore might hardly conceive any hope of doing any good, yet they should
not despair, For the Harvest was great, howsoever in their judgment the
number of the faithful was but small, Romans 11.2.
yet they should not be discouraged, For the Harvest was great. Elias being in
a Cave in ye Mount Horeb, 1. Re. 19.10.18
was in a manner discouraged, when he saw all the Prophets of God slain, and
his Altars broken down, and he left alone, whose life they sought also. But
the Lord appeared unto him and comforted him saying. Romans 11.4.
I have reserved unto my self in Israel 7000. men, which have never bowed
their knees to Baal, nor kissed him with their mouths. Here then, we that are
Ministers are to learn, not to be dismayed, although we see but small fruit
of our labors, but to go on forward diligently and painefully in the work of
the Lord, knowing that the Harvest may be greater then we do imagine and
although in our judgment there be few or none which return unto repentance,
yet there may be seven thousand in the sight of God, and therefore although we
may say with Peter: I have travailed all night, Luke. 5.5.
and have taken nothing, yet we must remember yt we say also, Nevertheless at
thy commandment O Lord I will still let down the Net.

Semper tibi pendeat hamus.
In quo non credis gurgite piscis erit.
The Church is called an Harvest, and therefore we must not look that it
should increase and grow to perfection all at once, but by little and little,
and that with much a do: for as the seed is first cast into the ground, then
covered with cloddes, afterward kept under with Frost and Snow, and when it is
grown up it is parched with heat, almost choked with briars and weeds, and
beaten down with storms and tempests, and at the last with much labor it is
brought into the Barnes: Even so, the Seed of Gods word, when it is sown in
the hearts of men, it is long before it take any deep root, and hardly does
the fruit appear, and when it is spronge up, it is parched with ye heat of
many troubles and miseries, it is almost choked with ye briers and brambles of
voluptuous living, and the thornie cares of this world, it is beaten down with
the storms and tempests of sundry temptations, and at the last with much a
do, it does make us fit to be received into the Barnes of everlasting joys,
and then only is the Harvest perfectly purged, for so long as we remain here
in this vale of misery, we must look for nothing else but to have ye tares
mingled with the wheat, the chafe with the grain, ye wicked with the good,
ye goats with the sheep, and therefore the church is compared to a family or
household, which contains not only sons but slaves also, Romans 9.21. 2. Tim.
2.20.
not all vessels to honor, but some to dishonor: it is compared also to, a draw
Net, Math. 13.47.
which being cast into the Sea, does gather all kind of Fish, good and bad.
And our Savior says, that the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man which
sowed good seed in his field, Math. 13.24.
but while me^ slept the enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat, and went
his way, and when the blade was spro^g up and brought forth fruit, the^
appeared the tares also: the^ came the servants of the householder and said unto
him. Master, sowedst not ye good seed in thy field?

from whence then has it Tares and he said, the Envious man has done this.
Then the Servants said unto him, will thou then that we go and gather them
up? But he said, nay, least while ye go about to gather the Tares ye plucked
up the Wheat also: Let both grow together until the Harvest, and in the time
of the Harvest, I will say unto the Reapers, gather ye first the Tares and
bind them in sheaues to burn them, but gather the Wheat into my Barn. And
therefore until the Harvest do come, that is the consumation of all things,
and the end of the world, we must look for nothing but to have the wicked
mingled with the godly, and the Tares with the good Grain. Some have gathered
out of this place, that obstinate Heretics and Idolators ought not to be
punished with death, because the Householder does command his servant to
let the Tares and the Wheat grow together until the time of the Harvest.
Mat. 13.24.30
But we must understand that as by the good Corn is me^t all the faithful,
all which are sowe^ of God, all which shall be gathered into the Barnes of
everlasting life: so by the Tares are me^t not only Heretics and Idolaters,
but also all which are sown of the Devil, all Hipocrites and Infidels, and
all which shall be cast into the Furnace of everlasting fire. And therefore, if
by this Parable, our Savior did forbid the punishment of Idolaters, by the
civil Maiestrate, it would follow also that neither Traitors, Whoremongers,
Thieves, nor Murderers, were to be punished with death, which were too absurd,
and too gross to be Imagined. For by the Tares are signified all the wicked,
and all which are sown by the envious man. Math. 13.28.
And therefore this commandment of Christ, given to his Servant, does not
concern the civil Magistrate, but as by the Field, is signified not the
Church where the Gospel is purely preached, nor our mind, as some do expound
it, but the whole world, containing all both grain and chafe, wheat and
Tares. And as the Harvest in that place is taken, not as it is here, for the
company of the faithful which gladly receive the word of God, but for the
universal consummation of the world, so by the servant are meant not civil
nor Ecclesiastical Magistrates, but the Angels of God, by whose Ministry, the
harvest, that is the consummation of the world, shall be accomplished: And
therefore, as in the beginning of the History of Job, God is set forth
consulting with his Angels, as a King with his honorable Counsel, that
thereby the incomprehensible providence of God, which governs all things, by
his Ministering spirits, might be, as in a lively table set forth before our
eyes: so here is the Lord set down as it were, talking with his Angels, of the
state of the Ghurch, and of the end of the world, when there shall be an
universal purging of the Church of God: And this may appear both by the
words of the servant. Number vis, vt colligamus Zizania? They do not say, shall
we gather this or that Tare, shall we punish this or that Idolater, this or
that Murderer, but will thou that we shall gather the Tares, that is, that we
shall make an end of all things, and purge the good seed which thou have sown
from all offenses? and also by the words of the Householder, for he does not
command his servant to suffer the Tares to grow, least they chance to
pluck up Wheat for Tares, but, least with the Tares they pluck up the Wheat
also, signifying thereby that he gave the commandment, not to provide for the
Tares, but to provide for the good Corn: and therefore, neither does the
general gathering of the good Corn into the Barnes, any thing hinder, but
that God may particularly by death every day, gather some of his Saints into
Abraham's bosom, Exodus 32.27. Deuteronomy. 13.9. 2. Par. 15.13. 2. Reg. 23.20. 1. Keg.
18.40 2. Reg. 10.1.
neither does the universal burning of the tares any thing hinder, but that
they may particulerly be plucked up by the Magistrate according to the word of
God. And there is no reason, but if they may be put to death, which murder the
body and spoil men of their goods, much more they which murder the souls of
many, and disturb the quietness of the common wealth, and rob God of his
honor, whose name be blessed for ever and ever.

Then the meaning of that Parable of our Savior Christ, is, that so long as
this wicked world continues, we must look for no perfect purging of the
Church of God. Let the Magistrate execute never so much, and the Preacher
teach never so much, there will be Heathen, Infidels, Jews, Turks,
Papists, Atheists, Hipocrites, continually troubling the church of God. But
all our comfort is that the Lord does tell us, that there will come an
Harvest time, wherein he will separate the Tares from the wheat, and the sheep
from the Goats. The wicked do provoke the wrath of God to burn and consume
them presently, and to throw them headlong into the bottomless pit of Hell:
notwithstanding, for the elects sake God does spare them for a time, until
the Harvest, that is, until the number of the elect shall be accomplished, which
shall never be, until the consumation of all things, and the end of the world
be brought upon us: and therefore, if in the mean time, in the Harvest of the
people of God, the Tares be mingled with the Corn, we must not fret our selves
because of the ungodly, neither be envious for the wicked dooers, Psa.
17.1.2.35.
For they shall once be cut down like grass, and as the green Herb shall
they wither away: though for a time they be lusty and strong, and spread
themselves like green bay Trees, yet shall they suddenly pass away so that we
may say with David. O how suddenly are they destroyed, Psalm. 73.19.
perished and come to a fearful end, even as a dream when a man awaketh.
And though for a time the Tares do flourish, amids the Wheat, yet shall the
Harvest at the last be ripened, and the^ shall the Lord send his Reapers to
gather the Corn into his Barn, but the Tares shall they bind together, and
cast into unquenchable fire. Here then learn good people, to show forth the
fruit of your profession, Math. 7.16.
for by the fruit shall the Tree be known. Every, good Tree brings forth
good fruit, and a corrupt tree brings forth corrupt fruit. Do men gather
Grapes of Thorns, Gala. 5.6.
or Figs of Thistles? Paul will have the faith of every Christian to work
thorough charity. For if the faith of a Christian be compared to a Tree, then
even as the root of a Tree, sucketh Juice out of the earth, the body receaueth
of the root, the branch takes of the body, and the fruit shoots out of
the branch: even so the faith of a Christian, must first be rooted and
grounded upon the death and passion of Jesus Christ, then must it send up the
Sap of love, and love must blossom forth in good works. And thus if our
faith be not a dead faith, but a lively faith, not a barren faith, but a
fruitful faith, not an idle faith but a working faith, a faith working through
charity: then are we pure spiritual Wheat for the Barnes of the Lord. The
Church here ye see is compared to a Harvest, the^ if we bring forth nothing
but Tares of sin and wickedness, we can look for no other, but to be
gathered by the Reapers, Math. 13.30.
into a bundell, and to be thrown into the Furnace of everlasting fire. Isa.
5.2.
It is compared also to a Viniarde which the Lord has hedged and gathered out
the Stones, and planted it with the best Plants, and built a Tower in the midst
thereof, and made a Wine Press therein: then if in steed of the sweet Grapes
of holiness and righteousness, we bring forth nothing but the wild Grapes
of sin and wickedness, that the Lord may say unto us, as he says unto the
Jews: Isa. 5.4.
what could I have done to my Viniarde, which I have not done, and behold now,
when I look for Grapes, it brings forth nothing but wild Grapes: then have
we a severe judgment denounced against us, by God himself, he will break
down the Hedge of ye Viniard, he will lay it waste, Math. 7.19.
he will let in the wild Boar, to devour and spoil it, yea he will hew down
the trees, and cast them into unquenchable fire. We are compared also to
ground on which the sower does sow his seed, Luke. 8.5.
then if we be that hard ground, whereinto the Seed of Gods word cannot
enter, but that it is plucked away by Satan, even as seed by the high ways
side, is snatched away by the Fowls of the air, or if we be that dry ground
whereupon the fruit does wither away, because it wants the moisture of the
dew of Gods holy spirit, or if we be the thorny ground whereupon the fruit
is choked, with the briars and brambles of cares, and riches, and voluptuous
living, then are our hearts evil and unfruitful ground, Mark. 11.13.^^
and therefore before God accursed, even as the Fig tree which had flourishing
leaves without fruit, was by our Savior Christ accursed, and dried up by the
roots for ever: but if we desire to be blessed of ye Lord, we must endeavor to
be good ground, yt is, Luke. 8.15.
as our savior does himself expound it, with a good and honest heart, to
hear the word of god, and to keep it, and to bring forth fruit with patience,
not to be idle and fruitless hearers, to let it in at the one ear and out at
the other ear, to hear it in the Church, and leave it in the Porche, but to
hear it, to keep it, Romans 2.13.
and to bring forth fruit with patience, for not the hearers of the word but
the dooers, shall be justified. Not every one that says unto me Lord Lord,
Math. 7.21.
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my
Father in heaven. Luke. 11.28.
Blessed are they which hear the word of God and keep it. So then, with
hearing, ye must join keeping, with talking, we must join walking, with
professing, expressing, with exhortation, conversation: with science,
conscience, with faith, charity. For it shall not be asked in the dreadful
day of judgment, what we have heard, nor what we have learned, nor what we
have read, but how we have believed, Math. 7.19.
and what we have done, and that same Tree which has not brought forth good
fruit, shall be hevven down and thrown into unquenchable fire, and they
which in the harvest do prove to be tares, shall be bound together by the
Angels of God, Math. 13.30.
and cast into the Furnace of eternal death, where the worm never dies, and
the flame never goes out. We are called also by the Apostle Paul, Gods
Husbandry. 1. Cor. 3.9.
Vos estis Agricultura dei: ye are Gods Husbandry. Whereby we are admonished
of our duty, that the more that we are husbanded by the word of God, the more
plentiful ought we to be in good works, or otherwise, our condemnation will
be the greater. We cannot allege the ensample of our forefathers, nor of any
others in this time, which have not the like Husbandry bestowed upon them.
For, Mat. 25.20.22.
to whom the Lord commits but two Talents, of him he will look for but the
increase of two. But to whomsoener he commits five Talents, of him he will
look for the increase of five. The Scholemaister will not require Latin of him
that never learned any, but he which has learned it, he must give an accoumpt
for it.

When a Master does send forth his servant in the night time, if he have
missed his way a little, he will not deal so rigorously with him: but when he
sends him in the day time, if he miss his way, then he shall more hardly be
excused. Where the Husbandman does take great pains in husbandry, there will
he look for much fruit, but where he never took any pains, there, it will
grieve him the less to have some thorns and thistles, briars and brambles.
And therefore, consider (good people) how the Lord has dealt more mercifully
with you of this Town of Manchester, then ever he did with your forefathers,
or then now he does with any place about you. He has given you a large
Talent, he has revealed his holy will most plainly and plentifully unto you,
he has sent you forth in the day time, even in the light of his glorious
Gospel, he has sent his servant early and late, to husband your hearts, and
to sow therein the seed of his most holy and blessed word, take heed
therefore that your fruits be aunswerable thereunto, or otherwise assure your
selves that your condemnation shall be the greater: Luke 1^.47.48
for, he that knows the will of his Master, and will not do it, he shall be
beaten with many stripes: and to whom soever, much is committed, of him shall
much be required. And thus dearly belooued, ye see how these allegoryes so
often used in the Scriptures, of Harvest, Trees, Viniarde, Ground, Seed,
Husbandry, do all admonish you of Gods great mercy toward you, how he does
account you for his own Harvest, for his Trees, planted with his own hand,
for his own Viniarde, for his own Husbandry, for his own ground, sown
with his own seed, the word of his everlasting truth, to the end, that if
ye will be aunswerable to these unspeakable mercies, and show your selves
plentiful in all good works, ye may at the last be also brought into his own
Barnes, of everlasting joys, there to be heirs of God, and fellow heirs with
Jesus Christ. The Harvest (says Christ) is great. The Harvest that is the
Church of God may be called great, either for the price and excellency
thereof, because Christ does more esteem one fafthfull member of his
mystical body, the^ all the wicked reprobates in the world, and make more
account of his Church, be it never so small, being purchased with his own
most precious blood, then all the number of the Infidels and Atheists, be they
never so many and so glorious in the sight of the world: or therefore may the
Harvest now be called great, because it is indeed dispersed far and wide
over the face of the whole earth. It is not now tied to the family of Jacob,
as the Jews would have it nor to Africa, John. 4 23. Apoc. 21.12.13
as the Donatists would have it, nor to Rome as the Papists would have it, but
God has chosen for the seed of Abraham, all which have the faith of Abraham,
and for the family of Jacob, all which worship the Lord in spirit and truth.
And therefore in the Apocalips, the Church is called a City, having twelve
Gates, three into every corner of the world. Ephe. 2.14.
And Saint Paul shows that Now the Wall of partition is broken down: so
that all the world is equally the Church of God, all countries are Judah, all
Cities are Jerusalem: all are the seed of Abraham, which have the faith of
Abraham. All the world is the Harvest, the Field, the inheritance of the
Lord, all houses are the house of God, where the Lord is worshipped in spirit
and truth: And thus is the Harvest great, being now not bound to any
particular place, but Catholic, and extended over the face of the whole
earth. I must needs confess, that if we compare the small number of the
faithful, with the great multitude of the wicked: the harvest will not appear
to be great, but the abundance of weeds will be more then of the good Corn.
And in this respect, Christ does call his flock, a little flock: Fear not my
little flock, Luke. 12.3^.
it is your Fathers pleasure to give a kingdom. Genesis 8.16.
There will be for Noah and his family, being but eight persons, all the
world, drowned and overwhelmed in wickedness. For Lot and his two daughters,
all Sodom and Gomorrha, Genesis 19.24.
with the Cities round about, destroyed with fire and Brimstone from heaven:
For one thankful Samaritane, there will be nine Leapers unthankful: Luke.
17.17.
so that of ten, scarce one will acknowledge Gods benefits, and fall down at
the feet of Jesus, and glorify God. 1. Reg. 18.19.
For one Elias, there will be four hundred and fifty Prophets of Baal, and
four hundred Prophets of the Groves which eat at Iezabels Table. For one
Prophet of God, Micheas, 1. Reg. 22.^.
there will be four hundred false Prophets, to prophecy lies unto Achab.
There will be but one of a City and two of a Tribe, which shall enter into
Sion the true Church of God: Ierem. 3.14.
in steed of the two legs or the piece of the ear, Amos. 3.12.
which the Sheepeheard shall save from the mouth of the Lion, the whole body
shall be devoured: Apoc. 3.4.
there will be but a few names found in Sardis which have not defiled their
garments, For wide is the Gate, and broad is the way, Math. 7.13.
that leads to destruction, and many enter into it, but straight is the Gate,
and narrow is the way, which leads to life, and few there be that find it:
and therefore, if we compare the number of the faithful with the wicked, we
shall find more Chafe then Grain, more Tares then good Corn: so that the
Harvest of the pure Wheat, shall be found to be very small, Isa. 24.13.
and therefore the Prophet Esaias does compare the Church to the shaking of an
Olive Tree, and to the Grapes when the vintage is ended, that even as when the
fruit of the Olives and the Grapes of the Vines are gathered, there remain
but a few hanging here and there upon the branches, even so is the Church of
God, as it were the glening of the Corn, when the Harvest is ended: And yet
dearly belooued, howsoever the Harvest of the godly being compared with the
abundance of the Tares, is but as Christ says, a little flock, yet surely it
is far greater then can be perceived with the eyes of man. Aug. in Ioh. Hom.
45. and cap. 20.
For as Augustine says, there are very many Sheep without, and very many
Wolves within. Where we account all to be Sheep, there are many Wolves, and
where we account all to be wolves, there has Christ his Sheep and chosen
people: and therefore we must not take upon us to judge our brethren, but to
commit judgment unto the Lord. For as Saint Paul says. 2. Tim. 2.13.
The foundation of God remains sure, and has this Seal. Dominus nouit, qui
sunt sui, the Lord knows who be his. Let every one that calls upon the name
of Christ, depart from iniquity: there is no place, no Region in the world,
no state of people, no degree of men, wherein the Lord has not some of his
chosen people. Genesis 41.42.
The Court of Pharao was very wicked, yet therein did floorish a godly Joseph.
Achab was a bloody Tyrant, and his wife Iezabell sought by all means she
could, utterly to destroy the Prophets of God: 1. Reg. 18.4.
yet Obadiah the Ruler of their house, feared God and hid an hundred Prophets,
by fifty in a Cave, and fed them with bread and water. The King of Aram served
strange Gods and committed Idolatry in the house of Rimmon, 2. Reg. 5.18.
2. Reg. 5.15.17.
yet Naaman the Captain of his Host, served only the Lord God of Israel. Who
was there a more deadly enemy to our Savior Christ, then Herod? yet was
there Manahem his companion, Acts. 13.1. Luke 8.3.
Ioanna, the wife of Cura, Herodes Steward, and the Ruler at Capernaam, under
him, which all feared God. Who was there a more bloody persecutor of all the
godly, then Nero? yet were there in his house many saints, as Paul says,
Phil. 4.22.
all the Saints salute you but especially, they which are of Caesar's house.
Who are more given to injury, violence, Acts. 10.3.
and oppression, then Soldiers? yet Cornelius a Captain of a band, feared
God, and all his Household, and gave much alms to the people, and prayed to
God continually. Who more wretched sinners then Publicanes? Math 9.9. Luke.
19.6.
yet were Matthew and Zacheus the faithful children of God. Who more blind and
obstinate then the Pharisees? yet was there amongst them a godly Nicodemus,
Ioh. 3.3. and. 7.50. and. 19.39.
which was desirous to be instructed by Christ, and resisted his companions the
Pharisees, and thought nothing to dear to be bestowed to the honoring of his
Lord and Savior. Who were more wilfully bent to withstand Christ the true
Messiah, then were the Jews to whom he was sent? As the Scripture says, John
1.11.47.
he came unto his own, and his own received him not: Yet were there some
Nathaniels, true Isralites, Lu. 2.25.37.38
in whom there was no guile: some Symeons which feared God and looked for the
consolation of Israel, and some godly Annas, which served God day and night,
with fastings and prayer, and confessed the Lord Jesus, to all that looked for
redemption in Jerusalem: so that, howsoever the seventy Disciples might
imagine the Harvest to be but small, yet indeed, as Christ tells them here,
the Harvest was great. Then dearly belooued, we are here to learn, not to
measure the Harvest of Christ according to our own fancies, 1. Re. 19.10.18.
(for if the spirit of Elias could not discern one, when in deed there were
seven thousand: how much less are we able to perceive the greatness of Gods
Harvest, whose eyes are nothing so bright, nor judgment so clear, nor
knowledge so perfect, as was in the holy Prophet of God?) But rather we ought
to praise God continually, for the great increase which he daily adds unto
his Harvest, and for the blessing which he gives to the course of his holy
word, making the same to fructifye and increase to hundreds and thousands, and
to pray unto him incessantlye, that as he has already drawn a great part
of Christendom, from under the Yoke of Antichriste, so it would please him to
continue his goodness, and to increase his Harvest daily more and more, to the
glory of his holy name, and the advancement of his kingdom, which the Lord
of his infinite mercy grant, for the merits and intercession of his dearly
belooued son Jesus Christ: and thus much for the first part, how, the Harvest
is great.

Now that our Savior Christ has told his Disciples of the greatness of the
Harvest, he shows them in the next place, of the small number of the
laborers, the Laborers, says he, are but few. By this word Laborers, he
means true and faithful Pastors: for otherwise, of other laborers the Jews
did want no store they had their Leuits, they had infinite Sinagogues, and
therein a great company of Lawyers and Scribes, they had their Priests which
challenged to sit in the Chair of Moses, they had their Pharesies the
expounders of the Law, which were in great estimation of learning and
holiness, and how then were the Laborers but few? We must understand that
our Savior speaks not of false Hierlings, but of true Pastors, not of those
which bear an idle name and title of Pastoures, being, Pastores a pascendo,
tanquam montes a mouendo, that is, feeders of feeding, as mountains of
moving: but of those that do carefully and painefully feed the flock of
Christ. And of these the number is very small, so that God may still say, as
he says in Ezechiell. Ezech. 34.6.
Dispersus est grex meus. etc. My flock is scattered through all the earth, and
there is none that does seek and search after them. This phrase of speech, to
call the Ministers, Laborers, and their Office a labor, is often used in the
holy Scriptures: Nos sumus cooperarij Dei, says Paul, 1. Cor. 3.9.
We together are Gods Laborers. I am in fear of you, Gala. 4.11.
least I have bestowed on you my labor in vain. Si quis Episcopatum
desiderat, 1. Tim. 3.1.
bonum opus desiderat: If any man desire the office of a Bishop, he desires a
good work. It is a work, non honos, sed onus: not an honor, but a burden:
or if it be an honor yet has it always a burden annexed. 1. Tim. 5.17.
The Elders which rule well, are worthy of double honor, Maxim, ij qui
laborant verbo and doctrina, especially they which labor in word and
doctrine. By all which places, we of the Ministry are admonished of our duty,
that we ought to be laborers, not loyterers, not to live idely and securely,
but to be painful workmen in the Harvest of the Lord. Saint Paul had no
better reason to persuade the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, Acts. 20.28.
to take heed unto themselves, and to all the flock whereof the holy Ghost had
made them overseers, then to tell them, that, the Church which they had the
charge of, was the Church of Christ, which he had purchased with his own
blood: neither can there be any thing, which ought more to stir up us which
be here present, to painful labor, and careful diligence, then to remember
that we are appointed laborers to work in the Harvest, not of men but of the
Lord, and in that Field which Christ has purchased with his own most precious
blood. We are called the Salt of the earth, Math. 5.13.
and therefore we ought to season the people of God, with the knowledge of his
holy word, we are called, Math. 5.14. Math. 6.22. Apoc. 1.20.
the eyes of the body the stars of heaven, the light of the world, and
therefore we must seek to drive away all ignorance and darkness, not
putting our lights under a Bushel, but setting them upon a Candlestick, Isa.
56.10.
to give light to all the household. We are called Watchmen, and therefore we
must not let the enemy come in while we sleep and delight in sleeping, for as
God says by the Prophet Ezechiel. Ezech. 33.6.
If the Watchman see the Sword coming, and blow not the Trumpet, and the
people be not warned, and so they perish with the Sword, they are perished for
their iniquity, but their blood will I require at the watchmans hand. We are
called here Laborers, and therefore we ought to labor in the Lords Harvest
dilligently and faithfully. Ier. 48.10.
For as the Prophet says, Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord
negligently: if this be the work of the Lord, to punish the wicked and
destroy them with the sword, as the Prophet does in that place describe,
then how much more shall we account it to be the work of the Lord, to edify
the souls of the simple, to sow in their hearts the seed of Gods word, to
bring them to repentance and amendme^t of life: this is the work of the
Lord, and cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently. We are
called the Angels and Messengers of the Lord of Hoastes, Math. 2.7.
the Ministers of Christ, 1. Cor. 4.1.
and dispensers of the secrets of God, and therefore, we ought to dispense the
word faithfully, in season and out of season, 2. Tim. 4.2.
knowing that if any do perish thorough our default, a severe account shall be
required at our hands. We are called builders, to edify and build the body of
Christ, Isa. 49.17. Ephe. 4.12 15.
that is, his Church, and to join it unto the head, Christ: and therefore we
must labor painefully and take heed where we lay our foundation, that we
build not upon the sand, but upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles,
Ephe. 2.20.
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner Stone. We are called, Luke.
6.39.
the leaders of Gods people, to lead them into all truth, and therefore we
must take heed that we have always the word of God a Lantern to our feet
and a light unto our paths, Psalm. ^19.105.
for otherwise, if the blind lead the blind, Math. 15.14.
they shall both fall into the Ditche: we are called Sheepeheards and Pastors,
and therefore we ought to feed the stock committed to our charge, or otherwise
there is no love of Christ in us. John. 21.15.
For our Savior moved the question thrife to Peter Simon, thou son of Iona,
do thou love me? his answer was, Lord I love thee, Lord thou know that
I love thee. Then feed my Sheep, feed my Lambs: And therefore, it is
impossible that there should be any sparckle of the love of Christ in our
hearts, except we have a care to feed those Lambs, for when he shed his
blood, Ezech. 34.4.
to strengthen the weak, to heal the sick, to bind up the broken, to bring
home that which is driven away, to seek that which is lost, and to defend the^
from being devoured of the wild beasts of the field, which we c^^ never do,
unless we be able to interpret the scriptures, and to apply them to the
instruction and comfort of the people, and therefore, (...) ^3.2. (...) 2.24.
Paul requires in the Minister that he be (...), sit to teach, al^
commands Timothy to show himself (...) rightly dividing the word of
truth, 2. Tim. 2.15.
not only and barely reading (for that were to give whole loaves unto
Children, for the which they should be never the better) but cutting and
dividing the word of truth, Math. 4.19. Luke. 5.5.
and as it were, breaking unto them the bread of life. We are Fishers of men,
and therefore we must at Christ's commandment, continually let down our
Nets. We are called Gods Stewards, Luke 12.42. and. 16.1.
and therefore, we ought to be faithful and wise, and give unto the Household
of God, their portion of meat in due season. Happy is the Servant, whom the
Master when he comes shall find so doing. We must every one of us be as it
were, Gen, 41.57.
another Joseph, that when the Aegiptians are pinched with famine, they may
find relief at Joseph's hand. The first thing then that is required in a
Minister, is, that he have knowledge and understanding, how to do his
Embassage, how to feed with discretion, first with Milk, and the^ with strong
meat, how to labor in the Lords Harvest, how to build, how to lead the
people of God, how to watch over them, how to lighten their hearts, and to
season them with the knowledge of Gods holy word. The Prophet says, Math. 2.7.
that, the lips of the Priest must preserve knowledge, that the people may
seek the law at his mouth: For, he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hoastes,
and not only should their lips preserve knowledge, but they must even eat
the roll of Gods book, Ezech. 3.2 3. Apoc. 10.9.
and fill their bowels with the volume thereof, whereby is signified, the
profounde and deep knowledge, and inward digesting of the word of God, which
ought to be in every Minister. Esai. 56.10.
The Prophet does greatly complain of the blind watchmen which cannot see,
and the dombe Dogs which cannot bark, and God denounces a severe judgment
against them, saying. Ezech. 13.3.
Woe be unto the foolish Prophets, which follow their own spirit, and have
seen nothing. Exodus 28.33.
About the skirts of the robe of Ephod, were goulden Bells always sounding, to
signify, that the Priest wheresoever he went, should be able to found out the
word of truth, and therefore, we which are called to be laborers in the
Lords Harvest, to instruct the people in the word of God. Let us first learn
how we must do it, for labor we never so painefully, 2. Tim. 2.5.
yet if we labor not as we ought to do, our labor is all in vain. The
laboring Husbandman, must first be able to choose good Seed, and then to
Sow it with discrescion: even so, the Minister must first be able to disseuer
the truth from falsehood, light from darkness, and meat from poison, and
then to vtrer his Doctrine, applying it to the profit and comfort of the
hearers. The Husbandman must first Plowe the Soil, and bruise the Cloddes,
before he commit the Seed unto the ground, even so must the Minister, first
bruise the cloddes, and knotty affections of men's hearts, by the Preaching of
the Law, and then Sow therein the sweet promises of the glorious Gospel of
Jesus Christ. Some are of this judgment, that only the law and the
threatenings of God against sin, ought now to be preached, both because the
manners of men are grown to be so wicked and desperate, that they have need
of a sharp and desperate remedy, and also because that Christian liberty,
the more it is preached, the more it is abused. I confess these things to be
true, and too true, the Lord be merciful unto us: But how so ever sin be
increased and Christian liberty abused, yet good brethren, we must so proceed
in teaching, that rather Christ be framed in the hearts, then Moses, and that
rather by acknowledging Gods benefits, men may be drawn to love him, then be
driven by fear to fly from him. For if Christ do come into our hearts, it
is impossible but that he should bring with him new virtues, new actions, new
motions, and a spirit sanctifying all things: and where Christ is not
received, there is it in vain to speak of any morrall virtue or vice
whatsoever. Ephesians. 3.17.
If Christ do dwell in our hearts by faith, then must it needs follow, that
we should be rooted and grounded in love, and say with the Apostle. 2. Cor.
5.14.15.
The love of Christ constrayneth us, for this we know, that if Christ dyed
for us, we which live should not live unto our selves, but live unto him which
dyed for us, and rose again: that as he gave his body and blood upon the
Cross for us, so we should give our bodies and souls to serve him, and show
our selves thankful for the work of our redemption, knowing that he did not
therefore die for us, that we should wallow in sin and wickedness, Tit 2.14.
but that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us a peculiar
people unto him, zealous of good works. And thus our especial care ought to
be, to frame Christ in the hearts of men. 2. Cor. 3.6.
And therefore Saint Paul says that God: Idoneos nos fecit Ministros noui
Testamenti: he has made us able Ministers of the new Testament, not of the
letter, but of the spirit: for the letter kills, but the spirit gives
life. Luke. 16.16.
Lex et prophetae vsque ad Iohannem, ab eo tempore regnum dei annunciatur. The
Law and the Prophets continued unto John, and from that time the kingdom of God
is Preached: whereby we are given to understand, that we are especially the
Ministers of the new Testament, to Preach the kingdom of God, that is, the
Gospel of Jesus Christ: not that we ought not to Preach the Law also, for
the teaching of ye law is very necessary. First, Romans 3.20. and 5.20. and.
7.7. Gal. 3.21. and. 4.1 Psa. 1.2. and 19.7 and 119.105. Math. 5.17.
to make us acknowledge our own wretchedness and misery: Secondly, to be as it
were our Schoolemaister, to lead us unto Christ: And last of all, to reveal
unto us, the will of our heavenly father: whereunto, every Christian must
endeavor, to the uttermost of his power, to frame his life and conversation.
But for that our cheifest labor ought to be, to sprinckle the souls of men,
with the blood of Jesus Christ, 1. Peter. 1.2. Heb. 9.14.
and by his death and passion, to purge their consciences from dead works, to
serve the living Lord. What though some do abuse the liberty of the Gospel,
and of the door of salvation, do make unto themselves a window unto all
wickedness? what though some by abusing Christ's benefits, do show
themselves unworthy of the same? what though many come to the Supper, without
their wedding garment? yet we must follow the ensample of our heavenly Father,
who, Math. 5.48.
makes the Sun to shine upon the good and bad, and the Rain to fall upon
the just and unjust: we must follow the servants, Luke. 14.17.
which were sent to bid men to the Marriage, we must bid all, both worthy and
unworthy, and if any do come which are unworthy, having not their wedding
garments, God will not condemn us, but them, he will not say to us, why did
ye bid him, why did ye let him enter? Math. 22.1^.
but he will say unto the unworthy guest: friend, how cammest thou heather,
having not thy Wedding garment? take him, bind him hand and foot, and cast
him into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. We
must follow the good Sheepeheard, Luke. 15.4.
which if he have but one Sheep lost, will leave ninety and nine in the
Wilderness, and go and seek that one which is lost. And therefore, if in the
whole congregation, there be but one, which with David, Ps. 6.3. and. 38.4
does groan under the burden of sin, and therefore needs comfort, and all
the rest be abusers of Christian liberty, there is no reason, that for the
great multitude of the abusers, he should be deprived of comfort, for whom
Christ dyed. And thus ye see, first, the wisdom which is required in them that
will be profitable laborers in the Lords Harvest, that they know how to
labor, how to choose the Seeds, how to Sow it with discretion, how to bruise
the cloddes and knottie affections of men's hearts, by the threatenings of the
law, but especially, how to molli^ie them and water them, with the sweet dew
of Gods mercies, and with the comfortable promises of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Then, ye which are now to take the Office of the Ministry upon you, are
here to try and examine your selves, whether ye be able thus to labor in the
Lords Harvest, or no: and if ye be not, assure your selves, the Lord does
not send you: ye respect the living to feed your selves, and not your
knowledge, to feed the flock: and therefore, John. 10.^.
are ye Hierlings, ye are thieves and murderers, ye come in at the window, and
not at the door, Christ Jesus. And as for you, which now either for want of
knowledge, or otherwise, for want of age, are not admitted at this time, into
the Ministry: be not therefore discouraged, but rather account it to be a
token of the merciful providence of God, that he would have you to tarry the
time, until he himself shall call you, and make you fit for that function, and
with this persuasio^ apply the scriptures, and no doubt the Lord will bless
both you and your studies the better. Paul will have the Minister to be no
(...) no young Plant, 1. Tim. 3.6.
not green timbered, but to be seasoned for a time, with the knowledge of Gods
word, and with gravity and integrity of life: For, if the chief beams and
Rafters of the house, be made of grieve Timber, there is great danger, least
the Timber shrink, and so the fall of the house be great. The Minister must be
one of the Beams to uphold the house of God, and therefore, seeing ye are yet
but green wood, as I am sure your own conscience does witness unto you: let
it not grieve you to be seasoned for a time, that ye may be made fit for the
building of the Lord. And here by the way, I am to make my humble petition to
you my Lord, that as your Lordship has had a godly care, and taken a good
course, that none should be admitted at this time, but such as for their
learning and knowledge, are of great hope and towardness: So also an order may
now be taken, that they may be driven to some godly exercises, whereby not
only, the good gifts of God may be continued and increased in them, but also,
Isa. 56.10.
the blind guides and dombe Dogs, which are already crept in, may be in time
reformed. You must deal with all these Ministers, as the Eagle does, with her
young Birds, as many as can look steadfastly upon the Sun, so many does she
nourish, the rest she turns out of the Nest, as unfit to be kept. You must
set before them all, Math. 4 2. 1. Cor. 14.29. 1. Tim. 4.13.
the beams of the sun of righteousness, Jesus Christ, appoint them godly
exercises, to the increase of their knowledge, and as many as cannot abide thus
to look upon the sun of righteousness, so many should be turned out of the
nest; as unfit to serve in your Lordships Dioces. And thus if their Talent be
exercised, then no doubt their Talent shall be increased, Math. 25.20.
and God will double his holy spirit in them, so that in short time they shall
be able both to exhort with wholesome doctrine, Tit. 1.9. Act. 1.4. and 6.3
Luke 24.49.
and also to improoue the gainesayers, and except they have these gifts and
graces of the holy spirit, and be endewed with power from an high, they are not
fit Pastors, for the Church of Christ. This then is the first thing which is
required in us, that are appointed to be laborers in the Lords Harvest, that,
we understand the mysteries of God, ^ Tim. 2.5.6.7.15.
and know how to labor. For as Paul shows Timothy, as he which strives for
a Maisterie, is not crowned, except he strive as he ought to do, no more can
the Husbandman reap any fruit, unless he labor as he ought to do: and
therefore, he prays the Lord to give him understanding in all things, that
he may be able to show himself a workman, that needs not to be ashamed,
rightly dividing the word of truth. For if the Ministers be not able thus to
divide the word of truth, then are they nothing else but, laborers without
tools, Stewards without Talents, Teachers without doctrine, Sheepeheards
without Pastures, Bells without Clappers, Cryers without voices, Watchemen
without eyes, builders without hands, Captains without weapons, Fishers
without Nets, Lanternes without lights, Ambassadors without tongues, Fe^rs
without meat, Sowere without Seed, leaders without sight, Sal^e, without
savor: and therefore good for nothing; but to be trodden under foot, to be
cast out of none, and thrown upon the Dounghill. The second thing which is
required in a Labourer, is, Luke 12.42. 1. Cor. 4.2.
that he do his work faithfully, without all fraud and deceit: Who is a good
and faithful Steward? say the Christ? and Paul affirms this to be required
in all the dispensers of Gods word, Colos. 1.7. Hebr. 3.5.
that every one be found faithful: such alone was Epaphras, a faithful
Minister of Christ, such a one was Moses, who was faithful in all his house,
and such ought all Ministers to be, to do the work of the Lord faithfully.
Saint Paul teaches us, 2. Cor. 2.17.
not to make merchandise of the word of God, 2. Cor. 4.2.
but to speak of Christ in sincerity as of God, in the sight of God, and to
cast from us the cloakes of shame, not to walk in craftines, neither to handle
the word of God deceitfully, but in the declaration of the truth, to approve
our selves to every ma^s conscience in the sight of God. Hereby then is
condemned, all wresting of the holy scriptures, to satisfy our own humors,
and also all ouercurious ha^dling of the word of God, 2. Cor. 12.3. 2. Cor.
4.5. 1. Cor. 2.1.2.4.15.
whereby the minds of me^ are corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ.
And therefore, we ought to preach, not our selves, but Christ, and to preach
him not in excellency of words, nor in painted eloquence, nor in the intising
speech of man's wisdom, but in plain evidence of the spirit and power,
confessing that we know nothing, but Jesus Christ, and him crucified. Saint
Paul will have the Ministers not to be (...), 2. Cor. 2.17.
Cauponantes vel adulterantes verbum Dei, not to mingle it as Vintners do
their Wine, and as false Huksters do their wares, but to preach it in
sincerity and truth. Hereby then is condemned, the unadvised mingling of
profane writers, and inventions of men, with the heavenly word of God, as
many now a days do, running up and down from Scriptures, to Doctors from
Prophets, to Poets, from Peter to Ovid from Paul to Horac^ from Christ to
Virgil, to the great derogating from the authority and majesty of our Savior
Christ, and his glorious Gospel, whereas, Heb. 4.12. ^phe. 6.17. ^ Cor. 10.5.
indeed, only, the word of God is the Sword, whereby we must cut down
sin and wickedness, and bring into captivity every thought unto the
obedience of Christ* and the c^use why there appears so small fruit of many
of our Preachings, is because, we trust not to that weapon^ which God does
deliver us. Ierem. 23.22.
For so says God by the Prophet, If they had stood in my counsel and had
declared my words unto my people, the^ they should have turned them from their
evil way, and from the wickedness of their own inventions. And therefore, why
the labor that we take in the Lords Harvest is often in vain, is because we
labor not with the right tool and instrument, the word of God, which, as it
is there set down by Jeremy, is only, Ier. 23.29.
the Hammer to bruise the stony heart. I confess that to illustrate and make
plain the truth, the Preacher may use what comparisons he can, as Christ drew
his Parables from the Harvest, the ground, the Seed, the Viniarde, and such
other things as are most familiar and best known unto the common people, he
may also use the sayings and sentences of Doctors and Fathers, yea and of
prophaine Philosophers and Poets, sometimes as Saint Paul does allege,
sometimes half verses, sometimes whole verses, out of Aratus, Menander, Act.
17.28. 1. Cor. 15.33. Tit. 1.12. Exodus 3.22.
and Epimenides, which were all profane and Heathnish Poets: and by this
means we may as it were, spoil the Aegiptians of their Jewels. But this must
be done sparingly, seldom, and with great judgment, not so much to
establish and confirm the truth, as to illustrate and make plain the truth.
John. 20.31. Romans 1.16. 2. Tim. 3.16.17
For otherwise, for the confyrmation of any doctrine we ought to lean only to
the authority of the word, which does fully and perfectly co^taine althings
necessary to our salvation, and is the power of God to salvation, to all
believers. And therefore, they are no faithful Ambassadors; which will do ye
message which their Prince never gave them in co^missio^, neither are they
faithful laborers, which will neglect that which their Master commands,
and do what seems good in their own fantasies: Here then the Papists are
condemned for unfaithful Stewards; whose doctrine is altogether, either a
clean contrary alteration; or else a wicked addition, unto the word of God? so
that God may say unto the^, as he says by the propher Esaias. Isa. 1.12. Act.
8.28. and. 17.11. 2. Peter. 1.19.
Who required these things at your hands? Who required this at your hands, yt
ye should cause my holy and blessed word to be locked up, and the decrees of
Antichrist to be placed in steed thereof? Who required this of you; to take
your obedience from your natural Prince, Romans 15.1.
to whom it is due, Tit. 3.1. 1. Peter. 2.13.
and to give it to a proud Prelate of Rome, that he by his pensions and
Pardons, and Peterpence, 1. Cor. 14.14.15.16.
may impouerish the whole land? Who required this at your hands? to patter up
prayers, in an unknown tongue, which ye understand as well with your heels,
as with your hearts, and to make your prayers not to me, the Father of Heaven,
Psalm. 50.14. Io^. 2.32.
who^ am only to be called upon, but to give mine honor to Angels and Saints,
to Idols and Images, to stocks and stones, to blocks and Bones? Math. 26.27.
1. Cor. 11.25.
Who required this at your hands, yt ye should take the sacrament of my blood
(which I shed for all me^) from the common people, and so to make my supper,
rather an excommunication then a Communion? who required this at your hands,
that ye should rather thrust your children into Abbeis and Couents, there to
live an idle and a Swinish life, being pampered up with all dilicious fare,
which may stir the^ up to all filthiness, the^ to set the^ to some homest
occupatio^, Genesis 3.19. 2. These. 3.12.
to get their living with the sweat of their brows, to the profit and
furtherance of the Common wealth? Who required this of you, that ye should
account it a more meritorious work, to gilde an Image their to cloathe a poor
naked man? and a better deed, to go a gadding on Pilgrimage to seek dead
bones, then to tarry at home and visit the poor members of Christ, which lay
sick and bedred, lame and impotent: 1. John. 1.7. Eccle. 12.7 Luke. 23.49.
Acts. 7.59. Apoc. 14.13.
who required this at your hands, that ye should make any other Purgatory,
then the blood of Jesus Christ, which does purge you from all your sin? or
that ye should place your holiness in kissing of Relics, creeping to
crosses, choice of meats, contempt of marriage, sprinkling of holy water,
ce^sing of Herbs and boughs, auricular shriuing, in consecrated war, Agnus
Deis, Crucifyres, Palms, Cream, Spittle, Salt, Oil, Ashes, Bells, Beads,
Ladies Psalters, Portuises, Lege^daries, Ma^s merits, work of supererogatio^,
Shrines, Roodes, Tapers, Frankencense, Masses, Dirges, Trentals, Bulls, Pardons,
Indulgences, and all such trashe and trumpery, whereof there is no mention at
all, in my holy word? Who required these things at your hands? and if I never
required them, but rather forbad them, and commanded the clean contrary,
then are ye no faithful laborers, 2. Peter. 2.3.
ye labor for your own gain, to make Merchandise of souls, for Lukers sake,
but ye are no laborers in my Harvest, Apoc. 22.19.
to bring increase into my Barnes: and therefore ye are accursed, and have no
part in the book of life. Thus good brethren ye see how we shall be faithful
laborers, we must, Deuteronomy. 4.2. and. 12.32. Pro. 30.6.
add nothing to the word, and take nothing from it, neither to decline unto
the right hand, nor to the left: for, if it be unlawful to add or to change,
Gala. 3.15.
or to abrogate any thing in the Will and Testament of men, how much less
shall it be lawful to put too, or to diminish, or to disanull any thing in the
Will and Testament of the everliving God: and if in making of the Tabernacle,
Exodus 25.40. 2. Cron. 8.14.
or building of the material Temple, it was not lawful for the workmen to
do any thing, but what the Lord appointed: how much less may the builders of
the spiritual Temple, the Church of God, decline from that rule which God has
prescribed in his holy word. Moreover that we may be faithful laborers, this
is required of us, that we avoid all flattery, and without respect of
persons, do bouldly that Message, Gala. 101
whereunto the Lord shall send us, knowing that, if we seek to please men,
Ezech. 13.12.
we cannot be the servant of Christ. ^ech. 13.18.
The Prophet denounces an woe against those, which sow Pillowes under men's
elbowes, and cry, peace, peace, where as no peace is, and God does threaten
by Jeremy, that, he will come against those Prophets, which have sweet lips,
Ie^ 10.
and flatter men in their sins. Woe be to them which speak good of evil,
and evil of good, which put darkness for light, and light for darkness, which
put bitter for sweet find sweet for sower. Pro. 12.2
Disperdat Dominus omnia labia adulationum: the Lord ^ut out all flattering
lips, says the Prophet David: and as flattering lips are abominable in all
me^, so especially they ought to be abhorred of us, which are the Messengers of
the Lord of Hoasts. We must all, Ephe. 6.19.
open our mouths bouldly, to publish the secret of the Gospel: Howsoever it
be a dangerous thing, for Lot to reprove the filthy and beastly Sodomites,
Genesis 19.7.
assaulting his house, yet he must not cease still to say I pray you my
brethren, Pro^. ^0.2.
do not so wickedly. Howsoever the wrath of a King be the roaring of a Lion,
and he that does provoke him to anger, does hazard his own life: yet if
Princes offend, ye Prophet of God must say, the Princes are rebellious, Isa.
1.23.
and companions of thieves: every one loves bribes they judge not the
fatherles, nether does the widows cause come before the: Ezech. 22.27.
the Princes of Judah, are like ravening wolves, sucking blood and destroying
souls for covetous Lucre. Although it must cost John Baptist his life, yet
must he not cease to say to Herod. Math. 14.4.
It is not lawful for thee to have thy brother Phillips wife. And not only the
wicked, but the godly also, when they fall, they must be bouldly and sharply
reproved, so that Nathan must say unto David, thou art the man, 2. Sam. 12.7.
it is thou that have done this deed, and doubt not but the Lord will so work
with it, that thy smiting shall be taken for a benefit, Psa. 141.5.
and thy reproouing for a precious balm, which will not break his head, and
howsoever the wicked do kick and spurn against thy godly admonitio^s, yet no
unthankfulness of the world, ought to drive them from performing thy duty, but
that the more stormy tempests that the weather does bring, the more painful
thou should be in the Harvest of the Lord: What though thou be sent, as
Christ here sent forth his seventy Disciples, as Lambs among Wolves?
Luke. 10.5.


What though thou be Sawde in pieces, with a Saw of wood, as the Prophet Isay
was? or have a Nail of Iron driven into the Temples of thy head, with Amos? or
be beheaded, with John Baptist? or be Stoned with Steven? or slain with the
Sword, with James? or most cruelly put to death with Peter and Paul, and the
rest of the Apostles? or have thy portion among the blessed Martirs of God,
whereof some were devoured with wild Beasts some burnt with fire and Faggot,
some broyld upon hoate coals, some hanged, some drowned, some torn in pieces
with wild Horses: yet must you always remember the comfortable promise of
Christ, Math. 5.10.
that, great shall be thy reward in Heaven. Blessed is the man that endures
temptation, Iam. 1.12.
for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of life, which the Lord
has promised to them that love him. Thus must the Ministers labor faithfully,
and not only faithfully, but willingly, as Peter says, feed the flock of
Christ, 2. Peter. 5.2.
which depends upon you, caring for it, not by constraint, but willingly, not
for fylthy luker, but of a ready mind: For if the laboring Servant, which
are hired to do the work of men, be bound to do it, Titus. 2.9.
without murmuring and grudging, and to serve their bodily Masters, with fear
and trembling, with singlenes of heart, Ephe. 6.5.
not with eye service, as pleasing men, but as the servant of Christ, doing
the will of God from the heart. How much more ought the laborers in the
Harvest of the Lord, to show all faithfulness, in doing that work
willingly, where unto the Lord has sent them? The third property, which is
required in those that will be good laborers in the Lords Harvest is,
Diligence, for otherwise they be not laborers, but loyterers, and therefore
Saint Paul does charge Timothy, 2. Tim. 4.1.2.5
before God, and before the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall judge the quick and
the dead at his appearing, and in his kingdom, that he preach the word, and
be instant, in season and out of season, that he improoue, rebuke, and exhort,
with all long suffering and doctrine, watching in all things, and doing the
work of an Evangelist. Solomon says, Prou. 27.29.
be diligent to know the state of thy flock, and take heed unto thy Herds.
Isa. 58.1.
God commands the Prophet, to cry aloude and spare not, to lift up his
voice like a trumpet, to show the people their transgressions, and the house of
Jacob their sins. Colos. 4.17.
Tell Archippus (says Paul) take heed to the Ministry, that thou have
received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it. Right terrible is the woe, which is
so often denounced in the holy Scriptures, against the slothful and negligent
Pastor, Ezech. 34.2.
as by the Prophet, woe be to the Sheepeheards, which feed themselves and feed
not the flock, and by the Apostle, Ier. 23.1. ^. Cor. 9.16.
vae mihi nisi Euangelizauero: Woe be to me, if I preach not the Gospel. If
the consideration of this woe, that is of the horrible judgments of God, were
laid up in our hearts, it could not be that so many of us should sleep in the
Cradle of Security, and utterly neglect the charge which is laid upon us: it
could not be, that so many of us should leave the study of the Scriptures, and
give our selves to lewd pastimes, as though we were called to cast a Bowl, to
prick a Card, to trip a Die, and not rather to feed the flock of Christ,
which he has purchased with his precious blood. Neither could it be, that so
many of us should depart from the flocks, over the which the holy Ghost has
made us overseers, and lie continually, either in ye Universities, or in
Cathedral Churches, not once indeuouring to fulfill ye Ministry, which we
have received of the Lord: and it could not be, that so many of us, by joining
living to living, should heap charge upon charge, without any care to
discharge: for, if they which discharge their office by substitutes, would
consider how yt he which feeds his flock, only by a Substitute, may
peradventure, go to Heaven by a substitute, but he shall surely, feel his woe
in Hell, in his own proper person, and if they which lie away for learnings
sake, would consider how lamentable ye case is, yt, the Steed should sterue,
while the Grass does grow, and how that before God this excuse will not
stand, live Horse and thou shall have Grass, and if all we which are careless
and negligent, would continually set before our eyes, ye woe so often
pronounced against us, and the heavy accounts which we are to make at the
dreadful day of judgment, when the secrets of all hearts shall be opened, it
could not be but we should have more care to fulfill the Ministry which we have
received of ye Lord, and when we have urgent occasion to go abroad (as often
times it falls out) and so for a time to be absent in bodies, yet it would
make us always to be present in heart, 1. Reg. 19.20.
and in prayer: and again, to remember the Counsel of Elias, to go, but, with
speed to return: For, when Elizaeus the Prophet asked leave of him to go to
his Father and Mother, he said, go, return, for what have I done unto thee? I
have anointed thee to be the Prophet of God, and that is the charge which thou
must now attend unto, notwithstanding go to thy fathers house, but with all
speed, return. As for those which continue from their flocks, and suffer the
word to cease amongst them, so that their souls do perish for want of food,
they have a severe plague denounced against them, by the Prophet Zachary.
Zach. 11.17.
O idol Shepherd, that leaves the flock, the sword shall be upon his arm,
and upon his right eye, his arm shall be clean dried up, and his right eye
shall be utterly darkened, his arm, that is, his strength, and his right eye,
his knowledge, and memory, shall all consume, perrish, and vanish away, and he
shall come to a fearful end. But thou will say, that thou art resident upon
thy living, and therefore thou do not fly away: Augustine says, Aug
tract. 47. in Ioh.
Fugisti quia tacuisti: Thou have holden thy peace, and therefore thou art fled
away: thou art present in body, but thou art absent in mind and voice, and
what will thy bodily presence profit, when thy heart and thy tongue, whereby thy
office should be discharged, is altogether absent? The^ ye which are now to
enter into the Ministry, and so to be sent forth as laborers into the
Lords Harvest, learn how to show your diligence, not by idle presence of the
body, but by painful presence of the heart and voice: for otherwise, Zach.
11.17.
the Prophet Zachary does account you to be nothing but Idols, not Pastors
indeed, but Idols, Psalm. 135.16.
such as the Psalmist speaks of, which have mouths and speak not, eyes and
see not, ears and hear not, neither is there any breath in their mouths.
Math. 25.20
If your Talent be but small, yet exercise the same with prayer and diligence,
and the Lord has promised, that, he will increase it, and double it, and when
ye shall show your selves faithful in little, he will make you Masters of
much. But if ye have any Talent, be it never so small, although it be but, one
Talent, yet if ye hide it, Mat. 25.28.30
it shall be taken from you, and ye shall be cast as unprofitable servant
into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teethe. But
otherwise, if ye perceive evidently that ye have no Talent at all, and that ye
are able to do no good at all, in the Church of God, I require and charge you,
before the Lord Jesus Christ, and as ye will answer at his appearaunce, that
ye presume not rashly, to enter into so high a function, Luke 12.42.
to be Stevvards of the Lords Household, having no portion of meat to give
them in due season. Remember the accounts which every Steward is to make at
the last day, when that dreadful voice shall be pronounced. Give an accounts
of thy stewardship, Luke 16.1.
thou may be no longer Steward. The Text says, that, the evil Steward
(...) he was first accused to his Master, that he wasted his goods, and then
he was called to his reckoning. Even so shall all blind guides, dombe Dogs,
unfaithful Stewards, Idol Sheepheards, and slothful loiterers, first be
accused to God, and then called to their accounts: who shall be their accusers
every slothful and unfaithful Steward, of what calling soever he be, shall
have three accusers. Romans 2.15.
The first is, their own conscience, for that will be as good as a thousand
witness, Iuuenal.
Nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore testem. A corrupt conscience is called a
continual Hangeman: Genesis 4.7.
it is sin laying at ye door of our hearts, it is called of the Prophet
Esaias, a Worm that never dies, and a Sea which always rages without rest:
Isa. 66.24. 1. Tim. 4.2.
of Paul, a fearing with a hoate Iron: and in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
Hebr. 10.26.
a terrible looking for of judgment, and violent fire to devour the
adversaries: and therefore, as often as they call to mind and remember, how,
they have eaten the fat, Ezech. 34.3.4.
and clothed themselves with the Woll, but that they have not fed the Sheep,
nor strengthened the weak, nor healed the sick, nor bound up the broke, nor
brought again that which was driven away, nor sought up that which was lost,
but have ruled their slocks with rigor and cruelty: this corrupt conscience,
Romans 2.15.
will be as good as a thousand witnesses, to accuse and condemn the^ before the
throne of God. Isa. 57.21. 2. Tim. 1.7. Sap. 17.10.11.
There is no peace to the wicked, ye Lord has said it, but they shall carry in
their breasts fear and terror, and torme^ting furies, continually citing the^
before ye tribunal seat of Christ. And if there be any which with vain
pastimes and pleasures of this world, do drive away the remembrance of Gods
judgments for a time, yet are they never the better for it: for, although they
seem to rejoice, yet as Solomon says, Pro 1.14.13. and 20.17.
Even in the laughing, the heart is sorrowful, and the mirth does end in
heaviness. Although the bread of deceit be sweet in the mouth, for a while, yet
in the end, the mouth shall be filled with Gravel: although for a time, they
live without remorse of conscience, Luke. 11.21.
and the strong man does so possess all things, that all things seem to be
quiet, yet in the end they shall be never the better for it, no more then the
stall fed Ox is the better, because he knows not that he is taken out to
the slaughter house, for a sudden death will have the greater fea^e. 1. Cor.
1.12.
And therefore good brethren, let every one of us endeavor as much as we can,
to keep the testimony of a good conscience, for as of all the treasures and
pleasures in the world, a quiet conscience is the greatest, Pro. 15.15.
as Solomon says, a good conscience is a continual feast, so it is the
greatest horror in the world, to make Shipwrake of a good: conscience: 1. John
3 21.
for if our heart condemn us, God is greater then our heart, and therefore let
every one of us labor faithfully and painefully in the Lords Harvest, let us
as good stewards, give unto the household their portion of meat in due season,
that whenever we must leave our flocks, we may every one of us, in the
testimony of a good conscience, say as Paul said to the Elders of Ephesus.
Act. 20.26.27
I take you all to record, this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men,
for I have kept nothing back, but have showed you all the counsel of God. The
second witness which shall accuse thee, if thou be an evil Steward, is, the
cry of the poor people, which by thy negligence, are pinched with the famine
of the word of God: Amos. 8.11.
for if in plaging of the body of goods, that be true, which the wiseman says,
Ecclc. 35.15.
that the tears which run down from the Widows cheeks, go up into
heaven, and the Lord which hears them does accept them: and that which James
says. Iam. 5.4.
the cry of the poor does enter into the ears of the Lord of Hoastes, and
that which David affirms, that, Psalm. 56.8.
God does put the tears of his Saints in his bottell: how much more shall the
tears and the cry which comes by the plaging of the soul, go up into the
ears of ye Lord of Hoasts? when the People shall hunger and thirst, for the
food of Godsword, and thou have none to give them? when they shall cry for
their portion of meat, and thou have none, neither for thy self nor for them.
This cry goes up into heaven, and the Lord which hears it, does accept it,
and when he calls thee to thy reckoning, he will one day remember it. The
third witness which shall accuse all evil Stewards, is, the hurt and damage
which is done in the Lords Harvest by their negligence: Gen 4.10.
for, if the voice of the blood of Abell, did cry out of the earth for
vengeance, and if in building of houses, with ye oppression of ye poor, one
stone do cry unto another, ^bac. 2.11.
and one beam cry against an other, woe be to him that builds of blood: How
much more shall the blood of the souls of me^, and the maintaining of our
wealthy estates, by the perishing of so many souls, cry continually out of ye
earth, to the Lord for vengeance And thus, if thou be an unfaithful and
negligent Steward, thou have three accusers, continually citing thee, before
the throne of God, and the Lord which hears their accusations, will one day
call thee to thy reckoning, when he himself shall descend from heaven with a
showte, 1. The. 4.16.17.
and with the voice of the Archangell, and with the trumpet of God, and thou
shall meet him in the Clouds, where thou shall see heaven above thee: ready
to receive the saints of God, Hell beneathe thee, gaping to devour thee, round
about thee, the world burning, and the Elements melting with heat: thine own
sins on the one side of thee, and the sins of all those which have perished
by thy negligence, on the other side of thee: behind thee the Devil, ready to
accuse thee: within thee a conscience already condemning thee, and before thy
face, the terrible Judge, accompanied with thousands of Angels, calling thee to
give an accomptes, of thy Stewardship. And if it be found, that, Luke.
12.48.45.46.
thou have not given to the Househoulde of God, their portion of meat in due
season, but have smitten thy fellow seruau^ts and given thy self to eat and
drink, Math. 25.30.
and to be dronken, then most assuredlye thou shall be cut off, and have thy
portion with the unbelievers: thou shall be cast as an unprofitable servant,
Mark. 9.44. Ezech. 34.1. 1. Cor. 9.16. Luke 16.26. Apoc. 14.11.
into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, where the
worm never dies, and the flame never goes out, where woes thou shall find
on every side, and nothing but woes, and of all woes this is the greatest, that
there shall be no end of thy woes. Where thou shall always consume, and yet
never be consumed, always burn, and yet never be burnt away, always die, and
yet never give over to death, but have pains unquenchable, intolerable,
easelesse, endless, and hopeless, from the which the Lord of his infinite
mercy, for his son Christ his sake, deliver us all, and give us grace so to
use our Talents, in this vale of misery, that when our accounts shall be made,
we may be found acceptable in his sight, and here that joyful saying: O ye
good and faithful servant, Math. 25.21.23.34.
ye have been faithful in little, I will make you Masters of much: enter
into the joys of your Lord, come ye blessed of my father, possess the
kingdom prepared for you, from the beginning of the world.

Thus dearly belooued, ye see the third property which is required in him
that shall labor in the Lords Harvest, that, Luke 12.46.45
he must be dilligent, and that if he let any perish, for want of food, then
does he smite his fellow servant, and murder them with a murder, which before
God is of all others most horrible: and therefore, if when we have murdered a
man, although it be but by chance medley, yet the remembrance of it does
grieve us, vex us, terrify us, torment us, and make our flesh to quiver,
shake and tremble: how much more ought ye to avoid the wilful murder of so
many thousand souls, which perishing by your wilful negligence and ignorance,
2. These. 1.8.9.
because they know not God, are thrown headlong into everlasting perdition? and
if the blood of me^ that are slain, being behoulden with the eyes of the
body, does move pity and compassion, how much more ought it to grieve the
eyes of your hearts and spirits, to see the bloodshed of the souls, 2. Sam.
22.15.
which brings death eternal? When David in the Harvest time, being in the
Cave of Adullam, did greatly long to drink of the water of Bethlehem, and
said, O that some man would give me to drink of the waters of Bethlehem, there
could not well any water be fetched, because the Garrison of the Philistines,
which were David's enemies were then in Bethlehem. Notwithstanding, when three
of David's mighty Captains, saw how greatly their King lo^ged for that water,
they valiauntly brake thorough the Hoaste of the Philistines, and drew water
out of the Well of Bethlehem, and brought it unto David: when David saw what
they had done, he refused to drink of it, and said. O Lord be it far from
me, that I should do this, Is not this the blood of the men, which went in
danger of their lives? And so he would not drink of it, but powered it out for
an offering unto the Lord.

Now if David would not drink once of the water of Bethlehem, because it was
brought unto him, with the ieopardie of three men's lives, how much less ought
ye not only to eat and drink, but also to cloathe your selves, yea and
delight your selves in pastimes and plesures, not once, but every day, not with
the danger of three men's lives, but with the manifest murder of so many
hundred souls?

And therefore as in the Solemnization of Matrimony in this Church of
England, the Minister does first charge the parties that are to be married,
as, they will answer at the dreadful day of judgment, when the secrets of
all hearts shall be opened, that if either of them do know in themselves any
impediment, why they may not lawfully be joined together in Matrimony, that
they confess it. Even so I am to charge you, before the Lord Jesus Christ, and
as you will answer at his appearaunce, that, if any of you do know in your
selves any secret impechment, that either ye want the inward calling, not to
respect the living, but to do good in the Church of God, or else that ye have
not the gifts of Nature, fit for that function, or that ye feel not your
selves so mortified with the spirit of sanctification, that ye have good hope
to live according to your profession, to despise the world, and painefully to
discharge your duties, that ye utter it, or at the least wise withdraw your
selves from rashelye entering into so high a calling. Otherwise assure your
selves, that ye do nothing else, but pluck the vengeance of God upon your
own heads.

But some of you say, that, ye have no other way to live, and therefore unless
ye ^e nows made Ministers, ye must needs he brought to extreme beggerie. I
answer, Ps. 33 19. and 34 8. and 112.1.^.3.
that if the Lord be willing to deliver you from poverty, he is able to
deliver you, and he will deliver you by a far more lawful means, if ye will
serve him and fear him, 1 Timothy 1.5. 1. Pet. 3.16.21. Tit. 1.15.
and although he should never bring you out of it, yet how much better were if
for you, to live here in perpetual beggar is, with a quiet conscience, then
with the best benefice in this Realm, to have a hell in your consciences, in
this world, and everlasting death in the world to come; for then, Mar.
8.36.37.
what will it profit a man, to win the whole world, and loose his own soul, or
what shall a man give for his soul? ye must remember the counsel which Paul
gives to Timothy: 1. Tim. 5.22. Psalm. 38.4.
not to be partakers of other men's sins: our own sins are a burden, too
heavy for us to bear, and altogether intolerable, then what a desperate case
are we in, if we do also charge and load our selves with a heap of sins
committed by other men? Ezech. 3.18.
whose blood must be required at our hands, if they be not dilligently lie
warned and reclaymed from their wickedness, that they may repent and live.

The fourth property, which must be in the labourer, is, that, he labor with
both hands, that is, both with life and doctrine, for otherwise, if he be
painful in teaching, and have no care to express the same in life and
conversation, then does he but build with the one hand, and pluck down with
the other: with the one hand he gathers together, and with the other hand he
scatters abroad, and then he is no good labourer in the Harvest of the
Lord, and therefore Saint Paul bids Timothy, 1. Tim. 4.15. Act. 20.28.
take heed unto himself, and to his doctrine, and continue therein: for, in
so doing, he should save himself, and the^ that heard him. And he wills
Titus, Tit. ^.7.
abooue all things, to show himself an ensample of good works, with vncorrupt
doctrine, with gravity and integrity, and with the wholesome word which cannot
be reproved, that he which withstood him, might be ashamed, having nothing
against him to speak evil of: and for this cause, there was placed in the
breast Plate, upon Aarons heart, Vrim and Thummim, that is, Exodus 28.3.
light and perfection: to signify, that, he should not only have light in
knowledge, but also integrity in conversation: for this cause also, God gives
the Law in Leuiticus, that, Leuit. 21.7.14 18.
the Priest shall in no case, take to wife an Whore, neither mary any woman
that is polluted, but that, he shall take a Maid to wife, and so be holy unto
his God: and in the same Chapter, he will have his Priests to have no blemish
in their body, neither any misshapen members: whereby is foreshadowed and
signified, the perfectnes which ought to be in their lives and conuersations:
for otherwise, if they preach the word of God, and have no care to reform
their lives thereafter, then are they not gatherers, Luke 11.23. Psalm. 50.16.
but scatterers, and God will say unto them, as he says by the Prophet David.
What have thou to do, to declare mine ordinances, that thou should take my
covenant in thy mouth? seeing thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my
words behind thee. When thou see a Thief, thou runnest with him, and have
been partaker with the adulterers, thou give thy mouth to speak evil, and
with thy tongue thou forgest deceit, thou sit and speak against thy
brother, and slaunderest thine own Mothers son, and therefore what have thou
to do to preach my laws, or to take my covenant in thy mouth? A Wall has
on either side great squared stones, and in the midst small pibbles, and
gravel, if one of the great stones which uphold the building, do slip away,
then all in the midst will soon clatter after. The square stones, of the Wall
of Gods building, are on the one side the Magistrates, and on the other side
the Ministers: if one of these do fall away, then are they guilty not only
of their own condemnation, but also of the blood of as many as perish by their
fall and evil ensample, and therefore we ought all to pray unto God
continually, that he will give us grace so to reform our lives, that we may
every one of us, say unto our flocks, as Saint Paul said unto the Phillipians.
Brethren, Phil. 3.17.
be ye followers of men, and look on them which walk so even, as ye have us,
for an ensample, for many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now I tell
you weeping: that they are enemies of the cross of Christ: assuring our
selves, that although we talk never so much, yet unless with our talking, we
join walking, and so by our lives and conuersations, give ensample to our
flocks: we are nothing but enemies of the cross of Christ, we cause the
Gospel of Christ to be evil spoken of, we draw from Christ both our selves
and others, and throw both them and us, into the pit of perdition, and then
are we like unto that Idiot, which standing on the Sea shore, and seeing
strangers passing by, does cry aloude unto them, away, away, the tide is at
hand. The Trauaylers looking back, and seeing the Fool to stand still, they
begin to say amongst themselves. Surely, the man does but jest, if this were
the time of the tide, he would surely pack away himself, we need not to make
any such haste: but by and by, the Tide comes indeed, and ouerwhelmeth both
the negligent fool, and the careless Horesemen. Even so, if we say unto the
people: The Tide comes, do this, or thou can never be saved, do this, or
else thou art damned for ever: and in the mean time, stir no foot our
selves, the common people seeing our careless negligence, they straight way
murmr amongst themselves. If these heavy judgments of God were true, they
would amend them selves, and thereupon they begin to be careless also, and
so in the end, both are overwhelmed, Apoc. 21.8. Isa. 30.33.
not with the waves of the Sea, but with the Lake burning with fire and
Brimstone, which is the second death, and with Tophet, the burning whereof is
fire and much wood, and the breath of the Lord, like a River of Brimstone
does kindle it. (Then dearly belooued) If we teach well, and live well, Chris.
in Math. 23.
we are become Judges of all men: but if we teach well and live ill, we are
become condemners, Romans 2.1.
both of our selves and others, for by teaching well, and living well, we
teach other men how they shall live, but by teaching well, and living ill, we
teach God how he shall condemn us, and therefore, let every one of us,
endeavor to follow, not the ensample of the Pharisees, which bind heavy
burdens, Math. 23.4.
and lay them upon other men's shoulders, but they them selves, will not so
much, as put too, one of their least fingers: but the ensample of the holy
Apostle Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 9.27.
to beat down our bodies and to bring them into subjection, least by any
means, after we have preached unto to others, we our selves become reprobates,
1. Pet. 5.3.4.
that we may be ensamples to the flock (as Peter says,) that when the chief
Sheepeheard shall appear, we may receive the incorruptible crown of glory,
which Christ Jesus has prepared for them which love him. I speak not this
good brethren, to accuse any man, nor yet to excuse my self, the Lord is my
witness. For I acknowledge my self above all others, to be a most miserable
and wretched sinner, the Lord be merciful unto me, and to us all, and give us
all grace hereafter, so to a mend our lives, that by our evil ensample, none
be compelled to start back from the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. But
howsoever we of the Ministry are not able fully to express our doctrine in
our lives and conuersations, as, we are not Angels, but men, and therefore
being flesh and blood, may fall and do fall, and have sundry imperfections,
yet good people, this ought to be no cause, why ye should challenge unto your
selves any more liberty, to wallow in sin and wickedness. For although the
Minister were most wilfully bent to work all uncleanness, even with greedines,
yet, if he sit in Moses Chair, Math. 23.3. Chris. in Math. 23.
if he be called to be your Pastor, ye must follow the exhortation of Christ
himself, to observe whatsoever by Gods word they command you, but not to do
after their works. For, as Chrysostom says, upon that place, Si been
vixerent, etc. If they shall live well, it is their own gain, if they shall
teach well, it is your gain, then take ye yours, and do not curiouslye meddle
with that which appertains unto others. The Earth is vile, the Gould is
precious, will any man despise the precious gould, because the earth is vile?
No, but as the gould is taken, and the earth left, so take ye the doctrine, and
refuse the manners. The Bees have no need of the stalk, but of the flower, so
take ye the Flower of exhortation, and let the unprofitable stalk of
conversation wither away. If thou thirste for the Heavenly food of Gods
word, refuse not the good and comfortable Wine, because it comes out of a
Treene or Earthen Vessel. Although the Rose be compassed about with many
Briers and Nettles, yet do not thou therefore refuse the sweet Rose, the
savor of life unto life, to those that shall be saved: if thou travail in a way
that thou know not, yet if a Criple by the high ways side do show thee
which way thou shall turn, refuse not thou to go thy way, although the Criple
be not able to remove an intche from his place. Although the Carpenters which
make the Arc be drowned, yet do thou, with the faith of Noah, enter into the
Arc, and thou shall be saved. Math. 2.6.
Although, neither Scribe nor Pharisie, nor Herod, nor any of the people in
Jerusalem, will bear thee company to Bethlehem, to worship the Babe Jesus: yet
if the Priests do show thee where thou shall find him, follow thou the
wisemen, Luke. 10.34.
and go alone. Although, both Priest and Leuit, pass by the wounded man, and
show no mercy at all, yet be thou that poor Layman, that pitiful Samaritan,
which bound up his wounds and powered in Oil and Wine, and brought him to an
Inn, and made provision for him. 1. Cor. 13.1.
Although, thy Teacher, speaking with the tongue of an Angel, and having no
love, be nothing else, but as sounding Brass, and as a tinkeling Simball, and
therefore do nothing profit himself, for a Simball or Harp, hears nothing
it self, yet may he comfort thee, when thy mind is in heaviness, if thou have
a lively faith, to believe and apprehend the sweet promises of Jesus Christ,
which by him shall be uttered. Aug. lib. 3. contra donat cap. 10. Contra Cresce
lib. 3. cap. 6 de fide ad pet. cap. 36.
Etsi aquae fluxu canatis, nihilo fit faecundior, hortus tamen per eum
irrigatur, et fructificat. Although, by the running of the water, the Chanel is
made, nothing more fruitful, yet the Garden which is watered by it, does
bring forth fruit more plentifully. Although the Scribes and Pharisees, will
put no finger to the burden, yet take up the Yoke of Christ and learn of
him, that he is meek, and lowely in heart, and thou shall find rest for thy
soul. Aug. contra litteras petiliani Donatistae cap. 27. tom. 7 Page 71.
Pontifex Caiphas persequutor vnius, et verissimi Sacerdotis, quamuis ipse non
sit verax, quod dat tamen verum est, si non suum det sed Dei. What though
Caiphas be a wicked high Priest, a persecutor of our Lord and Savior? yet if
he speak not from himself, but from God, John. 11.51. and. 18.14.
and Prophecy of Christ, that he must dye for the people. We must not
therefore despise, or renounce Christ, because God does compel even the
wicked, to confess him: Nay, what though it be Satan himself, which
confesses Christ to be the son of God, Luke. 4.34.41
and calls him Jesus of Nazareth, the holy one of God? yet we must not
contemn or refuse the son of God, because he compels the Devil and his
Angels, to acknowledge him. But rather much more we ought to fear that
omnipotent God, which so rules all things, with his mighty hand, that even
those whom he does not govern with his spirit, yet he does bridle them with
his power.

Math. 11.29.
Although, thou be taught or Baptized by Judas, yet do thou lay houlde upon
the blood of Jesus Christ, Mark. 16.16.
and thy sins are forgiven thee. Quos Baptizauit Judas, Aug.
baptizauit Christus. Whom Judas Baptized, Christ Baptized, for the dignity of
the word and Sacraments, does not depend upon the person of the Minister,
which may be wicked, but upon the promises of God, which cannot deceive. But
thou will say peradventure, they which live ill be Thorns, and how can a man
gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles? Aug. de pact. cap. 10. tom. 9.
Page 731.
Augustine does answer very well. The Grape does hang indeed amongst the
Thorns, but not of the root of the Thorns, for it hangs only of the root
of the Vine. Even so the doctrine which is taught unto them, although it hang
amongst the Thorns of many vices, in the Minister, yet it grows not on the
root of those vices, but on the root of the word of God, and the Gospel of
Jesus Christ: then if thou desire to taste the sweet grape of the Gospel of
Christ, Lege vnam inter spinas pendentem, sed de vite nasce^tem: Gather the
Grape, hanging indeed among the Thorns, but growing on the Vine Jesus
Christ. It is a lamentable case to consider, how in these our days, the
Devil has so bewitched the hearts of so many, that in all their assemblyes,
Feasts and meetinges, they have nothing almost in their mouths, but the
lives of the Mynisters, the lives pf the Preachers: And if they can espy any
fault in the world, then of a Moate, to make a Bearne, and of a Hillocke a
Mountain: And look who of all men, are, the fylthyest VVhooremongers, the
most blasphemous swearers, the most dissolute Gaymesters, the ranckest
Ruffyans, the most cruel oppressiours of the poor, the gretest spoilers of
the goods of the Church, wherewith the Ministers should do good and keep
Hospitality, they are of all other most busy, in displaying the faults of the
Ministry, which is only the devise of Satan, to draw them from the
consideration of their own sins, least they should repent and live: whereas
indeed they should first, Math. 7.5.
pluck out the beam out of their own eyes, and then should they better see to
pluck out the Mote out of their brothers eye. We have a Wallet cast over our
shoulders, in the end before us, we put the sins of our Ministers, and of
our neighbors, in the end behind us, we put our own sins, Psalm. 38.4.
and. 51.3.
and then, Non videmus manticae quod in tergo est. But good brethren, if ye
will be true Christians, ye must learn to turn the Wallet, setting your own
sins before your face, and casting behind your backs, the offenses of your
neighbors and Pastoures, and although some of your Ministers have not the
grace to live as they ought to do, yet ye must rather honor the bad for the
good, then despise the good for the bad: And if any thing be amiss in them,
the way is not to amend it, with vile and reprochefull slanders: but your
remedy is only to fly unto God, by fervent and hearty prayer, praying always
the Lord of the Harvest, that he will power upon them the dew of his holy
spirit, and make them fruitful laborers in his Harvest, that they may not
gather with the one hand, and scatter with the other, but labor profitably
with both hands, both with word and life, Tit. 2.7. 1. Tim. 4.16. Exodus 28.3.
with Vrim and Thummim, with light and perfection, with exhortation and
conversation: And here comes in the last part, which conteyneth the duty,
both of Minister and people, to fly unto God by prayer, that seeing the
Harvest is great, and the laborers are but few, we should pray unto the Lord
of the Harvest, to send forth laborers into his Harvest: where first we
must learn, what those laborers were, for whom our savior would have them
pray, to be sent forth into the Lords Harvest. They are set down all in one
verse, by Saint Paul, Ephe. 4.11.
some Apostles, some Prophets, others Evangelists, others Pastors, to the
knitting together of the Saints, to the work of the Ministry, and to the
building of the body of Christ. The seven Popish orders.
Then to be a labourer in the Lords Harvest, is not, to chaunt it is not, to
iangle as was in time past the office of the Porter: to read and singe
lessons, and to hallow bread, and all green fruit, as to Charm or to
Conjure, as was the office of the Exorcist: it is not, to carye Candlesticks
and light Tapers, as the Acolites: to provide water against Mass, to wash the
corporasse clothes, to vow chastity, to give the Chalice and cover to the
Deacon, as the Subdeacons: to serve at the Altar, and to read the Gospel, for
the quick and the dead, as was wickedly placed for the office of Deacons: it is
not, to mumble up Masses, and to offer up sacrifice, for the quick and the
dead, as the shaueling Priests: it is not, to sit Imperiously, with the Majesty
of a Triple Crown, and to dispose kingdoms, nor to bear a Crosier staff, and
bless, and challenge power to give the holy Ghost, and remit sins at their
own pleasure, as the Pope and his Bishops: it is not, to wear a Cardinals
Hat, nor to live unto themselves, and their own bellies, as the swimish
Cloister me^, Abbots and Priors, Munkes and Friars: it is not, to serve men's
humors, as elbow Chaplains, but, to be a labourer in the Lords Harvest, is,
Phil. 2.25. Act. 14.14. 1. Cor. 11.4. Acts. 13.1. Acts. 21.8. 2. Tim. 4.5.
to feed the flock of Christ, with the heavenly food of his blessed word,
as did the Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists, in the primitive Church and as
is now required of Pastors and such Elders or Bishops, which are appointed as
watchme^ over certain flocks and congregations, to rule and govern the same,
by the preaching of the Gospel, Tit. 1.5.7. Acts. 20.28.
by the administering of the Sacraments, and by the exercising of
Ecclesiastical discipline, and of the Doctors, whose charge is especially to
expound the right sense and understanding of the Scriptures, and to instruct
those which are Catechumenoi in ye points and principles of christian religion.

But what need we of these Pastors and Doctors, John. 16.13. Joel. 2.28.
to lead us into all truth? I answer, yt although it be the peculiar office of
the holy Ghost, to lighten us within, and to lead us into all truth, yet the
outward Ministry of ye word, is necessary, because God uses the same as an
inferior, and a seco^dary mean to bring us thereunto. The light of the su^ ca^
nothing help blind eyes, nor the lowdenes of the sound, profit deaf ears,
no more ca^ the word, pearce the hardness of the heart, unless it be mollified,
by Gods holy spirit: but both must go together, first, to have the eyes
opened, and then the Sun to shine and give light: and therefore, the spirit
of God and his word, are by Christ, both joined together, when he says to
his Disciples, John, 15.26.
the Comforter shall come, and teach you all things, Quaecunque dixi vobis:
whatsoever I have told you: where you see how with the working of the holy
ghost, he joins his word, No Text, no gloss, no Scripture, no spirit. What
then shall we say, to that place of Saint John: Ye know all things, 1. Ioh.
2.20.27.
the anointing which ye have received, dwells with you, and you need not
that any man should teach you, therefore it should seem to be needelesse, to
have any laborers in the Lords Harvest. But John writes not this unto them,
to signify that they had no need of teaching, (for then to what purpose
should he have written his Epistle unto them, if they had no need of
teaching?) but he shows them, that, they were not rude Scholars, and
altogether ignorant, but well skilled, and of great knowledge in the matters
which he propounded unto them: and therefore, that he did not so at large set
forth these points, as though they were altogether unknown unto them, but
that he did only bring these things to mind, that they might remember them,
as Peter says. 2. Peter. 1.12.
I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of these things,
though that ye have knowledge and be established in the present truth. Another
doubt may arise of that place in Jeremy, where the Lord says thus: And they
shall teach no more every man his neighbor, Ierem. 31.34.
and every man his brother: saying. Know ye the Lord: for they shall know me
from the least, even to the greatest, this is meant of the state of the Church,
under the new Testament, and therefore there needs no laborers in this
harvest. I answer, that indeed God makes there a comparison, betwixt, the
people under the Law, and the other under the Gospel, that, the light of the
Gospel of Christ, should be common and familiar unto all, whereas in the law
it was darkely figured by tipes and shadows. But he says not, simplye, that
there shall need no more teaching: but he adds saying: Know the Lord, they
shall no more need to be taught the first A.B.C. and first Principles of
Christian religion, Gala. 4.1.
as the old fathers, which were as young Children, ignorant of the first
rudiments: but they shall have greater knowledge, and yet notwithstanding,
diligently endeavor to go forward more and more, Isa. 2.3.
and say, as is in the Prophet, Come and let us go up into the Mountain of the
Lord, into the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways: then
this is a perpetual decree and ordinance of Christ, under the Gospel, that,
his people should be taught from time to time, Romans 10.14.
that, so^, faith may come by hearing, and hearing, by the word preached: and
because none can preach, unless they be sent, we must continually bear in
mind, this commandment of our Savior Christ that, we pray unto the Lord of
the Harvest, to send forth Laborers into his Harvest.

Which commandment, because Christ gave it in this place, to his 70.
Disciples, Let us of the Ministry, first apply it to our selves, and learn
here our duty, which is, that with all labors, we join our prayers, unto
the Lord of the Harvest. For, if in temporal things, nothing can prosper,
without the blessing of the Lord, as the Prophet David says. Psalm. 127.1.
Except the Lord build the house, their labor is but lost that build: except
the Lord keep the City, the Watchemen watches but in vain. It is in vain
for you, to rise up early, and to lie down late, and to eat the bread of
carfulness, as we see by experience every day, many rise early, and lay down
late, and eat the bread of carfulness, but they prosper not, because the
Lord does not build the house: and if worldly riches be the blessing of the
Lord, as Solomon says: it is the blessing of the Lord which makes men rich,
and if in fishing in the Sea, Luke. 5.5.
Peter may fish all night, and catch nothing, until our Savior Christ,
voutchsafe to come into the barge: the^ how much less shall we think yt we can
build the Lords house, or watch over ye flock of Christ, or gather a rich
harvest unto ye lord, or catch ye souls of me^ with the spiritual net of gods
word, unless with our rising early and lying down late, and eating ye bread of
carefulnes, we always, let our prayer and supplication be made to God, with
tha^ksgiuing. Phil. 4.6. Job. 31.27.
Iobe says: If my heart did flatter me in secret, or if my mouth did kiss
mine hand, this had bin an iniquity, to be condemned, for I had denied the
Lord above: where Job makes the ascribing of our temporal goods, to our own
handie work and saying. Haec sunt opera manuum mearum: these are the works of
mine own hands, to be nothing else, but a denying of the Lord above: How much
more then do we deny the Lord above, if in spiritual graces we do not
confess and acknowledge, that it is nothing for Paul, 1. Cor. 3.6. 2. Cor. 3.5.
to Plant, and Appollo to water, except the Lord do give the increase, that we
are not sufficient of our selves, to think one good thought, as of our selves,
but all our sufficiency comes of God, who has made us able Ministers of the
new Testament: that, Isa. 6.5.7. Ierm. 1.6.9.
the Prophet Isay is a man of polluted lips, be^fore the Lord do purge
them: that Jeremy is but a Child and cannot speak, before the Lord do put
his words into his mouth: and therefore, that in all our endeavors, we trust
not to our own wisdom, to our own learning, to our own policy, to our
own gifts of nature, but that in all our labors, we do in feruencie of
spirit, Psalm. 51.1^.
pray with David, O Lord open thou my lips, and then my mouth shall show
forth thy praise. Here also, in that our Savior does command his
Disciples, to pray the Lord of the Harvest, to send forth laborers into his
Harvest: we have to consider, the tender care which every Minister ought to
have of the Church of God, still to pray unto God for the same, and not only
to pray unto God, but also with great grief of heart, to remember, as well, the
small number of the faithful laborers, as also the great number of the
peoples sins? This vehement zeal and tender care for the Harvest of the
Lord, was in Moses, when he prayed so earnestly for the people, that he said:
Exodus 32.32.
O Lord pardon their sins, or else raze me out of the book which thou have
written. Genesis 18 24.
This was in Abraham, for when he saw how the sins of the Sodomites had
provoked the scourge of God against them, he prayed unto the Lord, and said.
Lord if there be but fifty righteous in the City, will thou destroy the
place, and not spare it for the fifty righteous? and again, behold I have
begone to speak unto the Lord, and am but duste and Ashes. If there lack
five of fifty, will thou destroy them for five? And again, what if but
forty? And again, what if thirty? what if twenty? And again, let not my
Lord be angry, if I speak once again? what if but ten: showing thereby
sufficiently, the earnest zeal which he had, 2. Pet. 2.7.
for the salvation of the people. This was in Lot, who was vexed with the
unclean conversation of the wicked, for being righteous, and dwelling among
them, in seeing and heareing, vexed his righteous soul from day to day, with
their unclean and foul deeds. This zealous care for the Lords Harvest, was
also in Samuel, 1. Sam. 7.9. Psalm. 119.136.
who cried unto the Lord for Israel: And in David, whose eyes gusht out with
Rivers of water, because his people kept not the Law of God. This was in the
Prophet Isay: Isa. 22.4.
who in the abundance of love, bewailed his brethren, which would needs
perish: saying, Turn away from me, I will weep bitterly, labor not to
comfort me, for the destruction of the Daughter of my people. Ierm 9.1. Ierem.
14.17.
This was in Jeremy, who cried out: O that my head were full of Water, and mine
eyes a Fountain of Tears, that I might weep day and night, for the slain of
the daughter of my people. Let mine eyes drop down tears night and day
without ceasing. Dan. 9.7.16.18.19.
This was in the Prophet Daniel, who when he heard out of Jeremy, that the
Captivity should continue seauentie years, he turned his face unto the Lord,
with fasting, with Sackcloth and Ashes, and prayed: saying. To thee O Lord,
belongs righteousness, to us open shame and confusion. O Lord I beseech thee,
let thine anger be turned away from thy City Jerusalem, thine holy Mountain.
We do not present our selves unto thee, trusting in our own righteousness,
but in thy great and tender mercyes. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord
consider, and do it, not for our sake, but for thine own sake, O my God.

This was in the holy Apostle Saint Paul, Acts. 20.31. Phil. 3.18. Romans 9.1.
who ceased not to warn every man, both day and night, with Tears, and he
called God to witness, that he spoke the truth, how he had great
heaviness and contynuall sorrow of heart for his Brethren, and that for
their sakes, Luke 19.41.
he wished himself to be separate from Jesus Christ. This was also in the
chief Shepherd, our Savior Christ, who when he beheld the City Jerusalem,
and the iniquity thereof, he wept over it, and cried out with grief of heart.
O if thou had known, at the least, in this thy day, these things which
belong unto thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes: and this ought
to be in all the Ministers of Christ, to have a zealous and a tender care of
the Church of God, which Christ has purchased with his most precious blood,
and therefore our Savior does here command his seventy Disciples, that in
all their prayers, they should not have so much respect unto themselves, as
unto the Harvest of the Lord, and bids them pray the Lord of the Harvest to
send forth laborers into his Harvest: And this is the duty, not only of
the Minister, but generally of all men, Psalm. 137.5.6.
to pray, for the peace of Jerusalem, and the prosperous estate of the Church
of God, Ephe. 6.19.
to pray, for the Ministers, that vtteraunce may be given unto them, that they
may open their mouths bouldly, to publish the secret of the Gospel: to pray,
2 These. 3.1.
that the word of God may have free passage, and be glorified among them: to
pray, for their Pastors, Colos 4.3.4.
that God will open unto them the door of vtteraunce, that they may so speak
the Mysteries of Christ, as it becomes them to speak, to pray with David,
that the Lord will be favorable unto Sion, Psa. 51.18.
and build up the walls of Jerusalem: And finally, to pray here with the
seventy Disciples that the Lord of the Harvest, will send forth laborers
into his Harvest, and this shall every one of you perform a great deal more
carefully, if ye will call to mind, either the great comfort which comes
unto you by the pains of faithful Laborers, or else the miserable estate that
ye stand in, if ye want these Laborers. For first, what greater comfort can
there be, to a trauayler, being in a strange place, and among his enemies,
then to be well armed, and to have a good weapen to defend him? Neither can
there be any greater comfort to us, that, Psalm. 39.12.
are strangers and Pilgrims, in this vale of misery, and continually
assaulted with most cruel enemies, the world, the flesh, and the Devil, then
to be well weaponed, with the sword of the spirit, Ephe. 6.17. Hebru. 4.12.
the word of God, which shall cut down sin in us, and enter thorough, even
to the dividing a sunder of the soul, and of the spirit, of the joints, and
of the marrowe. Then we ought always to pray with David. I am a stranger upon
earth, Psalm. 119.19.
O hide not thy commandment from me. What greater comfort to a man, which
walks in darkness, and in a daingerous place, Ephe. 5.8. Psa. 119.105. 2.
Pet. 1.19. Ephe. 5.8.
then to have a light to be brought unto him? Neither can there be any greater
comfort to us, which of our selves are nothing but darkness (as Paul
says, then to have the word of God, a Lantern to our feet, and a Candle
shining in a dark place: whereby we may be made light in the Lord, and walk
as the children of light. What greater joy unto a poor man, then to shrowde
himself under the wings of some Nobleman or Gentleman, and to wear his
Liuerie and Cognizance? neither can there be any greater joy to a true
Christian, then to wear the Badge of a Christian, which is a zeal to hear
the word of God, John. 8.47. 1. Ioh. 4.6. John, 10.27.
that hearing Gods word, he may be known to be of God, and hearing the voice
of Christ, may be known thereby, to be one of the Sheep of Christ, and
therefore such a one, as ca^ never perrish. There is no man, but he would
willingly be reconciled to his Landlorde, or any other, which is able to hurt,
either his body or goods: The Gospel of Christ is called, 2. Cor. 5.19. Math.
10.28.
the word of reconciliation: whereby we are reconciled to him, which is able
to destroy both body and soul, and cast both into Hell lier. No man but he
would willingly be saved: Iam. 1.21. Romans 1.16. Isa. 12.3.
it is called the word of salvation, which is able to save our souls, and
therefore, we ought with joy, to draw water out of the Wels of salvation: as the
Prophet speaks, there is no man but he would willingly be preserved from
errors and falsehood: it is called, 2. Cor. 6.7. John. 17.17.
the word of truth. No man but if he have any sparkle of grace, he would
willingly be delivered from the bondage of sin and iniquity. It is, the Law
of God, Psalm. 19.7.11. and. 119.9.
which is perfect, and conuerteth the soul: the Testimony of the Lord, is
sure, and gives wisdom unto ye simple: by the^ is the servant of God made
circu^spect: by teaching, improouing, 2. Tim. 3.16.
correcting and instructing, they make ye man of god absolute and perfect in all
good works There is no man, but if he have enemies, suing him at Law, for a
piece of Land, he would gladly have the advice of good and learned Counselors:
our enemies seek to pluck from us, the kingdom of Heaven, and therefore our
delight ought to be in the statues of God, for, they are our Counselors, Psalm.
119.24.
says David: if we have any suite, we are desirous to know the end, how that
judgment shall pass. Christ says, If any man receive not my words. Ioh.
12.48.
Sermo quem loquutus sum, iudicabit eum in nouissimo Die: the word which I have
spoaken, shall judge him the last day. There is no man, but if his Father have
made a Will and Testament, and therein bequeathed unto him, any worldly goods
or possessions, he will read the Will over and over again, to see what his
father has bequeathed unto him. But the Minister does bring unto you, not the
Testament of any mortal man, but, the Will and Testament of our Lord Jesus
Christ: Romans 11 27. 2. Cor. 3.6. Hebru. 8.8. and. 9.15. 1. Pet. 1.18.
wherein he has bequeathed unto you, not, temporal riches, but, the
everlasting joys of Heaven, purchased, not, with Silver nor Gould, but, with
his own precious blood: How much more then, ought ye to here, mark, and
commit unto me morie, this Will and Testament, of our Lord and redeemer? When
the Market day comes, that we must provide for food and rayement for our
bodies, we will apply it dilligently, to our great costs and charges.
Behoulde the Lord has appointed many days, especially, the Sabbath days,
to be the Market days of our souls, wherein we may freely provide for some
thing, to the nourishment and comfort of our souls. What a great care then
ought we to have, to resort unto the Church, Apoc. 3.18. Isa. 55.^.
to buy Gould tried by the fire, that we may be rich, and white raiment, that
we may be clothed, and as the Prophet says, to buie Wine and Milk without
Silver: and not so, to care for the body, which shortly shall be Worms meat,
that we have no care of the soul, which shortly shall be in the company of
Angels. There is none of us, but he would willingly conceive some hope of
eternal life: and this can never be, unless we have a desire, to sow in our
hearts, Luke. 8.11.
the Seed of Gods word. for, therefore, is the word of God called Seed,
because in the Seed is all the hope of the Harvest. Sow little, reap little,
sow sparingly, reap sparingly, sow nothing reap nothing, and therefore let
us never think, that we can reap the Harvest of everlasting life, unless we
have a care to sow in our hearts the Seed of Gods word: for without faith,
no man can be saved, neither can any man have faith, but, Romans 10.14.
by hearing the word of God: for how shall they believe on him of whom they
have not heard? or how shall they hear without a Preacher? Unless the ground
do give Sap unto the Tree, the Tree must needs wither: John. 4.14. Math. 25.8.
Unless the Spring do Minister Water unto the River, the River must needs
be dried up. If Oil be not still powered into the Lamp, the Lamp will go out,
take Fish out of the water, it will dye: to be brief, there is no living thing,
but if ye take from it, the food and nourishment due unto it, it must of
necessity dye and perrishe: even so, the faith of a Christian: unless it
receive Sap continually from the ground of Gods word, and be watered with the
Fountain of life, and have the Oil of the sweet promises of Christ, often
powered into it, and be daily fed with the bread of God, John. 6.33.
which comes down from Heaven and gives life unto the world, it must needs
be wythered, dried up, and extinguished: it must needs die perrish, and
utterly consume for ever: If these things were duly considered, they would make
us to hunger and thirste for the word of God, Psalm. 19.11.
and to account it, as David did, more to be desired then Gould, yea, then much
fine Gould: sweeter also then the Honey and the Honey Comb: they would make us
to say with the Prophet Isay, Isa. 52.7. Romans 10.15.
O how beautiful are the feet of them, which bring glad tidings of peace: And
according to the commandment of Christ in this place, to pray to the Lord
of the Harvest, Colos. 3.16.
to send forth Laborers into his Harvest, that, the word of Christ may
dwell plentifully in us, in all wisdom: Hebr. 6.1.
whereby we may not only learn the Doctrine of repentance from dead works,
and the first instructions of of faith toward God, but also to go on forward
to perfection, and to go through all the chief principles of religion, so yt
we may be able always, 1. Pet. 3.15.
to give an answer to every man that asks us a reason of the hope yt is in
us, for, this does the word of God require of every Christian. If these
reasons cannot stir up our hearts, so many sweet odours, and pleasant Flowers,
more gorgeously clothed then Solomon in all his royalty. The ground yielding
forth Grass for the Cattle, and Herb for the use of man, Psalm. 104.10
and Wine that makes glad the heart of man, and Oil to make him a
cheerful countenance, and bread to strengthen man's heart. The hiding of the
treasures of the Snow, and bringing forth the hoarie Frostes, Psa. 147.8.16.
the covering the heavens with Clouds, and bringing forth the winds out of
their places. The wonderful woorkemanship of God in man, which is as it were
(...) a little world: Wherein the glory of the workman does most appear, the
mighty operation of God, both in man and Beast, as well in the sharpness of
their senses, as in their stomach which digesteth all things, Job. 12.7. Isa.
10.42.
and yet does not digest it self, and sundry other such works of God: do
show his power and Godhead, (...) to make them in excusable which are Gentiles
and know not God, Romans 1.20.
and therefore the Prophet David says. The Heavens declare the power of God:
and the Firmament shows the work of his hands: Psalm. 19.1.
day unto day utters the same, and night unto night teaches knowledge,
there is no speech, nor language where their voice is not heard. Whose voice?
the voice of the heavens, the Firmament, the vnchaingeable course of day,
night, Summer and Winter, their voice is heard every where, they preach the
power of God. So that we cannot say: If we had known God, we would have feared
him and served him: for the Heavens as David says, are as it were, a line, and
capital letter, to set before us the power and wisdom God: that knowing there
is a God, if we will not fear him as God, Psalm. 19.4.
we may be made all inexcusable: an other reason which Saint Paul uses, is,
the law of nature, which God has engraven in the hearts of men, whereby their
own conscience, does hear them witness, and their own thoughts either
accuse or excuse, for, Nulla est tam barbara natio, Romans 2.14.15 Cic. de not
deor.
nulla gens tam efferata cui non insideat haec persuasio, esse Deum.

And therefore, the most wicked, howsoever sometimes, they (foolishlye) say
in their hearts there is no God: Psalm. 14.^
yet does the fear and terror which they continually carry in their breasts, and
ye judgments of God which they daily see before their eyes, compel them, will
they, nill they, to confess that there is a God in heaven, whom they have
contemned. As we read of C. Caligula, Suetonius.
although he was a bloody tyrant and a most dasperate contenmer of God, yet
when as by the terrible thu^dering and lightnings, he saw a token of Gods
wrath, he covered himself in corners, and crept under the Beds, for the fear
and terror thereof. Whereof came this same but that his own conscience told
him that there was a God above, whose voice he heard, and whom he had despised,
and who in the end, would surely be revenged? By these reasons (good people) ye
see that if ye want faithful laborers in the Lords Harvest, yet your
ignorance shall not excuse you, but that, Prou. 29.18.
where prophecy cease, there the people perrish, and the Lord will power
out his vengeance, even upon them which by his word have never known him.
For he says by the Prophet, Ezech. 3, 18. and. 33.6.
If thou do not warn the wicked man of his sins, his blood will I require
at thy hand, but he says therewithal, that, the wicked shall die in his
iniquity, the wicked is taken away for his sins, but his blood I will (also)
require at the Watchemans hands, so that both shall perrish, both the
negligent watchmen, and the ignorant people, both the blind leader, and the
blind follower, as Christ says, Math. 15.14.
If the blind lead the blind, they shall both fall into the Ditche. And
therefore, seeing your ignorance does not only not excuse you, 2. These. 1.8.^
but also throw you headlong into the pit of destruction, there to be punished
with everlasting perdition from the presence of God, and from the glory of his
power, great cause ye have to lift up your hearts unto the Lord early and late,
and continually to pray unto the Lord of the Harvest, to send forth
laborers into his Harvest, and not only to pray for laborers, but also to
pray that the labors and pains of the laborers, may be profitable unto you.
Acts. 16.14.
For except the Lord do open the heart of Lydia, she cannot so much as mark
those things, which Paul speaks: Neither can the word of God any thing profit
you, unless, with the planting of Paul, 1. Cor. 3.6.
and watering of Appollo God do give the increase: and as the Prophet says,
Ezech. 11.19.
put a new spirit within your bowels, and take away your stony hearts, and
give you hearts of flesh. And therefore whenever the seed of Gods word is
sown in your hearts, pray unto God, that he will so water it with the dew of
his holy spirit, that it may take such deep root, that Satan be never able
to pluck it away: assuring your selves, that the Diuill does go about
nothing so dilligently, as to keep you in ignorance and blindness, (...) and
to snatche the seed of the word, Luke. 8.12.
out of your hearts, least ye should believe and be saved. When a man has
taken away the weapon from his enemy, then may he work his pleasure, and use
him as he will Eue^ so, if Satan can pluck away our weapon, The sword of the
spirit, out of our hands, then may he handle us as he will, and when we know not
the truth, Ephe. 6.17.
he may entangle us in his snares, and at his own will, draw us unto all
wickedness and mischief, 1 Timothy 2.25.26
and therefore, his chief endeavor has ever been, to keep the people
unarmed, and to maintain his Bulwark of ignorance and blindness: and for
this cause, he sends his Messengers to sow this doctrine in the hearts of
men, that, Ignorance is the mother of devotion: that, the Bible ought to be
locked up, and nothing to be heard, but the traditions of his son the Pope:
that, it is Heresy to hear the word of God: that, the people may indeed,
come to the Church to be Christened, to be Married and to be buried, but in no
case, to pray, or to hear the Gospel of Christ: And thus the God of this
world has blinded their eyes, yt, 2. Cor. 4.4.
the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, which is the Image of God,
should not shine upon the^. Others think, that, if they come to the Church
orderly and customably to pray, that then they have gone far enough, and as for
hearing the word of God, they make small accounts of it: and therefore if they
can get such as can read the^ morning and evening prayer, they care for no
other laborers in the Harvest.

But these do not consider that which Solomon says. He which turns away
his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer shall be abominable: Prou. 28.9.
although he patter up never so many prayers, yet unless he show therwithall
a zeal to here the word of God, his prayer is abominable in the sight of God,
and this is a plague of all plagues, that, that prayer whereby we should ask
all good things at Gods hands, that prayer shall be come abominable. An other
spiritual plague is: the taking away of the food of our souls, and the
depriving us of the Gospel of Christ, which the Lord does threaten to all
the contemners of his word. Amos. 8.11.
Behold the days come, says the Lord God, that, I will send a famine in the
Land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but a famine of hearing
the word of God, and they shall wander from the North unto the West, from one
Sea to another, they shall run too and fro to seek the word of God, and
shall not find it: Math. 21.43.
And Christ does threaten the Jews, that, for their unthankfulness, the
kingdom of God, the preaching of the Gospel should be taken from them, and
given to an other nation which should bring forth the fruit thereof. And
surely if we consider our own unthankfulness, in this Realm of England, we
shall be compelled to confess, that we have deserved long a go to have this
plague to be brought upon us, that, the word of God should be taken from us,
and given to an other nation, which shall bring forth the fruit thereof. For
what one among a thousand has any care for the heavenly food of his soul?
what one among a thousand, does pray earnestly to the Lord of the Harvest, to
send forth laborers into his Harvest? Nay we are rather glutted with it, it
is but a vile meat think we, Numb. 11.5.
we had rather, return into Aegipt to feed on our Onyons. Leekes, and
Garleeke, then to taste of the sweet Manna, the word of the everliving God.
John. 1.10.
The light came into the world, and men looued darkness more then light. The
Lord of his abundant mercy, Luke 19.42.44
open our eyes, that we may once see those things which belong to our peace,
and know the time of our visitation, that by our unthankfulness we never
deserve to have the glorious Gospel of Christ to be taken from us. Alas, dear
brethren, we consider not the heavy judgments of God, which hang over our
heads, and shall most certainly be powered upon us, unless we repent us of
this our unthankful contempt of the word of God. It did nothing grieve the
Sodomites, Genesis 19.16.
when Lot was departed from them. The old world made no account of it, Genesis
7.1.
when Noah the Preacher of righteousness, went from them, and entered into the
Arc. Amo^. 7.10. Exodus 32.6. 1. Cor. 10.17.
All the land of Jury was not able to abide the words of Amos: when Moses was
away, then were the people of Israel all merry, they sat down to eat and
drink, and rose again to play: And so also it is with us, we rather wish
that these laborers which we have already, should be taken away, then that the
number of them should be increased: we had rather have their absence, then
their presence, their room then their company. But I beseech you consider how
in ye end they were all most miserably plagued: The Sodomites with fire and
brimstone from Heaven. The old world, with the flood ouerwelming the whole
earth. Exodus 32.27 2^.
The Isralits with a lamentable murder, staying every man his brother, and
every man his companion, and every man his neighbor. The Jews with a
miserable captivity in Babilo^. for the cause of their destruction was only,
the despising of the Prophets of God, as the Lord shows by his Prophet. Ierm.
29.18.
I will persecure them with the sword, and I will make them a terror for all
Kingdoms of the earth, and a curse and astonishment, and an hissing, and a
reproach, among all nations, where I shall cast them, because they have not
heard my words, says the Lord. When I sent unto them my servant the
Prophets, rising up early, and sending them, but ye would not hear, says the
Lord. But while they mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his word, and
misused his Prophets, 2. Chro 36.16
behold the King of the Chaldaeans coming with a fearce and terrible Army,
brake down the Walls of their City, fiered their Temple, burnt all their
Towers, destroyed Man, Woman and Child, so that none escaped death, but such
as were led into Captiuitye, and all the Goulde and Treasures both of the
Temple and of the Noble men was all carried away into Babylon. The Lord
knows whether the like Captiuitye be reserved for us or no: and, the Lord
grant that the days of our Gracious Prince Elizabeth, be not shortened for
our unthankfulness. There was never Country, that ever despised the Prophets
of God, but it afterward felt the scourge of God, and shall we, which are
most guiltye of this sin, be only free from the punishment?

No, no, it cannot be, but either we shall taste of a miserable Captivity in
this world, or else of a far greater Captivity, 2. These. 1.8.9.
when Satan shall lead both body and soul, into the bottomless pit of Hell,
there to be punished with everlasting perdition, from the presence of God, and
from the glory of his power.

These things good people, if they were well pondered in our minds, they would
make us continually to fly unto God, with fervent and hearty prayer, and to
say with David. Blessed art thou O God, Psalm. 119.12 18 19 33 35 97 135.
O teach me thy Statutes: open mine eyes, that I may see the wonders of thy
Law, teach me O Lord the way of thy Statutes, and I will keep it unto the
end, direct me in the pathe of thy commandments, for therein is my delight.
O how I love thy law, it is my meditation continually, show the light of thy
countenance upon thy servant, and teach me thy commandments: and they would
make us carefully to perform this which our Savior does command his
seauentie Disciples: To prave the Lord of the Harvest, to send forth
Laborers into his Harvest, and not only to pray for faithful Laborers, but
also to put to our helping hands and to endeavor by all lawful means
possible, to provide for such as shall painefully labor in the Harvest of the
Lord: for otherwise, if we will in words seem to pray for them, and then
indeed can not find in our hearts to bestow any penny upon them, that the
Laborers may have their hier, that, they which sow unto you spiritual
things, Math. 10.10. 1. Tim. 5.18. 1. Cor. 9.11.14 Gala. 6.6.
may in like manner reap of your carnal things: that they which preach the
Gospel, may live of the Gospel, as the Lord has ordained: then are our
prayers nothing else but mockeries, and plain Hypocrisy before God: for
outwardly we pray for them, but inwardly we are not touched with the want of
the thing that we desire. Here then is a Lesson for all Latrones (as they
are,) but Patrones, as they should be, that in bestowing their livings, they
seek not to enritche themselves by Sacrilege and Church robbery, nor yet to
provide for such as will flatter them in their sins, and sow Pillowes, under
their Elbowes, and cry: Peace, peace, where as no peace is, Ezech. 13.18.
Ierem. 23.30.
nor such as have sweet lips, and will pass and repasse, under their arms,
at their own pleasure, nor such as are domb Dogs and cannot bark, blind
guides and cannot see: Isa 56.10.
but that they travail to the uttermost of their power, to place faithful
laborers in the Harvest of the Lord, or otherwise they are accessarie to the
murder of so many souls as perish. And here also is a lesson for you of the
inferior sort, that seeing our livings are so spoiled by impropriations, that
they are not able to maintain Preachers amongst you, for ye know, that we have
but the chafe, and others the corn, we the parings, and other the Aples, we
the shells and others the Kernels: and ye see how every day it waxes worse and
worse, so that, he now does account him happiest, which can pill the Church
most, yet ye must not follow their wicked and desperate ensample, but every
one contribute something to the maintenance of some learned Pastor, to
instruct you in the word of God, which is able to save your souls. Set not
your minds so upon worldly things, Luke. 14.18.
as upon your Oxen, your Farms and your Wives, that in ye mean time, Math.
13.46.
ye neglect the Heavenly Supper which is prepared for you by Jesus Christ Ye
must account the Gospel of Christ, to be that Precious Pearl, which when a
Merchant man has found it, he sells all he has to bine it, Phil. 3.8.
Math. 6.33.
ye must account all things but doonge, so that ye may win our Lord Jesus
Christ. Seek ye first the kingdom of Heaven, and then all things shall be
given unto you. Spend not your substance in pride, riot, drunkenness and
excess, to the destruction both of your souls and bodies, but bestow it to
the glory of God, to the comfort of your brethren, to the godly releeuing of
your familyes, and to the salvation of your own souls. David says, Psalm. 69.^
O Lord the zeal of thy house has eaten me up: but we may say the zeal of
our own houses, the pride and excessive riotousnesse of our own houses, has
eaten us up: but few of us can say with David. O Lord, the zeal of thy house
has eaten me up. Especially, ye that are Landlordes, and have all the sweet
and fat of the earth, ye are to look unto it, that there be provision made
for Laborers in the Lords Harvest, and that ye bestow your portion liberally
thereunto, for, what a great shame is it, that ye whom the Lord has blessed
with so great abundance, should prodigally spend it, all upon your own
backs, all upon your own bellyes, all upon your own Kitchins, all upon your
own Stables, all upon Hanking and Hunting, all upon Whores and Hounds: and
nothing upon the Church of God, nothing upon the honor of your chief Lord in
Heaven, nothing upon the common wealth, nothing upon your brethren in Christ
deerly bought with the blood of Christ? And what a shame is it, that ye should
account the livings of the Church to be your own, to give them, to buie them,
to sell them, to farm them, at your own pleasures, and in the mean time, to
think that the care of the Church does nothing appertain unto you? As the
Prophet requires of Princes, Isa. 49 23.
so also all inferior Maiestrates, ought to be Nurcing Fathers and Nurcing
Mothers, to the church of God. Now the duty of a Nurce, is not only, to
nurture and correct, but also to feed the Child. Then if Justices of Peace,
and Magistrates, will punish the people for their sins, as their murders,
Thefts, and such other crimes, and in the mean time never see them fed with
the sinceere Milk of Gods word, then they are not Nurcing Fathers, and
Nurcing mothers: but Stepfathers and stepmothers, for they beat, but they do
not feed. Pharao was a cruel tyrant, yet when all his people were so
oppressed with hunger, that they were compelled to sell their Cattle and ground
for Corn, whereby all the Country was come into the Kings hands, yet he would
not only not suffer the Priests to sell their possessions, nor seek any gain
by their hinderaunce, but also of his own costs, he provided for them: Genesis
47. ^
for the Text says. The Priests had an ordinary of Pharao, and they did eat
the ordinary which Pharao gave them, and therefore they did not sell their
ground. Iezabell, 1. Reg. 18.9.
so provided for the Preests of the Groves, that she kept four hundred at her
own Table. The papists have thought nothing too much to be bestowed on the
maintenau^ce of their foolish superstition, and all the Heathen people in the
world are bountiful and liberal unto their Priests and Southsayers: how much
more then ought we Christians to be careful to provide not for idolatrous
Massing Priests, nor Heathenish Southsayers, but for faithful laborers in the
Lords Harvest to feed the flock of Christ which he has purchased with his
blood? for otherwise most certainly, the blind devotion of the Papists and
Infidels, will condemn us, and it will be more easy for them, then for us, at
the dreadful day of judgment: for as nothing ought to be more dear to the
Minister, then his flock, that he may say unto them, Phil. 1.8. and. 4.1.
as Paul says unto the Philippians. God is my record how I long after you all,
from the very heart root, in Jesus Christ, my brethren belooued and longed
for, ye are my joy and my crown, continue in the Lord my belooued. So on the
other side, the people should have joy in nothing, so much as in the Ministers,
and therefore God says to the Church, Isa. 49.17.18. 1. These. 5.13.
by the Prophet Esaias. Thy builders make have, as I live says the Lord, thou
shall surely put them all upon thee, as a Garment, and girde thy self with
them as a Bride: showing thereby that the joy and Crown of the Church, ought
to be the good and godly estate of the builders thereof, that they may be able
according to ye word of God, 1. Cor. 9.4.5. 1. Tim. 3.2.4. ^. Cor. 9.14.
not only, to sustain themselves with meat and drink, but to maintain a
wife being a sister, as Paul says, to keep Hospitallity to the credit of
their calling, to provide for their children, living under obedience, with all
honesty, and in all points well and honestly, to live of the Gospel, and not to
be brought to such miseryas they are now, in a manner, to beg from door to door.
And thus ye see it is your duty, not only, to pray for faithful laborers,
but to seek by all means possible, to maintain faithful Laborers: and
likewise, to keep out all Hierlings, thieves, and murderers: And therefore, you
my Lord, are here also admonished, not to regard the pitiful and lamentable
complaints of those which allege their charges heretofore, and their present
poverty, that unless their sons be now admitted, they must needs take
them from the Schole, and set them to the Plowe and Carte, but to answer them,
as Ulysses answered Andromache, entreating for her boy Astianax: Thy tears O
woman, move me much, but the tears of my countrey-women ought to move me
more: your complaints, indeed, are lamentable, but much more pitiful are the
tears of the Church the spouse of Jesus Christ. And last of all ye yt are ye
parents are here to learn, to weigh the gifts and ability of your children
before ye seek to bring the^ into the Ministry. It is a common use and custom
among you, if your children have any good gifts of nature, or any great token
of towardliness, then to set the^ to some occupation, or to place them in
service with some Gentleman: but if they be good for nothing, then to seek by
countenance of letters, to make them Ministers to serve the Church of God, so
that with the best ye will serve the world, and God must take that which is
left, whereas indeed, ye ought to think none to good to serve the Lord:
although, ye had but one, 1. Sam. 1.22.
and him as dear unto you as Samuel was to Elcana and Anna: but to account it
as King David did, a more honorable thing, to be a dorekeeper in the house of
his God, Psalm. 84.10.
then to dwell in the tabernacles of wickedness: what more vile office then a
dorekeeper? Yet David being a King, had rather be a door keeper in the house
of his God, then to dwell in the Palaces and Tents of ungodliness. The
scornful keeping back of the worthy, and the careless and impudent thrusting
in of the unworthy is a manifest sign, that ye have not that care for the
Lords Harvest, which ye ought to have, seeing that ye seek to place therein
loyterers, thrust in by your selves, and not laborers sent from God. Ye see by
the words of Christ in this place, that none ought to labor in the Lords
Harvest, unless he be sent of God, which is the Lord of the Harvest, Romans
10.15.
and therefore Paul says: How shall they hear without a Preacher, or how
shall they preach unless they be sent? No man takes this honor unto him, but
he that is called of God, even as Aaron was. Heb^. 5.^.
Now they only are truly sent and called of God, which inwardly, have God the
Author of their calling, and be fully persuaded in heart, that God has chosen
them to be fit Laborers, for the profit and benefit of his Church, and
outwardly have the Church, or the Elders thereof, by the ordinance of God, to
lay this office upon them. If any do thrust in them selves before they be thus
sent of God, and do preach the word, or Minister the Sacraments, being
either men which are not called, or women which may not be called to that
public function, 1. Tim. ^ 11.1^. Numb. 16.31.
they are no better then Core, Dathan and Abiram, who with two hundred and
fifty men, offered Incense to the Lord, without calling, but the earth claue
under their feet, and opening her mouth, swallowed up, both them and their
Tabernacles, and a fire coming forth from the Lord, consumed the two hundred
and fifty me^, which offered the Incense: and therefore, although there be
great want of Laborers in the Lords Harvest, and few to Preach the word of
God, yet none ought to intrude themselves, 1. These. 5.^1. Iam. 5.19. Deuteronomy. ^.7.
before they be called and sent of God, not only with the inward calling, but
also with the outward. I speak this of the public office of the Ministry,
Genesis 18.1^. Iosu. 24.15, Isa. 38 19. Ephe. 6.4.
for otherwise, every Christian is bound privately, to instruct his brother, and
especially, every parent and houshoulder is bound by the word of God, to be a
Bishop in his own family, and has charge not only of the body, but also of
the soul. But in the public office of the Ministry, there is required an
other manner of outward calling: first, Hebru. 13.17. 1. These. 5.11.
to be approved and allowed by the judgment of the Church, especially of
those whom the Apostle doothe call (...) which be over ye people and have the
oversight of the people, and therefore Paul will have in the Church a Seniory,
or Eldership, which he calls (...), when he says to Timothy: 1. Tim. 4.14.
Despise not the g^if^ that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with
the laying on of hands of the company of the eldership: Acts. 6.2.
and when the Deacons were chose^, the twelve called the multitude of Disciples
together. For the which cause good people, ye see how my lord at this time has
done nothing of his own private judgment, but has joined with himself a
Seniory of the Preachers round about you, who have altogether in this church
examined these which are now to be admitted for the space of these two or three
days, and for that the consent of the common people is not to be neglected for
(before the Deaco^s were chosen, the whole multitude was pleased: Acts. 6.^
) therefore, there is none at this time admitted but he is approved and
commended by ye letters of sundry worshipful and others, which are best
thought of, testifying both his good and godly conversation, and also the good
liking which the people have of him in that place whereunto he is already
called. And as for the rest, if any in those parishes can allege any cause,
why any of these are not to be admitted, if they will speak, they shall be
heard, and if they speak not, then their silence is to be taken for a consent,
especially seeing they have had knowledge so long before, as this business is
not now taken in hand of a sudden, but long before known to all the Country.

And here, as in Matrymonie, the congregation standing by, is deeply charged,
that, If any man can show any just cause why the parties that are to be
married may not lawefullye be joined together, that he now speak, or else
for ever hereafter houlde his peace.

Even so, that I may as it were, ask the Banes, betwixt these that are to be
made Ministers, and their charge and office, I most earnestly request you all,
as you will answer before the Lord Jesus Christ, and as ye tender the Church
of God, that If any of you can lay any thing to any of their charges, or show
any just cause why they may not be received into the office of the Ministry,
that he speak now, or else for ever hereafter hold his peace, from speaking
any ill of their admission.

Now after their election, there must follow their ordering, which that it may
be according to the word of God, there are two things required. Luke. 6.12.
Acts. 1.24. and. 6.6.
First, fasting and prayer, and therefore our Savior Christ before that he
sent forth his Apostles, he went into the Mountain to pray, and spent the
night in prayer to God. The Apostles in the choosing of Matthias, and in the
appointing of the Deacons, made their prayers unto God: Acts. 13.3 and. 14 23.
Paul and Barnabas, were sent forth with fasting and prayer. And the second
thing is, Acts. 8.1^. and. 13.2 and. 14.22.
the laying on of hands, whereby they are as it were separate from private men,
and sent forth unto the work, whereunto the Lord has called them: which
manner of ordeyning, as it is plainly commanded and appointed by God, so is
the number uncertain by whom it must be done, for that the Scriptures do make
mention, sometimes, but of one, 2. Tim. 1.6. 1. Tim. 5.22. Acts. 6.2.6. and.
13.1. 1. Tim. 4.14.
although (no do^bt) there were no more adjoined: sometimes of the twelve,
sometimes, of certain Prophets and Teachers, and sometimes of the Seniorie or
eldership, which seems most to appertain to the state of the church now
present. But here a question may be moved: how the calling of the first
reformers in the Church in this last age can be good, seeing they had no
imposition of hands, but only of Popish Priests, which are no true Seniorie?
I answer, that, the manner of calling, must be considered according to the
visible estate of the Church, which is either altogether corrupt, or else
abiding safe and sound. If it be pure, then is the ca^ing ordinary, but if it
be altogether corrupt, the^ an extraordinary vocation may have place, even
according as it shall please God to raise up his servant, and to imploye
the^, to reform the Church, and to bring her to her old purity. God is not
always bound to ordinary means: 1. Reg. 18 19.
for when the ten Tribes of Israel, were altogether corrupted through their
Idolatries: God did extraordinarily raise up unto them Elias, to reform them,
and to endeavor to bring the^ unto the right service of God* who
notwithstanding) was not a Priest, neither had he in that respect any
succession. That this general corruption shall be in the Church, in the last
age, and that God shall raise up witnesses to speak against it, it is
sufficiently showed in the Apocalips. Revel. 11.2.3.
Again I may answer, that, the most part of the first reformers of the
Church, in this last age, had after a sort an ordinary vocation (as they count
a vocation) for they were called by the Priests, and by them established and
setllin their charges: and therefore by consequent, had authority and right,
to go up into the Pulpit, and to teach in the Church, as Luther, Zwinglius,
Ecolampadius, Bucer, and before them, Wicliffe, and John Hus, and so many
Bishops in England, Scotland, Denmark, and else where, which have received,
and do preach the Gospel of Christ, have succeeded the Popish Priests, in
succession of the Chair and place, although in Doctrine, they have only
succeeded our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And therefore as we allow their
Baptism, so also their imposition of hands, until the time came, that the
Lord in his mercy took away the corruptions of them both. And thus you see,
how by the word of God, Ministers are to be publicly ordained with laying on
of hands, and with prayer, not with shauing and besmearing with Oil, not with,
Tapers, Basins, Towels, Chalices, singing Cakes, Wine and Water, Flower,
Crosses, Linens, bands: not with, breathing on them, as though it were in man's
power to give the holy Ghost: not with, Amicks, Albes, Sto^les, Girdles,
Mamples, Crosier staves and Miters: not with sundry such sottish ceremonies,
and foolish gestures, as have bin used heretofore, in the creating of popish
Bishops and Priests, greasy shauelings, and Idolatrous Massemongers: but
simplye and plainly, with laying on of hands, and with prayer. And for this
cause, my Lord has thought it convenient, at this time, not to ordain the
Ministers secrety in his Closet, as has been wickedly practiced of others
heretofore: but, to bring them into the face of the congregation, to the end
that we altogether, might, with one heart and one voice, pray unto the Lord
of the Harvest, that he will make them profitable Laborers in his Harvest.
And now therefore, dear brethren, let us not accoumpt this business, A
Spectacle to be gazed upon, but let us all with one accord, lift up our
minds unto the Father of Heaven, thorough the merits and intercession of his
welbelooued son Jesus Christ. Let us pray unto the Lord of the Harvest, that
he will grant not only to these, which are now to be sent forth, but also,
to all us which are sent already, the grace of his holy and comfortable
spirit, Luke. 24.49.
that he will endew us with power from an high: that he will so power out upon
us, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, Cor. 4.3.4. Ephe. 6.19.
that we may know the myseryes of his will, that he will so open unto us the
door of utterance, that we may bouldly publish the secret of the Gospel, that
we may with discretion, wisely, painefully, faithfully and dilligently, feed
the flock of Christ, which he has purchased with his blood, so that no
unthankfulness of the world may discourage us or drive us from the performing
of our duty, that we may fulfill our Ministry, Colos. 4.17. 1. Tim. 4.16.
and continue in doctrine: not to put our hands to the Plough and then to
look back again: as many in these our days, preach dilligently for a time,
while they have nothing, but when they have gotten good livings, then the fat
^ennes lay no Eggs. For, if we thus look back again, Luke. 9.62.
then we have our judgment denounced against us by Christ him self: that, we
are not fit for the kingdom of God. Let us also pray unto God that he will
root out all ravening Wolves, all Hierlings, Timeseruers, and dombe Dogs, 2.
These. 3.1. Psa. 51.18.
which hinder the course of the Gospel, that he will give his word free passage,
and build up the walls of Jerusalem, that, he will give unto us all the spirit
of sanctification, that, we may let our light so shine before men, Math. 5.16.
that they may see our good works and glorifye our Father in Heaven: that, so
we may labor with both hands, in the Harvest of the Lord, with exhortation
and conversation, with life, and doctrine, whereby there may be plenty, of
pure spiritual Wheat, to the lawde and praise of God, and great heaps of
true believers, to be gathered into the Barnes of everlasting joys. And
finally, that, he will bless all Schools of Learning, with increase in all
godly knowledge: and grant unto all Students, that, they may always have his
fear before their eyes, and make this the chief end of all their Studyes, the
glory of his holy name, the profit of the Church, and the maintenance of the
common wealth, whereby the number of true Laborers may be increased: for, the
Harvest is great, and the Laborers are but few.

And thus good people, that I may now draw to an end, ye have heard out of
this charge, given by our Savior Christ unto his seventy Disciples, all such
profitable Lessons as my slender Tallent would suffer me, at this time, to
deliver unto you. Much more might be spoken hear, Math. 21.22. Ephe 3.12. Iam.
1.6. Hebr. 4.16. Luke. 11.9.10
of the manner how we ought to pray to the Lord of the Harvest: that, we must
pray in faith, grounded upon Gods promises, with full assurance that our
request shall be granted, and that he will not forsake his church: and again,
that, we should be touched inwardly, Romans 8.26. John, 4.24. 1. Ioh. 5.14.
Psalm. 25.1.
with the want of the thing that we desire, and therefore, that we pray in
spirit and truth: and in heart, lament as well the small number of true and
faithful Laborers, as also the great abundance of Wolves and Hierlings,
Luke. 18.1. Romans 12.12. 1. These. 5.17. Colos. 4.2.
and that we ought to continue in prayer although we have not our requests at
the first, but that Thieves and murderers do daily creep in more and more,
and that we must pray only, John. 1^.13. 1. ^im. ^.5. 1. John 2.^. Math. 3.17.
for the merits and intercession of Jesus Christ, who is only the mediator
betwixt God and Man, in whom the Father ir well pleased: that, the Flock may
not perrishe, for which he shed his blood: Psalm. 50.15. Iam. 1.5.
and finallye, that, we ought to direct our prayers only to the Lord of the
Harvest: who is only able to hear us, Joel. 2.52. Acts. 10.26. Apoc. 19.10.
Romans 1.25.
and only of power to help us, and not to any Saint or Angel in Heaven,
ascribing that to the Creature, which is due unto the Creator, who be blessed
for ever and ever. But because these matters require a larger discourse, then
the weakness of my voice will now permit me to utter, I have thought good,
rather, to pass them over breefely, then by continuing my speech, either to
weary you and my self, or to withhould you any longer, from a far more learned
exhortation, which shall immediately be given you. The Lord of his infinite
mercy give us grace so to lay up these profitable Instructions, in our hearts,
that as we have heard them attentively, so we may bring forth fruit
accordingly, that we of the Ministry, may with all wisdom and discretion,
feed the Flocks committed to our charge, that we may labor so dilligentlye,
faithfullye, and paynefully, in the work of the Lord: that, no
unthankfulness of the world, may drive us which have now put our hands to the
Plowe, to look back again: that, we may take heed unto our selves, and to
our doctrine, and continue therein, whereby we may save our selves, and those
that hear us: that, we may not gather with the one hand and scatter with the
other hand, but labor with both hands, with word and life, as well by our
agreeing together with brotherly love, and gooing hand in hand together, in
the work of the Lord, as also, by all integrity, holiness and pureness of
living least while we preach unto others (...) selves become reprobates. And
the (...) ^e out the dew of his holy spirit, (...) you that are the hearers,
that the seed which we saw amongst you, may neither (...) out of your hearts
by Satan, as the seed by the high way side, is devoured by the Powles of the
air, nor choked with the Briars and Brambles of voluptuous living, and the
Thornie cares of this world, nor burnt up with the heat of per^ion: but that,
it may battle, as in good ground, and bring forth fruit an hundred foulde:
that so ye may be a plentiful Harvest unto the Lord not bringing forth the
Tares of sin and wickedness, but in the fruit of good works, aunswerable
to that husbandry, which the Lord has bestowed upon you. And the Lord pardon
both in you and in us, all our offenses, and all our sins, so especially our
dull spirits in prayer, and give grace hereafter, both to Pastoure and to
people, that we may pray earnestly from the heart unto the Lord of the Harvest,
to send forth Laborers into his Harvest, that so we may be taught, and so
we may live in this world, that at the last day, when we shall appear
before the Throne of Christ, the Angels of God may gather us, not as the
wicked, which shall be collected as faggots, and cast into the Fire, but as
pure Wheat which is gathered into the Barnes of everlasting rest, that we may
inherit the heavenly Jerusalem, the Land of Canaan flowing with Milk and
Honey. where there shall be no more Tares nor Weeds, nor Thorns, nor
Thistles, nor heat of Sun to parche, nor storms, nor tempests, but we
shall remain (for ever) a glorious Harvest unto the Lord, where there shall
be no more hunger, nor thirste, nor cold, nor sickness, nor temptation, nor
torment, nor myserie, nor mischife, nor envy, nor malice, nor grief, nor
pain, but the Lord shall wipe away all tears from our eyes, where we shall
enjoy such joys, as eye never saw, ear never hard, neither ever could enter
into the heart of man To the which joys, the eternal God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, both happylye and speedely, bring us all, for the mearites
of his dear Son our most merciful Savior: to whom with the Father and the
Holy Ghost, three parsons and one true and euerlyuing god be all honor,
glory, majesty, power and Dominion, both now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
The Printer, to the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, if thou find any faults escaped in the Printing, either in
mistaking of any Note in the Margent, or otherwise, I beseech thee not to
impute them to the Author, for that he was absent at the time of the imprinting
hereof, but only to the Printers necligence: who humbly requesteth thee with
thy Pen to amend them, as occasion shall require.

HILLARIVS, contra Auxentium Arrianum.
Primum, miserari licet nostrae aetatis laborem, et praesentium temporum
opiniones praesentes ingemiscere quibus patrocinari Deo humana creduntur, et ad
tuendam Christi ecclesiam, ambitione seculari laboratur. Oro vos Episcopos, qui
hoc vos esse creditis, quibusnam suffragijs ad praedicandum Euangelium Apostoli
vsi sunt? quibus adiuti potestatibus Christum praedicauerunt ge^tesque fere
omnes, ex idolis ad Deum transtulerunt? Anne aliquam sibi sumere^t ex patatio
dignitatem hymnum Deo in carcere inter catenas post flagella cantantes? Edictis
ne Regis Paulus cum in Theater spectaculum ipse estet Christo ecclesiam
congregabat? Nerone se aut Vespasiano aut Decio patrocinantibus tuebatur quorum
in nos odijs confessio diuinae pietatis effloruit? Illi manu atque opere se
alentes, inter caenacula secretaque coeuntes, vicos, castella, gentesque fere
omnes terram, maria contra senatus consulta et regum edicta peragrantes claues
regni caelorum, non habebant? An non manifesta se tum Dei virtus contra odia
humana porrexit? cum tanto magis Christus praedicaretur, quanto magis
praedicari inhiberetur? At nunc (proh dolor) diuinam fidem suffragia
commendant, inopsque virtutis suae Christus dum ambitio nomini suo conciliatur
arguitur, terret exiliis et carceribus ecclesia, credique sibi cogit quae
exiliis et carceribus est credita, pendet ad dignationem communica^tium quae
persequentium est consecrata terrore diligique se gloriatur a mundo quae
Christi esse non pot^ nisi came mundus odisset.

CYRIL. in Ioh lib. 5. cap. 12.
Idiotae et simplices caelum rapuint, nos autem doct cum scientiis nostris ad
inferna demergimur, qui scilicet nos inflant and non a difi^no.

HIERON. ad Nepotianum.
Non confundant opera tua sermonem tuum, ne cum in ecclesia loqueris, tacitus
quilibet respondeat cur ergo haec quae dicis ipse non facis*

Idem in primum ad Titum. Tom. 9.
Qua liberate peccantem corripere potest, cum tacitus ipse sibi respondeat
eadem se admisisse quae corripit?

BERNARD. de conuers. ad Clericos. cap. 29.
Curritur passim ad sacros ordines and reuerenda ipsis quoque spiritibus
Angelicis Ministeria, sine reuerentia, sine consideratione, in quibus regnat
auaritia, ambitio imperat dominatur superbia.

Idem Paulo ante. cap. 27.
Vae Ministris infidelibus qui nondum reconciliati, reconciliationis alienae
negotia apprehendunt, v^ filijs irae qui se ministros gratiae profitentur.

AT LONDON Printed by Richard Ihones, and John Charlewood. 1582.


