An EXHORTATION TO THE SCOTTS to conform themselves to the honorable
expedient and godly union between the two realms of England and Scotland,
dedicated to Edward duke of Somerset by James Harryson.

LONDON. PRINTED by Rich. Grafton 1547.

TO the right high and mighty prince, Edward, Duke of Somerset, Etle of
Hertford, Viscount Beauchamp, lord Seymour, Governor of the person of the
Kings Majesty of England, and Protector of all his Realms, Dominions and
Subjects, his lieuetenaunt general of all his armies, both by land and by
sea, Tresore^ and Earl Marshall of England, Governor of the Isles of Gernsey
and Gersey, and knight of the most noble order of the Garter: James Harryson
Scottisheman wishes health, honor, and felicity.
Calling to mind (as I do often) most excellent Prince, the civil discencion
and mortal enemitie, between the two Realms of England and Scotland, it
brings me in much marueill, how between so nere neighbors, dwelling with in
one land, compassed within one sea, alied in blood, and knitte in Christ's
faith, such unnatural discord should so long continue. Unnatural, I may
well call it, or rather a Civil war, where brethren, kynsmen or countrymen
be divided, and seek ye blood of each other: a thing detestable before God,
horrible to the world, and pernicious to the parties, and no less strange in
the iyes of reasonable men, then if the lymmes and members of man's body,
should fall out within them selfs, as the hand to hurt the foot, or the foot
the hand. If any utility or gain should grow thereby, it were the less
maruail, but when there does nothing ensue, but such fruit as war brings
furthe, which is fackyng of tounes, subversion of holds, murder of men,
rauishine^t of women, slaughter of old folk and infantes, burning of houses
and corn, with hunger and pestilence, two buddes of the same tree: and finally,
the utter ruin of the whole kingdom, I wonder that eemo^gest so many
pollitique rulers as be, and have been in both realms, the nuschief so long
spied, the remedy has not yet be sought. Who is so blind that does not see
it, or who so hard hearted, that does not pity it? I omit here to speak of
the great affliccio^s and misery, which Scotland has sustained by wars
in times passed, a matter over long to be rehearsed, and yet to great to be
forgotten. But to come to later time, what has been done within these six
years, sith the wars were reuined, how the country has been over run,
spoiled and heried by Englishemen on the one side and by our own warremen or
rather robbers on the other side (to speak nothing of the plague of God) it
would grieve any heart, to think. If this misery fell only upon the mouers
and mainteiners of such mischief, it were less to be lamented, but they sit
safe at home, and keep holy day, when the feldes lie full of their bodies,
whose deaths they most cruelly and vuchristia^ly have procured. If
Ede^brough, Lies, Louthian, Mers or Tiuidale had tongues to speak, their
loud complainte would perse the deaf ears. But what needs spethe, when
their iyes may se plain enough, what their deuillish hearts have devised. This
misery is much to be sorowed and more to be sorowed, then their wickedness to
be detesied, which have kyndled the fire, and still late on brandes to feed
the same. In whom if either respect of Religion, which they profess, or zeal
of Justice, whereunto they are sworn, either fear of God, or love to their
country, did any thing work, they would refuse no trauaill, nor torment of
body nor mind, no, nor death (if it were offered) for ye sauegarde of them,
whose distruccion they have wrought. And these be only two sorts, the one
is of such, as either for fear of their Hypocrisy to be reveled, or evil
gotten possessions to be transiated would have no peace nor concord: the other
be such as for a lawelesse liberty and doing wrong unpunished, would pull
out their heddes from all law and obedience. Such and none other be
adversaries to our cause. If these. if. sorts (I say) should feel but half
the misery, which the poor people be driven to suffer, they would not be
half so hasty to ryng alarmes. These be they which professyng knowledge,
abuse the ignorance of the nobility and commonaltie, to ye destruccio^ of
both, having peace in their mouths, and all rancor and vengeance in their
hearts, pretending religion, persuade rebellion, preaching obedience, procure
al disobedience, semyng to forsake all thing, possess all thing, calling
themselfes spiritual, are in deed most carnal, and reputed heddes of the
Church, be the only shame and slander of the Church. If these people would
as earnesty trauail for the concord of both realms, as they endeavor with
toothe and naill to the contrary, these mischeues aforesaied, should either not
have happened, or else at the least, not so long have continued: by whose lure,
so long as the nobles and commons of Scotland be led, I am in despair of any
amity or friendship between these two realms. GOD bring their falsehed once to
light, and turn their iniquity upon their own heddes.

BUT to my purpose, seeing the mischief so great, the aucthors so many, the
mainteinaunce so strong, and so few that seek amendment: in declaracio^ of
mine earnest, zeal and unfeigned affeccion toward my country, I in default
of other, put my self in prease. And though least able, yet most willing and
desirous of the honor and quiet of both realms, which cause, seeing it
correspondeth to virtue and godliness, me thought it convenient to seek for
the same, a patron virtuous and Godly, whereby your grace entered my
remembrance, whose procedynges hitherto have made manifest to the world, what
an ardent zeal ye bear, to thaduauncement of all verity and truth: So that
all men conceive certain hope that by your high wisdom, policy, and other
Princely virtues, the storms of this tempestious world, shall shortly come
to a calm. And seeing God has not only called you to the height of this
estate, but so prospered your grace in all affairs, both of war and peace, as
your acts be comparable to theirs, which bear most fame: your grace cannot
merit more toward GOD or the world, then to put your helpyng hand to the
furtheraunce of this cause. Hereby shall you declare an incomparable service to
the kings Majesty of England, which being young of years, is yet ripe in
virtue, to govern any kingdom, whose excellent gifts of nature, and
inclinacion to all Godliness considered, the world is in opinion, that he
shall be nothing inferior to the great honor and glory of his father, whose
praises I over pass, fyndyng my self unable to express them in any degree.
But since your grace, as a person most elect, is called to the gouernan^ce and
tuicio^ of his person, and proteccion of his realms and dominions, all men's
expectacion is, that having so apt a moulde to work upon, you shall so frame
his you the with verteous precepts, Godly examples, and sincere educacion, as
he shall prove a King equal with those, whom old histories, do most commend.
Wherein your graces laud cannot want, being so worthy a governor of so noble
a king: and much more if by your policy, diligence, and circumspeccion, he
shall at his perfect years be restaured to the whole isle of Britayn, whereunto
as he is justly entitled: So God the protector of al just causes, shall bring
your atte^ptes therein to good success. For the furtheraunce whereof, I have
declared mine opinion in writing, which, with humble heart. I offer and
dedicate unto your good grace: not as a gift worthy so great an estate, but
yet not unmeet for my purpose, ne for the time and occasion present, wherein
though I neither persuade my cause so pithihely, ne open it so lively, as to so
weighty a matter is requisite: Yet it may serve either for a testimonye of
mine honest meaning, or minister occasion to better learned men, to dilate this
argument more largely, whereby all war and hostility may cease and peace
and concord take place. GOD the very aucthor of peace, ever preserve your
grace, to the increase of the same, and furtheran^ce of all Godliness: and
grant to the Kings Majesty of England his righteous possession of the whole
monarchy of Britayn, to thaduaunceme^t of Gods glory, comfort to his lieges,
and confusion of his enemies.

English coat of arms DIEV ET MON DROVT



AN EXHORTACION
The cause where of I treat being so weighty, the discourse so large, and my
wit and cunnyng so small to set it furthe, I might well be discoraged to
enter so great a ground: but that love to my country on the one side, and
desire of concord and quietness on the other side, move me to speak, hopyng
that the honesty of the matter shall supply the rude handelyng, and the plain
verity, to stand instead of eloquence and cunnyng. For like as in an evil
cause, much art and conueyaunce must be used, before it can appear good: even
so in a cause true, honest, and righteous, there needs no subtle persuasions
or finesse of words: but how much the plainer so much the better, and how
much ye more eloquent, so much the more suspicious. For truth is sufficient of
her self, and needs no colors, no more then natural beawty, needs of
paintyng. Taking this for my foundation, I may the more boldly proceed
without fear of offense, seeing my cause is such, as all good men will
further, all wise men favor, and all Godly men defend, as that which being
enbraced, shall do good to many, and hurt to none, and being neglected, shall
hurt a multitude, and avail no man, tendyng no less to the commodity of the
adversaries, then of the favorers. Thus the ground being so true, the occasion
so honest, and the querell so righteous, there wants nothing but one that
could set the same forth accordyngly. And seeing such as can best, list
not, and that ought most, will not, and that would faynest, dare not take this
universal cause in hand, I being simple unlearned, and most barayn of all
orators art and persuasion, yet armed with truth moved with honesty, and
provoked by love, toward God and my country, (as David against Golias) enter
the field against the mighty Giauntes, enemies of concord and unity,
desiryng all my countrymen of Scottande (whose cause I now specially entreat)
to give me pacient hearing, whilst I suade them to that, which shall be
acceptable to God, commendable to the world, joyful to their fre^des, hateful
to their enemies, profitable to all parties, and to none so much as to
themselfes.

TO ground my cause upon truth (as I promised) I will set my foundation, upon
the infallible truth of Gods word, taking this text for my purpose. Omne
regnu^ in se diuisum desolabitur: that is to say: every kingdom divided in it
self, shall be brought to desolacion. If this sentence be well marked, and the
person of the speaker considered, I shall not need to be long in perswadyng
you to believe it. The words be true: for he that spoke them, cannot lie,
which is Christ himself the aucthor of al truth and verity. But though Christ
had not spoken them, let us se whether common reason does not affirm them,
and the experience of all realms and countries, in all times and ages, has not
approved them. And to fet our examples not out of strange countries, look
well upon the Chronicles of this island of Britain, and consider the estate
thereof, from the beginning, and compare them, with the histories of other
nations, and you shall not lightly hear or read of any one country sith the
worlds creacion, more invaded, wasted, and destroyed, then this I stand, ne
of people more often, ne more curelly spoiled, exiled, or afflicted, then the
inhabiters thereof, and all by division and discord: the seeds whereof, being
laid in by the devil as powder under a wall, after it once took fire, did so
terribly shake the fou^dacio^s of their common weal, that it riued a sunder
their Kingdom and monarchy, and diuidyng it into parts, brought the whole
at last to ruin and desolacion, which has not been fully recovered to this
day, nor in my iud gement like to be, so long as the islande is divided into
two parts, and known by two names, that is to say, England and Scotland,
and under two several governors. The cause whereof though it may chiefly
be ascribed to the just vengeance of God, provoked with the sins of the
people, as Gildas witnesses: yet is it clear that the only mean thereof, was
discord and division, among the Insulanes, whereby it came to pass, whylest
every one striued, all were over comen, and made an easy prey to strange
nations. For although outward enemies, upon tyranny and conquest, as the
Romans, or else expulsed from their countries, and driven to seek new
dwellynges as the Pictes, or allured with ye fertility of ye soil as the
Scotts inhabityng, the north parts of Irelande, invaded this islande: Yet
could those people never have kept quiet possession, ne reign so long as
they did, but through division and discord among the Britaynes, which being
stiff necked against God, and ingrate each to other (as the said aucthor
writes) by their demerites, were not only overcome with outward invasions,
but finally lost their name and, Empire, whereby the inhabitauntes being mixed
with strangers, have ever sith been vexed with intestine wars and civil
discord to the irremediable ruin and desolacion thereof, until it shall please
Gods goodness to have mercy on the people, and to reduce the islande to the
first estate, to one Monarchy, under one king and governor, as it was in the
Britons time. But if God of his goodness, without our deserts has in these
latter days, provided that blessed mean and remedy for the glory of his
name, and for our wealth and commodity: and we for our part, either of
stubburnesse will not, or of wilfulness list not, thankefully to receive his
synguler grace and benefit so freely offered, what then may be thought in
us? Ought not then all good men think (as they do in deed) that all the
mischief, effusion of blood, hunger and other miseries ensuyng of war, fall
upon us morthely and by deserte. Yes verily: And surely in this part, I must
desire you my countrymen, both of pardon and pactence, when I shall disclose
the cause of this mischief, and the long continuance thereof, to come rather
of us, the^ of the contrary part, which judgment (God is my witness)
proceeds neither of adulacion to English men, nor of malice to any estate, but
as my conscience moves me, and as the truth to al wisemen may appear.

BUT before I will stir that unsavory sink of treso^ and treachery, as one
that intends to make a great lepe, I must be forced to run back to
fetch my course, wherefore, omittyng the mattiers of the time present, I must
repete the estate of this island from the beginning, and what were the causes
of this division at the first, and by what ways it has continued from time
to time, and how it is yet norished, to the end that upon the causes opened,
and the persons detected, that be workers thereof, the remedies may be the
sooner found, and simple people beware of those, that with feigned fables and
lies, have led them long blindfold, and so would keep them, to the perdicion
both of their souls and bodies, and then shall we se, whether this saying of
Christ before recited, may not be well verefied in us of Britayne. In the
discourse whereof, because the right and title whereby the kings of England
claim to be superior Lords of Scotland, is incide^tly touched: I will use for
the more part the testimonies either of Scottish chronicles, or foreign
writers, and little of the English, unless where both Scottishe and English
do agree, or where by apparaunt reason, the truth stands more on the one side,
then on the other: and all to aduoyde the common cauillacion of such, as say,
how the Kings of England, prove their title to Scotla^de, only by English
aucthors.

THE opinion of most writers, and specially of Latins (at whom, as well for
auncientie, as indiffere^cie, I take my ground) is, that this islande of
Britayn, which co^teineth both realms of England and Scotland (as I said
before) was at the first, called Albion, that is to say the white land,
having that name Ab albis rupibus, that is to say, of the White Rocks and
Cleues, which appear upon the sea costs of thesaied islande, even as we at
this day call the country from whence the Brasill wood comes, Brasilia:
which opinion is more probable then the devise of a late Welshe Poet,
ymaginyng how it was called Albion, of one Albina, eldest of the fifty
daughters, of one Dioclesian king of Syria, which having killed fifty kings,
being their husbands, were for the same exiled. And after long wanderyng in ye
seas, arrived at last in this Islande, where they ingendered with spirits,
and brought forth.l. Giau^tes, which were Gog Magog and his fellows, with such
poetical fables, not only without good foundation, but also mere contrary to
all ancient stories, and welnere against al possibility of nature. But as the
be ginnyng of all nations for the more part be fabulous and uncertain, some
fetchyng their pedegre from the Gods, and some from the devils, as the Greeks
from Jupiter, the old Gauls from Pluto God of hell: so the better opinion,
as well of the latre writers, as also of Gildas a Britayn is, that this island
was inhabited from the beginning, by those that were borne in the same, and
afterward as the world multiplied, grew unto a great people, and from a
people unto a Kingdom, and governed by Kings, as by stories is to be seen,
of whom the first that we find, was one Brutus, which, whether he came out
of Italy or not, is not much material, but certain it is, that such a one
reigned, and was first King of the whole islande: which beginning of the
people, does make much more with the honor and glory of this islande, then to
beduce a pedigree, either from an outlaw of Italy, or a tirauntes sister out of
Egypt, as Welshe and Scottishe Poets, have phantastically feigned. For if we
account nobility by auncientie of years, and length of time (as some use now
a days) what can be more ancient, more noble, more high, or honorable, then
to have a beginning beyond all memory, and in process of years, from small
families, to grow into a great Monarchy and kingdom. In which point, the
old latins of whom the Romans descended, set a great part of their glory,
calling themselfes Aborigines, that is to say: a people from the beginning.

BRUTUS the first King of this whole Islande, by whom it was called Britayne,
and the people thereof Britaynes, reigned the year after the creacion of the
world, four thousand, C C. and, xlii. and as writers affirm had three
sons, Locrinus, Albanactus, and Camber, among who^ he divided the whole
island, assignyng ye supreme empire with ye greatest and most fruitful part
toward the Southe, unto Locrinus his eldest son, of whom it was called
Logres, and now England. To the second son, named Albanactus, he assigned
another part toward the North, which at this day the Scotts possess: by
which Albanactus, the country was called Albania, and the people, Albanactes,
as shall be showed hereafter. The.iii. part, liyng West, and toward the seas of
Gaul, which now is called wales, he gave to Ca^ber his yo^gest son, by
who^ it was called Cambria, and the people, Cambrians, as they call themselves
to this day.

AND though the island was thus parted, between the three brethren, yet the
supreme power and kingdom, remained always in the eldest: to whom the other
two were obedient, as to a superior king. The prose whereof, if any be so
curious to require, I answer, that the same histories, which speak of this
particion, declare in likewise of the subieccion: So that admittyng them in the
one, they must likewise be admitted in ye other. For ye more corroboracio^
whereof, the histories, both of Brito^s and Romans agree, that the Islande was
under kings at the beginning: which as they were called Kings of Britayne,
so was ye general name of the people, Brytons, neither was there any other
state or Kingdom in the Islande at those days, but only of Britons. In so
much, that the Romans, being most diligent reporters of the names of Princes
by the^ subdued, and countries conquered, whereas they make particular mencio^
of diverse kings of the Britains and of su^dery cities in Britain, yet do
they never name any people called Scotts, ne make mention of any such
Princes, as is pretended to have ruled over the^ which, if they had been so
glorious, both in war and peace, as they be set furthe: how should their
acts have been hidden to the Romans, which contended with all men for glory,
for thirst whereof, they sometimes sought enemies at ye worlds end. And
though it may be said, that Caesar and diverse other never came so far as
Scotla^de, by a great distaunce: yet, how could it be, ye Julius Agricola,
which, after the Southe parts of Britain was made a province to ye Romans
invaded unto ye Orcades, which is the farthest part of Scotland: and
after.viii. years wars there at the foot of the mount Grampius, now called
Gra^zebe^, fought against Galgacus with ten. M. Britains, whom he there
ouerthrewe: how (I say) could he be ignorant of the Scotts or of their
wars: So that it must be granted, that at those days, either they were not
in Britayne, or if they were in Britayne, their name and power was nothing
such, as we pretend. For who so diligently considers the course of the said
stories, shall well se, ye neither Pictes ne Scotts had any dominion in
Britayn, until about the declinacion of the Romain Empire: and that the Pictes
entered into Britayn before the Scotts, in the tune of king Marius, which was
about the year of Christ.lxxij. After which time, with the help of the
Irishe Scotts, they vexed the Britains with continual incursions. These
Pictes were a people of Scithia, now called Tartarie, and driven out of their
country, sought herberough emonges Irish Scotts, who being nothing glad of
such gestes, procured them to set foot in Brytayne as they did in deed, and
there continued many yers after. This people were called Pictes, because instead
of garments, they used to paint their skynnes with sundery figures of beasts
and birds, having collers of iron about their necks, and girdelles of the
same, about their wastes, and specially the nobility of them, which esteemed
the same for a great point of bravery. This does Herodia^ write in the life
of Seuerus thempecor, which came into Britayne, and repaired the wall,
begone before by Adrian his predecessor, by which wall, the Province of the
Romans was divided, from the residue of Britain, and was made first to
resist the incursions of such Britaynes as they accounted, savage and
barbarous. The ruynes of this wall, are to be seen at this preset: wherefore it
seems to me, that before the time of thesaied Adria^, the name, neither of
Pictes ne Scotts, was never known in Britayne, so that if they had any
possession there before, they came to it, rather by stelth then by any open
force, or conquest. I speak not this to minishe the honor and glory of my
country, nor to deface ye nobility, or the valeau^t acts of the Scottishe
kings, but to show that the first inhabitors of this isla^d, were al
Britains, more then.vi. C. years before Scotts had any Kingdom there, and that
they had no such original, as some have phantasied, but yt they are a people
mixed with Britaynes and come of Britaynes. In prose whereof, it is said, that
the Arms of Scotla^de, borne at this date (the trace of the flower deluce
except, which was late put in) is the self same arms, that Brute bare: yet
will I not affirm that Scotts be mere Britaynes, or English men mere
Britaynes, but that the more part of both people be descended of Britaynes.
For though the Islande has been often invaded by sundry nations as Romans,
Pictes, Scotts Saxons, Danes, and lastely by Normaynes: yet does it not
follow, yt the whole blood of Britaynes was so extincte thereby, but that there
must great number remain in every part of the island, whereby it may be sated
yt the race of the^ is mixte, but not merely fordoen and extirped: for no
country can be so invaded by strangers, yt the whole race of the old
inhabiters, can be worn all out, but that the substance or more part, shall
still remain. As for example, Italy has been invaded by Goths, Vandales,
Honnes, and other barbarous nations, can it therefore be said that the whole
Romain blod is utterly extinct? no verily: for of necessity, ye stock does
still abide, though not wholly, yet in the more part. And likewise of England
and Scotland, I doubt not to say, and am able to prove, that the great part
of both realms, is come of ye old Britayns. And though me have been mixed
with foreyn nations, whereby the Britayne tongue is changed and out of use,
pet does the blood and generaci^o remain: and as for the Irish toungue, which
they speak in the North parts of Scotland, does no more prove them to be
mere Irishe, then the English toungue used in all the South parts of
Scotland, proves the people there to be English.

BUT to resort to our purpose, how can it stand with reason, that the Pictes
and Scotts, two strong nations should make great wars, should so often
infest and vex both Brytains and Romans, ye and overcome the^ and at length
stablish two kingdoms in the Island, and no remembrance thereof found in any
story, either of the Britains or Romans, nor in any other autentique or
approved Cronicle. For Caesar Tacitus, Ptholomeus and Plinius, Romayne aucthors
(though we speak of no mo) and on the other side, Gildas, most ancient
writer of the Brytaines, though every where in their histories, they make
special mention of all the people, then dwelling in Britayne, yet speak they
nothing of those two nations, which if they were chief and stro^gest (as our
writers pretend) how could their names be pretermitted of so many aucthors,
whereby one of these two things must be granted, that either they were not
then come into Britayne, or else (if they were come) they remained subjects to
the Britaynes, according to the English history. Against which though it may be
objected, that Britayne was not always from the beginning, under one King or
one Ruler, but was governed somwhiles by one, and somwhiles by mo, (as the
Romayne stories declare) whereby there should be no such Monarchy and
kingdom, nor any such order prescribed by Brute, as the English stories
specify: yet does that make nothing to prove, the Scotts not to be come of
Britaynes, ne enforces any title for them, to be no subjects to England: for
it may stand together, that the estate of Britayne was such at the beginning,
as the English cronicles mention: and as in time all things change, so by
occasions ensuyng, the first order might be broken, and from one intier
Kingdom, to be divided into parts, as it should seem, that it was about the
coming of Caesar, who writes, that at his arryuall in Britayne, the cities by
common assente, elected Cassibilanus, to their King, whereby it may be
gathered, that the Monarchy thereof, was the^ broken by some faccion within the
Islande, which caused it to be a more easy prey to enemies. And this verefieth
my words spoken before: that division and discord of the people brought this
Islande first, into subjection of other nations. This is confirmed by the
Romayn stories, but namely by Cornelius Tacitus, saiynge that Britaynes at the
first were under Kings, and afterward by faccions and sedicions of Princes
and great men, were so divided in the^selfs, that to resist an universal peril,
scarsely two or three countries at the most, would agree together: so fighting
in parts, at last the whole was overcome. And by this mean was Britayne
first subdued, and made tributarie to the Romans, under whom it continued in
form of a proui^ce, until the time of great Constantine the Emperor, by
whom it was restored to liberty: yet was it not so brought in subieccion all this time, but that there were for the most part, kings in Britayne, as our
stories testify, and likewise the Romayne: wherein we read of Aruiragus,
whom Iu uenal writing to Nero, signifies to be a King by these words:
Detaemone Brita^no, excidet Aruiragus, that is to say: Aruiragus shall fall
from the stem of Britayne. And after him, of Lucius, ye first christian King,
who^ Elu therius bishop of Rome, in one of his epistles, calls king of
Britaynes, and so of Coelus with diverse other. Wherefore admitting the state of
Britayn to have been such at the beginning, as the English story affirms,
(which we must admit, because the contrary appears not) though there
happened some interrupcio^ of the Monarchy by the Romans, or otherwise: yet
when the people atteyned their liberty, and were governed by Kings of their
own: we must presume, that they obeyed them and their laws, and the people
to hold their lands in like course, as was ordained at the first: whereof it
must follow, yt if Scotts were in Britayn at those days, they knowledged ye
kings of Britayn for their superiors, according to the stories. In which point
I will not much stycke, consideringe the name of Scotts was not then known,
as I said before. And though our writers dream diverse things to the contrary,
we cannot admit their bare allegacio^s in disprofe of so many stories, of so
grave writers, in who^, as there is less suspicion of parcialitie, so was
there more certainty of knoweledge, then in the other, which were unborn
after them, by a great number of years. But admit no such order to have been
prescribed in government of the kingdom, as the English story alleges:
and though there had been, yet the interrupcion to be sufficient cause, to
break the same: and admit the Scotts to have been then in Britayne as they
were not: Let us se whether we cannot unite these people by another way. It is
certain that after the Romans had reduced the South and West parts of Britayn
into a province, as me^ desirous to enlarge their empire never content with
part, till they had the whole, they invaded the North parts of Britayne, and
ceased not, till they came to the Orcades, and so in fine, brought the whole
islande in subieccion: their stories herein be plain.

AND no less plain is it, that Constancius the^peror, who died at York,
married Helene, called saint Helene, daughter and heir to Coyll king of the
Britayns, of whom he begatte the great Constantyne, afterward Emperor, not
only of Britayn, but also of ye whole world:in whose person, both titles,
as well that, which the Romans had by conquest, as also that, which his mother
Helene had (as heir of Britayn) were united and knit together, and he without
al doubt or controversy, was very Emperor of al Britayn, whereby the island
after long servitude, was at last (as it were by Gods providence) restored to
his former liberty and honor, themperor being begotten in Britayn, son of
her, that was heir of Britayne, borne in Britayne, and create Emperor in
Britayne. Now if Scotts were then in Britayn (as our writers allege) then were
they subjects to Constantine, because the stories be evident, that he had al
Britayn in possession, whereunto whether he came by Helene his mother, or by
Co^sta^cius his father forces not much: for it suffiseth for our purpose, to
prove yt al Britayn, was under one Emperor, and being under one Emperor, then
was Scotland and England but one Empire. In contirmacio^ whereof, besides the
testimony of old histories, there be two notable things yet observed in
England, by all the kings successively, even sith ye said Constantine. The
one is yt they wear a close crown Imperial, in token that the land is an
empire free in it self, and subiett to no superior but GOD. The other is, that
in all their wars, they bear a banner with a red Cross, for their ensign,
in memory of that Cross, which appeared to themperor Constantine gooyng to
battaill, when this voice was heard: Constantine, in hoc signo vinces, that is
to say, with this ensign thou shall prevail. These two monumentes of honor
and religion in Britayn, were received from that noble emperor.

EVTROPIVS witnesses, that Britayne rested in liberty, during the life of
Constantyne, who left behind him.iii. sons successors of his Empire,
Constancius, Constans, and Consta^tyne, to whom being youngest, there fell for
his porcio^, Britain Spain, France, and the Orcades. This Constantyne was
after slain in Italye, by whose beathe, the Empire of Britayne came to his
brother Consta^cius which reigned twenty years, in whose blood, it
remained.xxiiij. years after, yt is to say, until the v. year of the ii.
brethren, Gracian and Valentinian, Emperors, what time by favor of the people,
Maximus was creat emperor in Britain. This Maximus as Hector Boctius alleges,
in ye.vij. book of his history, disce^ded of ye blood of great Constantine,
and reigned over the whole isla^de of Britain and the Orcades, seue^tene years
without interrupcio^. And being desirous of more empire, with a great number
of Britains, entered into France, and stewe Gracian the Emperor at Lions, and
forced Valentinian the other brother to flee to Constantinople, for aid of the
Emperor there. Nevertheless (as al worldly things be mutable) his fortune was
to be slain in Italy, leuynge behynd him a son named Victor, who was slain
in France: whereby the state of Britayne, drew every day into worse. It were
long to rehearse the mutacions of things, happening in Britayn, from the time
of great Constantine, unto Valentinian the Emperor, in whose days, the
Empire of Room was invaded with great multitudes of Barbarous nations. And in
his time, did ye Scotts being a nacyon come out of Irela^de (as Gildas
writes) pass over into Britayne, and finding the land destitute of men of
war, which either were all slain by tyrauntes, or waisted by long wars in
other countries, entered the Islond and making league with the Pictes,
prevailed so at length, yt they obtained all ye North part of Britayn in
possession, calling ye country Scotland, and themselfes Scotts. And this was
the third nation yt Invaded this Island: First cominge out of Scithia into
Irelande, and from Irelande into the North parts of Britayne. The Capitayn
and leder of this people (as Beede witnesses) was one Rewda, albeit the late
Scottishe Cronicles fet a much further beginning, which I will touch in his
place. But if we believe Beede, a man for his living and learning, reconed in
the nu^bre of saints, and of ecclcsiasticall writers, called Venerabilis, the
coming of the Scotts into Britayne was not until about ye year of
Christ.cccc. xliij. which was long after the coming of the Pictes: to whose
opinion, though he was a Saxon, I would sooner assent, then to the new fond
fables of our Scottishe Poets, framed upon pha^tasie, without authority
precede^t.

AND for the further proof of this Monarchy, it is read in the time of
Lucius, which was the first christen King of the Britaynes, as is said
before: there were in Britayne.iii. high Prestes, or Bishops, Idolaters, of the
Heathen religion, called Archiflamines, and.xxviii. other inferior Bishops
of the same supersticion, called Flamines: Instead of whom, this godly King,
ordained as many Bishops or Christ's religion, and three Archebishoppes,
placinge the first at London, the second at Yourke, and the third in the city
of Legions, which at this day is called Chester. To the province of Yourke,
there belonged all the North part of Britayne, now called Scotland with the
orcades. And notwitstanding all the mutatio^s, happening in process of years,
yet all the Bishops of those countries, came unto York to beco^secrated of ye
Arch bishop there, and promised obedience unto him, as to their Metropolitan
and head bishop: albeit by occasion of wars, they were su^mewhiles let so
to do. And of latter days, that is to say, in the time of Henry the.ij. King
of England, which was about the year of Christ a.M.C. and.lv. the English
history shows, that Michaell Bishop of Glascow, and after him, Tothadus
Bishop of saint Andrews, were consecrated by Thomas Archbishop of Yourk.
If my cou^treymen believe me not in this point, let them believe the Bulls of
Paschall, Calixte, Honorius, Innocentius, Eugenius and Adrianus, Bishops of
Rome, written to the Bishops of Scotland, so (...) as any of them were
rebel, or would not acknowledge the Archbishop of Yourke, Primate of
Scotland, for their head Bishop. This I allege to show, that the two realms
at the first were not only united in one Empire, but also in one Religion the
superiority whereof, seeing it so long continued in the English side, proves
in that part a certain kind of subieccion in Scotts, which I pass over. But
now having sufficiently alleged to prove, that al we were Britaynes at the
beginning, come of one kind, and living under one Monarchy, broken by
diusion and civil discord, as is showed before: there restethe to disprove the
feigned alligacions of the contrary part, which co^uey you from Pharao, the
tyrant of Egypt. And as it is to conjecture, if their wills might take place,
they would bring you under the servitude of Egypt again. But before I touch
ye argument, according to my promise at ye beginning, I must in part disclose
the aucthors thereof, whose vntrouthes, though I pass over, yet will they
bewrey it them selfs: for it is not unknown what persons they be, that take
upon them to write stories and Cronicles, both in England and Scotland: which
for the more part, be Monks and Friars, such as in name profess Religion,
being in deed the peruerters of all true Religion. These men, issuyng from the
prince of darkness, brougte up in darkness, and maynteined by darkness, seek
nothing so much as to keep the world in darkness, and not without cause: for
if their state should come to light, the people should espy how they are
plants, not planted by the heavenly Father but to be pulled up by ye roots.
Which thing being well perceived by ye most noble king, of immortal memory,
Henry the.VIII. of England, like a prince no less Godly then prudent, cleuyng
in that part to Christ's word, weded out of his realm, those wicked plants,
not only unprofitable to his common wealth, but also enemies to all verity
and true Religion, whose example, if we of Scotland, had the grace to follow, I
would nothing despair of an honorable and Godly concord, between both
realms in short time: and that without such war and effusion of blood, as
this deuillish generation has procured. But to the purpose, these men (I say)
after stha^ was let lose, and had filled ye whole world full of tumult and
sedicio^, ragyng with fire and sword against the Gospel, (which even then
began to give light in Britain) as Oules not apperyng in the day, nesteled
themselves in the night, of that ignorant world, having as mete a time to
crepe into the consciences of the simple Britaynes, as ever Saxons or Danes
had, to invade their la^d and country. So apperyng to them with a visor of
simplicity and holiness, semyng la^bes outwardly, and nevertheless Wolves
inwardly, gat credit of virtue and Godliness: And seeing the Coccle, which
their father Satan had sown among the Corn, so fair coming up, because the
harvest should be weeds, watered the earth, with such abundante showers of
lies and fables, that the wedes ouergrowying ye corn, the cropp was according
to the seed, and with such kind of bread have they fed the silly people,
vtteryng their dreams and muencions, instead of trouthes and verities. For as
Kytes bring furthe no culuers, no more can the father of falshed bring furthe
children of truth, qualis pater talis filius, they then being the impes of so
evil a tree, must of congruence bring furthe fruit, like to them selfs,
which was well seen in those days: For what through mischief and mortality,
raised by them on the one side: And what through preaching lies and
fantasies, on the other side, not only Gods word, but also all other
knowledge, has been obscured: whereof ensued universal ignorance, who, being
joined with error, brought forth an unhappy babe, called contencio^, who^ they
have most te^derly fostered ever since:not only ministryng matter thereof, in
pulpittes and stoles, but also in their stories and chronicles, myngelyng the
same with so many sedicious falshodes, as it is in doubt, whether the lines or
lies be mo in number. And because it were long to rehearse al their lesynges
and vanities, being to many to be well numbered, and to apparaunt to be hidden
(for all be poudered with like peper) yet in the Scottishe story a great part
of their practices is to be seen, and that eue^ at the very beginning, where
at, if they stumble, what shall we judge of the rest. If the matter were only
Poetical, or upon desire to show an ancient beginning, it might happily be
borne and yet scarce in a story, the law whereof, is to affirm nothing that
is false, to hyde nothing that is true, neither to be led with favor, ne
hatered. But seeing the thing is done of a set purpose, for norishyng
division in the two Realms, I cannot over pass it with silence.

GATHELVS son of Cecrops, king of Athens or Argiues, being banished out of
Greece, with certain other fugitives came into Egypt, in the time of the great
tyrant Pharao, which persecuted the children of Israel. In his days, the
Mootes entered into Egypt, and had brought the land unto utter ruin, had not
the king by gods commandment, committed his army unto Moses: But after that
Gathelus was come, and had won a battle against the Moors, Moses and his
company grew out of favor, and were fain to flee out of Egypt into Inde. Then
was Gathelus made lieuetenaunt of Pharaos army, and for his valeau^t service,
obtained Scota the Kings sister in marriage, with all the lands lately taken
from the people of Israel. After the death of this Pharao, reigned his son
Bochoris, which oppressed Gods people with more tyranny, then his father did.
But after ye God had sent great plagues among the Egipcians, Gathelus under
standing by the prophets, that greater were like to follow, forsook Egipte,
and in the year of the creacion of the world.iii.M.vj. C.xliij: He with Scota
his wife their children and servants, Greeks and Egipcians, came out of the
mouth of Nilus, and passing by the sea, called Mediterraneum, took land in
Numidie, and after, he arrived into a part of Spain, then called, Lusitania,
which because of his arriual there, had the name of Portyngale, as one would
say, the port of Gathele.

THIS is a great stomble at the thressholde of the door: for it is plain by
histories, that Lusitania, was not called Portyngale, almost by a M. years,
after this supposed time. But for the better trial, let us examine the
circumstaunces of the person, time and place. And for the person, we will
admit Gathelus to be the king of Athens son, although no such name is found
in the Greek histories, and we will admit Pharao to have a daughter, though
no history, Greek or Egypt, mention of any such. But when we have admitted
the persons, all the doubt is, how we shall couple them in marriage. For
accomptyng the time of Pharaos reign, father of Scota, after ye Hebrews, then
was she in the year of the creacion of the world, two thousand four hundred
years: and by our histories, Gathelus was in the year of the creacion of the
world three thousand six hundred forty and three: which is differente,
twelfe hundred years and more.

THIS being true, here were a very unfit marriage between these two
persons, the Bridegroom being elder then ye Bride, by.xii.C. and.xl. years.
But some wiseman will say, ye folk lived long in those days, yet can they
not deny, but she was to old a maid for so young a bachelar, whereby I can
worse believe, that they had any children, she being of such years. So that
to make this marriage frame, either Gathelus was elder then his father, or she
was younger then her brother by a thousand years at the least. And syns the
time of Abraham, men by course of nature, have not co^ monlie lived much above
a.C. years. And this is over plain to be excused, as a fault of the writer,
seeing the whole course of our history, depends upon ye time. If she then
could be daughter to none of the Pharaoes, no more could he be son to any
of the kings of Athens. And in the time that Gathelus lived, which is alleged
to be in the year of the world.iii.M.vi.C.xliii. there were no kings in
Athens, but it was governed by certain Rulers, as a free estate. If this then
be false in the original, we must judge in the sequel, which is of their
coming into Spain, and of their son Hyber afterward into Irelande, of
whom it is called Hybernia, with all the process of the history, no less
unlikely. For if either the Spa^yardes inhabitinge Galicia, or the Irishe men
that now be, had comme of Greeks or Egyptians, then of likelyhode, some part
of their speech or language, should remain there. The vocables and sou^ des of
which tongues, be as much differente in sound, as the voices of men, and the
noise of dogs. But saying this privilege has been given unto antiquity,
that to make their fame moore high and honorable, they might refer their
beginning to the Gods: and though the same were more like Poets fableis
then sincere histories, yet to be taken for true: So would not I travail so
much in disprofe of these trifles, but because I se, that as they were at the
first invented for division by new diversity of names, so they be continued at
this day for like purposes. Such practices have been used in Italy, between
Guelfes and Gibilines, and in Hollande between Hukeis and Cabellawes, and other
where by new found names, inverted by the children of perdicion, to set us at
division, even as they, by diversity of sects and names are divided from the
unity of Christ's religion. I need not to name them, for those co^panio^s, be
well enough known by their coats and hodes, whom as I do not reprove of
hatered to their persons, no moore do I impugn their histories for envy at
our nation, whose honor if I should not earnestly seek, I might be compted
most unnatural, but that I se what sedicion is sown by over much credit
unto their fables and inuencions, which I suppose has been a great let to
the co^corde, yt all good me^ desire. For saying the beginninges of people
cannot be certainly known, but only unto God, which was before al beginning,
it shall be better to admit some things for true, the contrary whereof cannot
be proved, then to labor in vain, where ye truth cannot be tried. But this
thing which is apparauntelye false, repugnaunte to reason, and not only
against al other histories, but also contrary in it self, yea and against the
scripture, founded upon falsehode, maintained upon malice, and set forth to
the division of two Realms: I thought it no unprofitable labor, to impugn,
lamentinge, that in a Chronicle so exactelic written, and so eloquentelie set
furthe, there should want verity, the chief ground of al history:
whishing unto the aucthor, as much want of malice and affeccion, as he has
plenty of wit and learning. An other argument I gather out of the same
history, where it is confessed, yt after the Britaynes inhabiting Scotland
were expulsed by the Pictes, they with their wifes and children, fled into
Ireland, where they continewed xlv. years together. Duringe which time, by
reason of biynge and selli^g, marriyng, and other trauffique with the Irishe
people, their name and tou^gue was a great part altered and lost. Yet, as our
histories show, the posterity of those people, coming afterward unto ye
possession of their country, to keep in memory of what kind they were come,
called them selfs Realbines, ye is to say: Albines again, for a knowledge (as
it should seem) as well of their kindered, as of their restitutio^ and coming
again: which is a better proof to show us disce^ded of Albanactus, (according
to ye English history) then to say, ye Realbines, is understood, kings of
Albion (as the tra^slator of Boethius history interpretethe. As though it
werlike, that those few, which had put foot, but in the smallest and most
barrain portion of the Isle, should call themselves kings of Albion, when they
neither came in by conquest ne reigned over any people, but occupied a wast
part of the land not being inhabited, as in the third Chapter of his
Chronicle appears. But how stands that with reason, that Britayne being
inhabited by the space of vi.C. years before their coming, such a country
should lie desert, and especially upon the sea costs: Which liyng open to
other lands, and sonest seen by them that sail, must of likelyhode have
inhabiters, before the inner part of the country. I say no more, but,
Mendacem oportet esse memorem: He that should tell a lie, had need to have good
memory, least his matter appear like a Meremaide, beginning with a woman, and
ending with a Fish, as when the end of the tale is repugnau^t to the
beginning, and the mids agreeable to neither of both. And doubteles it is no
small masterie to hide a lie: for apparel him never so fair, his rags will
appear, pack him never so close, the bu^dell will break, write him or speak
him, and his aucthor is bewraied, as a Ratte, is by squekyng: And though he be
allowed for a ceason yet at the end, time will try him, whereof ensues
great prejudice to the author: For though he sa^e afterward true, none will
believe him.

IF I should here enter into declaracion of the right and title, whereby the
kings of England claim to be superior lords of Scotland, I should of some be
noted, rather a confou^der of our liberties and fredomes, then a conseruator,
(which name I had late). But for somuche as the same is so exactelie set furthe
in an English book put in Printe in the year of our Lord.1542. at the
beginning of these wars, called: A DECLARATION, conteynyng the just causes
and consideracions, of this present war with the Scotts, wherein alsoo
appears the true and right title, that the kings most royal majesty has to
the souerayntie of Scotland: as nothing can be said more in so few words,
I will refer all indifferent readers to the same book, thinkinge it
nedelesse to spe^de any more time, in a matter so well proved: Nevertheless I
will somewhat touch a point or two, to give occasion to all such my
contreyme^, as mind the honor and quiet of Scotland, to confer my sayings,
with our histories, and to judge the matter without affeccion. Whereof settinge
a part the order devised by Brutus at the first concerning the division of
Brytayne, between his sons, with the Superiority supposed in ye eldest, and
subjection of the other two, pretermitting also the conquest of the whoole
Islande by Romans, and the title derived from the great Constantine:
letting pass also the sundry homages and recognicions of subieccion, made to
Arthur, and other kings of the Britaynes, and after him to Osbright, and the
Saxon Kings successively, which be at large expressed in the English and
Briton histories, and affirmed also by Marianus, our countryman, whose
aurthoritie is not light, if all these were of no credit, (as they must needs
be of great, how soever we esteem them) yet in my judgment our awn writers,
wherein they labor most to impugn the cause of England, do most advance it:
and therefore in this part, I will ground me upon them. They agree al
upon.xviii. homages and knowledges of subieccion and allegiau^ce, made by the
kings of Scotland successively, unto the kings of England, and many of them
within late memory. Which homages, though some of them, either following their
phantaseis, or fearing to offend our kings, allege to have been done,
somewhiles for Cumberland, and somewhiles for the Erledome of Hu^tingdon: Yet
the time considered, they declare, that such acts were done by our kings,
before any of the said Erledomes were in their possession, whereby they must be
understand absolutely done, for the realm of Scotland, and in that point I
refer you unto the readinge of Marianus: And of latter days, since that
those Erledomes were taken from us by Englismen among other, king James the
first, did homage, to king Henry the fourth of England. The words and
form of whose homage, who so list to peruse, shall well perceive the same to
have been made, neither for any of those Erledomes, neither yet for any other
hold, but merely, for the crown of Scotland, which as well he as other,
knowledged to hold of ye king of England, as superior lord. The records
remain, the seals and subscriptions be so many, so ancient, and so fair, as
cannot lightelie be counterfaicte. But some peradventure will say, that many of
those homages were done by force and compulsion: I answer, though it might
be, that some of them were so done, yet all could not be. For our Cronicles
specify yt those.xviii. kings, were in England, which no man can judge to
have come all thither by force, and all those did homage there, and those
homages, well nere all, appear to have been made for the croune of Scotland,
if we believe the records of England. And if any say, that they be
counterfeited, I think it sooner said, then proved. And touching the compulsion
and force, I say, though some of our kings might be co^ pelled by fear, yet
how could all be: or could an whole Parliament be compelled? Is it not
manifest, that when question arose, upon the title of the croune of Scotland,
between Balliol. Brus, and Hastynges, was it not decided by Edward the first,
king of England, as competent judge in that case? But here it is said again,
that he was judge in that case, not of right, but by consent of the parties.
Then look well to the words of the compromisse, which names him superior
lord of Scotland. And this was done in Parliamente, by consent of the three
estates, which of likelyhoode could not be all compelled. In which cause, I am
partly ashamed, of the impudent vanity of our writers, which rail without
reason against the judgment of Edward in that plea, as corrupt. and false.
This I say, that if the Judgment were to be given again, neither Mynos,
Lycurgus, nor Salo mon, (whose judgments in histories be so celebrate) did
ever give a more true, a more perfect or a more rightful sentence, either by
the civil laws, or by ye practice and custom of Scotland, or any other
reasonable law, and take the case, even as they propone it. But then we have
an other evasion, which is to allege prescripcion, because those homages have
not been done within memory. To that I answer, that though prescripcion
served in that case, (as it does not) yet the wars made from time to time,
counteruaile a possession thereof: In which point let us be well advised,
what we say, least by fleing the smoke, we fall into the fire. For once
admittinge him superior king, no prescripcion will serve against him. The
text is common, and no more common, then allowed, almost in all laws. Nullum
tempus occurrit Regi: Time cannot prejudice a King.

MOREOVER, I note this, that the Kings of England would never make peace with
us perpetually, neither as lawful enemies, but admitted a truce, or an
intermission of war for a time, always exceptyng, Lorne and Lundie, and with
a caution to save their title and right. Our own Records and registers
approve this: howbeit let no man judge, that mine intent is herin to plead the
cause of England, (for that I neither can do, ne profess to do) but only
to give light to such, as list to seek, that the matter is not so clear on
our side, as our writers would have it seem, and therefore, I would yt men
should weigh the querell indifferently, and without affeccio^, and not to lean
more on the one side, then on the other. For the title, which I allege, is
neither devised upon fantasy, worn out with age, introduced by conquest, ne
enforced with fe^^re or compulsion: but grounded upon truth, dooen within
memory, wrought by consent, and agreyng to all justice, equity, law, pacte,
and promise, not done in private, but openly, and not by a ^ew, but by a
multitude, upon a great deliberacion, and that in parliament: which title
enduceth no feruitude, but fredome, liberty, concord and quietness, and
serves as well for Scotland, as England, making equality without
supertoritie.

AT the parliament holden at Edinbrough (immediately after the death of our last
king) where all the lords, the other states and orders of our realm were assembled
(saving the Earl of Arguyle that appeared there by his proctor, sir Ihou
Ca^mell): The marriage between our Princes, and the kings majesty of England,
king Edward the.VI. (then being prince) was fully concluded by authority of
the same Parliament, al thassentes of the said states and Orders, concurryng
thereunto. The which, for more faith and testimony of the thing, was also
confirmed by writing, under the great seal of Scotland. May there be any
thing of greater authority, force, or evidence, any title more righteous,
then this? granted, not by our ancestors, but by our selfs, and to a prince
now living, not in time out of mind, but now these so few yers freshely
paste, not rashely, or suddenly, but by great and deliberate aduiseme^t, and
the same not of a few, but of all the states of the realm, assembled not at
al adventures, but sole^pnely in parame^t: a thing no doubt, instilled from the
almighty, and the same our most merciful god, into the minds of ye workers
thereof, to have set an end to all the discord of both realms, by that union
and knot of marriage. And what madness or devil (O most dear cou^treime^) has
so moved, or rather distracte our minds, eftsoon to take weapon in hand, and
the same against our promises, fidelities, honors, and oaths, having on our
side, no good ground, honesty, reason, ne any just respect, but only of
the prouocacion of the devil, the pope, and his rabble of religious men (as they
would seem to be) and specially those, whom we call our ancient friends, where
their are in deed our ancient enemies, ye Frenchemen. And when we shall have
well considered, this atonement with England, and compared the same, with the
league of France, and well weighed thententes and ends of both, we shall
perceive ye the one, calls us to an everlasting peace and quietness, and the
other has, and will keep us (if we forsake it not in time) in continual
misery and wars. And that may we easily judge, in repeting from the
beginning the causes of the one, and of the other. The Frenchmen, fearyng more
and more ye power of England, which had so many times dooen them so notable
displeasures, as not only to have won of them sundry battles (whereof for
briefnes sake, I report me to the stories) but also, for that the Englishemen,
have (as ye know) these many years, kept foot and possession of ground in
France, did besides and among many other things, devise this one, as a chief
stay for them, to make us of their faccion against England, thinkyng thereby
at all times, when either for just causes, England should have to do with
them, or they with England, we should set on the backs of the English men,
or otherwise anoye them, either to force the^ to withdraw their army out of
France, or else be constreined for resiste^ce, or invasions, to divide their
power, and so to be the weaker: eue^ as it has come to pass, that the
Englishemen, have so been forced to do, when nevertheless, it has redounded
to no less discomfiture of our nation, then of the Frenchemen, their
principal enemies. An evident proife and trial whereof, (partly because
things of farther time and memory, having been so many and so often need not
therein in to be narowly sought for, and partly because this example, being
freashest in mind, may, if it please God, work most best effect) did right
well appear, in the first voyage of King Henry the VIII. a Prince of most
worthy and famous memory, against France, when we invaded England, to have
hyndered his enterprise, and done there some displeasure, if we had might,
supposyng to have found at home, but shepherdes, priests and women. At one
time we lost the feld and our king, (being otherwise a noble Prince and a
valeaunte Knight) besides an infinite nu^bre of our countreimen, few of ye
English part wantyng, and king Henry, at the very self same time won the
battaill in France, at the journey of the spurs: and besides that, wo^ne also
by plain conquest, Turwayn and Turney. Now, when we shall have both
considered our league with the Frenchemen, and all the successes, that have
chanced to us syns the conclusion of the same, we cannot reckon how to aduau^t
us of any one thing we have wo^ne, but of infinite losses, misfortunes,
slaughters, spoils, and utter ruin, come thereby to us and our country
universal. The honor and profit, if any be, comes only to the Frenchemen,
which serve theimselfes of us for their money: for thinordinate gain whereof,
we do always hazard, our honors, life's, and country, and have lost our
friends, nay, rather being a membre of the self body with England, have
suffered our self to be divorced and torn from the same, and have so far
passed our own reason, that we have in yt behalf, attempted to do hurt to a
part of our awnselfes, if Gods goodness toward England, had not so provided,
that our power could not be hable to answer, to our misaduised wills: And so
far did we estraunge our selfs, that we could find in our hearts to become
servile, and to be as common hirelynges, to a foreign nacio^. For what other
thing do we but serve them for their money, to our own utter destruccions, to
ye spillyng of our own blood to the burning of our tounes, and to the waste
and spoil of our whole native country? And at this, do the Frenchmen laugh
they take pleasure, sittyng at home in security, except peradventure they
send a few of their cast soldiers, of who^ they make less accoumptes or
estimacion, then of so many sheep or hogs: Howbeit, to bring us in belefe,
that we be in some part of estimacio^ with them, they make of our nation,
certain chief presioentes in France, and the king has of us, a certain number
in his guard, for the defense of his person, in whom, how little he trusts,
God knows, and daily experience teaches. By this he makes us silly souls
believe, that he has us in singular trust when in deed, it is but a golden and
glisteryng bayte, alluryng our simplicity and credulity, to that Iro^ hoke,
that has caught and killed before now, the most part of our ancestors, and
now of late, no fewer of our fathers, of our children, and of our kinsfolk
while the French, lose not a man, but a few golden crounes. And yet our
preside^tes, for all the honor and authority, that they be set in, do serve
but as Ciphers in Algorisme, to fill the place, and instead of Jupiters
block, sent to rule the Frogs, whereupon they tread and leap, without
fear and danger. And our countrymen of the guard after many years, worn in
France, have this only reward at length, to be called of all the world, in
mockery, Iehan de Escoce. Yet is there one thing wherein we repose a certain
honor, and yet in deed, is the same one of the most dishonors, that ever we
received which was, when at thentre of a league, with Charles ye great King
of France, we received for an increase of the Arms of our realm, a trace of
flour deluces, not considering how shameful and dishonorable it was to us,
being so noble pleople, to deface our ancient Arms, and receive the note and
token of nobility and worthiness, of strangers: On the other part, how honorable
a thing, this attoneme^t with England, were for us, the blind man may se. For
being then (as algates we must be under some one) both under one king, the
more large and ample the Empire were: the more honorable and glorious: the king
of greater dominion, governance power, and fame: and the subjects more
renoumed, more happy and more quiet: the realm more sure, and formidable to
the enemies: and they less eshuned and feared.

THVS being both our people and forces joined in one, we should be the more
puyssaunt to invade, more strong to resist and defend. And our power being
such and so great, should be an occasion (for I will not now speak of all
things) to make us fre and sure from outward inuasice^r whereof (peace being
first between us and England) should follow peace with all others: In sort, as
the laboryng man might safely tille his ground, and as safely gather in the
profits and fruits thereof: the merchant might without fear goo abroad, and
bring in foreign commodities, into the realm: the governors being in
tranquillity, and not having their thought and cure divided into many sundery
parts, should, with less carfulness and anxietie of mind, see to the good
order of the common wealth, which never so truly florisheth, as in peace: In
fine, all murders, robberies, spoils, slaughters, and desolacions, being the
sequel, and as it were, ye children of war, yea, and war it self, the
Parente of the same, should cease: in whose places should succeed, peace,
wealth, quiet order, and all other graces and good happes. But if we be so
blind, that we will not see, and deaf, that we will not harken to these
wholesome admonicions, when without the fear of God, and without regard of the
common weal, we shall rush still hedlong, into the fury of war, let us
reckon with our selfs, (whose cause is most iniust and wrongful) what is to
be looked for, toward us, at the conquerors hands, seeing, that we have
refused so honorable, so equal, and so easy, yea, and friendly co^dicions of
peace: specially being called, not into subieccio^ or servitude, but into one
society and feloweship with Englishemen, and yt, by so honorable a mean, as
the marriage of our Princes, with the kings majesty of England, a Prince of
so great towardnes, honor, and expectacio^, both for yt he is descended of
such pare^tes, and also, for yt those virtues be all ready in him, as the like
were perchance, in no one prince before: So as we may surely hope and promise
to our selfs, more at his majesty's hand, then peradventure were lawful to
look for, of a mortal man. Then, what should we fear at the hands of such
a Prince, having married our natural queen but all grace, clemency, and
benignity, as well for her graces sake, who^ he shall have married, as also for
those virtues, which be to his Majesty natural and propre. Moreover, what
other thing is to be looked for at ye hands of the succession of the^ both,
which shall take as well part of her grace, as of his Majesty, then al gentle
and loving treatment and prerogatyue, seeing from the same we shall no more be
strangers unto that nation, but asnye and as dear, as the self Englishmen. And
so much the rather, when those hateful terms of Scotts and Englishemen,
shall be abolisshed and blotted out for ever, and that we shall al agree in the
only title and name of Britons (as verily we ought to do) and the self
realm, being eftsoon reduced into the form of one sole Monarchy, shall be
called Britayn: Then the which form, there is none other better nor no common
weal so well governed as ye same is, that is ruled by one king. The experience
whereof we have seen, even from the beginning of the world, continually to our
time. For who so shall well consider the states of all commone weals, that
have been governed by mo then one, shall perceive that the same has been ye
cause of their final ruin and exterminion. For governance may in no wise
suffer an equal companyon, ne any more be divided into the rule of two sundry
administers, then one body may bear two heads, or the world endure to have
two suns to give light at once. And that same appears in all other
creatures, emonge whom, there is any society, or body politic, whereby it may
easily be gathered, to be the primative decre, and the due order of nature.
Which, like as in many other things, so does it specially appear in the
swarm of Bees: for they being led with the only and mere instinct of
nature, will neither be without one King and governor, ne yet admit any mo
Kings, then one at once. And by the same nature, be we taught, to repute and
recke^ that body to be mo^streous, that has two heddes, and no less is the
realm, that has two kings. Then if in all things we should (as nigh as
might be) approach to the likeness of heaven, as well in our life's and acts,
as in all our fashions, we should not allow the regiment of many, for that
the heavenly things, have but one governor, which thing Homere (though he
were but an Heathen poet) seems to express in these verses.

To have mani governors is not good But let there be one ruler of Kings and
one King.

SVRELY, the answer of Cerbane Lydyane, whereof Serinus makes mention in his
comme^taries, was of no small gravity and importance. For when Craesus would
have joined his brother with him in the kingdom: the son (said he) is
aucthor of all good things in the earth, but if there should be two sons,
it were peril least their two heates, should burn up all the arth: Even so, as
one king is necessary, so mo then one, is hurtful. The experience whereof, (to
set examples no farther of) was well felt in England, so long as the seven
Kings reigned, as may well appear to them that read the story. Herefore
dare I boldly say, if these two realms were brought under one Empire and
governance, we should see an end of al strief and war, which will never
come otherwise to pass: And then should we have this common weal of ours,
being now out of all order, and in most miserable state and condition to be
most happy and most flourishing. The which thing to attein, it lies only
in you (O most dear countrymen): yours is the fault, you must make the
amends. And other conditions of recompense, then your selfs have agreed unto,
will undoubtedly, none be allowed. For what other conditions should England
receive of us, (having had so often experience of our breaches of peace, of
truce, and of our promises, which yet unto this day, we have never truly kept
toward the^, as they may in no reason trust us,) but in such sort, as
they may be assured to find us constaunt, firm and steadfast in our
promise. Wherefore, if there remayn with you (O dear countrymen) any remorce
or pity of our torn and woeful country, or of your selfs, stay betymes,
while you have time to do well. Reckon, yt though ye have offended, it is
better betymes to refourme the thing, which, by reason of sinistre and evil
counsel, has been evil done, then to stand obstinately in your most wicked
and deuelish enterprise, being utterly contrary to your faithefull promise, to
your honors, and also to right and duty: that if your awn particular
respects, do not move you, yet have mercy upon your commune country, your
mangled country, your country weepinge to you with bloody tears, which your
selfs do express, and wring out of her, and enforce her to shed. And surely
in this part, I would wyshe as much eloquence, as I have good will to set out
this woofull tragedy in her perfect colors: but seeing the same does not
serve to my wyshe, I must utter such matter, as the dolor of my heart, and
natural pit, may minister unto my pen, which if it could as lively depaynt
the greatness of this evil, as mine heart does Imagine and conceive the same
the multitude of tears, should set men's iyes from readyng and extremity of
affeccio^s, disturb their minds from conceinyng. Imagine you (I pray you) if
Britayne could speak, might she not well say thus: Has not the almighty
providence severed me from the rest of the world, with a large sea, to make
me one I slande? has not natures ordinance furnisshed me with asmany things
necessary, as any one ground brings forth? has not man's policy at the
beginning subdued me to one gouernoure? And has not the grace of Christ
illumined me over all, with one faith: and finally the works of all these
four, te^ded to make me one? Why the^ will you divide me in two? What folly,
yea, or rather what contempt of God is this, yt ye still tear me, pull me, and
ryue me in pieces? were their ever children so unnatural (if they were not of
the vipers nature) to rend their mothers womb? yea, were there ever beasts so
saluage, or cruel, to devour the dam? If bit des, beasts, and all things
natural have this reason, not to destroy their kind, how chances it then,
that you veyng men endewed with reason, bredde in one land, joined in one
faith, should thus unkindly, unnaturally, and vnchristenly, bathe your
swoordes in each others blood? May not the example of other lands teach you
to beware of division, to hate all discord, to abhor intestine war? May
not the ruin of ye Greeks, the fall of the Romans, and the subversion of
so many countries, commonweals, and states in the world, suffyce for pour
ensample? yea, may not the present sight of my ruin and decay, teach you to
take heed? If the counsels of wise men, experience of other countries, nor
ye pytie of me your mother, your nutryce, and your bringer up, do not move you:
Yet at the least, have and use some mercy toward your selfs. Have you not
shedd enough of your own blodde? what folly, or rather what fury is this, thus
to ruynate your selfs, and to devour one an other, to the discomforte of me,
and pleasure of your enemies? If ye would set before your eyes, the exceeding
quantity of blodd, that has been shed between you my ingrate and most
unnatural children: you would judge it sufficient, and more then enoughe, not
only to conquer Europe, but eue^ ye whole world. And to what utility has
all this been spent? surely to none other, then to the mischief and destruction
of each other, emonge your selfs. Oh incomparable loss for so little game. I
was never yet invaded by foreign enemies, but some of my children, were the
chief ayders, and only causers thereof: nor no mischief procured against me at
this day, but by their consent and cou^sail. Oh I an unhappy mother of such
children: how long shall these furies lead you? how long will you that my
wide fyeldes lie wasted, that my towns be desert and unpeopled, that my fair
houses and castles be spoiled and burnt, and my people famished? I cannot
accuse Romans, Pictes, ne yet Normais, but mine own rebellious, discorda^t
and graceles children. O hateful discord, no where do thou begin, but all
goes to wrecke, ere thou make an end. O privy poison, O familiar foo, O
dissembling traitor, O couerte pestilence: what could Caesar have prevailed
against me, if Mandru batius a Britayne, had not been divided from Cassibolan
my king? Will this fire never be quenched? this malice never cease, nor your
furye never end? If it be given you of nature if you suck it with your mothe^s
milk, if it grow in you with years, to hungre strife and watre: here this my
cou^sail: Before you make war at home, seek your enemies abroad Pursue their
life's, shed their blood, be wroken upon the^, kyl them, and overcome them,
and when they be all killed, overcome and subdned, then turn the swoordes
point against each other, but not before: and then shall you never so do, for
you never yet to this day, have wanted enemies. But to return to you again my
countreme^, whom, for ye natural love, I bear to you, I cannot leave to blame
for your folyes, or rather madness, and exhort you to this most honorable,
most godly and profitable attoneme^t with England, who wynkynge at our
transgressions, bearing with our perverse waiwardenes and pardoning our to
much ingratitude hitherto, does to her utter most strength and power, seek with
al possible gentleness, to reco^cile us and with all her endeavor continuallye
labors, to make us partakers of her concord and unity, her tra^quilite and
quiet, her wealth and luckey fortune, her co^questes and triu^phes: and
finally of all her incomparable joys and felicities. I shall lastely beseech
and exthorte, and (as far as the mothers authority over ye chylore^ may)
adjure you by God ye very aucthor of all peace Love, Charity, and co^corde, to
return into ye right way, out of the which, ye have so long gone a straigh.
Remember (I beseech you, o most dear cou^treme^) how that by this calling of us
into this unity, proceeding plainly from god him self he would also unite and
join us in one religion. For how godly were it, yt as these two Realms
should grow into one, so should they also agree in the concord and unite of one
religion, and the same ye pure, sincere and incorrupt religion of Christ,
setting a part all fond supersticions, sophisticacions, and other thousands
of deuilries brought in by the bishop of Rome and his creatures, whereby to give
gloss to their things and darkness to Gods true word, for ye only purpose,
to aduau^ce their glory, and tread Gods word under foot, to utter their
filthy merchau^dise, and to scla^der ye precious ware and Jewels of ye
scripture: and emo^ges ye rest, to destroy Gods peace, and ringe their own
alarmes, against his most glorious victory on ye Cross, throuout the world.
And I wot not whether firm co^corde be otherwise more sureli mortized in men's
hearts, then when it proceeds of ye true knowledge of Gods word, which does in
so many passages repete unto us, peace, peace: love, love: charity, charity:
and reproves war, hatred, and discord, seeds doubtelesse scatered by ye
devil, through those monsters of men, that profess preposterous religion, to
stir as well all others, as also most specially, you my cou^tryme^ most of
all, to this division and roar, wherein they (fearinge the worthy fall wherewith
God threateneth the^, which they now perceive by others examples to ha^g over
their heads) devise by hook and by croke to keep you still occupied in
mistrust of your best friends, casting before your eyes, mystes, shadows, and
colors (such as Iuglers use to do) to the end, lest if you should once se the
clearnes of Gods word, you should then incline to yt of your selfs, and most
easly, whereunto I do now with so much a do exhort you. I perceive that the
love to my country and nation, has made me unawares to have wandered further,
then at the first I purposed: wherefore I will make an end, if first I shall
repete that I have already proved unto you, that these two Realms were first
a Monarchy under Brutus, and so left by his order to his sons, by the
superiority given to the eldest, which form of governance, was also under
Consta^tyne. I have alsoo proved, yt these two realms ought to come under yt
form, and ye kings Majesty yt now is, to be Monarch of the same: as well for
the superiorite, which was in his au^cestors proved by ye homages and other
things before alleged, ye claim whereof did yet never cease as also specially by
force of your awn late act of parliament, whereby he ought of right to mary our
Pri^cesse, thi^heritrice of ye crown of Scotla^de: by occasion whereof we shall be
received, not into servitude, but i^to ye same fellowship we Englismen, ye
names of both subjects and realms ceassing, and to be changed into ye name of
Britai^ and Britons, as it was first, and yet still ought to be. And how
necessary yt same form of the governance of one Monarche or king is, you se
to be more clear then the son, and the same to be a ready and easy mean, how
both tappease al discord, which otherwise will never stint, and also testablish
us in everlasting peace, quiet and tra^quillite: unto which effects there is
verily none other mean. And ye thing self (though I should hold my peace)
does sufficiently speak and avouche ye same to be away unto both Realms most
honorable, because not only the Empire shall by ye occasion be ye more large and
strong in it self, and the King ye more puissant and famous: profitable, for yt
discord shall cease, and concord come in place, and thereby the people and
common weal flourish and prospere: and godly for ye we shall agree all in one,
and ye same the true and christen religion.

IT remains now to say unto you, that the right high mighty and excellent
prince Edward, duke of Somerset, earl of Hertforde, Viscount Beaucha^p, lord
Seymour, governor of the person of the Kings Majesty of England, and
protector of all his realms, dominions, and subjects his lieuetenasit general
of al his armies, both by land and by sea, Treasorer and Earl Marshal of
England, governor of ye isles of Gernsey and Iersey, and knight of the most
noble order of the garter: A man for his acts and worthiness, well known to
the world, and you, of whom you have had late experience to your pernes, and
his dolor, for that, as the loving mother, in beafyng her child weepeth, so
in punishyng you, he did it lothely, and to his grief, because he pitied your
case The said lord protector is coming toward you, with a puissau^t and
invincible army, having on his side God, and the just cause, and an intent, to
receive to mercy grace and favor, so many of you, as for yt furthering of this
marriage and his other Godly purposes, will come in to him. And co^trarily, to
punish and correct ye rest, yt shall remain in their stubburn and wilful
disobedience. Wherefore (o cou^trymen) considering ye on our part, we have
nothing but the wrong and iniust cause, violacio^ of our promises and oaths,
given to England with conceived words, after mature and just deliberacio^,
calling God and his angels, unto witness thereof, who knows our infidelity,
and will not leave the injury done to him and them, unrevenged. For the regard
of God, for your awn sakes, and for the tender respect of our country, cast
wisely down yt armor and weapons, yt you have so fondely put on and taken in
hand: and submit your selfs humbly, to the mercy and clemency of so noble and
benign a Prince: who is rather come thither, loui^gly toembrace and receive
you, yea, and as your protector, to defend and assist you: then to punish you
according to your deserts. But if you shall despice my cou^sail and abuse his
humanity and good offers, how gentle and clement soever he be of his awn
nature, think you for sure, yt God, who will not suffer infidelite, tescape
long i^chastised, will stir up his courage to do vengeance upon you for your
insole^cie and faith broken: ye which I writ, not without sorrow and tears:
Praii^g God for his pity and goodness, to give you his grace and better
mind, so as you may forsake the errors ye now lead you hedlong, and may follow
these good and wholesome cou^sailes, of your most natural, and most tender loving
countreima^: whereby, you may accord (as by your promises and duties, ye ought
to do) to so godly, so honorable, and so profitable condicio^s, as are now
ge^telly offered you.

Excussum Londini in aedibus Richardi Graftoni typis Impressoris. Anno salutis
nostrae.

1547.


