THE TRAGICAL LIFE AND DEATH OF MVLEY ABDALA MELEK the late King of Barbary.
With A PROPOSITION, OR PETITION TO ALL Christian Princes, annexed thereunto:
Written by a Gentleman employed into those parts.



Printed at Delph, ANNO 1633.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS, AND HOPEFVLL young Prince CHARLES Prince Elector
Palatine of the Rhyne, etc.
MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE, The great respect I received from your Highness at
Leyden two several times after my coming out of Barbary, and the great
desire your Highness expressed (as becomes Princes) to understand, and be
informed in foraigne afaires, and the State of other countries, has encouraged
me (having now again been employed into that country) to present to your
Highness, for a Nevv-years-gift, this short relation, of the life, and death of
the late King Muley Abdala Melek, as was related to me by way of discourse
only, at several times, by those who for the most part were eyevvitnesses:
Oculati testes. Which also may serve your Highness for matter of discourse, and
further information likewise, to discern betwixt a blessed Christian
government, whereunto God has ordained you, and a cruel tyrannous Mohammedan
government (as is the Turkish,) under which those miserable mis-belieuers: yea
and many Christians likewise there in most miserable slavery, groan: the
Lord deliver them from it. And give us grace to make use of it: both Prince.
people, and acknovvledge our own happiness. Prince, who command over
Christian, obedient, and dutiful subjects: and subjects who live under so
peaceable, and Christian a government, bona si sua norit agricola, free from
tyranny, rebuel: as, and tumults, whereunto that country of Barbaric has
this long time been subject. Such is the miserable state, and condition of
tyranny, and of tyrants, even of Kings: as your Highness may perceive, by the
sudden, fearful, and miserable end of this King: qualis vita sinis ita: his
life was bloody, and so it ended in blood, in his own blood. And thereafter
may your Highness, and all other young Princes, who have so good tuitors, and
overseers to inform them learn: (as that famous Buchanan tuitor to your grand
Father King James of blessed memory, in his epistle dedicatorie before his
Tragaedie called Baptistes, admonishes, vvorthie to be read over, and over,
and remembered of all young Princes, his words, as I remember, are these) mature
odisse quod tibi semper est fugiendum. Which I pray God both your Highness, and
all other Princes may remember, and make use of. Hoping your Highness will
accept of this small present out of a Barbarous country, for want of a
better. vvhither I should have returned, for the releasse of the remainder of
my poor countrymen, in captivity under the new King Muley Elvvalid, upon a
new treaty. Having already been a means to releasse above two hundredth and
threescore from Sallie: and threescore me as yet remaining under this king at
Morocco, and Sallie, by them taken again upon a late breach: besides what are
dispersed up and down the country: all promised by that King to be releassed
upon his treaty. VVhither (I say) I should have returned long before this
time, longed, and long looked for by those poor captives. Isa. 51. 14
For the captive hasteneth to be loosed etc. as it is in the Prophet. But
whether I shall return at all: or those poor captives be loosed, or
releassed at all, is in Gods hands: who can make their very enemies, P^ 46
and all those that have carried them away captives, to pity them: otherwise
no hope at all. And so I leave them to Gods mercy: and both them, and all
others in like distress, both there, and elsvvhere, to your Highness, and all
other Christian princes to commiscrate, according to a proposition, or
petition, I have hereunto annexed, highly concerning them in honor to
consider of: which is also in Gods hands: For the hearts of Kings (as Solomon
says) are in Gods hands, he turns the^ which vvaiesoeuer he pleases. In
the mean time (as my duty is, having been employed in these affairs) I can
but solicit, and petition, though without effect, in hope contrary to hope:
having hitherto received so small encouragement: but discouragements: and so
go on mourning still, and like to do: finis vnius mali gradus futuri. One
cross after an other still ready to receive me, Which I must bear
patiently, so commanded, so resolved: To take up the cross of Christ, and
follovv him vvhither soever he commands, from one conntrie to an other, from
one part of the world to an other, and to the worlds end. Quem statues finem
Rex magne laborum? And so go on mourning still, as I have don these many
years. Hoc continuis agimus annis: a countinuall mourner ever since the death
of prince Henry my master, now renewed by the death of your Royal Father,
and that renowned King of Sweden, who died that very day of the month
prince Henry died, The 6. Stilo (...) in The 1^ Stilo novo. Zec. 12 12.
the 6. of November: the date after the powder plot, ominous. For both which
the whole church of Christ has cause to mourn, and that continually, not
only outvvardlie, but invvardlie every family a part: as was that great
mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon. For that good King Josiah,
^2. 18.
continually, continuis annis even to posterity: to be continued ( I say) as
was that, for these two so good Kings, so suddenly, and so untimely taken
avvate. To mourn ( I say) continually, and invvardlie for our sins, which
are the cause of these disasters: Verus luctus est occultus: that is the true
mourning: so to condole, and mourn. And so let us continue our mourning, and
go on mourning still: every family a part, every true Christian a part, to
bear a part, in this so great a mourning, with our dear mother the church:
that comfortles Rachel, who vveepeth for her children, and will not be
comforted because they are not. Yea, let the whole church of Christ renevve
her weeping, and mourning again, till it Echo again, not only the last
words, vltima verba (as it is in Seneca) Sed totos reddat Troiae gemitus) for
her children first, and last taken from her, one after an other, because they
are not. Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, is not. King James, is not. Prince
Henry; is not And the other hopeful young prince Henry your brother, is not.
Your Royal Father, the King of Bohemia, is not. The King of Sweden, is not.
How is the valiant man fallen that delivered Israel? Besides other worthies:
the old prince of Orange, and others, they are not. Yea many other poor
Christian souls, of late slain, massacred, perished, and lost, both under the
Antichristian and Mohammedan tyranny, they are not. For whom the whole church
of Christ has cause to mourn: never more cause, never more seasonable.
Whereunto now I betake myself, even to prayers and tears the weapons of Gods
church: Which shall be the second part. And my Account hereafter mentioned,
the third, and last: Isa. 51.
If God permit, and other obstacles hinder not. And so rest Your Highness humble
servant,

JOHN HARRISON.

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF MVLEY ABDALA MELEK, the late King of Barbary.
IF Plutarch (who did write, and parallel the lives, and acts of the most
famous men of those times) were now living, to write and parallel on the
contrary the lives and acts of the most infamous men of the world, I think he
would have much ado to find out a fit match, either ancient or modern,
whereunto to parallel the late King of Barbary Muley Abdala Melek: yea rather
I think he would leave him vnparalel'd. And so must I, only setting down so
much as in that short time I staid at Morocco (which was but two months)
has been related to me by way of discourse, by such both of our own nation
and others as were for the most part eye-vvitnesses, which is scarce the
hundredth part of his cruel acts, and mad-pranks he played in that short time of
his reign: which was scarce four years, mad-pranks I may call them, for so
is he commonly called the mad King.

He was Son to Mulay Sidan by a negra, so by complexion a molato: The Mores in
that respect whether of vviues or concubines making no difference of
succession, but commonly the eldest, though by a concubine, carries the
crown: and sometimes the younger gets the blessing from the elder: quo iure
etc. capiat qui capere potest.

He was extraordinarily given to drink wine and strong drink, which added
to his natural disposition: (which needed not) inclyned to cruelty even from
his infancy. Of a manly stature: and of a most courageous disposition. A good
horseman, with his lance and target; would ever be the first man in the face
of his enemies: who indeed durst never look him in the face, but presently
faces about: his svvord making way for him which way soever he went. Such
was his resolusion, viam inveniam aut faciam. So that it may be doubted
whether his courage, or cruelty were greater: and in these two respects, I
vvil be bold to say (as before) not to be paraleld by any. As by these fevv
passages, gessing at Hercules by his foot, may easelie appear. And even
before he was King began to play his prize like, Hercules furens, his arm and
svvord still in action, cutting and killing at his pleasure upon every slight
occasion.

At one time he killed one of his own blood (the blood royal) only for
tasting a little of his svveet meats by stealth. Sweet meats must have sour
sauce. An other (the chieffest of the cast of the Shebanites allied unto him by
marriage of his Praedecessours into that cast) having vvronged one of his
servants, A cast is a tribe or kindred.
he takes some fevv of his servants, not above ten at the most with him,
goes desperately among all the Shebanites to the ^ent of this man, being the
valiantest amongst them all, challenged him of the vvrong: who slighted him
(being then not King) mounted on horseback, discharged his pistol at him but
missed, who^ presently this young Prince drawing his sword slew hand to hand
maugre all the Shebanits, and came of clear

An other time a Levantado or rebel (one of their saints) coming against his
Father Muley Sidan with 3000. horse, like to surprise him on a sudden, he
with his drums, musik and ensigns, and not above forty horse, went out
against him, chardged so furiously, as put them, al to flight: pursued the
victory, and (as they say) with his own hand vvounded the Levantado that he
dyed, his head after brought in, to Muley Sidan, hanged up in the Alcasaua, and
quarters likewise on the walls of Morocco, on the gates of the city. Having
be ore challenged his Father of neglect, and too much security: of whom not
only his enemies, but even his Father (as they say) stood in fear, yet his
Father calling him Father. Such is the praeposterous manner of the Moors, to
call their eldest Son Father, out of a reverence (as they say) they give to him
being the first born, and to be (as it seems) Pater familias, Father of the
family for the time to come, other reason I can not give of their
praeposterous inversion of that relation, (or rather confusion) for the Father,
to call his Son Father. Our Heavenly Father I am sure did not so, the King of
Kings: Thou art my Son, etc. as it is in the Psalms. Nor David the King in
that his patheticall expression of his Fatherly affection, far beyond theirs,
yea beyond all expression: Absalon my Son, my Son. After his coming to be King
some of the friends of the Leuantado having by stealth taken down his quarters
to bury them, he commanded a great number of the neighbors heads who dwelled
near there aboutes to be cut of, executing many with his own hands as he
met them in the streets.

And not long after immediately upon the death of his Father, being nevvlie
proclaimed King, his brother Muley Flvvallid (this King) coming against him
with a great force, better affected of the comminaltie than the other, in
respect of his cruelty: (which they greatly feared, and not without cause,
as afterward they found) Muley Abdala Melek giving order first for his
ordnance, to be dischardged, immediately after himself, being the first, man
(having but a fevv horse) chardged so furiously, and so thoroughly, as he
rovvted them all* whereupon his brother fled toward Sallie, but not long
after was betrayed and brought back again by Alkaid Hamuda dwelling near
Azamore, whose horma or sanctuary he took, invited and encouraged by him to
some further attempt: but indeed betrayed, who after used him in a very base
and unseemly manner, stripping him, beating him, and carrying him, chained upon
a horse to the King. Whereupon the King (they say) when he savv him relented,
yea wept, not using any extremity, but rather out of his lion-like
magnanimity, contemning what either he, or any other had don, or could do
against him. Yet did his brother live in continual fear, diverse times
threatened by the King in his mad humor, sending to him to prepare himself, and
to know what kind of death he would dye: but by mediation of his sisters
and others still put of. At one time (the King being at Saffia) in his drunken
humor, the sentence pronounced, and an Alkaid presently sent toward Morocco,
where his brother was then prisonner to execute it: but the next morning the
King comme to himself, and by mediation (as before) reversed, and a messenger
dispatched to countermaund the other, whom he ouertooke but at Tansift a river
within four miles of Morocco, commanded upon his life to overtake him: the
other making no great have, otherwise it had been executed.

One time at Saffia his Almahalla or camp (wherein his brother Muley Semyn
was then) coming to pitch near thereaboutes, he in steed of a warning piece
to remove further of, shot a bullet amongst them. An other time (as I heard) in
jest among the market folk: yet did no hurt but killed an ass.

An other time in his Almahalla (having been all the day abroad drinking as he
used) and coming riding in late at night upon the spur, as he passed by the
ordnance, whereof the English had the chardge, he commanded on the sudden
swearing a great English oath, give fire: which they presently did, they
durst do no otherwise: so shot away his own uncle being in company with
him all to pieces,

His youngest brother, yea and his own young son, sometimes would he hang up
by the legs, and beat them with his own hands. No merveile then if he were
cruel to others, being so unnatural to his own flesh and blood.

Every day must see blood (blood shed) were it but of a hen, else not
satisfied. Possessed (as some of the Moors have told me many are, and that he
was) with a she devil, frequent amongst them as (it seems) amongst the
heathen in times past, whereof a heathen philosopher writes a set treatise of
Incubus and succubus. And the party who told me this said, that one day
going a hawking having other Moors with him, one follovving a good distance
in the high way, on a sudden stood still, and not long after they savv a
smoke arise in the same place, vvhereat they wondered, and went back,
finding the man much amazed. Asking the reason, he said a woman met him there
very fair and in good attire, who offered herself to be his wife, he
ansvvered, he had one already, she replied he might take an other (for so the
Moors may by their law) being very importunate with him: at length looking
dovvnevvards perceived her clubbed feet, and what she was, whereupon he went
back, and absolutely refused, and thereupon she vanished in that manner in a
great snuff. The man presently thereupon falling sick, and so continued a good
while. How true this is I can not say, but was reported to me very
seriously, and for a certainty. But of this I am sure that the devil can
transform himself into an Angel of light: much more take upon him the shape of
a man, or a woman, as God permits to delude those that obey not the truth.
And this likewise I know to be true and certain, that he is both a liar
(the Father of lies) and a murderer from the beginning: ever a thirst, and
never satisfied with blood. And therefore no merveile if this tyrant were so
possessed as before, that every day he must see blood else not satisfied. And
if every day, how much blood may be thought he shed in that time of his life
and reign.

Sometimes he would cut of men's heads with his own hands, and with his
own sharp svvord, saying, those whom he commanded did not cut them of
well, and at once: which don would ask one of the Englishmen if it were
not well done, he must say yea Muley. Yea six or seven men's heads in one day.

Once by euermuch drinking distempered in his body, having his arms and hands
benumbed, his Doctor persuaded him to enter into a bath. After his bathing
meeting with one of his concubines, drevv out his svvord and cut of her head,
to try the strength of his arm if it were sound again. Also an other for
going out of her bite or chamber to the next door to one of her fellows, for
the Moors are jealous even of their women, and will not suffer them to
company together.

Made one man stand still while he threvv stones at his face, threatening if he
offered to stir or move he would cut of his head. So likewise abroad in the
fields, ofttimes would cause some one of his servants to lie down
grovelling, and sit upon him in steed of a stool a whole night together
drinking: and the man durst not for his life stir. And some to stand by him
whole days and nights without moving hand or foot, otherwise would have
cut of their heads.

Would cause men to be drubbed, or beaten almost to death in his presence,
which was but a common and gentle correction, five or six hundredth blows at
once, and after they must kiss the ground, and give him thanks. To whom in
this particular, and others likewise, I may parallel a great Lord in this part
of the world: who (having slain an other in a private duel, and, upon just
occasion offered, taxed by one to whom he had don vvrong, disgracing, and
disabling him, and that in an open assembly, and displacing him too: and
therefore had the party reason there also to right himself, and reply, par
pari refer, and disable him likewise for shedding of blood, which by the
Law of God is murder) caused the party to be committed to prison (closse
prisoner at the first) and there kept, and fed with the bread of affliction,
till in the end he was forced: (his imprisonment, and punishment both of body
and purse, besides the disgrace, no sufficient satisfaction) to kiss the
ground, that is, make an humble submission, and subscribe that he had offended,
and abused his Lordship with opprobrious, and uncivil language etc. that is
to say, that the Law of God is an opprobrious and uncivil language, which
says: He that smites an other with an instrument of iron, that he die is a
murderer etc. which submission he now utterly disclaimeth, as most
blasphaemous against God and his Law, and don of infirmity, and by dares of
imprisonment, having no means at all to maintain himself any longer in
prison, but there to starve: praying God to forgive him, and them likewise
who imposed it. To whom (even to that great God) that great Lord ought rather
to make submission, for violating his holy Law, as David did, (a King and
was not ashamed.) I have sinned etc. yea and after fell to the ground, and
kissed the ground with many tears. Therefore is he a saint in heaven: and
Muley Abdala Melek, and all such bloody tyrants, and murderers (without
repentance) devils in hell. For Topheth is praepared of old even for Kings,
and Lords too if they repent not: For with God there is no respect of persons.
Nor was with this King Muley Abdala Melek, in the cruel course of his
tyranny: whereunto all, both great and small, were subject.

Yea he would, cause some to be beaten on the soles of their feet, and after
make them run up, and down among the stones, and thorns. And so also used
some that were lame, and hurt, pulling of there shoes, and making them run
barefooted in such places: or else would cut of their heads.

Did cause one of his Alkaids (his chieffe falconer) to be drubbed and beaten,
many hundredth blows on the buttocks (as himself told me) and after forced
him to ride in that painful manner after him a havvking. Also the same Alkaid
told me, that the girth of his sadle being broken, and he allighted: an other
Alkaid coming to help him, and holding his stirrup, the King called that
Alkaid to him, and caused him to be drubbed for holding his stirrup, and not
long after the like occasion falling out again, caused the same Alkaid to be
drubbed again, for not holding his stirrup.

He run a man's thigh thorovv with his lance to the saddle, and after because
he was not able to ride after him a pace, give him two or three hundredth
blows.

Would with his sword cut and flash men for his pleasure, and after himself
give them plasters to cure them.

Would cast men to the lions to be devoured, an other of his torments.

To one among the rest he promised that if he would fight with them, and
could escape he should be perdoned: which he did manfully (as I was told)
beating them from him either with stones or some such means clearing himself,
yet after was put to death

Some he caused to be rastrar'd, or dragged by the feet at the horse heels,
their back and head against the stones: as he did the Hacam of Morocco (the
chieffe officer of that city) round about his Almahalla or camp till he died.
Others iointed, their fingers, and toes first cut of by every jointe, arms
and legs, and so head and all. An other hanged up by the privy members, one
caused to sit upon him to weigh him down: and vet the man living.

Another (a hole dug in the ground) set in the earth up to the head, as
Scholars in some places use to shoot at the cock at Shrouetyde: so did he
cause the captives with their pieces to shoot at this poor man's head. They
all missing, he himself came near with his own piece and shot him, calling
him a devil because they all missed him.

He cut of a Moors head (a church man, or Sexton) for crying on the church
tovver or steeple, and cursing all that did drink wine, forbidden by their
law. An other also for crying and singing more then usual. For the Moors
have noe bells, but in steed thereof, these cryers to call them to their
devotions: in the name of God, one God, the great God, and his Prophet Mahomet,
the Messenger of God. Some say this mad King did once threaten that he would
have one of the Friars, French or Spanish, to sing mass before him: which I
think would have pleased him little better.

He caused a French captive to turn Moore, and be cut, that is made an eunuch,
only for extolling the King of France to be one of the greatest Monarchs of
the world. An other, who kept his horse, never without slashes and vvounds.
An other Frenchmans doublet with a pair of sizers did he cut all over in
slashes with his own hands, saying, he was now a right French Cavallero,
like to the rest.

If in his drunken humor abroad in the fields (as he was seldom sober) he did
fall from his horse, all his Alkaid^ and servants must do the like, and lie
down, and do as he did. Much like the catching of the dotterill: and not
offer to rise or get on horseback till he did, nor to hold his stirrup, or come
near him all the while, if they did he would give them blows. One of his
Alkaids, for some such like offense, caused he to sit 24. hours on he top of
his tent in the Almahalla (as it were on the pillorie) for all men to gaze
upon. And now and then would he give them a pill called Shishai (the effect
whereof is to make men merry drunk) to make himself sport. But indeed his
only sport was in cutting of men's heads, and (as before) in shedding, and
seeing of blood. No one day escaped but one or other sacrificed in most bloody
manner to this insatiable devil: and she devil together, if that opinion of
the Moors be true, as before.

On a time the Christian captives, at Saffia the port town, had laid a plot to
break the prison, and escape by sea in a boat, but in the acting thereof
were discovered, all taken and beaten in most pitiful manner to make them
confess the Authors, most of them Spaniards, and French: the chieffe plotter a
Spaniard (as it seems) of some account, called Don Pedro, who was sent for
to the King (then in his Almahalla) who thereupon called all the English, and
others to kneel before him, setting the Spaniard also right before him. Then
said to the English, you see this mis beliuer that would have run away, if
any of you be like minded, run sure, and clear away: otherwise, if you be
taken see here your doom. Then caused he first the Spaniards ears to be cut
of one after an other: then his nose: then his lips one after an other: then
his mouth, on both sides slit up to the ears: then his fingers disiointed one
from an other: which don the King fell a laughing, ha, ha, ha. Then said the
Spaniard to him (having all this while looked him in the face and endured it
very manfully) now Tyrant do thy vvorst. whereupon presently he cut of
his head. So dyed this valiant champion, even in death triumphing over his
tyrannical tormentors.

An other time a Moore being brought before him for some misdemeanor fearing
death, said unto him: Muley, I have lived all the days of my life hitherto a
Christian, if thou vvilt now pardon me, I will turn true Moore again. His
meaning was that he had lived a wicked, and lewd life, as many Christians
have don, and do, both in that and other countries, I speak it to their
shame, whereby the name of Christ, and his religion is scandalized, and
blasphaemed: but yet, notvvithstanding that his confession, that he had lived a
Christian, and profession to turn Moore again, (that is to say,) to lead a
godly life, was executed. For with this King there was no respect of
persons, or religions, or occasions great or small. Sins venial, or mortal
all one, that is to say mortal, Occasions? nay often times without any occasion
at all but only as he met with any by accident, in his drunken and deuilish
humor, would try (as before upon his own women) the strength of his arm,
and goodness of his svvord and chiefflie upon his own nation without respect
of persons: he had no minions, or favorits at all: one good property in him.
What shall I say. But (as an Alkaid telling me of these and other his mad and
tragical acts exclaimed) a devil, a devil. His Alcasava, or court the very
picture of hell: which made the greater and better forte to flee away into the
mountains, or stand upon their guard a far of: like those vvylie foxes in
AEsop seeing all foot steps going forvvard into the lions den, but fevv or
none retrorsum, back again. And those that did, hovvling, and crying,
weeping, and vvayling sighing, and wringing their hands, either for
themselves, or their friends. This was the daily, and doleful music both
within and without: the very gates of hell. Friends? nay rather fiends,
daily tormenting one an other. For so would he command his Alkaids, and
servants to drub one an other at his pleasure, and cut of one an others heads
too.

He would commonly say in a jesting manner, that it seemed to him whenever
he executed any of the Moors, that they had two or three heads: meaning to
cut of but one, he left none: vvishing (as it seems) like that Roman tyrant,
that all the Romans had but one neck, he would cut them all of at once: So
Muley Abdala Melek, the Moors, of whom he was Flagellum, the only whip
that ever was. And (as some think) the best King for the Moors that ever
was: requiring not a block, but AEsops storke to keep them in subjection,
they otherwise prone to rebellion, affecting alteration, and innovation: as
their refran or proverb is: Cus-cus a dish of meat in great request with them.
Every day a new cus-cus, every day a new wife, and every day a new King.

And though he was thus cruel and tyrannous to the Moors, and others, yet
did he favor much and respect the English, to wit the captives, both before
and after he was King. Making one of them once to ride behind him, but
vvithall bidding him not sit too closse to him for filling him full of lyce.
Threatening sometimes, but yet never giving any of them so much as a blow.
Who in his fathers time were kept in chains both by the neck and legs, but he
coming to be king releassed them, and made them, his gunners, giving them free
leave to go up and down where they would at their pleasure, and do almost
what they would: and not a Moore that durst control them, but rather stood
in awe of them. Though their allowance but short, yet, having that liberty,
they made the better shift. And sometimes the king himself in a good humor
would give them money: yea, and sometimes in his mad humor. Yet did he cause
some English boys perforce to turn Moors, cutting them, and making them
capadoes, or eunuchs: but afterward (as they say) repented, saying: he
would never more force Englishmen to turn Moors, for he found them better
servants to him being christians, then Moors: for that being christians they
would stand by him, and stay with him: but being Moors run away from him,
having more liberty and opportunity.

And as he was (as I may say contrary to his nature) thus favorable to the
captives, so was he likewise to the Merchants, or others that came as hoare.
He being at Saffia one time standing upon the walls, an English boat coming
as hoare, he called to one of the men to come to him: who, not knovving him to
be the king, all the while stood talking unto him with his hatt on his head in
Spanish, after the King going into the castle, called one of the English
captives to him, asking him if his countriemen had no better manners? bidding
him gofetch the party to him, who being come, the King would say nothing to
him, but only made him to attend there a good time, and caused the English
captive whom he loved well, to be committed to prison in the others steed,
and chains to be put on him. But the next day sent for him, causing his svvord
to be restored to him, and so, in a mad humor, made him, both with his svvord
about his side, and chains about his legs, to walk after him round about the
walls, talking, and jesting with him familiarlie as he was wont: and then
after this chains also were taken from him. This only he did in jest, to
teach Englishmen good manners against an other time. But to the Moors his jests
were in good earnest, a word and a blow.

At the same place at Saffia, he would take the women, a washing at the sea
side upon the sands, set them upon their heads, and cause water to be powered
(with reverence be it spoken) into their unseemly parts, to see if it would
come out at the mouth again.

He mustered all the fair women in Morocco: (whereof it seems he had a
Catalogue) causing them all at once, and on a sudden to come forth into his
great garden, called Monsarat: (being a mile in length, planted with Orange,
and lemmon trees, and all kind of fruits) and there pitch their tents for 14.
days together: praetending a pilgrimage with his women to Gometta, toward
the hills of Atlas, no man to come near them (no not their husbands) but only
their negras, and serving maids: himself only vvalking the round, all these
women daily and nightlie sitting, and attending in their tent doors as he
passed by to view them: modesty may not repeat the rest. At Gometta there is
the monument of Siddie Blabbas one of their great saints, and there a great
stonne, upon which the Moors use to rub their bellies, saying it cures the
chollicke and diverse other diseases. Some Christians say this Siddie Blabbas
was saint Augustine, and that upon this ston he preached: both which savor
of superstition. But Muley Abdala Melck had no such devotion, for he went not
there at all, nor those women neither, almost famished and starved with
hunger, and cold: for no man durst come near them all that time to bring them
any provision. This was one of his tragicomicall parts.

One of the Englishmen whom he loved above the rest, who had the chardge of
one of his chieffe horses, which was very unruly, and would bite any man
that came near him, therefore alvvaies fast tied up: the king coming into his
rovva, or stable, and spying some thing amiss about the horse, would not
strike the Englishman, but commanded the horse to be let loose, and the
Englishman to stand fast by him, suffering the horse to bite him at his
pleasure, eue^ the flesh from his arms: durst not stir till the king called to
him. An other time, the same Englishman complaining to him, that he had nothing
to eat save barlie, the King caused the horse his Sabadera or bag in which
they use to give them provander, to be hanged about the English man's neck full
of barlie: (as they do upon their horses heads) and so made him eat the
barlie like a horse. An other time the King, having taken offense at some
thing, threatened to kill the Englishman, and that without delay: an Alkaid,
vvilling to save his life, offered the King I know not how many hundredth
Duccats for him, to buy him of the King. Why thou fool (said the King) do
thou think I mean to kill him? No, I would not for so many thousand
Duccats: but to the Moors (as I said before) his jests, and threats were in
good earnest.

One of his Negros whom he loved, and called brother, having offended him,
being in his Obadia, that stately palace, vvalking in his garden, a little
paradise, in the midst whereof are diverse pleasant tankes or ponds, he
caused him to be cast into one of them, forbidding any to come near him to
help him out again: at length, having vvalked a turn or two, bade one go
pull him out: who brought him word he was drowned. What my brother
drowned, said he? Go pull him out, and bury him: there was all the mourning.

An other he caused to eat his own excrement: asking how it relished. Yea
he himself cut a piece of the brawne of a man's arm whom he had killed,
broyled it on the coals, Gago from whence al their gold comes conquered by
his praedecessors.
and did eat it.

The King of Gagoes son, not over a day or two before the Kings death (some
say the same day) drinking together, because he was not able to pledge him so
much as he drunk, being all aqua vitae (for so must every one do as he did,
and drink as he did) caused the whole bole full of aqua vitae to be given him
backwards like a glister, till it reversed in their faces again that gave it.
Having not long before made him to stand two days, and two nights in the
water. And before thrown down an other of the sons from the walls of
Saffia, and broke his thigh.

Under a color of going a hawking, would lie whole days, and nights abroad
in the fields a drinking: And before his death many days, and nights
together. God having bereaved him of his understanding as he did Nebuchadnezer,
and driven him from men to dwell with the beasts of the field. Yea he himself
not long before, having driven away from him all his most trusty servants,
(save one or two) committed to prison: And vvithall a vvatchfull dog which he
loved, and fed with his own hand, for some small offense he took, likewise
committed to prison with them: commanding he should but have so much bread,
and water a day. All these his watchmen at once sequestered from him, and the
other so over toyled, and vvearied with watching day and night: (perhaps also
vvearie of him as were others:) all seemed to conspire his death. Plotted (as
it seems) before by some of the Elchies, or renegadoes, whom the King had
threatened the next time he came to his house in Morocco to cut, and make
Eunuchs, to the number of two hundredth: whereof they were sore afraid. And
therefore one among the rest (a Frenchman as is reported) vvatched his
opportunity when the King came back to his tent at night (having been all the
day abroad a drinking) and with a piece chardged with two chained bullets,
shot him in by the fundament, and privy members into the body, as he was
lying along in his tent. A just judgment of God, in respect of that glister of
aqua vitae he gave to the King of Gagoes Son: and threatening likewise the
elchies as before.

As also in respect of that abominable impudent and filthy act he did at
Saffia to those poor women. But chiefly (which God in the end will punish
upon those Mahometans, both Turks and Moors) in causing poor Christians
(boys and others) to be circumcised perforce, yea cut, and made eunuchs. A
just judgment of God (I say) of all those Tyrants, both Turks, Moors, and
others, to be trembled at: and so I leave him.

Immediately after his death his younger brother Muley Elvvallid was saluted
King: being at that time a prisoner in the Alcasaua, the Kings house in
Morocco, expecting daily nothing else but death. Whereupon some of his friends
(as at such a time, and in such a case all are friends, and happy he that can
be the first; and svviftest Messenger) running in all have to the prison door,
and crying out aloud to him to come forth: he thinking it had been to
execution, to be put to death: lingering, and excusing himself, that he would
but take leave of his wife, and make himself ready (which he did only to
die) they calling, and crying more and more, at length he came forth, and so
was pregoned, and proclaimed King of a prisoner (I say) on a sudden become a
King. Of a far more soft nature, and disposition than his brother: yet cruel
and Tyrannous to poor Christians, and to the English, whom of late he has
most Barbarously entreated some of them. Eight at once taken, and circumcised
perforce: beaten, vvounded, and one man's head almost cut of, to make them turn
Moors, and forsake their faith. The rest fearful, daily expecting the like
measure: as by letters lately written from the Merchants there may appear:
which I reserve, with other passages, to a further account, leaving them to
his mercy, which indeed is cruelty: For the mercies of the wicked are
cruelties: and him and them to God to judge betwixt them, which in time might
have been prevented, by a seasonable dispatch long since expected: the loss of
so many poor Christian souls, as necessary I dare say as some other
dispatches: if the bodies, and souls of Christians be esteemed of any value
now a days: as they are in Gods sight right precious: precious in the sight
of the Lord is the death of his saints.

And now will I address my self (with this Proposition: and petition
hereunto annexed) to Christian Princes, to condole, and commiserate the
distressed, or rather desperate estate of these most miserable, or rather more
than miserable, creatures, if more may be: not only the English, but all other
nations, who this long time have endured a most miserable, and intolerable
slavery under these infidels, both Turks, and Moors, and are like to do more
and more if not prevented: Which I pray God at length they may take into their
Christian consideration. AMEN.

A PROPOSITION, AND PETITION TO ALL CHRISTIAN Princes, and States, Professors,
and Defenders of the true Christian faith, against all Antichristian powers
and principallities: As well the Pope, and his adherents, as the Turk, and his
Vassals, the Mahometans: both the one, and the other, now in these last days,
to be utterly destroyed: and the Kingdom of Jesus Christ to be erected never
to be destroyed: but to endure, and triumph even to the end of the World,
according to Daniels Prophecy 2. 44. And our Saviors likewise: Mat. 24. 14.
This Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a witness
unto all nations, and then shall the end come.
MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCES, Having been heretofore diverse times employed
into Barbary, for the redeeming of poor Christians out of Slavery, and other
affairs: and having been an eye-vvitnes of those great miseries, or rather
indignities, don to those poor Christians in those Countries by that Barbarous
people: indignities (I say) not to be uttered, not to be expressed, but rather
veiled over: as did that painter the sorrowful, and mournful, or rather more
than mournful countenance of that heathen Prince for his daughter, adjudged
to be sacrificed to that heathen Goddess, or rather Idol: by no painters
pensill to be expressed. More than mournful (I say) maiora lachrymis: so
many poor Christians daily taken by those infidels, Turks and Moors, and
carried captives into those cruel lions dens, as sheep appointed for the
slaughter: bought and sold in the merket, as beasts, and not men: and devoured
by those blooddie monsters: whose souls lie under the Altar, daily sacrificed
to those heathen devils, crying: How long, o Lord holy and true, do thou
not judge, and avenge our blood on them that dvvell on the earth? Yea beaten,
and tormented even to death, to make them forsake their faith: as not only men,
but children also have been forced, (and are daily) taken perforce (I say) and
circumcised, yea made Eunuchs, and so disabled at once, both from being men,
and Christian men, and otherwise most shamefullie abused by those filthy
sodomites, not to be uttered. Quis Italia fando etc. temperet a lachrymis?
Indignities (I say) maiora lachrymis, don, not only to those poor Christians,
but even to Christ Jesus himself, and his whole Church, and so to be
apprehended, without any National difference: whose members we all are, and
ought to have a fellovv-feeling of one an others miseries, or else we are no
Christians at all, nor worthy that name. I say, having been an eye-vvitnes of
those great miseries, and indignities don to the poor members of Jesus Christ,
(and consequently to himself:) as a poor member of his body, I could not but
be sensible thereof. And present the bodies, and souls of those poor members
of Christ (like that Leuite in the book of Judges) dismembered, cut in pieces,
and quartered, to the eyes likewise of all the tribes of Israel: that is to
say, the whole church of Christ, both Prince and people, of what nation
soever, all members of that his mystical body, and all alyke interest
therein: obliged, like the Israelites, to join together as one man, to right,
and revenge, even with the hazard of their lives, and estates, these so great
injuries, and indignities: consider of it, take advice, and speak your minds.
Open thy mouth for the dumme in the cause of all those that are appointed to
destruction. Those poor sheep appointed for the slaughter: the slaughter both
of body, and soul bought with so dear a price, whose blood else will be
required: required (I say) at the hands of all those, to whom God has given
power, and means, ( For to whom much is given of him much shall be required)
but want hearts, and minds to right, and redress it: speak your minds.
Consider of it (noble Princes and States) by your Ambassadors one with an
other, both for the present how to relieve all those poor souls that are in
misery, both under the Turks and Moors: and how to prevent the miseries of
others for the time to come, like to be taken by their ships at sea more and
more, and made slaves, that is to say more than miserable: if not prevented.
Which a fevv good ships, (had Christian Princes considered of it all this
time, and been so minded (that is to say of one mind hinc illae lachrymae)
might have prevented: and may yet for the time to come. To you I speak (most
noble Princes and States) that are of one mind: consider of it take advice,
and speak your minds. And in you to the whole church of Christ: let it be a
free will offering, both of Prince and people to Christ Jesus, toward this so
Christian, honorable, and charitable a work. A seacond redemption of his
poor distressed members, out of the hands of those infidels, very easy to be
tamed, and subdued: and with no great chardges to any, out of a voluntary
contribution of many. And (if I were vvorthie to advise, and this my
proposition, and petition to take effect) this free will offering, or
contribution, to be deposited in the hands of the Lords the States General of
the united Provinces, and the Prince of Orange: who have so great store of
ships, and can most convenientlie manage such affairs by sea: and are so
noble, and so honorable, as no doubt they would advance it to the utmost.
That so this sacred service, being managed by one undertaking State, consisting
of so many wise Statesmen, and prudent Senators, may by Gods blessing
receive better success, than those expeditions in former times, frustrated by
the dissension of diverse Princes undertakers: as in the Turkish history may
appear. The greatness of which Monarchy now draws to a period: (as that
of Rome,) magnitudine laboranssua: both the one, and the other, (as I said
before) now in these last days to be finally destroyed: and the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ to be erected, never to be d^stroyed, etc. I speak not these
things of my self, neither do I now come from my self, but have the holy
Prophets, Apostles, and Disciples of my Lord and Savior Christ Jesus for my
vvarant. And in his name only, and no other, even from the King of Kings do I
now come: (I magnify my employment) more than an Ambassador, and yet
vvithall a petitioner, to treat, and entreat in the behalf of his poor
afflicted members, who are not able, buth with prayers, and tears, to treat,
or entreat for themselves. Open thy mouth for the dumme in the cause of all
those that are appointed to destruction. There is my commission: there is my
vvarrant. And I must in duty, and will, stand upon it, it standing so highly
upon the King my masters honor, the King of Kings: expecting now how I
shall be received: the success whereof I refer to him. And so conclude with
prayers, and tears the weapons of Gods church: Quid enim nisi vota supersunt.
Praying God to put into the hearts of Christian princes, with one mind to
fulfill his vvil: for the final destruction, both of that Antichristian, and
this Mohammedan tyranny: and the final establishment of his aeternall
Monarchy never to be destroyed. AMEN, AMEN.

FINIS.

