PLAIN PERCEVALL THE Peacemaker of England. SWEETLY INDEVORING WITH HIS blunt
persuasions to botch up a Reconciliation between MAR-TON and Mar-Tother.
Compiled by lawful art, that is to say, without witch craft, or sorcery: and
referred specially to the Meridian and pole Artichocke of Nomans Land: but may
serve generally without any great error, for more Countries then I Will speak of.



Quis furor aut hos, Aut hos, arma sequi, ferrumque lacessere iussit. Printed
in Broad-streete at the sign of the Pack-staffe.

TO THE NEW VP-START MARTIN, AND THE MISBEGOTTEN HEIRS OF HIS body: his
overthwart neighbor, Mar-Martin, Mar-Mar-Martin, and so forth following the
Traulila-lilismus, as far as Will Solnes stuttring pronunciation may stumble
over at a breath: To all Whip John's, and Whip Iackes: not forgetting the
Caualiero Pasquill, or the Cook Russian, that dressed a dish for Martins diet,
Marforius and all Cutting Hussnufs, Roisters, and the residew of light singred
younkers, which make every word a blow, and every book a bobbe: Perceuall the
Peacemaker of England, wishes grace to the one party, of the other Parish:
and peace stichd up in a Gaberdine without pleat or wrinckle, to the other
party of this Parish.
I Would it had bin PERCEVALS hap, to have com to the beginning of a friendly
feast, or to the latter ending of so dangerous a fraye. And I thought I had bin
fair for it at the first: for plodding through Aldersgate, all armed as I was,
with a quarter Ash staff on my shoulder, and an empty belly under my
northern belt, I spied me, a large P. with a wide mouth like a porradge pott,
and being quicksented thrust forward on the trale, and found it was Papp. But I
cannot tell, what the goodere came into my mind, but somewhat it was, that
persuaded me to try before I tasted, and look before I licked: And though my
sharpset-stomach would have straight fell into acquaintance, by reason of some
ancient familiarity between a western fellow, and a whitpot: yet bearing a
brain as well as a belly, I stood sauntring over it, like a whelp that had
scalded his mouth with lapping up hot water Grewell: till I found that it was
no meat indeed for PERCEVALL, but rather a bone for MARTIN to digest, if his
stomach would serve him: for though the first ladlefull had a smacke as soft as
pap, the next morsel, a taste as sweet as a fig, and so forth: yet I see he
that was Cook and Cater, thought to feed MARTIN with these nunchio^s, as men
feed Apes: with a bit and a box on the ear. Why but soft masters, fair
play and no snatching: is your feasting turned to a fray? put up, put up your
weapons, and be some wiser then some. They were never tall fellows of their
hands that were such hacksters in the street: nor ever proved old wringers
indeed, that sell out at their belly metal. Go to MARTIN, go to: I know a man
is a man, though he have but a hose on his head (and thou have a close house on
thine) but the greatest quarrellers meet often with their ouer-match. Putcase
thou had a good cause (as alas I am a plain fellow and not given to
swearing) yet a couple of these late Roysters would mar ten MARTINS, at the
cracking of a stage Jest. They have plaguey Clubfists, the one with his
Counter-Cuffe, the other with his Country Cuffe, would quickly make a blew
MARTIN. And you on the other side: what need all this stir? this banding of
kilcowes to fight with a shadow? If I were at home, within the precinctes of
mine own domination, I would charge you in Gods name and the Queens, to put up
your whinyards, you are men enough, able to deal one to one at handigripes,
come cut and long tail: why should you offer to take the advantage of the
higher ground? Truly, truly, I will present you at the law day for a riot,
though I be neither side man for this Meridian, nor Warden, but to ward my
self as I walk. There is more danger in breaking the Queens Majesty's peace,
then you are aware of. That mad companion MARTIN, you know, plays least in
sight, and serves you, as Aeneas served Turnus, to make him fight with a mist
in steed of a man: he does but send his picture, to make trial of your
affection toward him, as (my boy at home says) Heliogabalus did, to search
the humors of the Roman Senate. If you had used his Image somewhat more gently,
within this space, he would have appeared in his likeness, incarnated or
incased in some knaves skin or other I warrant you: bear with one gross
term, so as I make no custom of it. Come on therefore MARTIN and the rest,
house your selves in the next Tavern, I will set my self (not a knave
between two honest men) but as a good fellow, betwixt the shadow of MARTIN,
and the natural shape of your selves, to try whether I can stint this, Hold
my dagger from your throat, or no.

Yours if you like me: mine own if you strike me. P. P. P.

HE was a tender hearted fellow, though his luck were but hard, which hasting to
take up a quarrel, by the high way side, between a brace, of Saint Nicholas
Clargie men: was so courteously embraced on both parties, thas he tendered his
purse for their truce, and swapt away his silver for Copper retaile. Such
copsmates would be examined, if it were but for Alcumist: and such a kind heart
Chronicled, if it were but for a fool.

All this wind shakes none of my Corn, quoth Perceuall, whereupon Gossip
Reason the chief actor in the pageant of my brain, and high speaker in the
Parliament of my devise, began this motherly, and well powdered tale. The
meddling Ape, that like a tall wood cleauer, assaying to rend a twopenny billet
in two pieces, did wedge in his pettitoes, so fast, between the two clefts,
that he stuck by the feet for a say: and remained forth coming at the
discretion of those, whose occupation he enchrochd upon before he was free:
Short though were his prentiship, did he not pay for his learning? Tush
Perceuall, has no felicity in these captious Intergatories. And therefore
good sweet Tenant Reason, speak plainly, and say Landlord mine (give every
man his right) he that thrusts his finger between the bark and the tree, is
like to be pinched: Counterfeit Martin, or Counter Martin, let them fight or be
frinds, with a knaves name: encounter not them, they be like Gins, they carry
fire in their hearts, and death in their mouths. If they get thee within their
reach: thou must come to knokham fair, and what bewteene the block and the
beetle, be thumpd like a stockfish, now gandmer are not these your examples
moralized? Pithy stufe to keep a man from crossing the bowling Alley, for
fear of a broken shin. Or it moves me as much as Two ancient standers, that
Senior and the post.
the fatherly rebuke of an old stander, moude that university post, which
seemed to take the wall of a Senior. I cannot though you should bind me to such
a stubborn post, as that grave student met with in the dark, but carry one
bucket of water, when I hear the bells ring backward, and the fire run
forward. They were in a fault, where the fire first began': but first and last,
help, quench all; or else these high flying sparks will light on the heads of
us all, and kindle in our bedstraw, if other folks lodging be no better then
mine. Well fare London yet, for a policy besides water (which they put in
practice too lately, the more was the pity:) pull down the houses burning,
lest they catch hold on their neighbors. I, but you talk of cost, and
commission. That trick would ask a long pole and a hoke, and my quarter stafe
is too short, except a man stood on tiptoe. But now I remember my self, never
will I ouerstraine my strength, nor play at hand over head so high, but where I
may feel sure footing.

Give me my spectacles, that I may see whether I dream, or whether these
sights be all in good sadness, which I behold, sometime these madcaps be at a
fray: sometimes at a feast: it makes no matter whether it be plain dealing or
iugling, take them at the best, and sit down to their banquet. And since Martin
and his brood has furnished the first course, with sundry dishes, and saweed
them thoroughly: and again his heavy frinds Pasquill, Marforius, and the fresh
Cater of late, have counter coursd him, with messes somewhat hot of the spice:
(for the Pay had corns of long Pepper as big as a hatchet:) I follow like a
plain dunstable Groom, with salt and spoones on a trencher. Indeed you say
true, Sal sapit omnia: and service without salt, by the rite of England, is a
Cuckholds see, if he claim it. Go to then, and take salt to your soppes, least
sorrow attaint them. Make brine for your bull biefe, that it may suck out
those swelling corrupt affections that remain some what rank in the flesh.
As for my spoons, those I brought, that I and my companions might have one slap
at the Spoone meat, wherein Martin boasted Martin called his arguments spoon meat
in his protest.
his Cookery: and the other set out their skill. They had need be large long
Spoons (say you) if I come to feed with such whipsters. Let me alone, for my
actiuity, at the dish meat, and a long arm, though my scoope be the shorter.
Perceuall, you are somewhat a merry man, as well as the rest, according to your
homely Country fashion. Mary sir, there is somewhat in it beside true working,
and a Gods name, quoth the good man, that checked his wife, for hopping about
the house, and telling what the scholars of Oxford paid for their good cheer:
when he no sooner stepped over the threshold, but fell into the same tune and
taking; and about they went. My Masters be ware of Martins circle, for if his
frinds or his foes chop into it unawares, they are like to dance after his
pipe, and set themselves upon a miry pin, (for so does he) till his
vnderpinning will fail him, I doubt.

Come on Martin, put out (as the passenger said to the Miller) not a knaves
head, no keep in, thou art wiser then so, yet if wind do not fail thee, thy
late Customers, which play more sacks to the mill, have brought greists or
jests at least wise to be ground. If thy mill stones be not worn too blunt,
for want of pecking, there is picking meat for thee: make meal of it, and take
large tole to the enriching of the Tolbot thou talkest off.

Martin me thinks the clacke of thy mill, is somewhat noisome to the whole
country, thou live in; either thou art well set en work, or else, thou have
wind at will to thy sails.

I pray thee make once an auricular confession, tell me in mine ear: is the
desire of Reformation so deeply imprinted in thine heart, as the term is often
printed in thy papers? Is it conscience or lucre, that spurgals thy hackney
pen, to force it take so high a hedge, as thou leapest at? I have seen as mad
a trick as this, when a Rank rider has put his horse to a hedge, and lay in
the ditch for his labor. Thy foming mealy mouth betokens stomach, and young
unbridled fits, for all that fatherly countenance, and grave vizard which
sometimes thou use to plead the cause of thy Reformation under. No no, you
use the nostrils too much, and to many unseasoned frumps, to come of that raze,
that sincerely in time of superstition required Reformation. Whow? I go about
to disgrace thee? No no I come but by the way of entreaty, as it were with a
beck to admonish thee, that thou putst the wrong foot before, and therefore
pull back. Yet bear with me, if I doubt whether all be gold that glistereth,
since Saint Martins rings be but Copper within, though they be gilt without,
says the Goldsmith. Idle terms came never from Saint Paul, nor reproachful
taunts from Michaell: yet S. Paul, no doubt, was merry in his days: and the
Archangell, you know, was at controversy with the Devil. Here again whow?
nay if I trot so heavily, I am neither for Martins riding, nor these three new
merry men's reading. Gape Martin that I may see thy age, but take heed, thou bite
me not: I thought so: the mark is not out of thy mouth, for thou have a Colts
tooth in thine head still: if thou will have it drawn by foul means, these
Roisters have beetles to knock it out: if gently, let me be thy tooth drawer,
I have a kind heart of mine own, and that name has been good at such a
practice heretofore.

Take heed Martin, a horse may over reach in a true pace, and thou play the
fool though thou should have a good matter in hand. As for my part, I come
not to take any part, I am none of those, which love fending and proouing, if I
can part you but for the time present, I am at my Iourneies end. Let the higher
officers examine the cause, and find the fault (if al be true thou talkest of)
where it is: yet (as a well bearded Poet taught a Queen to speak in a Latin
Interlude) Etsi causa repetentis bona, Mala sic perentis est. Out upon thee
Perceuall, what gibberish is that? what, what, latin in the mouth of a plain
fellow? Nay I wot near, but it has left behind it a wale in my throat like a
strange bodylouse in an unknown pasture. Well Martin, Sustine pronunc, stand by
a trice, but look you depart not the court, in pain of mine Indignation. Thou
shall perceive that like a good sempster, I can cut even by a thread, and part
this quarrel without partiality. If I use indifferency, call me not John
Indifferent now, for my good will: or if I lay my helping hand, to the cure of
such a broile, without breach of peace, or danger of riot; say not thou as an
old Pasquill said being in a trance of that famous and modest Clarke
Erasmus, that I hang houering in the mid way betwixt heaven and hell: He no
doubt, misused, for fancy sake the memory of a good man deceased: and thou in
so saying should mistake the good meaning of one well Disposed. Stand by I
say, till thy turn comes about again,

Now, my Country men on the other part, make your appearance, think not
skorne that Perceuall, is somewhat in your tops, my surname is Peacemaker, one
that is but poorly regarded in England, because Peace has been long
plentiful: but yet one that may speak with some authority, as long as our
most royal Peace-Mistres holds the stern (which God grant long she may.) That
fair, and fairest flower, in our garland, if she should fail: then were it
high time for Perceuall and all Peacemakers, to put up their pipes, or else in
steed of the soft violine, learn to sound a shrill trumpet. Well then, let a
poor man's tale be hard amongst you. Martin is the man and the mark you shoot
your forked arrows at: if you strike his face, you can raise no skin, for his
forhead is brass: nor fetch up his blood, because he is given to blush no more
the^ my black dog at home: welfare a fair face upon an ill pair of shoulders
yet: if you pearce his heart, you can do him little harm, for he is liude like
a Cat: strike his tongue, the biternes of the same, will trace out the Author of
the wound, like the fish Torpedo, which being towchd, sends her venime along
line and angle rod, till it cease on the finger, and so mar a fisher for ever.
Fie, fie, will you upon a spleen, run upon a Christen body, with full cry and
open mouth? Though indeed I cannot blame you, since his proceedings were so
unchristianlike, if you took him for a Monster, or a Maddog: and so went about
to worm him: but I am afraid such a careless curre, is cureles: wormeseede
and reasons will do him no good: and for other remedies that might come by
insicion, his wormeaten Conscience refuses, (as Dionysius did the hands of his
Barbar, for fear lest mistaking his beard, he would have cut his throat) and
therefore keeps him out of your Clutches. Yt were good to keep such a Cur in
awe, but alas hurt him not, for a dogs mouth is medicineable, (they say:) Verum
est, if he bite not where he should lick, I am answered. But here is such
likening Christianfolks to dogs; that I cannot away with it. Shall we have
neighbors children, lie skufling in the kennel together by the ears like bride
well birds? it is as good as a bear bayting for them, which love neither, to
see either Nouze other so bedlemlike. Never a beadle sturring? nor bear-heard
at hand to put his staff in the mouth of the bear, or pull off these dogs?
This will prove foul play: whosoever get the victory, Seu vincas, seu
vinceris, maculere necesse est si: the rest was at my fingers end: but fare
well it, since it is gone: Bear with my shittle remembrance. I do not think,
though Martin and you be of diverse Parishes, but you be all of one Church,
sail all in one ship, and dwell all in one Commonwealth. Nay you are all good
subjects, or else I would the woorst were curbd with a checkthong, as big as
a towpenny halter, for halting with a Queen so good and gracious. All this
heart burning between you, is but about the bounds of the Parish, and the
limits of the Church lands. Let the yoouth be content to be infourmed of the
Mearstones, by the Auncientry of the Parish: and not continue such bustling,
backbiting, with facing and defacing one another to the uttermost: this is
Spite, and not Spirit, or if it be, it is some spightfull Spirit. It were
enough to entitle those Brown sectaries of the Black Prince, with the name of
traitors, and not to cast them like squibs and wild fire within your own
hatches, and the body of your own Commonwealth. Mary who began (say you:)
Martin called traitor first, he spoke lauishly, and must hear as knauishly. Now
the blood is up; he that has most gall in his garbage, thinks to win the
goal. And he that has most tongue powder hopes to drive the other out of the
field first. I could tell these eager younsters, how they might be even with
their Adversary: give fair words for foul: Do good against evil: and heap
hot burning coals upon his head. That is a sentence sooner belieud because it
is scripture, then put in practice, for all it is true.

Such a Deane, such a Doctor, slips within the compass of treason cries
Martin. Another, takes him by the nose with a pair of left handed pincers, and
pulls him over the pumpes into the same puddle. Wot you O P. P. there I played
upon thee to thy pain.
what the little wagges said, when they had been telling many precious
miracles of Robin-goodfellow and the devil? We shall speak so long of the
devil in jest, that he shall come amongst us in good earnest: God warrant us,
and therewithal, crossed themselves, for it was in the old time: I would we
could bless us from him, this new time. But I am afraid, there will be so
much talk of traitor, and so long use of such bugs words, that some of our
Male-contented Hussnuffs, and Marprelats will prove their words master, yet I
will nicke-name no body: I am none of these tuft mockadoo mak-a-dooes: for Qui
mocchat, moccabitur, quoth the seruingman of Abington.

And, as who should say, they that named Rebels oftenest with a breath, were
the soundest winded subjects: who can tell that? Not I: but sure I am, that the
boy which greeted his father with a letter clapped full of commendations,
commendations, and nothing but commendations, prooude as untoward a son, as
he that directed his superscription to his most obedient parents.

If Menippus, or the Man in the Moon, be so quick-sighted, that he beholds,
these bitter sweet Jests, these railing outcries: this shouing at Prelates to
cast them down, and heauing at Martin to hang him up for Martilmas biefe: what
would he imagine otherwise, then as that stranger, which seeing a Quintessence
(beside the fool and the Maid Marian) of all the picked yoouth, straind out of
an whole Endship, footing the Morris about a May pole. And he, not hearing the
cry of the bounds, for the barking of dogs, (that is to say) the minstrelsie
for the fidling, the tune for the sound, nor the pipe for the noise of the
tabor, bluntly demanded, if they were not all beside themselves, that they so
lipd and skipd without an occasion.

Back with that leg Perceuall: Nouice as thou art, do thou think that we
are some, all mad? Alas I am a stranger, and cannot tell what your horse play
means. Learn, learn to understand the occasion of those actions: Their words
are common? for every cutpurse Occasions and actions common.
uses them at the Old Bailey, that has had any skill in his miniken Handsaw.

I can tell who was acquainted with an old sooker, that caries such Potticall
verses of the State of Flanders, in a linen bag (though they be no baggage
neither) as would make a man think upon driving out sides, and taking of parts
as long as he lives. My self drinking hand to hand with the founder of them:
for lack of a nutmeg, he gave me a great and a less, to grate in a spice
bole, and this was the powder. Orgia turbantem natum dum mactat Agaue,
Insana, insanum Penthea, credit aprimi.


Had not he a long wind that sowpd up these two at a draught? and a good head
that carried them away without staggering, together with their Appurtenances?
Mad was the mother and killed her wood son, etc. That liquid Poet, had asked
himself the question, who was in the fault, that two factions were at daggers
drawing, till they were like to draw all to an uproar, he answers like a sly
slave; Ambo. for that was his meaning, though he wheeld about, seeking to
declare his mind, with a Far Fetched Simile.

But (say you) there is no reason in it, that we should stand bound to the good
a-bearing, crcept Martin were bound to the peace. If he snarle like a cur at
us, why should not we provide a Bastinado for him? and he making an assault, to
mount over our park pales: why may not we have one cast in his Orchard, and a
fling at his Medlar tree? Mary sirs, for fear the Cudgel fall down again
upon a man's own Costard. If a swift running stream have free passage along
the kennell, fare well it, you shall never hear worse of it: but stop it, and
Hercules like where it finds no way, it will make one: and so set the next
neighbors meadows all on a floate. When he began to skold first, you should
have betook him to an Ostler, to walk, while you had called an officer to
chamber his tongue.

So if you had done, his own poison would have festered in his own flesh.
Pride and venime, if they had so ranckly possessed his heart, they would have set
his own skin a strute, and burst his hide before this time. I see the vain is
up in the forhead, and Martin shall have as good as he brings, or else a free
school of skolds shall be set up for the nonce. O that M. Th. Cicero might rise
again, a little before his turn, and see railing made a profession, Slander
set in a Shrine, and honored with the slaughter of many ripe wits, in steed of
a sacrifice: how would he blame England now, (as he blamed Athens when he
liude) for erecting Chapels in honor of that dishonorable cowple: Reproach and
Impudency: or as he checkd his Country men the Romans, which Virtutes enim non
vitia con. secrare decet ^ic. de l^. 2.
had builded an altar to the Agewe, and a monument to the remembrance of Cursed
Fortune. I cannot tell what Spiritual Chapels, and Invisible altars our men
set up now a days, but I am sure, one of the Largest Churches in England is
like to fall on his maribons, and so mar the fashion of his bones, that it may
be called Allstones here after. Had Martin walkd that way he might have espide a
great hole and a miserable maime in the body of that Church. It is an ill wind
that blows no man to good they say: yea but the Prophet Aggeus would have
given counsel to repair such a place of prayer: if Martin himself cry
Havoc at it, believe him not, Aggeus was a great deal the honester man,
although while he liude he was no saint. Where was I? my journey lies not that
way: I was about to say that the Printers had hard luck if they lost by these
matches that are made of late against Martin. Whose states when I look upon, I
am ready to cry at as a Country man of mine did, when traversing London
streets, he spide a Jack an apes, in a gaie cote, sit mooing on a Merchants
bulk: Good Lord what knacks are made for money, now adays?

Speak a blooddy word in a Barbors shop, you make a forset: and good reason
too, Cap him sir, if he pay it not. Speak a broad word or use a gross
term amongst huntsmen in chaze, you shall be leasht for your labor: as one
that disgraceth a gentleman's pastime and game, with the terms of a heardsman.
And is there no penalty to repress such lavish over reachers as offer legends
of lies to the press? Martin, he put those lies into print unlawfully, which
he coind in hugger mugger: and others opposite to his humor will have their
lies lie open manifestly, if it be but to show that they dare put in for the
whetstone, and make as loud lies as Martin the forman. But who is the father of
such fruit, or the sower of such seed? False witness, and lying was forbode by
Moses Law, but is taken up now for a custom, of one lewd Customer, and has
got Chapmen that will never lay it down, except they make their end as tedious
to the indifferent Reader, as his beginning was odtous to the peaceable hearer.
He that catches every flying tale by the end, may chance to take a frog for a
fish, and do as the boy, that bit a snake by the head instead of an eele.
Heresay is too slender an evidence to spit a man's credit upon, or to broach a
man's Conscience with kitchen terms or any thing, nothing comes amiss to
Perceuall.

I see neighbors how you crowd backward, thinking belike to ride upon my
Crupshoulders: I am no Ape Carrier, I pray you defile not my sheeps russet
Coat, with your dirtie shoes yet: this home made Karsey, and my plain speeches
may have as much wool (I dare not say so much wit) as is in your double pild
velvet. Blessed are the Peacemakers (I say:) and so are neither the breeders
nor favorites of discord. Cursed are the malicious inuentors of slanders; and
so are neither the renewers nor continuers of Concord. O so some of those
companions ply the bore, to bore a shadow, and beat their knuckels against a
bare wall, and to get a sure card on their side, either calls for Justice, and
seeks to incense our noble Queen against the other. Indeed I confess some of
them have great cause so to do, but what then? Let her imperial Majesty
alone, by her gracious leisure, and wisdom, she will prepare a boisterous
snuffle, for such boisterous headstrong Iaddes, as will be wincing. Slow to
wrath, and slower to punishment, and always like Elizabeth, she peaseth the
sword of Justice, with an upright hand: when season serves, she will strike,
and yet divide so equally, that she hurts not one heir of an natural subject.
No doubt she is the natural mother of this Island (if Solomon himself were
Judge) that is so tender over her Sons and subjects. And they on the other
side, stepdames, and most unnatural parents, that would have their children
dismembered and cut off in middle. Again, those children be chaunglings, that
in steed of sucking the milk, would suck the blood of their nourses. Do
thou believe there be any Fairies then Perceuall? I cannot tell whether there
be Fairies, but I am sure there is a foul Devil that brings forth changeable
coured vrchins, which can glister like a gloss worm near gold, look pale and
wan upon Lead, and brown upon Iron: tell me now, whether is such a one a
Chaungling, a Horselech, or a Chamelaeon? their Law: set down your staff, and
pause a while, this heavy fardell has bred a stitch in my short ribs. But
well remembered, Crier, make an, o yes, for Martin to come into the Court. O
sir, do you stand under my sleeue, and I see you not? I pray God I have not a
fool at mine elbow, the Devil you have, quoth his heavy frinds. I think the
mad slave, has tasted on a ferne-stalke, that he walks so invisible.

I have had conference Martin, with these ruff Roisters that challendge thee
at all weapons, from the forest bill, to the bodkin. They seem to blame a
certain Pipe of Pistling, that has took the tip of thy tongue and a vain of
lavish iangling, that has made thy palate rise out of socket. Their teeth
water at revenge, and are sharp set on edge: thy self was the grindstone of
their wits, and now if they cannot come at the fair, to hold thy nose to the
grindstone, they swear to chop thy Relickes and hacke thine hackle as small as
fuel to the fire. I perceive, and they would feign be on thy Jack for thy
sawcines, that thou art principal picker of the quarrel.

O Martin, honor gray hears, during thy nonage: or else look for dishonor and
dotage if thou can get any competent years on thy back, before thou
procurest a hempen chain above thy shoulders. Be thou a young boy, or a stale
Batchelar, (unmarried thou art by thine own Protestation) learn to reverence
those two ornaments of a commonwealth, Age and Authority. Bar this pert
bearding of men reputed honest for their behavior, and honorable both for
their calling and counsel: Leave thrumming thy Pibauld Iestes with Scripture,
Iron and Clay will not be tempered together. Thy pamphlets which thou sendest
into the broad world, may well be Pistles, but certainly they be no Gospels.
The word of God is sufficient to work the will of God, and need not thy
frivolous medleis, thy humane traditions, or additions, either to qualify the
virtue, or disgrace the enemies thereof, which thou pretendest, being thy
self, I doubt, an archenemie to the same.

Ask the Printer is he have not a merier book: this fellow is fallen so low
into his dumps, that there is no sport in reading him. Let me gape and stretch
my self a little, and then hay we ye.

I find that in every trade and occupation, there is a better and a worse, as
there is in every warpe of fish, a great and a less. There is a Shomaker,
there is a Cobbler: a Tailor, and a Botcher: a Merchant, and a Broker: a
Haberdasher and a Pedlar: a Mason and a Dawber: a Minstrell and a Fiddler: a
Parson and a Uicar: a Minister and a Curat: there steps me in a third tricksie,
neat, nimble, spruse Artificer into every one of these occupations: and like a
prickeard Mule will be of another distinct kind from either dame or fire. One
standing all upon his pumps and pantables, will be above a Shomaker. Another
mounts upon a loftier Shop bourd then a Tailor, and will be none otherwise
termde then a shaper of garments forsooth. Stand thy ground Perceual, never run
through such a rableme^t of Craftsmen forward, and backward, I am windles to
follow thee so fast over and over so many trads. I have thy meaning at one
word, as well as at an hundred. Then sir if you be of such a sudden conceit,
follow me step by step, from these handicrafts to matters of Religion. Some of
conscience study to reform their own lives, and look first into their own
bosom: others to the intent that all the world might suppose, that nothing
were amiss at home, like bad huswifes fly abroad, and search out public
imperfections, to busy their heads about. Some again endeavor to practice,
without a multiplying of words openly: others bear a ready tongue in their
heads, but bray them in a mortar, they will never be mortified in deeds: Some
earnest protestants are precise in correcting their own corrupt affections,
and in aduertising their brother kindly of his faults as they fall: he goes for
my money. Comes me in an Hipocriticall younster, and he will be a Puritan, and
an ase before any that ever bare the name, or else you abuse him. I have heard
of words that have degenerated into a worse signification from a better, but
few terms that were betterd by any that used them. I hard say a good old
Doctor (he shall have my good word though he be laid in his grave) found out
Puritanisme in Papistry (for so he termed their fained hypocrisy) when he
dealt against Jesuits: then though we cannot be too forward in a good matter,
yet the devil can invent sins in excess, as well as in defect. Men have great
desire to be compted high fliers and deep swimmers, yet be the both dangerous
exercises, considering that a man has neither wings to beat the air, nor
finnes to break the water. Adam would have been a God, but that his foot
slipped, and he fell into a state mortal. I do not think, Martin, but the old
Serpent can tempt the perfectest Eve that ever was, and then let Eve alone to
persuade her husband. But thou have no Eve to trouble thee: no but thou have
flesh and blood to interrupt thee.

Nay Perceuall, now you wade into such particulars, you are wide: stand not
upon the private censuring of persons, lest thou seem as senseles, as they
which determine upon an Ale bench whether the passenger that passes by the
lettise, be a Saint or a Devil. Nay ho there neighbor: chaue hard them say,
that if a man point with his finger in the Court of a Prince, he may chance to
forfet his whole fist for his sawcines: he points fair, that disapoints his
mouth of such a nourse, as either of his hands be.

But there is one thing used amongst these Marrers and Markers of folks which
mask with vizards of Reformation, that sticks in my stomach, and will not be
digested. The greatest coursers, and professed hunters of dumb dogs: such as
weary themselves in hollowing after that Vermin, and make their voices hoarse,
in crying out against them, are the very foster fathers, that pester our Church
with that Cattle. I wish that we had none of these toong-tide Curs, that
cannot bark, nor say buffe to a woulfes shadow: if it were possible. But you
that most cry out against them, why have you brought them up no better? Why
have you not taught some of those Puppes their lerrie? I will take it upon the
credit of my self, an vpstantiall yeoman, that they most part of these mute
shepherds are hatchd up under the wing of those which beat most upon the
remoouing of dumb dogs. I could give you some examples in Bedfordshire: a
whole rablement at least. A Preacher, if his conceit be any thing swift, that
he can roll it in the pulpit, must have his reader at his elbow, to favor his
voice. A Minister that has any thing a fat benefice, and a full belly, will
have his Co-brother to assist him. And what must he be but either an halfe-peny
boy, or an idle craftsman, that shall serve for meat, drink and cloth, a
little tutoring in Divinity, and the reuersion of a benefice, when it fauls,
where his godfathers commendatorie letters may prevail. I could well like that
men of some desert and imploiment should have their assistants, so they were
Preachers, but you shall not take them in that fault. Where is the conscience
of these criers out on blind guides become? not resident at home now: but
abroad, busy in inueighing against Bishops for their tolerations granted, to
such as themselves have preferred, commended, presented. And by this
Leger-demaine has the Commonwealth been robbed of Tailors, Shoomakers, and good
Artificers, and the Church ouercharged with bad Ministers: which thank God, I
dare say in their hearts (with that firehot Preacher) that they are so far
from the Romish Religion, as they cannot understand a word of the Latin tongue.
I tell you, this is a misery to hear, and a misery to see: that such eager
Callers for Reformation, should plant s^ips of their own gathering: supplant
Magistrates for wincking at it, and make the people believe, that they would
have it otherwise, with all their hearts. Now dare these fellows aspire to
further authority in Minister-making, when they suffer their houses to be the
Nourceries of such impotent and impudent encrochers upon Church-Offices? What
say the people to this gear? tush, let the master alone to speak for the
man: he will commend him, for his great pro^^ting in knowledge under him:
prefer him for a piece of plain doctrine; praise him, that he is not
infected with Philosophy, or such like University learning: but especially
that he is an honest man, zealous, forward in Religion, and one that seeks for
Reformation. This fellow cannot be misliked I warrant you: I, I that one word
of Reformation, Martin, which has been so much in thy mouth, and so greatly in
thy request, has made thy Customers swarm like Bees to the ringing of a
Basin: but take heed, thine own Cattaile sting thee not, when they shall taste
what Hemlockes thou have mingled, wherewith thine hiue was anointed.

But tush thy gossips will stand upon it, that Martins clock goes true, though
the Devil were in the Horologe: their relish is altered so far with the
sirope of self-love, that Choler is called Zeal, and Melancholy,
Mortification: whereupon follows swift judgment that cuts all other from
salvation: and some bad sullen conceit peeuishly taken from their own
humorous imagination, that they would have all stamped upon, that be not of
their stamp, or will not be strainde to their stark staring madness. You had
best say now I speak against good men: quatenus they are good, Martin, I am
their Orator, in the state demonstratiue to extol them: but a wart is a wart
if it were in the face of Alexander: frowardnes is frowardnes, if it were in my
Father: sin is sin in holy David himself. And Socrates had a wanton look
of his own, though his scholars should beat the Phisiognomer for so saying. I
would they were so good as I could wish them: we should have better fruit, and
more good deeds, which are now both thin sown god wot, and thinner grown. Yet
be they, as be may, I may be thus bold with their masterships. Beware of a
heat, for so long as a man is warm, he cannot feel his own imperfections,
but thinks that every man which sweats not is keycold, such fiery Agues fall
soonest into a surfeit, and founder themselves with their intemperate
behavior. You shall have a lame Jade, bridle, and brag it up and down
Smithfield, when he is a little chafde, as though he could stand on no ground
for lustines: set him up in a stable, till he wax a little cold, and his limbs
be so stiff, he can stand on no ground for lamenes. Some of thy mates Martin,
I am afraid, be always stirring so busily, least standing long still in the
open fair, they fall to downeright halting, and so be disclosed for arrant
heldings. Such Iadish tricks make a sound horse to be suspected, and some
hipocrites, make earnest professors doubted of, yet neither condemned so
vnmercifullie as though there were no way but one: God forbid. But leave leave,
all the sort of you, to boulster up the faults of your own parishioners, and
boult out the skapes ofsuch as are none of your sectaries. One spakey Apple
will make the whole hourd smell, pick him out: One Hipocriticall dissembler,
will bring reproach upon the whole brotherhood, cull him out: and although he
defy the Surplice, (which is a point of great valiancie) yet let him be put to
the choice of a whip or a white sheet: if he have offered in secrecy to
defend this position. That a woman waking may lawfully graft Dianaes arms,
upon the Temples of her husband sleeping. You mean unhappily Perceuall,
whatsoever your words be: I know a newst what Circuit you are in. But is it
not a Religious deed to conceal the blemish of a brother, least the Gospel be
ill spoken of for his misdeeds? As who should say the punishment of malefactors
were not the fruit of the Gospel? which heavenly and blameles Oracle none but
Atheists and Miscreants will condemn for the shameless action, of such a one as
speaks of gospels in the day: but uses I knew not what nightspels in the
dark. Never be afraid that any which has his five senses, will impute the
fall of a brother to the ouergreat knowledge he had in the scriptures: but to
the slender practice and profit he made in the same: for all his great boast.
Take heed, have an eye to the door, least that, that Frierly Caveat creep in
amongst Protestants, Simon casl^ tamen ca^^.
whereby their ghostly Fathers wished a man to live Charily, though not chastely.

Whether will Perceuall and this weather hold? nay no further Martin, thou
may spot in that hole, for i will come no more there: here I pitch my staff,
and stand to urge thee, with these promises above named: thou begannest ^^st,
and therefore give not over last. Thy beginning was worst, let thine ending be
best. Controversies be meat and drink to the people: but do not cramme them
with such gobbets, as may stick in their throats, least they hang the head on
the shoulder, like him that was slain with an arrow at Tiburn pricks. That is
a new kind of dict, with all my heart. Yet sir, when the steel and the flint
be knockde together, a man may light his match by the sparkle: surely, but I
think tinder be very danke now adays, and though it take fire quickly, yet
it takes light by leisure: for there has been striking and iarring ever since,
and a great while before, that a learned man somewhat on thy side, Martin,
seemed to persuade that contention for good matters was good: you should have
his words: but that Graecum est, non potest legi: and yet I see no more Candles
tinded the^ wont to be, but a great many Beacons Car.
more fired then ought to be. You shall never make me believe, that many
Arguments turn soonest to Agreements. I have seen them, which have seen such
hurly burlies about a couple, (that were no Fathers of the Church neither)
Aristotle and Ramus, or else ask the Uniuersities, such a quoile with pro and
con, such urging of Ergoes, til they have gone from Art together by the ears,
and made their conclusions end with a Clunchfist, right like the old
description of Logic. My young masters could not be content to whet their
wits with such a co^tentio^: but fell to whetting their Tuskes at one another:
like those children which sitting in the Chimney corner, some at one side, some
at another, with the fire in the middle; fell to it with firebrands, when they
should have but warmde themselves and away. One little spark of dissension, is
able to set a whole house, a Town, an University, a City, a whole Realm on
fire, the affections of young men be so ready to nourish it. Well then Martin,
and you professed Mar-Martins, in presence of me Perceuall shake hands and be
friends, meet half way, and I standing iump in the middle will cry aim to
you both: so as you come not running with force and maine, and crush me betwixt
you for my good will. As for thine offense Martin, of higher Powers, I dare
undertake, the Bishops seek no blood, so as thy rash attempt might be
qualified with submission. And so did Paul, (cls I am deceived) either plead
ignorance for an excuse, or seem to recant and correct his ruff speech, he had
made to a man in authority: belike he was afraid least his example should have
animated any pert Controulers of Magistracy, and therefore cut them down,
which should speak ill of the Ruler of the people. How strangely look these
merchants on both sides? I would we had an Ostler to give them a turn or two
till their sweating were done. What metal be they made of? their noise
nothing like bells, and yet a man may stop his ears to hear their dinne, with
honesty: it goes through my head, and makes a great many more deaf and
displeased besides me. They agree like two drums, which are headed, the one
with a sheeps skin, the other with a wolfes hide. It can never be good music,
that stands all upon sharpes, and never a flat: all divisions framde with such
long discords, and not so much as a concord to end withal, argues a bad ear,
and a bungling Artist. Martin and counter Martin, be you not all Country men?
make you no account of that name? unnatural children, will you distract your
natural mother? will you send Foxes with fire brands at their tails, to burn
so forward a crop of toward youth, so well eared, that they put us in hope
already of a timely harvest, and a plentiful Gardener for seven years after?
send not a whirle wind amongst them, least beating one against another, they
dash out the Curnell, or be ledgde on the ground.

Go too I say, never strain courtesy, who shall begin: beshrow him that comes
lagge in so good a course as is renewing of frindship. Down with those great
hearts, and bridle those angry fits, stand not in that clamorous accusation of
one another, the best of both may be amended. Let the wisest be the forwardest,
and the most fool the frowardest. What overthwart companions be these, the
more I persuade, the more they look askaunce over their shoulders: you turn
the wrong way and be too wayward. Remember your selves, walk about, and cool
this flushing in the face, left it fume up, and make you brain sick. I would
feign do some good upon you: but when I lead a horse to the water, if he will
not drink, what can I do, but whistle him. If my presens persuade nothing,
yet in mine absence, think of Perceual, and let him not have his name
Peacemaker for naught. I am sorry, if I have put my finger in the fire, and
cannot quench it: yet the best is, I can pull it out again harmles, for a wet
finger burns not. I will keep me far enough from the flame, though perhaps I
may smell in the smoke, by touching the brands.

O Perceuall! so some of these will be-daube thee with Ink, and plague thee
with black and white: for I see how they gird thee in their sleeu^s already.
Tush I can paint as fast as they, though perhaps not altogether so fair. But a
Jews letter scrible scrable over the Copurtenaunce of a man's countenance, will
dash a body wickedly. You see my quarter staff, is it not a bless beggar,
think you? A washing blow of this is as good as a Laundresse, it will wash for
the names sake: it can wipe a fellow over the thumbs, wring a man in the
withers, and must needs dry beat a skoundrell, if it be artificially managed.
Will you fight then Perceuall? no truly, I had rather see my quarter ash
staff converted into ashes, then I would use it against any person: and then I
am sure I shall not be pinchd on the parsons side: for they would have peace as
well as I. But let a Trauailor walk with his implements about him: A Dag case
may be as good now and then as a case of Dags. The sight of a Hanger rusted in
the sheath hanging by ones side, may safe conduct a bodies purse, and save a
picking saint hearted thief from hanging beside. But what if these Roisters
draw their Pen and Inkehornes, and so set upon thee? They may quickly set me
up, for I will be no Peace-Breaker: yet if they house me, I may chance to
thrust a wispe out of the window and so make them waspish. O that is an
excellent Auditor for a skold, a cucking stool will cool somewhat too much
this wether: but a wispe will heat to the heart like Malmesie. But you my
Masters that strive, for this supernatural art of wrangling: let all matters
be hushed and quiet a Godsname: if my tongue wax current at the later end of my
tale, and incur any suspicion that I am currish naturde, because I talk of my
fence, write my terms in the wind, or let them pass for wind: and carrouse up
your own quarrels in the cup, and let the licour and they, like good fellows,
march arm in arm, down your throats. And so having skinkde mine Vltimum Vale
in a parting pot, I put you both in a draught: And drink to the funerals of
your Enimitie. Stay good neighbors, now I am for your company.

Medio Tutissimus ibis.
This work being finished, and red over and over by the head of the parish,
they called a vestry, wherein they concluded, to write every man some verses in
the commendation of the Author, because it was a custom greatly taken up in
the University of late. And thus they flourish in their mother tongue, as here
follows.

The gay bay Larell bow, that prancks my Cole,
As special fore horse of my beanefed Teeme,
Take Perceuall, and clap it on thy pole,
Whose fortops such a branch does well be seem:
If any ask why thou art clad so garish:
Say thou art dubd the forehorse of the parish.
Quoth A. N. Carter.

Holdhether, thou bell wether, of my fold,
Although thou have dischargde thy duty well:
Surrender up thy watch though it were gold:
For learned Perceuall must bear the bell.
If (quoth my wether) it be Perceuall:
Let him for me, take bell and horns and all.
Not so quoth G. A. Shepherd.

Thy praises Perceuall shall flourish in my dary,
My Paper, Curds, my Pen shall be a spoone,
Where I for aie will make thy praises tarry:
And if my Paper do not sincke too soon,
Else will I write them all upon a cheese,
That as the same increases, so may these.
Quoth goodman Bl. farmar.

The Cobblers prophecy upon the Author.
This patch here placd, the which I bast:
And sow so fast, shall sooner wast
Then Perceuals renown.
My shoe shall rend, my nall blade bend,
My lingels end, first shall I spend,
Before his works go down.
At these assaies, thou gettest such praise,
As near decaies, then go thy ways,
For I stand to the same.
If any such, by chance I tuch,
As seems to grutch, for I speak so much,
George Cobbler is my name.
FINIS.
My frinds all favor I beseech,
To yield our Perceuall good speech:
Hushed Momus or my needell in thy breech.
Cast me the bottom of brown
thread hither.
All folks of favor I beseech,
To yield our Perceuall good speech:
Or else my needell in their breech.
Cast me hither the bottom
of brown thread.
So I will chalk thy praises up,
And preach thy fame upon a cup:
Remembering Perce, at every sup.
But that I have such have of my
work against Christide.
Quoth N. G. Botcher.

Feceris Hussnuffos scribendo relinquere Cussos,
Necnon Martinos (appositiue dico) male natos cum part binos,
Es quoque Clubfistos omnes pacaucris istos,
Perceuall, ac idem (si possess) scindere pridem
Inceptas lites, vis, tanquam runcina, vites.
Es melior, (quidest Latin propter.) An Alehouse
To stablish friendship, or botch up Peace in an Endship.
Twenty pound for a Dictionary.
Given in the Church lost. By me H. D. Schollard maker for fault of a better.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page 1. line 11 read Alcumists.

Line 30. read not with them.

Line 31. Gins read Gunnes.

Page 9. line 21. aprimi read aprum.

Page 12. line 35. coured read colored.


