STRANGE AND WONDERFVLL THINGS.

Happened to Richard Hasleton, borne at Braintree in Essex, In his ten years
travails in many foreign countries.

PENNED AS HE DELIVEred it from his own mouth.

NON PLUS
WB
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by A.I. for William Barley, and are to be sold at his shop in
Gracious street, near Leaden hall. 1595.

AA


TO THE WORSHIPFUL Master Richard Stapar, one of the worshipful company
of the Merchants adventurers of this honorable city ofLondon, trading to
Turkey and the Eastern kingdoms. Your worships faithful welwiller W. Barley,
wishes all fortunate and happy success in all your enterprises, with
increase of all worldly worship: and after death the joys unspeakable.
Worshipful sir, the many reports of your rare virtues, generally spoken of
all honest trauailers, who has tasted the benefit of your bounty, not only
in our home borne country where you have your residence but in those far
countries where your honest factors trade; by whose worshipful and express
command given them, and the good they daily do for all men which seek them:
your worship is accounted and called the Pattern of bounty, especially of
such as are in their travail distressed with want, which with money are
relieved, as well as other great cost their favor or friendship can procure, so
that not only the poor and needy are pleasured thereby, but those that swim
in most abundance* all proceeding of your most kind and courteous disposition.

The remembrance of which, moved a longing desire in me, in some sort, to
explain your worthiness and fame by your bounty gained, it had never such
opportunity until this time: when perusing my store of papers and writings,
of sundry men's labors, I chanced on this Pamphlet, which imports the
troublesome travails of our near neighbor borne at Brainetree in Essex,
named Richard Hasleton, whose miseries as they were many, being in the hands
both of Christians and Heathen enemies, for God and our countries cause, and
his escapes from death so often and so wonderful, with the constant enduring
of the same: his preservation, and safe return to England, where his longing
desire so often wished him: all which considered, with your worships love to
all Traua^^ers, imboldned me the rather under your worships patronage to
publish the same, especial zeal procuring me thereunto: and partly in regard
of your many favors to the said Hasleton in his miseries extended, that your
worships good ensample may lighten others to such good actions, hoping your
worship will except of it no less friendly, then I offer it willingly* which
if you do, then is my desire satisfied, and my self rest bounden to your
worships worthiness: ever beseeching the giver of all good to increase the
number of such worthy minded subjects, by whom our Prince and country, are in
foreign parts so much honored.

Your worships to command in what I may, William Barley.

The miserable captivity of Richard Hasleton, borne at Brainetree in Essex.


IN the year 1582. departing the English coast toward the end of May, in a
ship of London, called the Mary Marten, one of the owners was a citizen of
London, called M. Eastwoode, the other of them named Master Estridge dwelling
at Lime-house, being laden and bound for Petrach. A Town of ma^te, being
within the dominion of the Turk, where we safely arrived and made our mart,
and within eight and twenty days went lading homeward, and presently we
waied anchor, and set sail, and coming out of the golfe of Lepontoe, grounded
upon a rock, lying on the larboarde side, being in very great danger, in
doubt to loose both ship and goods, yet it pleased God that we recovered. Then
about the midst of the month of July, we came right before Cape de gatte,
when having a very small wind, we discried two Galleys, whereupon the master
commanded the gunner to put forth the ordinance, and to heave the skiffe over
board, then did the gunner demand of the master to make a shot, which he
granted. Then did he bestow eight and twenty shot, but to no purpose, for the
enemy lay very far out.

Now when we saw our shot and powder spent so much in waste, some of our
company cried to our master to show the Turks letters, but he would not, but
commanded the gunner still to shoot, for now the Galleys were within shot, and
did shoot at us, both with great shot and Muskets, and presently both our
gunners were slain, both with on shot, and some other maimed, whereby we were
in great doubt, for the Galleys lying on both sides of us, one of them had shot
us under water, whereby our ship was foundred before we perceived: then we
perceiving the ship to sink from us, such as were weriest lept into the
skiffe, as many as it was able to bear* the rest leaping over board, such as
could swim saved them selves, going aboard the Galleys, the other were drowned.
Now I being the last man upon the batches, because I was at the stern and
being sore hurt with a Muscot shot, the Turks made have to board our ship,
hoping to save some of our goods, two of them came aboard, the first came to me
and took me by the bosom. I drew out my knife very speedily and thrust him
into the body, and so slew him the other was gone down into the ship where I
left him, for even then was the ship sinking from me, wherefore I betook my
self to swimming and turning me about to see the ship I could see nothing
thereof but only the flag: then did I ^^oun to the Galleys, and laying hold
upon an oar, got into the Gallie: when I was aboard, I stripped of my clot^es,
then presently was I commanded to the Poope to talk with the Captain, who
inquired of me whether I was a Merchant, which because I would not confess, he
gave me xv. strokes with a cudgel, and then put me in the Ga^lie^ hold, where
I was six days, taking very little sustenance, lying in extreme pains, by
reason of my hurts which* I have received in the fight, and with anguish of
mind for my hard hap.

About three months after the Galleys returned to Argire, where immediately
after my landing I was s^lde for 66. doubles. Then did I fall into extreme
sickness for ten days space, no^withstanding I was sent to sea by my master
(to whom I was sold) to labor in the Galleys at an Oars end, where I remain^d
three months, being very feeble and weak, by reason my sickness continued the
most part of that time, yet was I constr^ined either to labor or else to loose
my head. I had no other choice: then the Galleys returning home to Argire,
after my coming on shore I was in a maruailous weakness, what with contin^all
labor, with beating, and with sickness, which endured three monthe^, being in
a most miserable estate without all sucker, seeing no man to pity my misery,
having no nourishment but only bread and water, and that but sma^l quantity:
no apparel on me but a thi^ shirt, and a pair of linen breeches, and l^dged
in a stable on the cold ground. Thus I being almost in despair ever to
recover, yielded my self to the will of Almighty God, whom it pleased in the
en^ to give me a little strength. And after for the space of two years or more*
I was diverse times at my labor at the oars end, after my accustome^ manner,
till such time our sleete of Galleys (...) wi^h the Galleys of Genua near the
Christian shore, and they following ^^ in cha^e, it chanced by reason of
tempest, that our Galley was cast away near unto the wea^ side of the Island
Fermonterra: there were in it of Christians and Turks to the number of two
hundred and fifty, which were all drowned, except fifteen, of which my self
with two others, with great difficulty brake o^r chains, and taking hol^e
upon an Oar, we escaped to the shore, not without great danger of drowning. We
being now gotten to land, and accompanied both with Turks and Christians, we
took our rest under bushes and thickets, the Turks were very unwilling to
depart with us, thinking to find some other Galley of the company to take us
aboard and carry us back to Argire, but we hoping now to get out liberties,
conveyed our selves as secretly as we could into the w^^ds* and went unto a
^^ck and with sharp stones we did beat off our Irons, and s^ed ^^mediatly to
the Christians, and yee^ded our selves: but one of them which escaped with me
who was borne in S^lauony, tol^e them that I was and English Lutherian.

Then was I presently carried aboard a Gallie of Genua, and put in chains, and
upon the mo^row was I sent over into the Isle of Iuisey, being within the
jurisdiction of Maiorque, which all are in the dominion of Spain) there was I
imprisoned in the high Tower of the town Castle, with a pair of bolts upon
my heels, and a claspe of Iron about my neck, there hanging a chain at the
claspe, where I remained nine days, fed with a little bread and water. Now
because I had in no respect offended them, I demanded wherefore they molested
me, saying it was contrary to law and the profession of Christians. Then did
they ask me if I had spoken any thing against the king, and against the Church
of Rome? I answered nothing. Then they told me I should be sent to Maiorque,
to answer before the Inquisition. Then the Justice or chief officer of Iuesey
brought me back to Genua, requesting to have me chained in a Galley, which the
Captain did, asking the Justice who should be my surety for running away? He
demanded if there were not a spare chain? he said yes: then he commanded a
chain to be brought forth, and chained me at the sixth Oar before, where I
rowed until we came to the Port of Spine in Maiorque, garding me with xiiij
Galleys.

Then were the ^^^icers of the Inquisition, sent for by the Captain, which
came the second day after our coming there: and at their coming they offered
me the Par, which I refused to touch: whereupon they reviled me, and called me
Lutheran, taking me presently out of the Galley, carried me on shore in
Maiorque, and finding the Inquisitor walking in the Market place, presented me
to him, saying: Here is the prisoner. He immediately commanded me to prison,
whether they carried me, and put a pair of shackles on my heels, where I
remained two days. Then was I brought forth into a Church, where the
Inquisitor sat usually in judgment: who being ready set, commanded me to
kneel down and to do homage to certain images which were before me, I told
him I would not do that which I knew to be contrary to the commandments of
Almighty God, neither had I been brought up in the Roman law, neither would
I submit my self to it. He asked me why I would not? I answered, that whereas
in England, where I was borne and brought up, the Gospel was truly preached,
and maintained by a most gracious Princes, therefore I would not now commit
Idolatry, which is utterly con^emned by the word of God. Then he charged me to
utter the truth, otherwise I should abide the smart: Then was a stool set, and
he commanded me to sit down before him, and offered me the cross, bidding me
reverently to lay my hand upon it, and urged me instantly to do it, which
moved me so much, that I did spit in the Inquisitors face, far which the
Scribe gave me a good buffet on the face.



So for that time we had no more reasoning, for the Inquisitor did ring a
little Bell, to call up the keeper, and carried me to ward again, and the
third day I was brought forth again to the place aforesaid.

Then the Inquisitor asked me what I had seen in the Churches of England, I
answered that I had seen nothing in the Church of England, but the word of God
truly preached: then he demanded how I had received the Sacraments? I replied
that I had received them according to the institution of Christ that is, I
received the bread in remembrance that Christ in the flesh died vp^n the cross
for the redemption of man. How (said he) have thou received the Wine? whereto I
replied and said, that I rec^iued the wine in remembrance that Christ shed his
blood to wash away our sins ^e said it was in their manner, I said no: then
he charged me to speak the truth, or I should die for it. I told him I did
speak the truth, and would speak the truth: for (said I) it is better for me
to die guiltless then guilty. Then did he with great vehemence charge me
again to speak the f^^th, and swear by the Catholic Church of Rome, that if
I did not, I should dye in fire, then I said, if I died in the faith, which I
had confessed I should die guiltless, and told him he had made a vain oath.
And so I willed him to use no circumstance to diswade me from the truth, for
you cannot prevail though I be now in your hands, where you have power over my
body* yet have you no power over mysoule. I told^ him he made a long ma^ter
far from the truth, for which he said I should die. Then he had me say what I
could to save myself: where I replied as follows. Touching the manner of the
receiving of Sacraments, where he said it was like to theirs: you (said I) when
you receive the bread, say it is the very body of Christ, and likewise you
affirm the wine to be his very blood, which I denied: saying that it was
impossible for a mortal man to eat the material body of Christ, or to drink
his blood.

Then he said I had blasphemed the Catholic Church, I answered that I had said
nothing against the true Catholic church, but altogether against the false
church: he asked how I could prove it, saying, if I could not prove it, I
should die a mos^ cruel death.

Note by the way, that when any man is in durance for religi^n he is called to
answer before no ^^en assembly, but only in the presence of the Inquisitor,
the Secretary, and the Solic^^^^, whom they term the Broker: the (...) is as
I take it, be^^use they doubt that very many of their own people (...)
confess the Gospel, if they did but (...) and understand their absurd dealing.
Again to the matter because it was so secret, they v^ged me to speak the
more: then he inquired whether I (...) ever bin conf^st, I said yes: he
demanded to whom? I said to God: he asked me if I had ever confessed to any
Friar? I said no, for I do utterly defy them: for how can he forgive me my
sins, which is himself a sinner as all other men are.



Yes said he, he which confesses himself to a Friar, who is a Father, may
have remission of his sins by his mediation, which I said I would never
believe. Wherefore seeing they could s^duce me by no means, to (...) to their
abominable id^latrie, the Secretary cried, Away with him: the Inquisitor and
he ^rowned very angerly on me for the aunswers which I had given, and said they
would make me tell an other tale. So at the ringing of a little Bell the Keeper
came and carried me to ward again. At my first examination, when the Keeper
should lead me away, the Inquisitor did bless me with the Cross, but never
after. Two days after was I brought and set again upon a stool before the
Inquisitor, he bad me ask misericordiam, I told him I would crave mercy of
Jesus Christ, who died for my sins, other misericordiam I would crave none.
Then he commanded me to kneel before the Altar, I said I would, but not to
pray to any image, for your Altar so adorned with many painted images (which
were fashioned by the hands of sinful men,) which have mouths and speak not,
ears and hear not, nosesand smell not* han^s and handle not, seete have they
and walk not, etc, which God dot^ not allow at his Altar, for he has ^tterly
condemned them by his word. Then he said I had been wrong taught, for said he,
whosoever shall s^^ these figures in earth, may the better remember him in
heaven, whose likeness it does represent, who would be a mediator to God for
us: but I replied that all images were an abhemination to the Lord, for he has
condemned them in express words by his own mouth, saying: Thou shall not make
thy self any graven image, etc. Yea said he, but we have need of a Mediator
to make intercession for us, for we are unworthy to pray to God our selves,
because we are vile sinners, I said there was no mediato^ but Jesus Christ:
where after many absurd reasons and vain persuasions, he took a pause.

Then I asked him why he kept me so l^ng in prison, which never committed
offense to them, knowing very well that I had been Captain in Argire near
five years space: saying, That when God by his merciful providence, had
through many great dangers, set me in a Christian country, and delivered me
from the cr^elty of the Turks, when I thought to find such favor as one
Christian owes to another, I found them now more cruel then the Turks, not
knowing any cause why. The cause (said he) is, because the King has wars
with the Queen of England (for at that instant there was their Army prepared
ready to go for England:) whereupon they would diverse times give me
reprochefull words, saying that I should here shortly of their a^riuall in
England, with innumerable vain bragges, which I omit for brevity.

Then did I demand if there were not peace between the king and the Queens
Majesty? whether they would keep me still? yea said he, unless thou will
submit thy self to the faith of the Romish Church: so he commanded me away, I
asked, wherefore he sent for me, and to send me away, not alleging any matter
against me? he said I should have no other matter alleged, but that which I
had spoken with mine own mouth. Then I demanded why they would have the Romish
Church to have the supremacy? whereto he would make no answer. Then I asked if
they took me to be a Christian? yes said he, in some respect, but you are out
of the faith of the true Church. Then the keeper took me to prison again: and
after for the space of three weeks, I was brought forth to answer, three
several times every week: at which times they did sometime threaten me with
death, some while with punishment, and many times they attempted to seduce me
with ^aire words, and promises of great preferment, but when they saw nothing
would draw me from the truth, they called me shameless Lutherian, saying many
times: see, he is of the very blood of Luther, he has his very countenance:
with many other frivolous speeches.

After all this, he commanded to put me in the dungion within the Castle,
five fathem under ground, giving me once a day a little bread and water, which
they let down in a basket with a rope, there remained I one whole year, lying
on the bare ground seeing neither Sun nor Moon, no not hearing man woman or
chi^de speak, but only the keeper which brought my small victual. It
happened about the years end, upon the feast of Philip and Jacob, being the
first day of May, that a pretty boy being the Keepers son, came to give me
my ordinary food, which he used sometime to do. Now when he opened the door,
and had let down the basket, I asked who was there? he answered by his name,
saying here is Matthew. I asked him where his Father was? he is gone to Mass,
said he: so he let down the trap door and went his way, leaving the roape
with the basket hanging still. And forasmuch as I lay without all comfort,
reposing my self only unto Gods providence, yet unwilling to loose any
opportenitie that lay in me (if God were pleased) whereby I might be delivered.

So soon as I heard the boy was gone. I iumped up and took hold upon the
reap, and wound my self up to the door* setting my foot against the wall
and with my shoulders did I lift up the trap door. Now when I was aloft, and
saw no man, for they were gone to see some ceremonies of their idolatrous
exercises in the city. I knew no way to escape away, being now in the midst of
the way: wherefore it was impossible to convey my self so secretly but I
should be espied.

Wherefore for a present shi^t* I went secretly into a void room of the
Caste^l, where lay great store of Lime and earth, where I tied an old cloth
(which I had) about my head and face, to keep the dust out of my eyes and
ears, an^ so did I creep into the lime, and covered my self so well as I
could* lying there till toward midnight: and then hearing no man stirring, I
got up, and sought some way to get forth but could find n^ne. Then being
greatly perplexed, I bent my self to the good pleasure of Almighty God, making
my humble prayers, that he would of his mercy vouchsafe to deliver me out of
this miserable thraldom And searching too and fro, in the end I came where
three great horses stood tied by the head and feet: then did I unloose the
halters from their heads, and the ropes from their legs, and went to the
castle wall: when I had tied them end to end, I made it fast to the body of a
Uine which grew upon the wall, and by it did I strike my self over the wall
into the town ditche, where I was constrained to swim about forty paces,
before I could get forth of the ditch.

Then walked I too and fro in the city above two hours, seeing no man, neither
could I devise any way forth: wherefore I retu^ned back again to the town
ditch* to see if I could (...) any way to bring me without the town walls*
and following the ditch, at the last I perceived by the noise of the water,
that there qas a water gate through the wall: where I (...) and found that the
(...) of the water was under the wall, then did I very (...)y enter the water,
and diuing under water, got into the watergate, and suddenly the force of the
water did drive me through with such violence, that it cast me headlong against
an other wall on the outside, which with the blow did much amase me: yet by the
help of God I recovered, swimming down the ditch, till I came where was a
trough or pipe, which I took to be laid over the d^tch, to convey some fresh
water spring into the city: there did I climb up a post which bare the same,
and got upon the top of the pipe, where some ofthe watch being near the wall
percei^ed me, but could not any way come near to me. Then cried they in their
tongue, who is there, three or four times, but I made no answer, but crept as
fast as I could to get off the pipe to land: where before I could get down,
they shot some of their Muskets after me, but thanked be God none of the shot
did hit me. Thus with great difficulty I escaped out ofthe city, and went
about six miles from thence before the day brake.

Then I went into a thick wood, for I perceived there was very many sent forth
with ^span and cry, both footmen and horsemen to apprehend me, (...) I lay
^till the day and night following: And after for s^auen days space I wandered
through desert ways, among woods and bushes, many times as I came near the
port ways, I heard the pursuers inquiring after me, demanding of diverse
whether they had seen me pass: ^^me were very earnest to take me, other
wishing that I might escape, for very many times I was so near them, that I
heard every word they spoke. Thus I imagined by all possible means to avoid
the hands of these unmerciful tyrants, being in great extremity with hunger
and cold: for since the time I came out of the prison, which was at the least
eight days, I had none other sustenance but Berries which I gathered from the
bushes, and the roots of Palm, and other like roots which I dug out of
the earth, and no other apparel but an old linen cloth about my body, and a
red Cap on my head, without either ha^^, sh^^es or any other furniture, so that
by reason the way was very hard, I was forced to cut my cap in two, and lap it
about my feet, to defend them from the sharp stones and gravel.

Thus ^^aueiling for the most part by night, I cha^sed to come where was a
house standing alone, and near the house there stoo^ a cart, wherein lay
certain horse collers, where searching among them, I ^ound the collars lined
with sh^^pe skins, which (...) I (...) upon the collars, and apparrelled my
self with them in (...) manner. I put one piece before me like a breast plate,
and an (...) on my shoulders and back, with the wool^ie side toward my body
(...) them together over my shoulders and under my arms with (...), which is a
weed like to that whereof our hand-baske^^ are made, which is we^l known to
such as have trauel^^^ (...) parts* and with an other piece I made me a cap.
And in (...) s^emely ornaments I passed forth till about three days after,
(...) early in a morning, most unhappily I crossed an high way, (...) a
countryman travailing with a Moile laden with rund^^^^ of wine, espied me, and
demanded of me whether I was bound, I said I was going to Coothea, which is a
town lying upon the shore side, but he suspecting me to be the man which was
pursued, b^d me stay but I went onward, he ran after me, and threw stones at
me, but I not able to overrun him, being very ^eeble, turned back, and with
a pole which I carried began to defend my self, striking at him three or four
times, at the last I thrust at him, and hit him on the breast, and overthrew
him, whereupon he made a horrible cry: and immediately there came to the number
of fifteen more, some horsemen, some footmen: some having swords* some
Harquebushes, and other Crosbowes: when I was thus beset, knowing no way to
escape, I yielded my self. Then they bound me hands and feet, laid me on a
Moyle* and carried me back again to the city of Maiorque, delivering me to
the Inquisitor, who when he had sent me to prison, commanded a pair of boltes
to be put on my legs, and an Iron claspe about my neck, with a chain of five
fathom long hanging thereat, which was done accordingly. And on the morrow I
was brought forth to the accustomed place, and in the same manner, where the
Inquisitor sitting, asked me first why I had br^ken prison, and run away, I
said to save my life: yea (said he) but now thou have offended the law more
then before, and therefore shall the law be now executed upon thee.

Then I was carried away again, and immediately there was called an assembly of
Citizens, and such as were seen in the law, to counsel, and to take advice,
what punishment they might inflict upon me* which being deliberated: I was
brought forth again and carried to the place of torment, which was in a Cell
or vaute under ground, there being present but four persons, that is to say,
the Inquisitor, the Solicitor or Broker, who is to see the law executed, a
Dutche woman that dwelt in the city, who was commanded thither to tell them
what I spoke, because I spoke many times in the Dutche tongue, and lastly the
tormentor. The Rack now standing ready before them, with seven Flaxen roapes
lying thereon, new bought from the market.

Then the Inquisitor charged me (as at all other times he used to do) that I
should speak what I had to say, and to speak the truth, otherwise I should be
even now tormented to the death I seeing my self in the hands of such cruel
tyrants, as always thirst after the blood of the innocent, even as Caine who
being wroth with his brother Abell, and carrying an heavy countenance, could
no way be eased but with his brothers blood: so I past hope of life, turned my
back toward them, and seeing my torments present before me, I fell down upon
my knees, and besought the Lord to forgive me my sins, and to strengthen my
faith, and to grant me patience to endure to the end.

Then they took me into a void room, and stripped me out of my ornaments of
sheep skins, which I repeated before, and put a pair of strong Canuas
breeches upon me to cover my pri^^ies, then bringing me to the rack again, he
commanded me to lie down (the bars of the Rack under me were as sharp as
the back of a knife) now I willingly yielding my self, lay down, then the
tormentor ^ound my hands over my breast crossewise, and my legs clasped up
together, were fast ^ied the one foot to the other knee. Then he fastened to
either arm a cord, about the brawne of the arm, and likewise to either thigh
an other, which were all made fast again under the rack to the bars, and
with an other cord he bound down my head, and put a hollow Cane into my
mouth^ then he put four cudgels into the ropes which were fastened to my arms
and thighs.

Now the woman which was present being interpretor, began to persuade me to
yield, and confess the faith of the Church of Rome. I answered, if it were
the will of God that I should end my life under their cruel hands, I must be
content: but it it please him, he is able to deliver me, if there were ten
thousands against me. Then the tormentor (as he was commanded) began to wrest
the ropes, which he did by little and little to augment my pains, and to have
them endure the longer, but in the end he drew them with such violence, as
though he would have plucked my four quarters in sunder, and the^e stayed a
good space: yet to declare their tyrannical malice, thinking my torment not
sufficient, he added more, pouring water through the Cane which was in my mouth
by little and little, which I was constrained either to let down, or to have
my breath stopped, until they had tunned in such quantity, as was not
tolerable to endure, which pained me extremely: yet not satisfied, they took
and wet a linen cloth, and laid it over my mouth, till I was almost
strangled: when my body being thus ouercharged with such abundance of water,
after they had thus stopped my breath with the wet cloth, suddenly with the
force of my breath, and that my stomach was so much ouercharged, the water
gushed out and bare away the cloth as if it had been the force of a condict
spoute. When the Inquisitor saw that all this would not make me yield, he
commanded the tormentor to wind the cord on my left arm more straig^t* which
put me to horrible pains, and immediately the roape burst in sunder. Then said
the Inquisitor, yea is he so strong, I will make him yield, and commanded the
tormentor to put too a new roape.



Then the woman again bad me yield, saying it were better to yield then to die
so miserable a death: but I besought Almighty God to ease me of my pains, and
to forgive me my sins, answering her, that though they had power over my
body, yet there was no torment should compel me to yield to their idolatry,
whereby I might bring my soul in danger of hell fire. Then the Inquisitor
asked her, what I said? she answered that I had said I would never submit my
self to the Church of Rome: then did he most vehemently charge me to yield and
submit my self to the Romish Church, otherwise he would pluck off one of my
arms: Whereupon I denying still, the tormentor in most cruel manner, wrested
the r^pes as if he would have ^ent my body in sunder: I being now in
intolerable pains, and looking for nothing but present death, cried out in the
extremity o^ my a^guish. Now farewell wife and children, and farewell England,
and so not able to utter one word more, lay even senseless.

The Inquisitor asked the woman again what I said, she laid her hand upon my
head, and perceiving that I was speechless, told him I was dead: wherefore
the Tormentor loosed the ropes, unbound my hands and feet, and carried me unto
a chamber which they te^med S. Walters chamber. Where I c^mming to my self and
receiving some sense and reason, but could have no feeling of any lim or
io^nte. Thus I lay in a most lamentable and pitiful manner for five days,
having a continual issue of blood and water forth of my mouth all that space,
and being so feeble and weak by reason of my torments, that I could take no
sustenance: till the sixth day, a little recovering my strength, they gave me a
little quantity of bread and wine ^oo together, and presently the very same
day, they carried me forth into the City, and set me upon an Asses back, and
whipped me through out every street of the City of Maiorque, giving me to the
number of five hundred lashes, which made the blood to run down my miserable
carcass in such abundance, that it dropped at the belly of the Ass, to the
ground. Now there were carried with me about the City very many harlots and
whores, and other malefactors which had offended the law, but none punished
like me. After this they carried me to the chamber from whence I came, where I
lay without all worldly comfort.

Can any man (which understands the absurd blindness, and wilful ignorance,
of these Spani^^ tyrants, or Romish monsters) think them to be of the true
church, which defend their faith with fire, sword, and hellish torments,
without all remorse or pity, as you may perceive by a manifest trial here set
down to the open view of the world: for when these helhounds had tormented
this miserable creature, as you have heard with a monsterous and most
unchristian kind of torment, which he endured for the space of three howe^s:
till being at the very point of death, and ready to yield up the ghost, they
not yet satisfied with these torments which he had suffered already, reserved
his life, minding to increase his pains, which they were nothing slack to
perform, so l^ng as he remained in their power.

Now the second night after that they had whipped me about the city as
aforesaid, about midnight I recounting to my self in what m^sery I both did
and h^d remained, I thought to put in practice once again to get my liberty,
craving of the Lord with hearty prayer to assist me with his mighty hand.

And immediately searching about, I found an old Iron stub, with the which I*
brake an hole through the chamber wall, and crept through (...) an other
chamber, where I felt in the dark many pieces of plate, which I little
regarded: after I found many Towels and Table napkins. Then seeking further, I
found a long Cane whereon there hung many puddings and Sauceges, I plucked
down the Cane, but had little mind on the victual. Then I found certain
knives, then I espied some light at a great window in a Garret or loft over me:
wherefore I tied a crooked knife to the Cane, and thrust up a long Towell, and
with the knife at the end of the Cane I drew the Towell about a bar of the
window, and drew it to me, and with that towell I did climb up into the
window, but then I could not get forth between the bars, wherefore I dug
forth one of the bars, and tied my towels and napkins together end to end,
and fastened one end to a bar of the window, and then did slide down by them
till I came within three or four fathom of the ground, when the towels brake
in sunder, and I fell down into a Well which was direct under me, where I was
almost drowned: yet it pleased God to deliver me. And then being in the city
without the castle w^lle^, I knowing no other way to get out, went again to
the town ditch, where I got through the water gate with less perrill then
before, by reason there was less water then was the other time. Then went I
with all speed into the woods, lying all days in woods as close as I could,
and travailed by nights through woods and mountains: and upon the third night
about midnight, I happened into an Olive garden, not above half a bow shoot
from the sea side, in which garden I found a little skiffe or boat lying under
a Pomegranate tree, and there lay in the boat a hatchet, all which served
happily for my delivery.

Now I being unable to carry the boat to the water side, di^^^ut small
tr^rchens of wood, and upon them did slide it downell the water fide. Then I
cut down an arm of an Olive tr^e, t^ make my boat a mast, and having no
other shift, made me a sail^ cloth with my bre^ches and a piece of mantle which
I had about me, and for my Oars were very mean, yet durst I stay to look^ for
no better, but presently set sail and yealded my self to the goo^ pleasure of
almighty God, betook my self to sea, willing rather to abide what the Lord
would lay upon me, then to dye among these most cruel tirants.

And by the providence of God, upon the second day in the forenoone I discryed
the coast of Barbar^e, for the ^^^de stood northeast, which seruedme most
happily.

Understand that this cut is from shore to shore, one hundred and fifty
leagues, which is four hundred and fifty Englishmiles, and at that time a very
rough sea, in so much if it had not bin by the great and wonderful power of
God, my vessel and I, had both bin over whelmed.

But I falling with the country of Cabiles, commonly called the king of
Cookooes land, near a town called Gigeley, where I went on shore, leaving
my boat to swim which way the wind and weather would conduct it, thinking
it had done me sufficient service.

But see now, when I had escaped through the surges of the sea from the cruelty
of the Spaniard, I was no sooner landed and entered the Mountains, but being
espied by the Moors which inhabit the country, who pursued very earnestly to
take me, supposing me to be come from the Christian shore to rob in their
coaste for many times the Spaniards will pass over in some small vessel, and
go on shore: and if they can catch any man of the country, they carry them
away to make Gallie slaves, wherefore the Moors are very diligent to pursue
them at their landing: and if it chance they take any Christian* they use him
in like sort. Wherefore I being very ^nwilling to ^all into their hand^, was
constrained to go into a river which ran between two Mountains, and there
to stand in water up to the chinne, where the bushes and trees did grow most
thick over me: where I stoo^ certain hours, until they had lest searching
for me.

Now when I perceived they were departed* I went out (...) the water being very
^eeble, for I cat nothing all that time, but the bark of the trees which I cut
with my hatchet. I went ^oorth as secretly as I could, minding to pass to
Argi^e: I had not gone above three mi^es, when I espied a Moore a very well
favored old man, who was weeding in a fiel^ of wheat, I spoke unto him in the
tongue of Frank, The (...).
and called him to me, I having my hatchet in my (...) cast it from me, He came
unto me, and taking me by the hand, demanded very gently what I would have. I
perceiving that he did even at the first sight pity my poor and miserable
estate, told him all things that had happened unto me, how I was an English
man, how I had bin Captive in Argire, how I chanced to come to Genua, their
sending me to M^iorque, and all the the torment which I had suffered there, and
finally, my escape from thence, with all the rest that followed.

This good aged father, when he had heard my lamentable discourse, The
charitabl^ mind of a simple old man.
showing himself rather a Christian, then a man brought up among the Turkish
Mahometists, greatly pitied my misery* and ^ort^with did lead me home to his
house, and caused such vi^tu^^s as the country yields to be set before me,
which was dried Whea^e and Hun^e, and baked a cake upon the fire hearth, and
then ^ried it with Butter which I thoug^t very good mea^e, for I had not been
at the like banquet in six^ years before* the good father showing me what
comfo^t he could.

There I remained (...) and twenty hours, in ^he mean^ time the Moors* which
dwelt in the vil^ages by, understanding of my being there, came, and calling me
forth, inquire of me what I was, from whence I came, and whether I would* and
with great vehemency c^arged their ^eapons against my breast, The old man still
pi^ted him, and did what lay in him to deliver him.
insomuch that I thought they would verily have (...), but mi^e (...) that good
old man came forth and (...) for me, and ^o diswaded them from doing me any
(...) and took me back again into his house*

This being past, I r^queste^ him to help me to a guide to con^ict me to
Argire, and he presently provided two, whereof the one was his son, to whom I
promised to g^ue four crowns for their pains. So taking my leave of my good
hoas^, we ^^oke our way toward Argire: when we had not passe^ above xxiiij.
miles on the way, we chanced to meet a Gen^^eman of that country, who was as
(...) were Pu^ueior to the king, and went about the country to take up c^rne
and grain for the kings provision: he meeting us upon ^he way, asked whet^er
we were travailing? my guides answered, that we were going to Argire, he asked
what we had to do there? they said to deliver me there. Then he demanded what
I was? ^hey ^ol^e him I was an Englishman that came from the Christian ^^oare;
and was bound toward Argire.

Then did this Gentleman take me from them, sending them back from whence they
came, but compelled me to go with him to a village by, and very earnestly
persuaded me to turn Moore, promising if I would, he would be a mean to
prefer me greatly, which I still denied. Then upon the next day, he carried me
further to a town called Tamgote, and delivered me to a noble man of great
authority with the king, which was as Liefetenant general for the wars (for
this King of Cook^o^ houldeth continual war with the King of Argire,
although they be both subject to the great Turk.)



I was no sooner brought before this Nobleman, but he demanded whether I would
turn Moore, I answered that I would not immediately he commanded a pair of
shackels to be put on my heels, and a claspe of Iron about my neck* with a
chain thereat*

Then was I set upon a Mule, and conveyed to Cookooe, where the King lay* when
I was came thither I was presently brought before the king: who inquired what I
was, and from whence I came and what my pretense was. I answered that I was an
Englishman, and that I came from the Christian shore, intending to pass to
Argire. Then he asked me what I could do. I told him I could do nothing. Then
he demanded whether I were a Gunner, Gunners are in great estimation with them.
I said no: then he persuaded me very instantly to yield to their religion,
offering to prefer me: wherefore, I desired him to give me liberty to
depart, for my desire is to be in England with my wife and children. Yea, said
he, but how will thou come there, for they minded to keep me still: and
evermore the king assayed to seduce me with promises of great preferment,
saying: if I would serve him and turn Moore, I should want nothing. But on the
contrary, I besought him to give me liberty to go to Argire, where I was in
hope to be delivered, and sent home to mine own country.

Now he seeing he could win me by no gentle means, commanded me to prison,
saying, that he would either make me to yield and turn Moore, or else I
should die in captivity.

In this while that I remained in prison, diverse of the kings house came to
me, persuading me to yield to the kings demand, alleging how hardly the king
might use me, being now in his power, unable any way to escape, and again how
bountifully the king would deal with me, if I would submit my self.

Within a little time after, it happened there was great preparation for to
receive the King of Abbess, whose country adioineth to the king of Cookooes
land, and are in league together, and join their armies in one against the
king of Argire. Now at his coming, I was fetched forth of prison, and
commanded to charge certain pieces of Ordinance, These men are nothing expert
in Artillery.
which were three Sacres and two Minions of brass, which I refused not to do,
trusting thereby to get some liberty, wherefore at the coming of this king of
Abbess into the town, I discharged the Ordinance as liked them very well, for
they are not very expert in that exercise, for which I had some more liberty
then before.

This King of Abbess tarrying some certain time there in consulting with the
king of Cookooe, for matters touching the wars with Argire, and understanding
of me, sent for me, bring very desirous to talk with me, where after certain
questions, he desired of the other king that he might buie me, which he would
not grant. Then the King of Cabiles or Cookooe persuaded me very seriously to
serve him willie, and to turn Moore, and offered to give me vij. hundred
Dubles by the year, Very many offers of preferment to draw me from the word
of God.
which amounts to the sum of fifty pounds of English money, and moreover
to give me by the day thirty Aspers (which is worth twelve pence English) to
find me meat, and likewise to give me a house and land sufficient to sow an
hundredth bushels of grain yearly, and two Plowe of Oxen, furnished to till
the same: also to furnish me with horse, Musket, Sword, and other necessaries,
such as they of that country use. And lastly he offered to give me a wife
freely, which they esteemed the greatest matter, for all buy their wives at a
great price, yea if there were any in his court could content me I should make
my choice, but if there were not, he would provide one to my contentment,
whatsoever it should cost him. But when he perceived all he said was in vain,
he sent the Queen and her gentle women to talk with me. When she came, she
very courteously entreated me to turn and serve the King, and to consider well
what a large offer the King had made, saying, that I was much unlike to come to
any like preferment in my country: and many times she would show me her
Gentlewomen, and ask me if none of them could please me, but I told her I had
a wife in mine own country to whom I had vowed my faith before God and the
world, which vow I said I would never break while we both lived. Then she said
she could but marvel what she should be whom I esteemed so much* as to
refuse such offers of preferment for her sake, being now where I must remain
in captivity and slavery, all the days of my life, but when she* could
prevail no way with me, when she had uttered these forsaid speeches, and many
other which were frivolous to rehearse, she left me, yet by her means I had
more liberty then before.

After this I was set to saw Boardes and Plankes, and was commanded to make a
carriage for a piece of Ordinance: Thus they compelled me to labor daily,
which I did the more willingly, because I hoped still to get my liberty
thereby in the end. Then they willed me to show the fashion of our edge tools
after the English, which when they saw the fashion, their Smithes wrought them
very artificially, and gave them very good temper: for these things I was had
in more estimation, insomuch that they took off my Irons, and let me walk
abroad with a keeper. Then was I commanded by the king, I was made master of
work wherein I had but small skill.
to teach the Carpenters to frame a house after the manner of English building,
and for that purpose were sent forth Carpenters and workmen with me to the
woods to fall timber, all which were to do what I appointed upon the kings
commandment. Now I being chief Master of the work, appointed out the trees
which were very special good timber: in small time we had finished our frame,
which liked the King very well. By this means I had more liberty then before,
and was very well entreated, yet I was greatly grieved in mind, that I could
not procure any means for my liberty, although at that time I wanted few
necessaries: yet was I daily devising how I might escape away, for three
special causes: one was, for the special care I had of my salvation, because
(as you have heard) there were many temptations laid before me, to draw me
from a Christian to be an abominable idolatour. The second cause was, for the
love and dutiful allegiance which I owe to my Prince and natural country.
The third is, the regard of the vow which I had vowed in matrimony, and the
care of my poor wife and children: which causes moved me so much, that
whereas by reason of my diligence in these foresaid matters, I walking abroad
with my keeper, who not suspecting me, was not so attentive as before he had
been. So soon as our frame was finished, I took opportunity, and showing
them a pair of heels, took my way over the Mountains, intending to go for
Argire. But presently there was great store of men, both on horseback and one
foot, who being more perfect in the way then I was, quickly ouertooke me, and
carried me back again to Cookooe. I was presently brought before the King, who
asked me why I ran away? I told him to have liberty. Then he called certain
of his servants to him, and commanded them to lay me down at his feet, which
four of them did, and laying me flat upon the belly, one of them gave me 75
stripes with a great cudgel, till I was not able to remove out of the place.
Then the king commanded to carry me to prison again, whether two of them
carried me, and put me in Irons and there left me, where I remained for the
space of two months: I was now made a water bearer.
then was I brought forth of prison, and sent daily to a fountain or well,
about half a league from the town to fetch water with a couple of Asses, for
ye use of the kings house.



Now in this time many artificers, as Smithes, Ioynces, and carpenters, and
many other, came to me to understand the fashion of many English tools, as
Plane yrons, Goudges* Chissels, and such like, for which they showed me some
favor, and gave me some money: and when I had gotten a little money, I
bestowed it upon apparel, and caused it to be made like to theirs, which I
carried secretly, when I went to fetch water, and did hide it in a dry cave
under the side of a rock: I bought me likewise a sword and a lance, such as
they use to travail with, I also provided a file, all which I laid up with my
apparel.



It happened that the King of Abbess, came again to visit the King, and to
take counsails about warlike affairs, as usually they did, wherefore when they
heard of his coming, making great preparation for him, it fell out so that
there wanted water, in the offices: where in an evening there was exceeding
thunder* and rain, and lightning so that there was no man would go for water,
but every one calling for the Englishman: then I, which durst say no nay, took
the vessels, and hung them upon the Asses, and so went through rain, and wind,
and thunder, and all, till I came to the well, where I left my Asses, to wander
whither they would, and went to my apparel, and with my File cut off my
yrons, and made me ready, in my suit of Moors clothing, and with my sword by
my side, and my Lance on my shoulder, took my way once again toward Argire.

And that night I went about twenty miles over Rocks, and mountains, keeping
my self out of beaten ways, casting my way by the moon and stars. When the
day began to be light I lay me down in a brake of thick bushes, and there I
slept the most part of the day, and in the evening I began to travel forth on
my way.

Now on the third night I was to pass a bridge where was continual watch, and
ward, both day and night, where I must of necesitie pass, by reason the river
ran betwixt two mountains which were so steep that no man can neither go
down to enter water, nor yet being in, can by any possible means get up on
the other side, which river is a great defense to the Country.

Where I used no delay but entered the Bridge in the beginning of the night,
about nine of the clock, being in great doubt of the watch, but at the first
end of the Bridge I saw no man, until I was happily passed over, then there
came one after me and asked who goes there, it being somewhat dark and I in
apparel and with my weapons like a Moore, of their country, answered bouldly
that I was a friend and told him I was coming to the Governor to deliver
letters from the King, for near the rivers side there is a Uillage, where
dwells he who has charge of the keeping of this passage.

Whereby I went onward through the Uillage, but before I was far passed: I
heard horsemen upon the Bridge, which asked whether any man had passed that
night, the watchmen told them there was one gone even now, which said he went
to deliver the Kings letters to the Officer.



But I thought no time now to hear any more of their talk but betook ^e to
my heels, and so soon as I was without the Town I went out of the Port way,
into woods, and kept desert ways that night and day following. And the next
night I came within the liberties of the King of Argire, where I knew the
Cabiles, could not fetch me back again.

In this order I escaped their hands, by the mighty power of God: for
understand, that in these desert Mountains there are all manner of wild
beasts in great number, Many dangerous wild beasts in that country.
as Lions, Bears, Woolues of marvelous bigness, Apes, wild Swine, and also
wild Horses and Asses, with many other hurtful beasts, yet was I never in
danger of any of these.



In this country of Cabyles, there is diverse kinds of very pure mettales,
as Gold, Silver, and Lead, and good Iron and Steel, but they for want of
knowledge and skill, make no use of any metal, except Iron and Steel:
although at such times as I have been present whiles the Smithes have tried
their Iron, I have seen among the dross of the Iron very perfect gold, which
they perceiving me to behold, were very inquisitiue to understand whether it
were gold, or any other metal of substance: but I told them it was but a
kind of dross, whereof we made colors for paint^^^ in England.

They carried me out to the Mountains, and showed me the rocks where they
gathered their Iron, which rocks had veins of very pure gold Oar, which I
would not reueile to them, but answered as before: because I doubted if the
king once knew me to have experience in such mysteries, he would keep me the
more straight, whereby I might have remained in bondage during my life.

Now when I was within the country of Argire, I was out of danger from the
pursuers, and then did I walk by day, and kept the common ways, where coming
within the view of Argire, upon the way I met a Turk, who knew me at the first
sight, since I was prisoner in Argire, and demanded if I had not been captive
with such a man? I said yes: he then inquired whether I went to the city? I
said yes, then returned he back, and did accompany me to the City.

When I came there, I would have gone to the English house, but he led me
violently to my old Master, where I rested me a day and a night, my master
not being very earnest, for because in this time that I was absent all the
English captives were redeemed and sent home. Wherefore I went to the English
counsel, hoping to be presently delivered, who gave me very good words, but
did not show me that favor which he professed.

I could make some discourse of his unkind dealing with me and other of our
countrymen, which I will leave till more fit occasion: for understand that
whiles I was with him, there came a messenger from my old master, with whom
I was before I went to Genua, who would have carried me away by force, but I
would not go, requesting the counsel to take order for my delivery: but he
persuaded me to go with him, saying, that he would in time provide for my
liberty.

But by means I would not yield to go to my Master, nor yet the counsel
would not take order for me I was taken by the kings officers, and put in
chains in the Kings prison among other captives: and at the next setting out
of the Galleys I was put to my old occupation, where I remained a Galley slave
for three years and above after.



In which time I was eight voyages at sea, and at such time as the Galleys lay
in harbor, I was imprisoned with the rest of the captives, where our ordinary
foo^e was bread and water, and at some few times, as once or twice in the
week a small quantity of sodden wheat.

To conclude, I passed my time in sickness and extreme slavery, until by
the help of an honest Merchant of this city of London, and having a very
fit opportunity by means of certain our English ships were ready to set
sail bound homeward, upon Christmas even being the 23 of December 1592. I came
abourd the Cherubin of London: who weighing anckor, and having a happy gale,
arrived in England toward the end of February following.

Thus have you heard how it has pleased the Almighty God (after many and
great miseries) to bring me to the port which I longed greatly to see:
beseeching God of his mercy, to prolong the days of our most gracious and
renowned Queen, whose fame reaches fair, and whose most happy government is
in admiration with foreign Princes* So wishing all to the glory of God, and
furtherance of the Gospel, I end.

FINIS.

