A Declaration of egregious Popish Impostures, to withdraw the hearts of her
Majesty's Subjects from their allegiance, and from the truth of Christian
Religion professed in England, under the pretense of casting out devils.

PRACTICED BY EDMVNDS, ALIAS Weston a Jesuit, and diverse Romish Priests his
wicked associates.

Whereunto are annexed the Copies of the Confessions, and Examinations of the
parties themselves, which were pretended to be possessed, and dispossessed,
taken upon oath before her Majesty's Commissioners, for causes Ecclesiastical.

AT LONDON Printed by James Roberts, dwelling in Barbican. 1603.

The Argument of the several Chapters.
1 THE occasion of publishing these wonders, by the coming into light of the
penned book of Miracles.

2 The fit time that the Popish Exorcists chose to act these miracles in.

3 The places wherein these Miracles were played.

4 More special considerations touching their choice of places.

5 The persons, their Disciples pretended to be possessed, and dispossessed.

6 Their ways of catching, and inueigling their Disciples.

7 Their holy pretenses to make their Disciples sure unto them.

8 Their means, and manner of instructing their Scholars.

9 Of the secrets, and strange operation of the holy chair, and holy potion.

10 Touching the strange names of their devils.

11 The reasons why sometime one devil alone, sometimes an 100, sometimes a
thousand are cast out at a clap.

12 Of the secret of lodging, and couching the devil in any part of the body
that the Exorcist please.

13 Of dislodging, rowsing, and hunting the devil by the dreadful power of the
presence, approach, and bodily touch of a priest.

14 Of the strange power of a Catholic Priests breath, and of the admirable
fire that is in a Priests hands to burn the devil.

15 Of the admirable power in a Priests gloves, his hose, his girdle, his
shirts, to scorch the devil.

16 Of the wonderful power in a Priests albe, his amice, his maniple, his
stole, to whip, and plague the devil.

17 Certain questions answered, concerning the Church of Rome, her making,
and accumulating yet more dreadful tools, and Engines for the devil.

18 Of the dreadful power of holy water, hallowed candell, Frankincense,
Brimstone, the book of Exorcismes, and the holy potion, to scald, broyle, and
to sizle the devil.

19 Of the astonishable power of Nicknames, Relics, and Asses ears, in
afflicting, and tormenting the devil.

20 Of the dreadful power of the Cross, and Sacrament of the Altar to torment
the devil, and to make him roar.

21 Of the strange forms, shapes, and apparitions of the devils.

22 Of the admirable final act of expelling the devils, and of their forms in
the departing.

23 Of the aim, end, and mark of all this pestilent tragaedie.

TO THE SEDVCED Catholics of England. *
SEduced and disunited Brethren, there be two grand witches in the world, that
seduce the souls of the simple, and lead them to perdition: Lying wonders, and
Counterfeit zeal. The power of these two, the spirit of God has most lively
expressed unto us, one in the person of Simon Magus the Sorcerer, who with his
lying wonders had so bewitched the simple people, as they followed him with
this acclamation: This man is the power of the great and mighty GOD. The other
in the person of some of the Corinthians, who by the feigned zeal of the
counterfeite Apostles, were bewitched, and carried from S. Paul, the true and
blessed Apostle of our Savior Christ. These two witching powers have many
years since combined and united themselves in the Pope of Rome, and his
disciples, who take upon them the sovereign power of our savior Christ, with
authority to command unclean spirits, and to make them obey: and do pretend
such a burning holy zeal unto you, as that they regard neither the pleasures,
profits, nor preferments of this world, nay not their own liberty, and lives,
but do offer them up both as a sacrifice for your souls consolation. These
are mighty powers to sway your judgments, and affections from us unto them.
Now if it shall appear unto you as clear, as the light of the sun, that
these powers be feigned, and counterfeite in them, and that they be in truth
nothing else, save the mists, and allusions of Satan, to dim the ey of your
understanding, and bewitch your affections to doat upon their impious
superstition, what can you, or any ingenious spirits do less, then bewail
your seduced misaffection unto us, and to account them as the grand Impostors,
and enchaunters of your souls? And that this may be clearly manifested unto
you, I beseech you in the bowels of our blessed Savior, to let open your ears
and eyes to this short declaration: to peruse and read it with a single ey, and
impartial affection, and if it shall not most perspicuously appear unto you,
that the Pope, and his spirits he sends in here amongst you, do play Almighty
God, his son, and Saints upon a stage, do make a pageant of the Church, the
blessed Sacraments, the rites and ceremonies of religion, do cog and coin
devils, spirits, and souls departed this life, to countenance and grace, or
face out their desperate abominations, then stand disunited, and disaffected
as you do. It is not in any man (I confess) to feel those divine beams of
burning zeal that were in S. Paul, who wished himself Anathema for his
kinsmen according to the flesh: yet a man of Jonas spirit I can easily name,
that would most gladly be cast into the sea, to calm this tempest of
opposition risen here amongst us, and of Ieremies devotion, that does pray for
a fountain of tears to bewail the lamentable blindness of his own nation,
that men as you are, borne free of an understanding spirit, and ingenious
disposition, should so basely degenerate, as to captiuate your wits, wills, and
spirits, to a foreign Idol Gull, composed of palpable fiction, and diabolical
fascination, whose enchaunted chalice of heathenish drugs, and Lamian
superstition, has the power of Circes, and Medaeas cup, to metamorphose men
into asses, bayards, and swine. Is it not their own brand they have stamped on
your forheads, that England has been always good ass to the Pope?

Who does not bewail the sely doting Indian Nation, that falls down and
performs divine adoration to a rag of red cloth: and the besotted Egyptians,
that kissed with earnest devotion the Ass upon which the Idol Isis sat, and
the lymphaticall priests of Baal, that launced their own flesh before an Idol
of wood? Would God your bewitched dotage were not as palpable, and more
lamentable then theyrs, that fall down and adore a morsel of bread, that
kiss and clip with religious devotion the Popes toe, for bearing the feigned
counterfeit of our Savior on earth: performed with the right Egyptian gloss,
non Papae sed Petro, non asinae sed deae, this honor is not to the Pope, but
to S. Peter, not to the ass, but to Isis. Your Popes being proclaimed by your
own Oraclists to the world, one to be an Ass, another a Fox, another a Wolf.

What people, but you, were ever so bewitched, as to be borne in hand, that a
house was carried in the air from Palestina to Loretto: that a painted Image
in a wall, does work as high miracles, as ever were performed by the eternal
son of God: that the prints of S. Frauncis stripes, the tail of our Saviors
Ass, the milk of our blessed Lady are this day to be seen: and these
graceless saltlesse gulleries either to be believed, or countenaunced, by men
of wit, understanding, and spirit, such as are this day many in the Romish
Church? If you ask me the cause, what can it be but this, that God has given
them over to the spirit of illusion, to believe unsavory lies, for refusing in
their pride to embrace the pure naked synceritie of the Gospel of Christ. He
that sits in the heavens, Almighty God, with his Angels, and Saints, do laugh
these misshapen monsters to scorn.

And who can but bleed in heart, to see you as far bewitched on our
imposturising renagadoes, that come fresh from the Popes tyring house, masked
with the vizard of holy burning zeal. First it may please you to observe, that
the wiser grauer sort of the^ do keep themselves warm in their Cloisters at
home, and do feed themselves fat with the spoils of your confusion. These
lighter superfluities, whom they disgorge amongst you, how they play the Bats,
and Moales, either trenching themselves in the mines of your labyrinths at
home, or masking in your gold and silver abroad in the fashion of great
Potentates, until Gods reuengefull arm does uncase them to the view of the
world, and then they suffer the mild stroke of justice with a glorious
ostentation, as you in beguiled simplicity do imagine for their conceited
religion: but as the wiser see, the state did always know, and is of late
published in their own writings, for high and odious treasons: and professed by
their own Masters, that have made them after their own images, to be of a
spirit of contradiction to our Governors and Prince: and it is wondered at by
themselves, considering their treasonable machinations that her Highness, and
the state, have carried so mild, and merciful an hand over them, and that any
one of them is left alive to libell against the admirable lenity of her
Majesty's gracious proceedings. Wherein be ye well assured, that if the sword
of justice were drawn, and inflicted according to the weight and measure of
their detestable designs, that fewer of the^ would come over, and that this
couey of night-birds, would shrowde themselves warm under the gentle wings of
their holy father at Rome. But admit (as you conceive) that they died for the
credit of their conceited superstition: what did Lucians Peregrinus less, then
offer himself in fire at Olimpia for the credit of his fascination? What did
Aesculapius upon the hill Aetna to get himself a name, but cast himself
headlong into the burning flames? What do the Indian-priests at this day, but
sacrifice themselves for the countenauncing of their diabolical incantation.
It is no new, nor strange thing for the authors, and maintainers of sects, and
factions in all kinds, to die with seeming show of glorious resolution. Do
but seriously recount the quality of this fugitive generation, and see what
pious resolution can lodge in their breasts. What are they before they go over
but discontended, ruinate, stigmaticall refuse people: of a factious,
ambitious, exorbitant conversation abroad, exploded, or cunningly discarded
their own Societies where they lived: and how ghostly and priestly they
demean themselves here amongst you at their return, I refer you for
demonstation to this short, and perspicuous declaration. Wherein you may
plainly see, if you do not wilfully hoodwinke your own eyes, that the holy
pretended hot zeal of the fiery spirits from Rome, is the mere Heathenish
iugling of Bells priests, to devour your goods, lands, and patrimonies, the
rights of your posterity, and ancient monuments of your name, to defraude your
children of their bread, and cause you offer it to impure dogs, to enrich their
own Cloisters, Colleges, and Churches, with the spoils of your desolation,
to defile your chaste houses, pollute your tender virgins, deprave, and inueigle
your own wives lying in your bosoms, especally by that poysonable engine of
hypocritical Confession, and finally to offer you up as a pray to that Monster
of Rome, the head of all unnatural and detestable rebellion.

And that this declaration might be free from the carpe, and cavil of
ill-affected, or discomposed spirits, I have alleged nothing for material, or
authentical herein, but the express words, either of some part of the
Miracle book, penned by the priests, and filed upon Record, where it is
public to be seen, or else a clause of their confession who were fellow
actors in this impious dissimulation. Whose several confessions, and
contestations (the parties being yet living) are here published in print,
that the world may be a witness of our integrity herein. All which had been
long ere this offered to your equal consideration, but that the Miracle-booke
came but lately to hand, and the getting of four chief Daemoniacks together,
besides many more assistants, being persons of that quality and condition, was
a matter of some pains, and travel to effect.

If the form and phrase be distasting to some clowdy spirits, as too light,
and ironicall for one of my profession, let the matter be my Aduocat, that
draws me thereunto, and the manner my Apology a little too: trusting I may
be excused to jest at their jesting, that have made a jest of God, and of his
blessed Saints in heaven. If I have wittingly falsified or feigned any thing
out of that book of wonders, God do so to me, and more, for doing them so
much wrong: but if all be truly, and authentically set down, give GOD his
glory, his Church her honor, your Sovereign her allegiance, your Brethren
their due affection, and the Pope, and his iugling companions, their deserved
detestation. And so I leave you to the protector of all truth, and the revenger
of all falsehood, and hypocritical dissimulation.

Yours in Christ S. H.

A declaration of Popish imposture in casting out of Devils.
CHAP. 1. The occasion of publishing these wonders, by the coming to light of
the penned book of Miracles.
ABout some three, or four years since, there was found in the hands of one
Ma. Barnes a Popish Recusant, an English Treatise in a written hand, fronted
with this Latin sentence, taken out of the Psalms, Venite, et narrabo, quanta
fecit Dominus animae meae, come and I will show you, what great things the Lord
has done for my soul. Which treatise when we had perused upon this holy
inuitation, we found it a holy fardell of holy relics, holy charms, and
holy consecrated things, applied to the casting out of many thousands of
devils, out of six young persons, 3. young men, and three proper young maids,
accomplished by the means of Fa: Edmunds, alias Weston, a principal Jesuit of
his order in those times, and twelve secular Priests, his reverend assistants.

The names of the parties supposed to be possessed, were these, Marwood,
servant (as has been informed) to Ma. Anthony Babington, Will: Trayford,
attendant at that time upon Ma: Edmund Peckham, Robert Maynie Gentleman,
lately before come out of France: Sara Williams, Friswood Williams, two
sisters, and Anne Smith, all three meniall servant to Master Peckham
aforesaid. The names of the Actors in this holy Comedy, were these, Edmunds,
alias Weston, rector chori, of who^ you have heard before, Ma: Cornelius, Ma:
Dibdale, Ma: Thomson, Ma: Stemp, Ma: Tyrrell, Ma: Dryland, Ma: Tulice, Ma:
Sherwood, Ma: Winkefield, Ma: Mud, Ma: Dakins, Ma: Ballard, and some other
besides, that were daily comers, and goers.

This play of sacred miracles, was performed in sundry houses acco^modate for
the feate, in the house of the L. Vaux at Hackney, of Ma: Barnes at Fulmer, of
Ma: Hughes at Vxbridge, of Sir George Peckham at Denham, and of the Earl of
Lincoln in Chanon Row in London. The time chosen to act, and publish these
wonders, were the years 85, and 86, ending with the apprehension, and
execution of Ballard, and Babington, and the rest of that impious consort.

And because the gentle Invitator of us to come, and see his wonders, when we
come to see them, himself, and his actors do play least to be seen, it has
been thought meet, to send for him, and as many of his play-fellowes, as
Tiburne will give leave to come, to confer further with them, touching this
mystical play; whether the parts have been handled handsomely, and
cunningly, or no: what the scope of the Author Edmunds, and his associates was
in this wonderful pageant, and whether good decorum have been kept in acting
the same. Wherein (I must tell you) some pains have been taken by some in
authority, for the finding out of such agents, patients, and assistants, as
have furnished the stage, and in bringing them to say their parts so
perspicuously on the stage, as that every young child may see, who he is, what
he means, and whether his part tends.

Marwood, and Trayford, cannot yet be found, it is thought they are conveyed
beyond seas, (as some other of their play-fellowes should have been) for
telling of tales. The other four possessed have come to light, and upon
gentle conference, have frankly, and freely advowed, and have sealed it with
their voluntary oaths, taken upon the holy Evangelists, that all in effect,
that passed between them, and the Priests, in this wondrous possession, and
dispossession, was naught else save close packing, cunning iugling, feate
falsehood, and cloked dissimulation. One of the reverend Priests, who was
himself a principal actor in this holy legerdemaine, being examined, has
contested with the confession of the other examinats, touching the unfolding of
this sacred pack. All whose several examinations, confessions, and relations,
touching the beginning, proceeding, and finishing of this tragical comaedie,
we have thought meet ad verbum to publish in print, that all men may see we
have dealt truly, and sincerely herein, and that all may likewise see, quanta
fecit Dominus, (according to the saying of that Latin sentence praefixed to
the discourse) how great things the Lord in his mercy does by course of times
reveal, of that man of sin, of the mystery of iniquity, and of those
reverend iugling Priests, his disguised comaedians.

Wherein, that every person may appear in his own proper colors, the devil
in his, and the devils charmers in theyrs, that every part may be considered,
how well it has been played, and what actor has best deserved the plaudite,
or suspendite, for his good action, and wit, venite, et narrabo, come and see
it set out, in the sacred robes out of the holy wardrop from Rome, their holy
attire, their holy relics, their consecrated creatures, their own speech,
action, and fashion, and thus it begins.

CHAP. 2. The time when the Popish Exorcists chose to act these miracles.
THe Politikes maxim of using, and plying of time, has been so well
practiced, and plied by his Holiness of Rome, and his holy crew, as that little
time has been lost, wherein something has not been attempted against her
Majesty, and the kingdom, since her first coming to the crown, to this
present time. I will only point, at those former times, as I come along to our
time of this tragedy of devils.

Her Highness was no sooner come to the Crown, but Marie then wife to the K.
of France, was declared in Paris to be the lawful Q. of England, and the
arms of both her Majesty's kingdoms, ann. 1558.
England, and Ireland, were commanded to be set, in vasis, et tapetibus
regijs, et reliquis vtensilibus. The popish Bishops, lately before deprived in
the second year of her Majesty's reign, purposed to lose no time, when
presently after their said deposition: 1559.
plerique eoru^ exco^municationis censuram, aduersus reginam aliosque nonullos
ad hibendam censuerunt. It was no long time after this, when it should have
been a Canon set down, in the Counsel of Trent, by the instigation of his
Holiness Agents there present: de Elizabetha haeretica declaranda, 1562.
if the Emperor had not interposed to stay that course. It was time well plied,
when the same his Holiness contriuing her Majesty's utter destruction, 1567.
(as appears in the life of Pius 5. published in Italian) and drawing the king
of Spain into the same, he sent over one Robert Godolphi a Florentine, under
the color of Merchandise, hither into England, to excite a rebellion, and
furnished him with 15000. Crowns toward the same: by whose cunning
persuasion, the Noble men in the North parts being risen in Arms, forth
comes the Popes Bull, blanched with a fair goodly face of pastoral zeal,
and love to the Catholic religion, exco^municating of pure devotion (God wot)
the Queens Majesty, and discharging her subjects from their allegiance unto
her: being indeed naught else, save a deuilish Engine, to strengthen the
rebellion: 1569.
which being dissolved, and the heads thereof dispersed, the time was plied on
still with consolatorie Letters, written from the Pope, containing matter of
new comfort, and encouragement to the Duke of Norfolk, the close designed head
of that rebellion, by his intended marriage with the Scottish Queen. Forces
were promised to be sent over with all speed from beyond seas, to the aid of
the said Duke, under the leading of Vitelli, appointed to that office by name
from the king of Spain, the coming of which forces, 1572.
the Duke him self did stay, by losing his head. And least the King of Spain
should quail in his princely designements against this kingdom, in regard of
his unfortunate success, Saunders, (the Popes darling) eggs him on with a
fresh assault, to keep the Spanish Engines in work, alleging this, 1577.
as his maine battery to cause the King to be doing, that the whole state of
Christendom stood upon the hot assayling of England.

Neither was it long time ere this vigilant champion had gained time again, by
obtaining of his Holiness, men, money, and munition, with which he came with
open arms into Ireland, like a Fury from Hell: and in his vain hopes had
devoured that kingdom, for the use of his holy Father the Pope forsooth, and
for his young Master the Popes Nephew. Where he breathing out his furious
Ghost, 1579.
as a pledge of his wicked attempt, Parsons the Popes Minion entertaines the
time, with a new coined plot, coming into England upon no meaner errand, then
to continue the deposing of her Majesty, and the setting up of another Prince.
1580.


The wise espying, and circumspect implying of the advantage of these times:
you see from what heads and fountains of holiness they came, yet none of
these is the time, that does consort with our casting out of devils, we have
now in hand. Ours is the time, when his Holy: the King of Spain, and Parsons
their Entelechie, were plotting beyond the seas, for the delivery out of prison
of the Q. of Scots, by forcible attempt. Which action, after mature
deliberation being cast upon the Duke of Guise, he the said Duke, was the^
busily preparing his forces for England, for the sudden effecting of the said
attempt.

I omit how Charles Paget played his time, in coming secretly into England, to
solicit the Earl of Northumberland to diverse treacherous attempts. How
Frauncis Throgmorton plied his time at the instigation of Mendoza, in busily
sounding of Havens, for the safe arrival of the Guisian forces. How Doctor
Parry plied his time, in enforming his conscience, for the sudden, and
desperate murdering of the Queen: (for there was no time spared, no means
unassayed, no devise unthought upon, no person unattempted, every one of that
holy hellish association, striving to win the garland from other, by having his
hands soonest, and deepest dyed in her Majesty's blood) and I come to the time
when the Guisian exploit, grew toward the prime, and was on foot for England.

Which stratageme, being inspired by the Pope into Parsons, by Parsons into
Edmunds, alias Weston, a Provincial of the order of Jesuits for that time,
residing here in England: between Parsons, and whom, as between two
Intelligences, in a superior, and an inferior sphaere, there was a mutual
communication of all matters of import, and by the same Edmunds being breathed
into the breasts of all their subordinates, and dependants here in the Land,
it cannot be conceived, what a spirit, life, and alacrity, the whole Popish
body of Traitors (half dead before) did suddenly conceive, how every limb,
member, and joint of that holy body did bestir it self, to be serviceable to
this holy design. But Fa: Weston above all, whose head and heart, were so
big with the Guisian attempt, as he thought his time come, to advance the
banner of Ignatius for ever here in England, by making himself, and his order
famous by some notable exploit: and it being Gods permissiue providence, that
this popish body, co^piled of so many horrible and detestable treasons, should
be wholly inspired from the spirit of his Holy: and of hell, Weston, as a limb
of the same body, moved with the same spirit, chooses to eternize himself
from the power of hell, by casting out devils. Wherein he bestirs himself so
spritely, and plays such a deuill-prize at the L. Vaux his house in Hackney,
with such a wonderful applause, as Array, Parsons Ape, a runnagate Priest, and
a notable Polypragmon here in our state, meets with Ma: Tyrrell newly come
from beyond seas, and vaunts with a big look, that Fa: Weston had showed
such sovereign authority over hell, as the devils themselves should confess
their kingdom was near at an end. And the same Array, was so full fraught with
hope, and confidence, in the Spanish, and Guisian attempt then in hand, as his
first congee was in Master Tirrels ear at their entering into Paul's, bidding
him to be of good cheer, for that all things now went very well forwards. A
loyal generation of Priests.
The King of Spain (quoth he) is now almost in readiness with his forces for
England, it stands us now in hand that be Priests, to further the Catholic
cause, as much as possibly in us lies.

Paget, and Morgan, two principal limbs of this popish body, being acquainted
with the aforesaid plot, and fearing that the Guises attempt, by delivering the
Scottish Queen by open Arms, would sparkle abroad before it were ripe, and so
receive a check by our English forces, before it came to the push, cast about
in their brains for a shorter way at home: Ballard the bloody Priest is dealt
withal to prick on Babington, Tilney, As is lately confessed by Fa: P. in his
Apolog.
and the rest of that aspiring popish band to attempt a desperate truculent
act, by laying violent hands upon her Majesty's sacred person. Which whilst
it was in hammering, the Catholic Priests, not caring by what means they
effected their treacherous designs, set themselves on work on all hands, with
working of wonders by dispossessing of devils: unto the acting of whose
miracles, Babington and his consorts, do diverse times repair to Sir George
Peckhams house at Denham, with four or five Coaches full at once. And this new
tragedy of devils had his time of rising, and his fatal time of fall, with
the true tragedy performed upon Bab: and his accomplices, for their detestable
treason. The pestilent drift, and pernicious course of this deuill-worke you
shall hear of hereafter.

CHAP. 3. The places wherein these miracles were played.
IT has been always the ill fortune of this holy order of Exorcists, that the
professors of it have been reputed errand Iuglers and Impostors, yea sometimes,
by the greatest protectors of their own religion. A great man told Mengus,
that if there were fifty Exorcists at once standing before him, he should
deem nine and forty of them for no better then Impostors, and Mengus (as
seems) was afraid himself should have made up just tale. Wherefore the
Masters of the Art, have so warily devised their rules, and canons, as a man
may see they labor to preoccupate men's minds for fear of suspicion, which
gives the greater occasion to suspect them the more.

Mengus his caveat of declaring places not meet for exorcisme is this:
Praecauere debet Exorcista quantum potest, Cap. 15. flag: demon.
ne absque graui necessitate exerceat hoc officium adiurandi daemones in
domibus priuatis, ne detur occasio scandali pusillis. His positive rule for the
place appointed is, Sed debet exorcizare in Ecclesia, vel in alio loco Deo
dicato vel alicui sancto. His reasons against private houses, and for Churches,
or at least consecrated places are first, that being done publicly, the
weaker sort may have no occasion to suspect the action of fraud. 2. Tum quia
in domibus priuatis, vt in pluribus, ad sunt mulieres, quarum consortium debet
summopere ab exorcistis vitari, ne incidant in laqueum diaboli: that is,
because in private houses, there are commonly some women, whose company the
Exorcists ought to decline, least happily they fall into the snares of the
devil. 3. Tum quia ibifiunt multa turpia, tacenda potius, quam hic inserenda:
that is, because in such houses, turpitudes be committed, meeter to be
silenced, then here to be named. 4. Tum quia Ecclesia proprie est locus
deputatus vbi Euergumeni debent exorcizari: that is, because the Church is
properly the place appointed to that action, wherein the possessed ought to be
exorcised. And what need these cautious rules, to avoid suspicion of iugling,
turpitude, and women, if nothing were amiss? Auricular confession, is an holy
action of more priuacie, solitude, and familiarity with women, yet because no
man (without reason) may suspect, but that all is well between a ghostly
father, and his ghostly child, there be no rules made of iugling, turpitude, or
women in that mystical function. Sure all is not well in this exorcising
craft, that iugling, turpitude, and women, must be so precisely avoided.

Indeed whereas in his 17. chapter fa: Mengus disputes, that though exorcising
ought to be done in the church, yet the doors of the Church may be close shut
about them: his fatherhood gives us just cause to suspect, that though he would
seem to have it public, touching the place, for a seeming show of avoiding
iugling, turpitude, and women, yet he can be content by shutting the doors, to
have it privately done: or such only let in, as the Exorcist best likes.

See the practice hereof in the iugling Exorcists at Paris, anno 1599, who to
make a show of avoiding of that, which they only intended, iugling deceit,
Page. 6. of that book.
they must have their Minion Martha Brossier exorcised in a Chapel forsooth:
but yet with such a wary eye cast upon the spectators, as there coming in
amongst the rest one Marescot a Physician, a man they did not affect, Seraphin
the holy Exorcist cries out with a loud voice, if there be any here that is
incredulous, and will trouble Martha Brossier, the devil will carry him away
in the air. Wherefore ye see it was very wisely provided of Mengus, to have
an eye to the door: the like ill-fauoured accident fell out amongst our holy
crew, at their principal Theater, Sir George Peckhams house at Denham, where
for want of having a watch at the door, there comes in one Ma: Hambden of
Hambden, who, being one of the incredulous persons, that F. Seraphin co^plaines
of before, and espying their bungling, and using these words in detestation of
their iugling: I see this dealing is abominable: See Friswoods Co^fess:
and I marvel that the house sinketh not for such wickedness committed in it:
and so departing utterly discontent: this incredulous spectator so skared our
holy actors with fear, that they slunke out of the house every man his way, as
a dog that had been bitten by the tail, and leaving their patients alone,
gave the devils an otium, or leave to play for that night.

Now let us look in a little amongst our twelve holy Exorcistes, or rather
twelve holy disciples, and Fa: Weston their holy head: who though they be not a
working, yet by this time they are whetting their tools: and let us see, how
warily they have put in ure their Master Mengus his canon, of choosing a
Chapel, or holy public place to exorcise in, for fear of suspicion of
iugling, turpitude, and women. First, it does not appear that they acted any
of their wondrous dispossessions in any Church, Chapel, or consecrated
place, as F. Mengus had appointed them: except happily they slipped into some
Noble man's void house in London: which houses, in regard of their owners
callings, being above reach of authority, are commonly now adays the
sanctuaries for Popish treason, consistories for plots of rebellion, and
Chapels for all Romish loathsome abomination: not that the Noble men
themselves are privy to such meetings, but their corrupt housekeepers much in
fault for entertayning such guests: and yet the owners themselves not
altogether free from blame, for making no better choice of those, to whom they
commit that charge.

But it appears not (as I said) that they met in any chapel, or holy place at
all: but the chief places of their solemn meetings, were the L. Vaux his house
at Hackney, near London, Master Gardiners house at Fulmer, Ma: Hughes his
house at Vxbridge, and Sir George Peckhams house at Denham: places very fitly
accommodating their holy intentions. First for their capacity, being able to
receive the holy troop, and their train (for they removed bag, and baggage,
as your wandering Players use to do.) Next, for their security, the owners
being trusty tried sure cards, and commanders of their neighbors
adjoining, if any suspicion should arise: and then for their situation, being
remote and secluse from ordinary access.

At the L. Vaux his house at Hackney, was the prime grand miracle performed, by
the grand Master of the craft, Fa: Weston himself, upon one Marwood, servant
to Babington the traitor: where a wonderful thing fell out. Fa: Weston, at the
very first encounter with the devil, stunted the devils wits, and the devil
being once put out, could never hit in again, but vntrusses, and cries out, O
me stultum, insanum, et infaelicem: O foolish, In his own tract. upon record.
page 2.
mad, and miserable devil that I am: which put all the whole company of
spectators into such astonishment, as there was a confused shout made of
weeping, and joy, for this foil of the devil. And the Epilogue was this, O
Catholicam fidem, o insensatos haereticos: O the Catholic faith, o senseless
haereticks, that could never learn the feate, to skare a devil from his wits.

At Fulmer house there were no great miracles done, only the grounds of their
Art laid sure, and a little trying of their tools, whether their tew would
hold or no.

At Vxbridge they lay but two or three nights at the most, and yet the place
was graced with a punie miracle, or two. Dibdale the Priest had his wench set
so close unto him in the way thither, (for avoiding turpitude and women) as she
felt her self to burn, and could hardly endure the heat of the holy man.
Trayford cries out by the way water, water, as the Friar did that by Absolon in
Chawcer was scalded in the toote. And thus were their Journalls toward Denham,
where the Court stayed: the hangings were tricked up, the houses made ready,
and the greatest part of the wonders of this comaedie was performed. Their
harbinger, and host both, in all these iournies (for the owners of houses, and
their families, still left their own houses, and made all clear for these
holy comaedians, as is used to be done toward the coming of a Court) was one
Edm: Peckham; an excellent purueior for such a camp; one of a very ruinate
estate, an intemperate disposition, an unclean conversation, and a man so
deeply engaged to this holy band, as that himself, his wife, his concubine,
and his whole family lived wholly at their charge. This is the man that still
furnished the camp with all kind of luggage, and pleasing provision: that
scoures the coasts, to see that all be clear, that looks to the trusses, and
fardels, that no iugling sticks be left out: the sacrist of these holy
mysteries, playing himself five or six parts in this comaedie: the harbinger,
the host, the steward, the vaunt courrier, the sacrist, and the Pandar. And
this shall suffice touching their places in general: more special
considerations of the same, you shall hear in the chapter ensuing.

CHAP. 4. More special considerations, touching their choice of places.
VIno vendibili non opus est hedera. Weston, in regard of his own fame, needed
nothing more then ordinary, to commend him in this admirable science: but his
12 disciples being but punies, and newly entered by him into the school of
legerdemaine, stood in need of some grace, and commendation, to bring
themselves into custom: therefore, like wise retaylers, they chose unto
themselves places of advantage, to advance their profession. Where it is to be
observed, that whilst the chief of the Popish holy body here in England had
their heads, hearts, and hands full of practices of treason; some other Priests
there were that bestirred themselves. as fast in employing all their wit, and
skill, about getting into their hands huge mines, and masses of gold, silver,
and treasure (called by the Artisans in that mystery Treasure Trouve) supposed
to be hidden, in diverse houses, woods, and plots of ground here in England:
whether to furnish the heads and leaders of the conspirators for their holy
service, they had in hand against her Majesty, and the state, or to enrich
their own cofers, I leave it to conjecture.

For compassing of this treasure, there was a consociation between 3 or 4
priests, deuill-coniurers, and 4 discouerers, or seers, reputed to carry about
with them, their familiars in rings, and glasses, by whose suggestion they came
to notice of those golden hoards. The names of the discouerers, or seers, were
these: Smith, Rickston, Goodgame, and James Phiswick. The names of the
deuill-coniuring priests, for some reasons I forbear: and two of the places
(amongst many) wherein they dealt were Denham, and Fulmer.

Touching Denham the Gentleman, chief owner of the Manor, testifies that the
4 seers, or impostors, had borne him in hand, that there was great store of
Treasure Trouve, hidden in his said Manor, and appointed him a night certain,
when to dig for the same, which time they kept: and that himself with diverse
of his servants being present, there was nothing found, but old empty earthen
pots. And concerning Fulmer, the same Gentleman tells us also, that the
impostors aforesaid, departed from his house to Fulmer. But the penner of
these miracles, remembers more distinctly, both the year, month, and day,
when they went thither. The 22 of October, anno 84. there came 3 coniurers to
Fulmer, upon a Thursday (says he) and there remained working in their Art,
until the Tuesday following.

Upon occasion of the practitioning of these coseners, and devil coniuring
priests for money, was phancied a conceit, and from phancie grew rumors, and
tales, amongst the common sort (as upon any slight occasion of such matters,
have used to be) of spirits, devils, and bug-beares, walking, and haunting
those places, and houses where the coniuring had been. Sara Williams, one of
their patients, says, That she had not been long at Fulmer, but she heard
say, that the house was troubled with spirits. The penner of the miracles, as
if he meant to scare us with the very noise, reports us the manner of the
Hobgoblins in a very tragical style. The whole house (says he) was haunted in
very terrible manner, molesting all that were in the same, See the book of
miracles. Page, 26.
by locking, and vnlocking of doors, tinckling amongst the fier-shouels, and
the tongues, rattling upon the boards, scraping under their beds, and blowing out
the candels, except they were hallowed. And further, that these ill mannered
vrchins, did so swarm about the priests, in such troops, and thronges, that
they made them sometimes to sweat, as seems, with the very heat of the fume,
that came from the devils noses. Ma: Maynie a pitiful possessed, does
affirm, that within a day, or two after his coming to Denham, the maid-cooke
told him, that there was great walking of spirits about the house, and that
diverse had been greatly affrighted by them. And if you will not believe these,
believe the devil himself in his Dialogue with Dibdale, Page, 25, of the book
of miracles.
crying in his devils roaring voice, that he came thither for Money, Money.

And if you happen to wonder, why I called these houses of Denham, and Fulmer,
in the beginning of this chapter, aduantagious unto our holy impostors,
considering Fa: Mengus his rule of places for exorcising, cited before, that
they must be consecrated, hallowed, or holy places at least, you will wonder
somewhat more, when you hear Fa: Thyraeus prescribing, that at any hand before
the holy works of exorcising, the ill affected party be begun, first, and
above all, to purify, and exorcise the place, that the house being cleansed
from those troublesome haunting companions, that do make men sweat, the holy
work may proceed the more facile, and with better success.

Where by the way you are to observe out of learned Thyraeus his 70 Chapter De
locis infestis: the whole course hereof, that is, of exorcising the places.
Which must be performed by these 5 holy works: Diuini auxilij imploratione:
psalmorum gradualium recitatione: lectione Euangelij: thurificatione: et
conclusione. By calling upon God, the blessed virgin Mary, and the Saints: by
saying over the 15 graduall Psalms: by reading over the Gospel of S. John,
concerning Zacchaeus climing up into a tree: by holy fumigations: and the
Epilogue of the whole work. These be the five holy scare-deuils, which our
Exorcists should have used, to have driven the devils from the house. And here
I must needs shame my self, and lay open unto you, the shallowness of my
wit, that is not able to diue into the bottom of this sacred mystery: why
above all other Gospels, the Gospel of S. John, touching Zacchaeus climbing
into a tree, should have such a potency to fright a devil out of a house.
Whether there be any hidden antipathie between the nature of devils, and a
Sycamore tree, as was between Scaliger and a Rat: or that the devil bare a
spite to the tree, for helping low Zacchaeus to see our Savior pass by: or
that the devil had himself some mischance out of the tree: or that our
Saviors dinner at Zacchaeus house was dressed with the wood of that tree: or
else his cross for have made of that tree, Oedipo opus est, I am at a full
point. And if I send you to Thyraeus, to vnridle the ridle, I doubt you will
laughed at him, as you do at me.

Howsoever it be, our holy Exorcists used neither that, nor any other of the
five terrors, to flight the devils from Fulmer, nor Denham, but were content
with their company, and fell to their work. And herein they showed a part
of their greatest skill of legerdemaine. First, this fabulous rumor of the
houses haunted with devils, did blanch over, and blaze their Art the more of
casting devils out, and so brought them into credit. Secondly, if they had
read the Gospel touching Zacchaeus, and skared them away, they had wanted
devils to furnish out the pageant. Thirdly, it bred a reverend opinion, and an
admiration in all that came to see wonders, at the virtue, and holiness of the
Priests, that durst walk up and down amongst the thickest swarm of devils,
and never a devil so hardy as to touch an hair of their beards. Fourthly, it
served their purposes excellent well to cover their bungling, iugling, and
legerdemaine, in that the servants of the houses having their phancies
oppressed with the conceit of spirits, and devils haunting in every corner of
the house, they were so distracted with fear, as they had use of neither wit,
nor will, to doubt, or look into their packing.

And by this you see our punie Exorcists, as young as they be, showed more wit,
and skill, then either Mengus their Master, or Thyraeus their prompter, in
picking out these places of Hobgoblins, to make the stages for their Comaedy,
and not offering first by holy fumigations, to scare the vrchins away. One
doubt I have more, wherein I must crave your gentle assistance.

Some curious head, more nice then needs, may pick at a moate, and ask me
two or three questions out of this narration. First, whether a man may be a
coniurer, sorcerer, or Enchau^ter; that is, enter into league, friendship, and
familiarity with the devil, as the priests that coniured for money at Denham
did, and yet be accounted a ghostly Confessor, a reverend father, and an holy
priest still? A simple doubt God wot. Syluester, Bonifacius, and some other
Popes, have been errand deuill-coniurers, and yet their holiness not an
halfepeny the worse. This simple questionist must understand, that God has
tied the spirit of holiness with so sure a chain to S. Peter's chair, as that
let the Pope, or any popeling, be an Ethnic, a Turk, a Saracen, or a devil,
he cannot avoid it, but by sitting in that chair he must wear out his
holiness, and be holy still.

Secondly, if he would know how it comes to pass, that the famous Thyraeus
having labored, and sweat so much to set down all the causes, ways, and
means, how wicked spirits do come to haunt houses, and having by the
dexterity of his wit found out twelve ways, this way of haunting houses after
coniuration, is none of his twelve: we must tell him, that our Exorcists are
not of his old plodding fashion, but of the new cut, and such, as you shall
find, (by that time you have them a little hot in their work) will set
Mengus, Thyraeus, and Sprenger to school.

Thirdly, if he tell us by the rules of that black Magic Art, concerning
coniuring up of spirits, that the Coniurers great art, and industry, is not so
much in raising up a spirit, as in commanding him down again, and that if
he cannot lay him down quiet, the Artist himself, and all his company, are
in danger to be torn in pieces by him; and that he is so violent, boystrous,
and big, as that he will ruffle, rage, and hurl in the air, worse then
angry God Aeolus ever did, and blow down steeples, trees, may-poles, and keep
a fell coil in the world. And upon this will be questioning, how it happened
here, that our haunting spirits at Denham, and Fulmer, raised by the black
Art, did not ruffle and rage in the world, as those coniured spirits use to do,
but did put their heads in a bench-hole for a twelve month together, till these
holy good men came to their work? I must tell him, that our haunting spirits
were of a more mild, calm, and kind disposition, loving the company of
wenches, and holy priests; and for their staying so long about the house, as
Rats about a Barn, we say they did that kindly, expecting the priests their
holy Masters to come to set them a work. And so these quiddities being
satisfied, I hope I may proceed.

CHAP. 5. The persons pretended to be possessed, and dispossessed.
AFter that our holy order were resolved of their holy wonders of casting out
devils, and had both time and place fit for their purpose, a meane-witted man
would ask the question, that young Isaac did of his father in a much holier
cause, Lo here are all things ready, but where is the sacrifice? The time is
here fitting, and the places prepared, but where are the possessed parties,
upon whom these miracles must be showed? The young gallant in the comaedy
thought it an impossible matter, that his Sycophant should be furnished at a
days warning, both with money, and a Merchant to cosen the Baude: and his
Sycophant cheeres him up thus: consilij, dolique copiam structam gesto in
pectore mecum. And so was it with our cunning Comaedians; they had a world of
devises, to get themselves patients, ready coined in their budget. Trusty
Roger the Leno, Edm: Peckham.
had his hooks so sweetly bayted, and his sprindges so artificially set in
every haunt, and glade, that he was always sure of either a Gudgin, or a
Woodcocke, to furnish out a service. It is a common ground with them (as with
all other conspirants, in any badde practice or science) not to deal with any,
that are not in some degree, or other obliged unto them. Marwood, Ma: Anthony
Babingtons man the traitor, the first subject, whereon the grand miracle at
Hackney was played, is not now forth coming, as I guess, for fear of his
telling tales out of school. And if one should kindly ask Fa: Weston in his
ear, what is become of him, that he might be spoken withal, I suppose of his
modesty he would sooner blush, then tell. This actor played his part
extempore there on the stage with a very good grace; and if he had now the
good hap to be conferred with-all, I doubt not but he could, and would relate
(as other his cue-fellowes have done) how he came to that facility in his
part, who were his prompters, his directers, his teachers, and who did help him
put on the devils vizard on his face. It may suffice, that it is said, he was
Anthony Babington his man.

Trayford the young Gentleman forsooth, was of Ma: Peckhams priuities, or
privy counsel if ye will, the Leno his own Hypodromos, sworn true to the
Pantofle, young master of the Maidens, serving in the nature of a refresher,
to furbush over his masters brayed wares: one that couth his actions, and
motions so readily, and expressed them so lively in the scene of possession,
as Sara Williams his play-fellow, In her examination.
had almost forgotten her part, and marred the play; sure I am she confesses,
that she loved the young devil too well.

Ma: Mainie, by birth a Gentleman, by education a Catholic, one that had
sucked from his mother the taint of Romish contagion, was by her conuayed beyond
Seas, ere he was 14 years old, and for his deeper grounding in Popish
superstition, being maintained 2 years in the Seminary at Rhemes, entered
himself into the order of the Bonhommes. But shortly leaft his fraternity, and
came over into England: where his brother Ma: John M. having married Ma.
Peckhams sister, and he accompanying his brother, sometimes to Ma. Peckhams
house at Denham, fell eft-soones in acquaintance with this holy league there:
and seeing amongst their society no Bonhomes at al, but wares of a much
lighter, and pleasanter gloss, was the more easily allured into the holy
combination, and being once entangled, could not get out again, but of a
metamorphozed Bonhomme, became an excellent deuill-comaedian: See his examine:
though now ye may perceive the Gentleman does rue, that ever he did set his
foot on the stage. This man had bonds enough about him, to make good his trust,
and fidelity to the holy association: education, religion, affiance, and
besides, to some kind she-deuils of that order, no unkind affection.

Anne Smith, attending at times upon Mistress Peckham (a maid when she came to
the league) of 18 years of age, nusled up in the true rites, and ceremonies of
the Popish fascination, and so an affectionate proselyte to that Mimick
superstition (it being the only religion to catch fools, children, and women,
by reason it is naught else, Ed: Peckham.
save a conceited pageant of Puppits, and gaudes) she was first seized upon
by old Harpax, the Leno, graund probationer of the devils female in the play,
by the means of her sister, one Alice Plater, his sweet Mistress forsooth: she
was directed down to Denham, for her better instruction in mystery of
possession, and thence after an act, or hope of probation, she returned to
London: whence she became Stamp the Priests peculiar, to be conuayed again to
Denham.

Sara Williams (a maid when she came to the league borne at Denham, not above
15 years old, when she entered these sacred mysteries) an appendant to the
family of Sir George Peckham of Denham, one of a very good personage, favor,
and wit: she was a long time managed to be brought to the lure, and for her
better advancement in her masters eye, she was made mistress Peckhams
chamber-mayd pardie: the pleasing parts she brought with her to the camp were
much envied, and eyed by those naughty haunting devils, that would blow out her
candel, except it were hallowed. The poor wench was so Fayrie haunted, as she
durst not go, especially to Ma: Dibdale his chamber alone. See her examina:
But you shall hear her own confession.

Friswood Williams, sister to Sara, (a maid when she came to the league)
about 16 years old: a plant of the same soil, and a hanging to the same
house, her father having been Sir George Peckhams man. She was sent down to
Denham under color of visiting her sister Sara, whom she heard to be ill at
ease, as also to be helpful to mistress Peckham about the possessed: Under whom
she was admitted to be attendant in a place of reuersion; who had not been
long within the compass of that holy circle, but she was discovered to have a
tang of possession. She kept her scene at her cue with her fellow play-deuils,
so long as at the last she got such a pinch of Tom Spanner in the dark (one of
the haunting crew) that the marks of it, were many days after to be seen.

Here you may perceive, in what terms the patients on both sides with their
holy Masters stood, how the devils of both kinds, he is, and she is, became
combined together, by the cunning Leno his means, and were so far engaged
each to other, and to the whole band, that they had as good play their parts
well, and have good cheer, good store of gold, much making of, and other
gentle pleasing courtesies for their pains, as by stepping aside, to spoil the
play, and to blot their own reputations besides.

We might now proceed toward the presenting of some of our Actors upon the
stage, but that old doting Mengus, upon pure spite to hinder our sport, has
dropped out a dry threadbare rule, forged in his own brain: A caveat of
avoiding suspicion forsooth: telling us, that we have marred all in our holy
play of devils at first dash, for taking upon us to exorcise young wenches,
being flatly against the Canon of that sacred Science, which is this in his
book, Si mulier sit, quae exorcizatur, sit valde senex: We must not exorcise a
woman, except she be old. To this Canon we answer, that Mengus speaks like
an old worn Exorcist, whose mark is out of his mouth: his rule has many
faults and infirmities in it. First, it is against the maxim of charity, that
biddes us do good unto all: and what greater good can be to a young maid,
then to ease her of a devil? Secondly, we find by experience, and the
confession of our young demoniacks, as you heard, that our exorcising priests,
be of a very hot temper, and fiery complexion, so as but touching the young
wenches, they cry out that they burn, this were very dangerous for an old
dry woman, least she should take fire. Thirdly, this would much abate the
credit, and custom of Mengus his own profession, for we find not an old woman
in an age to be possessed by the devil: the devils of our time in this Horizon
loving more tender dainty flesh. And indeed it would be a Quaere, handsomely
interlarded with Obs, and sols, why all both Popish, and other devils which
begin to swarm pretty well in these days, bear such a spite to young Lads,
but especially to young girls, and maids, that they ordinarily, or not at all
vex any, but such. But I leave that to the profound Masters, and professors
of this holy hellish science. Fourthly, Mengus showed no wit in teaching this
rule: for there be certain actions, motions, distorsions, dislocations,
writhings, tu^blings, and turbulent passions fitting a devils part, (to make it
kindly expressed) not to be performed but by supplenesse of sinews,
pliablenesse of joints, and nimblenesse of all parts, which an old body is as
unapt, and unwieldy unto, as an old dog to a dance. It would (I fear me)
pose all the cunning Exorcists, that are this day to be found, to teach an old
corkie woman to writhe, tumble, curuet, and fetch her Morice gamboles, as
Martha Brossier did. These anus decrepitae, be asinae ad lyram to this gear:
and therefore their Patron Mengus, may wear the ears himself, and leave
these stagers out.

CHAP. 6. Their ways of catching, and inueigling their disciples.
THe gift of discerning of spirits spoken of by S. Paul, being (as it is
supposed) ceased in Gods Church, it becomes a point of highest difficulty in
the old, and new exorcising craft, by what means a man shall come to be
certain, whether the party affected be possessed, or no.

Learned Thyraeus discourses touching the signs of possession in three large
chapters de doemoniacis. Chap, 22.23, 24.
First he says, that neither the confession of the party, nor his fierce
behavior, nor his brutish, and barbarous voice, nor his terrible countenance,
nor the privation almost of all his vital functions, nor his diseases, and
pangs incurable in physic, nor the having the devil often in ones mouth, nor
for a man to consecrate himself to the devil, to be presently snatched away by
him, nor the revealing of secret matters, nor the knowledge of strange
languages, nor extraordinary strength, nor all the signs, that appeared in
such, as were spoken of in the Gospel to be possessed, are sufficient, and
undoubted signs, and rules, that the party, in whom they appear, is indeed
possessed. And then going along, and naming other signs unto us, he puzzels
himself pitifully, and leaves his Reader in a wood.

Our late popish Exorcists, have certain new devised signs of their own
observation, more fitting the times, and effectual for the gracing their
graceless profession. Their Empericall signs be these. 1, If the party
affected, cannot for burning abide the presence of a Catholic priest. 2, If
she will hardly be brought to bless herself with the sign of the Cross. 3,
If a casket of relics being brought her, she turn away her face, and cry
that they stink. 4, If S. John's Gospel being put in a Casket, and applied unto
her, she rub, or scratch any part of her body, and cry it burns, it is an
evident demonstration, that the enemy does lurk in that part. 5, If she can
hardly be brought to pronounce these words, Aue Maria, the mother of GOD, and
most hardly the Catholic Church. 6, If a Casket of relics covered with red,
do seem white unto her. 7, If she tumble, and be vexed, when any go to
confession. 8, If she have a shiuering at Mass. 9, If she fleere, and laugh
in a man's face.

But our holy Tragaedians here had have of their sport, and therefore they
would not stay the trying of any such curious signs, but took a shorter cut.
Marwood, Westons patient, being pinched with penury, and hunger, did lie but
a night, or two, abroad in the fields, and being a melancholicke person, was
scared with lightning, and thunder, that happened in the night, and lo,
Weston Tractat.
an evident sign, that the man was possessed. The priests must meet about this
pitiful creature. Edmunds must come, the holy Chair must be fetched out, the
holy budget of sacred relics must be opened, and all the enchaunting
mysteries applied about the poor man.

Ma: Maynie had a spice of the Hysterica passio, as seems from his youth, he
himself terms it the Moother (as you may see in his confession) and says,
that he was much troubled with it in France, and that it was one of the
causes that moved him to leave his holy order whereinto he was initiated, and
to return into England. For this, and for leaving the order of Bonhommes, see
here an evident sign, that Maynie had a devil: whatsoever he did or spoke,
the devil did, and spoke in him: the horse that he rid upon to Denham, was no
horse, but the devil: Maynie had the devils in liuery-coates attending upon
him: and all this tragical outcry, for leaving his order, and a poor passion
of the Mother, which a thousand poor girls in England had worse, then ever
Ma: Maynie had.

Before I come to their women patients, I must tell you a tale, that I have
heard, which happily has but too authentical records for the nature of a
tale. There was an holy man, who had more then a months mind to a dainty
piece of flesh, that was often in his eye, and by gloses and gifts, and
Court-tricks, had as much as he desired. This holy man was a setter to an
exorcising crew, and to make his game as sure to the holy association, as he
had done unto himself, he tells his sweet Cressida, that himself was much
troubled in mind in her behalf, and should get no quiet to his conscience,
till they had both confessed themselves to an holy Catholic priest; which
when she had done, the silly Conie was caught: she was seized upon for brayed
wares, and was enforced to become a priuada, and to follow the holy Camp.
Here is no morrall (gentle Reader) and therefore let us have no application.

Anne Smith was somewhat more affected with that hystericall humor of the
Mother, and came to London out of Lancashire to her sister for physic: where
meeting with the common badger, or kiddier for devils, Ma: Peckham, at the L:
Staffords house in London, she was marked out for the Court of possession, and
by devise was sent down to the holy hote-house at Denham, where after she had
tasted a little of the discipline of the holy chair, her heauing of the Mother
proved a monstrous shee-deuill, and she was chaire-haunted so long, till she
was feign, for her better ease, to use swathing bands for three years after.

Miracle book. Page 20.
Sara Williams, had a little pain in her side (and in an other place beside)
but because that was not enough to discover a devil, she was Cat-bitten too.
That is, once seeking for eggs, in a bush by a Woods side, and a Cat leaping
out of a bush, where she had lain a-sleepe, Sara was scared with the sudden
leaping of the Cat, and did a little tremble, as persons suddenly moved with
fear use to do: Lo here a plain case, Saraes Cat was a devil, and she
must be Cat-hunted, or Priest-hunted for this sight.

Look her Confess.
Fidd: Williams was deuill-caught, by a very strange means. She dwelling with
Mistress Peckham, and being one day in the Kitchen, wringing out a bucke of
clothes, Dibdale the Priest came into the Kitchen, where she was a washing,
and tapping her on the shoulder told her, that her Mistres looked for her, to
whom she answered, that she had almost done washing, and then she would go.

Presently after this, she lifting at a tub of water, which stood there ready
filled, to be used in her washing, her feet slipped from under her, the
Kitchen being paued, and having a shrewd fall, did hurt her hippe, with the
grief whereof, she was constrained for 2 or 3 days to keep her bed. Here
begins the devil from the Kitchen. Into her chamber comes the loving crew of
pitiful deuill-catching Priests, they bemoane the mishap of her hippe
forsooth, and after some other kind ceremonies, they fish out of her at
length, that she had been sometime past troubled with a pain in her side. Ah
Sir the case is plain: these two put together, her hip, and her side make up a
just devil, and a monstrous one too, compounded of two such dissimilar parts
I ween. But will you see how? It was the devil that tripped up Fidds heels in
the Kitchen, and gave her the shrewd fall. And why, would you guess? The
wicked spirit could not endure her, because she had washed amongst her buck of
clothes a catholic priests shirt. Jesus Maria. And a worse thing in it then
so: but I will give the records leave to speak it for me. I trust you will not
look for any other, after this dangerous fall on the hippe, but that this
should prove a real possession, as in deed it did.

Young Trayford the sixth patient, being a boon-companion, as seems, and
loving wine, and women well, (as appears by the declaration) had enflamed his
toe, and at some times felt a spice of the gowt: a plain case (as the nose on
a man's face) the young man had a devil, and must be coniured all over for his
wicked toe. Now what a woeful taking are all those poor creatures in, that
have about them by birth, casualty, or mishap any close imper, ache, or other
more secret infirmity? when a pain in a maids belly, a stitch in her side, an
ache in her head, a crampe in her leg, a tinckling in her toe, (if the good
Exorcist please) must needs hatch a devil, and bringforth such chaire-worke,
fier-worke, and deuill-worke, as you shall hear hereafter? And what a
deliration is this in our grave, learned, and famous College of ancient
renowned Physicians, to undertake a long, costly, and painful course of study
in those excellent worthies of learned times Galen, Hippocrates, and the rest,
and to spend their money, strength, and spirits, in searching the treasury of
Nature: let them cassier those old monuments of Ethnic profane learning, and
turn Wisard, Seer, Exorcist, Iugler, or Witch: let them turn over but one new
leaf in Sprenger, Nider, Mengus, or Thyraeus, and see how to discover a devil
in the Epilepsie, Mother, Crampe, Convulsion, Sciatica, or Gowt, and then
learn a spell, an amulet, a periapt of a priest, and they shall get them more
fame, and money in one week, then they do now by all their painful travail
in a year.

It is a very poor bayte, as you may see by Trayfords gowtie toe, where-out
our hungry Exorcists will not, rather then fail, nibble a devil. And if I be
not much deceived, I have heard it credibly reported by some, that have cause
to know, that the Popes Holiness himself may be deuill-caught by this trick.
For it is credibly avouched, that this sweet natured Clement the 8, with using
too much some sweet sauce, is molested with the gowt. Now what a Quaere would
this prove, if a Lynceus Exorcist should discover a devil in his Holiness toe?
How would the Scotists, and Thomists belabour, and trick the devil with
questions in the Popes toe? First, whether his Hol: being necessarily invested
with the holy spirit of God, can possibly admit of a devil, no. Then granting
by way of admittance, that his Hol: may be possessed, whether his resolutions
be to be taken for the Canons of Gods holy spirit, or the maxims of the
devil: and lastly, if the devil may lurk in the Popes toe, whether his wise,
holy, sweet babes with beards, that have kissed his toe, have kissed the
devil, yea or no in his toe: but my wit is too shallow, to sound these deep
profundities: I must go on, and tell you, what farther news from Denham.

CHAP. 7. Their holy pretenses to make their Disciples sure unto them.
YOu will wonder, that these visards being so bare, and made all of brown
paper, should ever serve the turn to make a mask for a devil, until you
hear how handsomely the glue of holy church does make it hang together, and how
it is stitched up with packthreed of holy devotion. If their patients be
Catholics, whom they set their hook for, a lime-twigge of a rush will serve
the turn to catch them, hold them, and fasten them to their tackling: but if
their Conies be Protestants, and such as go to Church, then some holy
ceremonies for good fashion sake, must be solemnly used, to combine them the
nearer unto their holy Fathers, that the band and knot may be the surer
between them for untying again, and to bring them to lie between the sweet
breasts of their holy Mother, the Romish Church: that the mammaday, which shall
be given them, may do them the more good.

Here you are to understand, that all, or the most of us Protestants, are
forsooth in a most woeful case: for the most of us already, without the help
of either passion of the Mother, Sciatica, Gowte, Cat-biting, or hipping,
according to the Romish Calendar, are plainly, and really possessed with
devils. In so much as the reverend Thyraeus disputes it very profoundly, De
Daemo: Cap. 18.
pro, and con. and foyles a whole chap: with this learned problem: Vtrum
heretici sint vere a daemonibus obsessi? Whether Protestants (whom he terms
Haeretiques) be truly possessed with devils. Where first he says for us, that
we have magnam coniunctionem, vel comunionem cum Daemonibus: Great fellowship,
and near friendship with the devil. 2 Quam plurimi cum diabolo egerunt, vel ab
eodem tanquam magistro sua dogmata acceperunt. That very many of us have dealt
with the devil, and have received our principles of no other master, then the
devil: And these reasons, he says, will easily persuade some to think, we
have actually devils in deed. But he for his part, of pure good will unto us,
will think that we are not to be accounted properly possessed. Propterea quod
vera in ipsis signa, quae obsessos produnt, desiderantur. His reasons, that
move him to think so well of us, are, because we do not tumble, wallow,
foame, howl, scricke, and make mouths, and mops, as the popish possessed use
to do. Lo, does not the good man deserve you should give him a bribe, for so
mildly concluding his aphorism on your sides, that you are not to be said to
be really possessed: but only to deal, talk, make league, friendship, and
familiarity with the devil. But our 12 Apostolical Exorcists, and Weston
their head, in their deeper in-sight, and experience of us Protestants, have
long since set old Thyraeus to school, and bidden him turn over his book to
an other leaf: for they plainly see, teach, and avouch, that the greatest part
of us Protestants, are possessed in deed. Sara Williams says in her
deposition, that it was an usual saying with the Priests, that many
Protestants were possessed. But Friswood goes further, and says in plain
terms, That the Priests in talking of the Protestants, have affirmed of them
in her hearing, that the greatest share of them were possessed with devils. I
could wish, that whilst our Exorcists are in this good mood to say, and avouch,
that you have devils: and you in your good mood, for hearing them so say, that
you had some 12 of their holiest Exorcists amongst you, and Weston their
champion, to try whether they could conjure a devil out of you, or you
conjure them, for saying you have the devil. But I pray you in the mean while
help them out of their muse, for they are sorely perplexed, to think upon that
day, when England shall become Catholic again, how the Catholics shall be
pestered with work in casting out devils, by reason of the infinite number of
us protestants, that having devils in us, must come into their handling. Our
hands (say they) shall then be full of chaire-worke indeed. And verily as many,
as be young women, and maids, and mark in the course of this story the kind
handling of Anne, Fid, and Sara (three proper young maids) by the Doctors of
the Chair, and withal, shall observe well the manner of the Chair, their
holy brimstone, holy potion, and the rest of that holy geere, will (I doubt not)
be much delighted with the contemplation of that day, and rather then fail,
heartily both wish and pray, that all their holy works may grace Tiburne, as
they have worthily deserved, with new holy relics, before that day come.

Well, howsoever you like them, or their holy chair, this is their theoreme
sure, and sound, that the greatest part of Protestants be possessed: and so
they proceeded with Anne, Fid, and Sara. Who before they becam entangled in
their holy ginnes, were protestant maids, and went orderly to Church. Mary
after that they, and their Leno had caught them with cat-biting, hipping, and
crosbiting (as you have heard) and that they had brought them with their
Syren-songs to believe, that some wicked spirit had lain a long time lurking in
their bellies, and their sides, why then they enchaunt them a fresh with this
lamentable doleful dittie: That their hearts do bleed for sorrow, to see them
in this pitiful woeful plight, being in Satan's possession, that they burn
with bowels of co^miseration, and compassion of their distressed estate, that
they would spend their best spirits, and lives to do them any good: only one
little thing is a bar, that hinders the influence of all divine grace, and
favor upon them, and that is their religion, which they must first abandon,
and be reconciled to the Pope, or otherwise all their holy ceremonies are of no
avail. And here begins their holy pageant to peep into the stage. First,
they tell Friswood, and Sara, (as you may see in their confessions) that their
baptism they had received in the Church of England, must be amended, in regard
it wanted many rites, ceremonies, and ornaments, belonging to the baptism of
the Church of Rome.

Here Allen and Parsons will con you little thank for so little setting by
their resolution in cases for England. Their words are these: Ceremoniae
omissae baptismi in pueris, In their book of Cases for England.
cum possunt commode suppleri, debent, non autem id faciendum consulimus in
ijs, qui sunt prouectioris aetatis, ne inde nascatur scandalum, aut opinio,
priorem baptismum non valuisse. Your Ceremonies (say your two Gods) may be
fitly played upon the baptism of children, but upon an adultus not so: least a
conceit, or scandale arise thereby, that the former baptism should not be of
it self good. Allen and Parson, determine Friswood and Saras English baptism
good enough, without your goodly ceremonies flourished over their heads, and yet
you must be doing in spite of them both. Your implements were ready for the
purpose, and it fitted your deuill-worke better, and so you esteemed not Allen
or Parsons a pin. And in good sooth, you might as well have kept these goodly
Ceremonies in your budget, except you clearly meant, to mock almighty God, and
to make the sacrament naught else, save a rattle for fools, babes, and women,
to make sport withal. In my opinion, there was never Christmas-game performed,
with more apish, indecent, slouenly gawdes, then your baptising, and
super-baptising ceremonies are. Your puff, your crosse-puffe, your expuffe,
your inpuffe upon the face of a tender infant, being the impure stinking
breath of a foul impure belching swain, your enchau^ted salt, your charmed
grease, your sorcerised chrisme, your loathsome driuell, that you put upon
their eyes, ears, noses, and lyppes, are fitting complements for hynch pynch,
and laugh not: coal under candlestick: Friar Rush: and wo-penny hoe. Which
are more ciuilly acted, and with less foul soil, and loathsome indecorum,
then your spattring, and greasing tricks upon the poor infant: and yet old
doting Bellarmine blurres three whole leaves of paper, in displaying the banner
of this ridiculous trumpery, telling us a long tale, that they came from
tradition of the Church: when we can as well tell, as he can his Aue Marie, from
what sniueling Pope, what drunken Friar, what Heathenish imitation they did all
proceed.

But see these popish guegawes acted upon Friswood herself. First out comes
the holy chair, and Friswood the new babe is placed very demurely in it, with
a cloth upon her head, and a cross upon it. Then in comes the priest attired
in an Albe, or a Cope with a candle in his hand, (or else he is Anathema by the
Counsel of Trent) and after the performance of a whole anticke-sute of
Crosses, he approches very reverently to Friswood in the chair. Then, as
herself in her confession describes it, he first charms her in Latin, then
he puts salt in her mouth, spittle upon her ears, and eyes, and annoints her
lips and her nose with oil, and so God and Saint Frauncis save the young
child: in stead of Friswood, christening her by the name of Frauncis, because
that Saint had such a sovereign command over the birds of the air, that his
name for it was made communicable both to he, and she: and Sara was
christened by the name of Mary.

Suppose now (gentle Reader) that Friswoods Mother had come suddenly in, and
seen the Priest with his candell in his hand, and his Cope upon his back,
busy in his enchaunting Latin charm, and with-all had espied her daughter
Friswood musled in her chair of estate, with a cloth, and a Cross, and her
other sacred gear, I wonder what she would suddenly have thought: whether she
would not have been much amazed at this infernal incantation, and have
imagined that a ghost in steed of Friswood, had been coniured out of hell.
But if she had had the heart to have spoken unto Friswood, and to have called
her by her name, and she should suddenly have stepped out of her enchaunted
chair, and have said, that her name had not been Friswood, but Frauncis,
verily they would have taken her for a ghost in deed, or have feared that the
Priest had enchaunted her out of her wits.

But stay, what have? For after these new transformed creatures had their
ceremonies, and rites done upon them, and were framed, fashioned, and attired
for their parts, and were ready for the chair, and the stage, no man abroad
could be admitted to either sight, or speech with them: intus res agitur, they
were now mystical creatures, and must attend their sacred close mysteries
within. All must be mum: Clum, quoth the Carpenter, Clum quoth the Carpenters
wife, and Clum quoth the Friar. You shall be more thoroughly confirmed by
Friswood her self, touching this point, who says in her examination, See her
examina:
That neither she, nor her sister Sara did see either father or mother, being
in the same Town, all the while that they were in their hands: neither would
they suffer their father or mother to speak with them, though they desired it
many times: and that her mother growing into some earnestness, and hard speech
with the Exorcists, because she could not be permitted to see her daughters,
the priests did shake her of with angry words, saying, that she had as much
need to be exorcised as her daughters had. A man would now verily persuade
himself, that there game was sure set, and needed no more watching; and yet
ye shall see a nail, or two driven in more, to riuet the frame more sure.

After her new christendom, Fris: in her examination says, that before she
should come to receive the sacrament, they told her, that she must first vow,
and promise by the virtue of that holy sacrament, that she would ever
afterward hold the religion of the Church of Rome, and never go again to any
of the Protestants Churches, nor never read the English service, or the
English Bible, or any other English books written by the Protestants, in
matters of religion. And this vow (as she says) is ordinarily made by all
that are reconciled.

CHAP. 8. Their means and manner of instructing their scholars.
WHen they have brought in their Conies, and made them as sure, as flesh and
blood can make them, have enchaunted them with their compassionate devotion,
have engaged them unto their ghostly Fathers, have fascinated them with their
solemn incantation, have initiated them into their Church by their new
mock-Christendome, have confirmed them with their sacraments, and have bound
them by vow, never to forsake their ghostly communion: then begin they to read
them Lectures by rote, in their school of legerdemaine, and to acquaint them
with their parts, they have in hand to play. Wherein the good conceit of their
scholar to apprehend her lesson well, to carry in mind what her Master has
said over, to apply it to her own case, and to put it handsomely in ure, is a
little required.

First, they omit no occasion, at all times, in all places, when they be
together, and their scholars by their sweet side, to talk of the strangeness
of possession, of the wonders they have seen in possession, of the many
marvelous possessions they have been at: and the Echo in all meetings is still
possession. Then they tell over, and over, how wondrous strangely the parties
possessed, whom they have dealt withal, have been affected: and they say over
very treatably, particularly, and distinctly, the whole Catalogue of the
actions, motions, passions, perturbations, agitations, gestures, tumblings,
discortions, deformations, howlings, skrikings, visions, apparitions, changes,
alterations, speeches, and railings, that the parties possessed have used, and
practiced in their several fits.

Hear Sara Williams their scholar report her own lesson in these words. It
was the ordinary custom of the Priests, to be talking of such, as had been
possessed beyond the seas, and to tell the manner of their fits, and what they
spoke in them: also what ugly sights they saw sometimes, and at other times
what joyful sights: and how, when relics were applied unto them, the parties
would roar: how they could not abide holy water, nor the sight of the
sacrament, nor the anointed Priests of the Catholic church, nor any good
thing: how they would greatly commend heretics: how the devils would
complain, when the Priests touched the parties, that they burnt them, and put
them into an extreme heat: how sometimes they could smell the Priests. Here
is her lesson read over: and mark the scholar how well she conned it, and
made application thereof. By the said tales, (said she) she well perceived,
how she might please them, and did frame herself accordingly, at such times
as she well perceived, it was their intent that she should so do.

Hear Friswood, Saras sister repeat her lesson by heart, that her good
Masters had said over to her, when she came first to school. See her examina:
Her words are thus. That the priests would be often talking in her hearing, of
certain women that were possessed beyond the seas: how the devil in them
could not abide the holy potion, nor the burning of hallowed brimstone, nor the
applying unto the^ of holy relics, nor the presence, or touching of Cath:
priests, nor holy water, nor the holy candle, nor the blessed sacrament: but
would start at it, and say they burned, rage, and rail against the Priests,
and commend upon every occasion those, that were the Protestants. See how in
time she could her lesson by heart, and profited in this godly school. By this
means she learned, (as she says) what to say, and do when the priests had
her in hand: that is, to start sometimes, when they brought relics unto her,
to pretend that she could not endure the presence of the sacrament. Marry
Friswood being a scholar, not of the quickest apprehension, did not con her
lesson by heart the first day, (which cost her the setting on in the holy chair
for her dullness) but it was some six or seven weeks, ere she found their
meaning, and then (quoth she) I began to find their iugling, and how that my
self saying this or that, spoke nothing, but what I had learned of the Priests.

Hear Anne Smith report, how she learned her eve, to come into her fits.
These are her words. She had been told by diverse (as she confesses) how others
had been troubled, viz: how in their fits they were greatly tormented: how they
could not endure the priests to come near them: how when a Priest did lay his
hand upon any part of them, the said party would be so hot, as though it
would burn the^ to the bone: how the devil in them would rail upon the
Catholics, and greatly commend the Protestants: and many other such things.

Hear Ma. Maynie their chief scholar, relate how by degrees he grew to his
perfection in the iugling school. First (says he) being at my L. Vaux his
house at Hackney at dinner, in the dinner time there was much communication of
the late possession, and dispossession of one Marwood by certain Priests, and
chiefly (if I do not forget my self) by Ma. Edmunds: the tales which were
told of that matter seemed strange unto me, as what extraordinary strength he
had in his fits, how he roared like a Bull, and many other such things. After
this being at Denham, the women of the house came unto me, and reported unto
me the manner of the fits of the two possessed in the house, describing them in
such sort, as I was much amazed therewith. Then they permitted me to have
access unto Sara Will: when she was in her fits, and informed me likewise of
the manner how she, and others had been troubled: and when I had learned their
humor, and perceived as well by the rest, as by mine own experience, what
would content them, I framed my self accordingly.

Lo here the Captain of this holy school of legerdemaine tells you, what was
the highest point to be learned in this school, and what was the perfection of
a scholar, of the highest form: to wit, to frame themselves iumpe and fit
unto the Priests humors, to mop, mow, jest, rail, rave, roar, commend, and
discommend, and as the priests would have them, upon fitting occasions
(according to the difference of times, places, and comers in) in all things to
play the devils accordingly, as Ma: Maynie here says, and his other
play-deuils before. As every scholar in this school had the wit, and good
grace to frame himself betimes, to the bent of his holy Master, and to act
his feats kindly, roundly, and artificially at a beck, so was their proceeding
with him, or her more gentle, and mild. For if he could once read his lesson in
his Masters eyes and face, what needed any other hard horne-booke to beat
about his head: but if he were dull, and slow, unto this framing himself, and
must here his lesson many times said over by heart by the Priest, and yet could
not learn his cue, or else not perfectly remember his several changes, and
keys, why then he must taste of the discipline of the school, to rouse up his
spirits better, and cause him entend his gear well; and that was the
discipline of the holy chair, (whereof ye shall hear anon) such a discipline,
as by that time it had been tasted soundly but once, or twice, I suppose the
devil himself (if he could have had the sense of it, that these poor
scholars had) would rather have chosen, to have roared, fomed, and wallowed,
and have turned him into all shapes, as the priests would have him, then ever
to have endured, the course of the same. But his chair could not be spared,
for many good offices, and therefore of that more at large hereafter.

CHAP. 9. Of the secrets, and strange operation of the holy Chair, and holy
Potion.
Salve prisca fides tripodis, says the Poet to the enchanted feate at Delphos,
which was so famous for the holy inspiration of the God Apollo, that his
Prophetess could give no Oracle, except she were placed over that sacred
stool. We have here in hand, a more sacred enchaunted seat, which was so
potent, and of so various uses, and offices, to our holy Impostors, as without
it they could show few, or no wonders, or miracles at all. And that is the
blessed chair, which I eft-soones mentioned unto you, which served them to
more good purposes, for their holy legerdemaine, then ever the chair, or sword
at Delphos did Apolloes priests. I should do you wrong, if I should not first
describe this blessed Engine barely, and nakedly unto you, and there repeat
you the manifold commodities, and delights of the same.

You shall have Fidd: and Sara the reporters of it unto you, who by reason of
their woeful experience, have best skill to do it.

At the end of the first Mass, (says Fidd: Willi:) that ever she saw, which
was said by Ma: Dibdale: he told her, See her examine:
that now they would make trial, what was in her. And thereupon she being
perfectly well, and telling Ma: Dibdale, and the rest as much, yet they would
needs have her sit down in a chair, which she did. Then they began to bind
her with towells, whereat she greatly meruailed, and was therewith cast into a
great fear, as not knowing, what they meant to do with her: being in this
case, Ma: Dibdale began to read in his book of Exorcising: and after a good
while, seeing no other alteration in her, then the tokens of fear, which
increased by reason of his words, and dealings, then they urged her to drink
above a pint of Sack, and Sallet-oyle, being hallowed, and mingled with some
kind of spices: when she tasted this drink, which they termed, an holy
potion, it did so much dislike her, that she could drink but a little of it
at once, her stomach greatly loathing it, and then the Priest said: all that
came from the devil, who hated nothing worse, then that holy drink: so as she
was held, and by very force caused to drink it up at diverse draughts.
Heere-vpon she grew to be very sick, and giddy in her head, and began to fall
into a cold sweat: verily then believing, that (as the Priest said) it was a
wicked spirit, that caused her to be in such case: whereas afterward, when she
better had considered of their dealing with her, she easily perceived, that
the drink they gave her was such, as might have made a horse sick. This was
the first part of the chayre-worke, and the second was sweeter then this. When
her stomach, head, and veins, were full of the holy drink, then to take
brimstone, and burn it in a chafingdish of coals, and by force to hold down
her face over the fume. Which broyling with brimstone Ma: Maynie confesses he
saw so butcherly practiced upon Sara Will: as he had seen her face after it,
look more blacker, and swart, with the fume, then any chimney-sweepers did.

Now I present unto your imaginations, Sara Will: sitting bound in a chair (as
poor wench she often did) with a pint of this holy potion in her stomach,
working up into her head, and out at her mouth, and her eyes, nose, mouth, and
head, stuffed full with the smoke of holy perfume, her face being held down
over the fume, till it was all over, as black as a stock, and think if you
see not in your mind, the lively Idaea of a poor deuill-distressed woman in
deed.

And here, least good Father Mengus should take it in ill part, that we leave
him out of this deuillish work, who had his greatest part in prescribing the
perfume for the chair, you shall first hear his Dos touching the bill for the
holy perfume: and then I shall be able to give you a perfect receite, to make
an horse possessed.

After his holy benediction, Page, 173. Flag: Demon: this is his perfume.
Accipiatur Sulphur, Galbanum, and caet. Take brimstone, Assa faetida, Galbanum,
S. John's Wort, and Rue. All these things being hallowed, according to their
own proper, and peculiar benediction, must be cast upon the fire, and the
smoke thereof applied to the nosethrills of the possessed. Now you have your
full number of simples, take your whole bill, to possess a horse with a
devil. Take a lusty young stond horse, and tie him with a big rope to a Smiths
forge, take the holy potion compounded of Rue, Sack, Drugges, and Sallet-oyle
Ana more then a pint, put it with an horn down into the horses throat, that
done, take Brimstone, Assa faetida, Galbanum, S. John's Wort, and Rue, burn
them all together, upon a chafing dish of coals, apply the smoke so long to
the nosethrils of the horse, till you have made his face with the smoke, look
as black as the Smith: and if the horse do not snort, flyng, foam, curuet,
and take on like a devil, you may pay the Smith, for his holy drink, and take
the horse with you for your pains. There is neither Horse, nor Ass, nor
Dog, nor Ape, if he had been used, as these poor seely creatures were, but
would have been much more deuillishly affected then they. Neither is any man
living (as I suppose) of that mortified patience, who would not be much moved
with indignation, to hear the seely maids complain of the usage of that holy
infernal crew.

First, Fidd: Williams complains, as ye have heard in her relation, That it
made her giddy, and cast her into a cold sweat. 2, That it cast her into a
rage, and caused her to speak, she wist not what. 3, It did so intoxicate,
and benum her senses, as in one of her fits, where-into they had cast her by
their holy potion, and brimstone, there were two needles thrust into her leg,
by one of the Priests (whereof in an other place) and she wist it not, till
after she had recovered her senses. 4, For her complaining to them of their
inciuill, and inhumane usage of her by their potion and perfume: They had her
to the chair, and so plagued her with both, as being therewith wonderfully
sick, she fell into a swound. 5, It was so loathsome a thing to the beholders,
to see the holy potion given unto them, that diverse Gentlewomen present, did
weep for pity, to see them go to their gear. 6, She was so haunted
heerewith, and grew so weary of her life by this means: as she cried aloude
unto her uncle, whom she heard by chance on the other side of a garden wall:
O good Uncle, help me from hence, for I am almost killed amongst them here
already, and shall not live, if I continue here long. 7, Being grown to great
weakness, and almost desperate, she told the priests plainly, at the end of
one of her fits, where-into they had cast her, by their drinks, slibber-sawces,
and brimstone, that if she had a devil in her, they had best to cast him out:
For (quoth she) if ever you torment me so again, dispatch me, if you list:
otherwise I will certainly by one means, or other, get away from you, and will
tell my friends of all your proceedings, and dealings here, both with me, and
others. Thus far Fidd Williams: and was Sara her sister, less beholding to
their holy potion, holy brimstone, and the chair? let her self tell you, who
has best cause to remember.

First, she says, she does not remember every several time, when they bound
her in the chair, but they troubled her very often, (praying God to forgive
them) and affirms, that when she came to the chair, she was so used, as that
every time, if she might have had her choice, she would rather have chosen to
have ended her life, then to have gone into it. Secondly, that if at any time
she was past the use of her senses, it was by reason of the holy potion, they
compelled her to take. Thirdly, that she fell into the passion of the
trembling of the heart, only upon grief of their bad usage of her, and that
thorough that passion, she did diverse times swound. Fourthly, that they used
their holy brimstone so much, as the stink of it never went out of the
chamber. Fiftlie, that foul holy potion, made such an impression in her
phancie: and the loathsomnes of it did so stick in her mind, as yet to this
day she cannot endure the taste, nor savor of any thing that was in the same.
In so much, as about three years since, she feeling a pangue of sickness in the
Market at Oxford, some of her neighbors at unawares, gave her a little Sack:
which as soon as she perceived, she fell to be very sick upon it, and was
constrained to lie there all night. The offense of the Sack being the only
grief that she had, after she was recovered of her said pangue. Sixthly, they
would hold her nose, and face perforce, so near over the smoke of brimstone,
feathers, and such other stinking gear, that the very pain she felt, caused
her to cry, and scritche very loud, and to struggle as much, as possibly she
could, till her strength failed her. At one time she was so extremely
afflicted with the said drink, that her senses went from her, and she remained
in a swound: and after that, her head was so giddie with the potion, and her
senses so troubled with the brimstone smoke, as she spoke, and babled many
idle foolish words. Seauenthly, their chair, potion, and brimstone perfume
grew so hateful to her sister Fidd, and so intolerable to her self, as upon
her sisters suggestion, she attempted to run from the house, and to wade
through a brook, half a yard deep of water.

Thus much Sara Williams. And did Ma: Maynie, their prime professor escape,
the chair, the brimstone, and the blessed potion? That had been great pity,
the devil, alias Weston, loved him much better then so. Of whom Ma: Maynie
complains, That he was constrained by him to drink most loathsome draughts
of such confections, as he had ready for him. And that sometimes they burnt
such abominable stinking, and violent things, holding his nose by force over
the smoke, as I think (quoth he) would have made an horse mad. But in another
place, he tells us a shrewder tale of Weston, that holy devil, touching this
deuillish potion. God knows (says he) whether Weston supposed I would have
taken some course, to have shortened mine own time, as constrained by some sort
thereunto, by the great weakness, and wearines of my life. Is this an effect
of your blessed loathsome potion, to drive Fidd, Sara, and Ma: Maynie, into a
loathing of their own lives: and to enter into a desperate resolution,
touching shortning the same? Then holy gentle devils, the Masters of this
deuil-tragedy, let me ask you a question, but it shall be in your ear, that
the Catholics, who hold you for holy ghostly fathers, may not hear: How many
drammes of this holy potion had you given to the wench, that you wot of, whom
you exorcised so long, till she fell from off a pair of stayres, and brake
her neck, whether for telling of tales, or that you feared after-claps; it is
very probable, you had filled her head full of your holy perfume.

Anne Smith, was yet in a far better case, then these: for she confesses,
she was so gently tied, and hampered, in the holy chair, that she was
compelled, for three years space after she was released, to swadle her body,
for the very sorenes she felt of their holy hands.

Gentle spectators, we have held you som-what long, ere our play begin: but now
you see the devils are come upon the stage in their proper colors, Beelzebub,
alias Weston, and his 12 gracious assistants: For if the devils themselves
should have devised a deuillish potion, to have intoxicated poor creatures,
and cause them to play the devils, they could not have invented a more potent
potion then this. Lucian tells a tale, that the passengers to hell are made to
drink a draught of a potion, that makes them to forget all they have said, or
done in their life: our stygian Impostors go far beyond that stygian lake,
for they have composed a potion, that brings not only a privation of wit,
memory, and senses, but makes their patients to scritch, tumble, and roar,
like the devils in hell. And this (good man deuill-whipper Mengus) as seems,
is the mystery of your sweet compose, to fume a devil out at a man's nose,
like the smoke of Tobacco?

Whereas your prescript is compounded of these delicate simples, Brimstone,
Assa faetida, Galbanum, S. John's Wort, and Rue; Porphyrie, and Iamblichus, men
acquainted with the nature, and disposition of devils, before your whip had ere
a string to it, do affirm, that those forcible violent savors, and stinking
odours, are the very delicacies for devils, and allectiues to their noses. And
that the devil would not vouchsafe to come give his Oracle at the statua at
Dodona, until he were wooed by these delicious perfumes. Those devils of that
clime, are belike of an other temper, then these under your lash, or else let
me tell your riddle: you never meant (good man) to scare out a devil by these
filthy fumes, but to scare poor souls into the fashion of devils, by these
pestilent fumigations.

CHAP. 10. The strange names of their devils.
NOw that I have acquainted you with the names of the Master, and his twelve
disciples, the names of the places wherein, and the names of the persons upon
whom these wonders were showed: it seems not inco^gruent that I relate unto
you the names of the devils, whom in this glorious pageant they did
dispossess. Wherein, we may call unto Porphyrius, Proclus, Iamblicus, and
Trismegistus, the old Platonicall sect, that conuersed familiarly, and kept
company with devils, and desire their help to expound us these new devils
names: and to tell us at what solemn feast, and meeting in hell, these devils
were dubbed, and hallowed with these new strange names. It cannot be but our
holy deuill-crue had surely met with Menippus, proclaiming himself new come
out of hell: ad sum profoundo Tartari emissus specu: Else they could never have
been so deeply sighted, and acquainted with the Muster-booke of hell. Or else
it may seem that our vagrant devils here did take their fashion of new names
from our wandering Jesuits, who to dissemble themselves, have always three, or
four odd conceited names in their budget: or else they did so plague the poor
devils with their holy charms, and enchaunted gear, and did so intoxicate
them with their dreadful fumigations, as they made some so giddy-headed, that
they gave themselves giddy names, they wist not what. Or else there is a
confederation between our wandering Exorcists, and these walking devils, and
they are agreed of certain uncouth non-significant names, which go current
amongst themselves, as the Gypsies are of gibridge, which none but themselves
can spell without a pair of spectacles. Howsoever it is, it is not amiss that
you be acquainted with these extrauagant names of devils, least meeting the^
otherwise by chance, you mistake them, for the names of Tapsters, or Iuglers.

First then, to marshall them in as good order, as such disorderly cattle will
be brought into, you are to understand, that there were in our possessed 5.
Captains, or Co^maunders above the rest: Captain Pippin, Marwoods devil, See
the book of Miracles.
Captain Philpot, Trayfords devil, Captain Maho, Saras devil, Captain Modu,
Maynies devil, and Captain Soforce, Anne Smiths devil. These were not all of
equal authority, and place, but some had more, some fewer under their
command. Pippin, Marwoods devil was a Captain, (marry either cassierd for
some part of bad service he had done, or else a malcontent standing upon his
worth) like some of our high Puntilios, scorned to sort himself with any of
his rank, and therefore like a melancholic Priuado, he affects Marwood to lie
in the fields, and to gape at the Moon, and so of a Caesar's humor, he reigns
in Marwood alone.

Captain Philpot, Trayfords devil, was a Centurion, (as himself tells you)
and had an hundred under his charge. Mary he was (as seems) but a
white-liuered devil, for he was so hasty to be gone out of Trayford, for
fear of the Exorcist, that he would scarce give him leave, being a bed, to
put on his breeches. The names of there punie spirits cast out of Trayford were
these, Hilco, Smolkin, Hillio, Hiaclito, and Lusty huffe-cap: this last seems
some swaggering punie devil, dropped out of a Tinkers budget. But Hiaclito may
not be slipped over without your observation: for he scorning a great while (as
the Author says) to tell his name, at last he answered most proudly, my name
is Hiaclito, a Prince, Book of Miracles.
and Monarch of the world. And being asked by the Exorcist, what fellows he
had with him: he said that he had no fellows, but two men, and an vrchin
boy. It was little beseeming his state (I wis) being so mighty a Monarch, to
come into our coasts so skuruily attended, except he came to see fashions in
England, and so made himself private till the Exorcist reueald him: or else
that he was of the new Court cut, affecting no other train the^ two crasie
fellows, and an vrchin butter-flie boy.

Soforce, Anne Smiths possedent, was but a musty devil; there was neither
mirth, nor good fellowship with him, affecting so much sullenness, as he would
hardly speak. Yet as all melancholic creatures use to have, he had a restie
trick with him. For whether Alexander the Apothecarie had put too much Assa
Faetida in the fumigation for the devil, or had done the devil some other
shrewd turn with his drugges, sure it is that Alexander the Apothecarie,
riding one day toward London, to fetch more Priests to Denham, his horse fell
a plunging, and Alexander came down: and returning to Denham, he constantly
affirmed, that it was Anne Smiths devil, that played the Jade with him.

Modu, Ma: Maynies devil, was a graund Commander, Muster-maister over the
Captains of the seven deadly sins: Cliton, Bernon, Hilo, Motubizanto, and
the rest, himself a General of a kind and courteous disposion: so says Sara
Williams, touching this devils acquaintance with Mistres Plater, and her sister
Fid.

Book of Miracles. page, 42.
Sara Williams had in her at a bare word, all the devils in hell. The Exorcist
asks Maho, Saras devil, what company he had with him, and the devil makes no
bones, but tells him in flat terms, all the devils in hell. Here was a goodly
fat otium this mean while in hell: the poor souls there had good leave to
play: such a day was never seen since hell was hell: not a doore-keeper left,
but all must go a maying to poor Saras house. It was not kindly done of the
devils, to leave the poor souls behind, especially going to make merry
amongst their friends. But what if the souls had fallen a madding, or maying
as fast, as the devils, and had gone a roming abroad amongst their good
friends, had not this (trow we,) made a pretty piece of work in hell?

And if I miss not my marks, this Dictator Modu says, he had been in Sara
by the space of two years, then so long hell was clear, and had not a devil
to cast at a mad dog. And soothly I cannot much blame the devils for staying
so long abroad, they had taken up an Inn, much sweeter then hell: and an
hostess that wanted neither wit, nor mirth, to give them kind welcome.

Here, if you please, you may take a suruay of the whole regiment of hell: at
least the chief Leaders, and officers, as we find them enrolled by their
names.

First Killico, Hob, and a third anonymos, Book of Miracles. page, 34.
are booked down for three graund Commanders, every one having under him 300.
attendants.

Coronell Portirichio had with him two Captains, and an hundred assistants,
and this he affirms to be true upon his oath taken upon the blessed
sacrament, and then you must believe him: an admirable new way to make the
devil true, and cock-sure of his word, to offer him an oath upon the blessed
sacrament, and then dog with a fiddle. But the devil is like some other good
fellows in the world, that will not swear, except he allow their Commission
that tenders him his oath: and Commissioners for the devil, are only holy
Exorcists, and then it must be the sacrament of the Mass to, else I wis it is
not all worth a bean.

Frateretto, Fliberdigibbet, Hoberdidance, Tocobatto were four devils of the
round, or Morris, whom Sara in her fits, tuned together, in measure and sweet
cadence. And least you should conceive, that the devils had no music in hell,
especially that they would go a maying without their music, Page cod.
the Fiddler comes in with his Taber, and Pipe, and a whole Morice after him,
with motly visards for their better grace. These four had forty assistants
under them, as themselves do confess.

Lusty Iollie Ienkin, (an other of Saras Captain devils names) by his name
should seem to be foreman of the motly morris: he had under him, says
himself, forty assistants, or rather (if I miss not) he had been by some old
Exorcist allowed for the Master setter of Catches, or roundes, used to be sung
by Tinkers, as they sit by the fire with a pot of good Ale between their
legs: Hey jolly Ienkin, I see a knave a drinking, et caet.

Delicat, an other Captain, or vicenarie in Sara, having under him twenty
assistants, seems by his English name to be yeoman of the Sprucery, to see the
devils motly visards, after they were soiled with Brimstone, and sweat, to be
brusht up, and kept sweet, neat, and clean. These were the Officers, or
Commanders names, that had taken up their lodging in Sara Williams, now the
many, rascality, or black-guard of hell, were God knows how many in her: for
all were there tag, and ragge, cut and long-tayle, yet diverse of them it
pleases the holy Exorcist to command their names to do them some grace,
others he lets go out, leaving no names, but an ill savor behind the^. The
names of such as the Exorcist thought good to favor, were these, Puff, and
Purre, the two fat devils, that had been coniurd up for money, anno 84, and
would not home to hell again, till good company came for them. Lusty Dickie,
Cornerd-cappe, Nurre, Molkin, Wilkin, Helcmodion, Kellicocam. These were like
the Sporades in via lactea, having neither office, order, nor rank; all these
were Saras devils.

Maho was general Dictator of hell: and yet for good manners sake, he was
contented of his good nature to make show, that himself was under the check of
Modu, the graund devil in Ma: Maynie. These were all in poor Sara at a chop,
with these the poor soul travailed up and down full two years together; so
as during those two years, it had been all one to say, one is gone to hell,
or he is gone to Sara Williams: for she poor wench had all hell in her
belly. And had had it still to this day for any thing we know, if it had not
pleased Fa: Weston, and his twelve holy disciples, to have delivered her of
that deuil-childe. But of this you shall hear hereafter: now I may proceed.

CHAP. 11. The reasons why sometime one devil alone, sometimes an 100,
sometimes a thousand are, cast out at a clap.
YOu have formerly heard of the names of the Priests, graund rectors of this
Comaedie, and lately of the names of the devils, their Cue-fellowes in the
play: good order seems to require, that I should marshall them together, as
birds of a feather: but I choose rather to violate good method, and put my
self upon my Reader, then to offend our deuill-mastix by such an unpleasing
combination. Now because some may wonder how it comes to pass, that hell in
this Iubile was broken up, and that such millions of devils, like Herrings in a
barrel, were packed up in Sara Williams, and the rest, and sometimes one
alone, sometimes six, sometimes 900 were cast out together, and yet Maho with
a million of assistants left still behind: this contains many mysteries, as
fit to be learned, as the rest. We will consider these two heads a sunder, for
the worthiness of the matter: first, why these devils are said to be so many;
next, why sometimes one, sometimes many are said to be cast out at a time.

In the first, our holy deuill-charmers have the vantage of Tinkers, and
Surgeons by much: For these, the one has his certain number of holes to mend,
and the other his certain number of sores to salve, and when he has done,
except by some pretty knack in his budget, he can multiply one hole in four,
and the other draw one sore into six, he is in danger to be out of work: but
our holy budgetters having to deal with devils, in nature invisible, and in
number innumerable, do wisely provide so many to be packed up in one patient
together, as except hell it self be drawn dry, they can never want work.

Sara Williams was a patient, that pleased their handling well, and therefore
she was furnished with all the devils in hell at a clap; so as if Hercules
himself had been in this hell, there had been work enough, both for him,
and his club. The casting a devil out of Sara, was like the drawing of a
bucket of water out of a Well, it made the devil spring the quicker, and like
to cutting of one of Hydraes heads, which made seven more to arise in his
place.

This ground must be well laid, and this principle well conned by all the
professors of this black Art, that they be sure of hell, and devils cnow in
the party at first: which being not well advised of by some simple witted men
of ours, late probationers in this science, they were enforced for enlarging
their work, to bungle it out woefully, and to say that the devils they had
cast, did rebound back again, and so made them new work to begin again;
which by this provision of thrumming in devils at the first, might most easily
have been avoided.

Secondly, this device of an huge many of devils to be in one party, served
them, as a shelter against what wind or weather so ever. If the parties they
had in handling, grew weary of their occupation, as loathing their drugs,
fearing their tortures, and hating their cosenage and so were like to break
from them, and to tell tales out of School, they had (by this devise) their
evasion at hand. There were yet many devils in the party forsooth, and it was
not he, or she, that so said, but the devil: so as if he says any thing in
opening their legerdemaine, he shall be possessed as long as he lives; and
then may he say, and swear what he will, for he shall be no more credited,
then Pippin their devil, and that which would anger any poor soul at the
heart, what so ever he does, or says, it must not be he, that so does, or
says, but the devil.

Let poor Sara Williams give you instances of this. Read her examine:
She grew so far discontented with their holy potion, and their chair, as
she begins to speak bugs words, and tell them, she would complain: the
priests had their ward-word ready: it was not Sara, but the devil, that so
spoke, because he could abide no Catholic priests.

She attempts to take her heels, and run away from them, the common voice
was, it was not Sara, but the devil: she did not run, but was carried by the
devil. She smiles, and it must not be she that smiles, but the devil. She
weeps, and she was borne down, that it was not her self, that wept, but the
devil: so as she said, she was at her wits end, fearing (as seems) so much as
to mutter, hum, or spit, for fear the priests should make it not of her own
spitting, but the devils. This devise is in steed of all the Orators in the
world, to free them from imputation, and to secure their iugling: for say any
thing distasting to them, and to their holy crew, ye shall be sure to have the
devil put upon you for your labor; and they have several spirits to command
for their bayards, to bear their several fardles of crimes. Tell them that
they are Impostors, and deserve to be branded on the foreheads with the
Character noting their trade: Lo, say they, it is not you, but the spirit of
malediction. Put them in mind of their devil daliance, with Fidd, and Sara
Williams: it is not you, but the spirit of lust. Note their factious ambition
in seeking sovereignty, and command: it is not you that so speak of them,
but the spirit of pride: and not only words, and speeches, such as they liked
not well, but even actions, motions, iestures, and carriage of the body, if it
make any thing against their lewd iugling, shall be branded with no other
stamp, then the devil.

You may see a pretty piece of this puppet-play, (and so judge of the rest)
acted between Ma: Maynie, See Maynies confess.
the dumb Actor, and Weston his Interpreter.

Ma: Maynie the Actor, comes mute upon the stage, with his hands by his side,
and his hair curled up. Lo here (cries Weston the Interpreter) comes up the
spirit of pride. Suddenly the mute Actor cries out, Ten pounds in the hundred,
that voice (cries Weston) is the voice of the spirit of avarice. Maynie makes a
scornful face, and that is the spirit of Envy. He bends, and knits his
brows, and that is the spirit of Wrath: he yawnes, and gapes, and that is the
spirit of Sloth. Thus Weston in Ma: Maynies face reads you the devils, that
are the seven Authors of the seven deadly sins: and as many devils (if he
list) can he show in any Protestants face at any time he pleases; all, or most
of us in his opinion, being really possessed with devils.

For the second point: why sometimes, a devil alone, sometimes an 100,
sometimes a thousand, are blown out at a clap; there are two weighty reasons
attending that devise. One is to advance hereby the reputation of some man of
especial note, and credit amongst them, who must be their Hercules, to
control with his club the monster maister-deuils of greatest potencie, and
command. Every plodding priest could cast out an vrchin, or boy devil, the
rascal guard that attended Prince Hiaclito: but Modu the General of Styx,
with his seven Colonels under him, the seven masters of the seven deadly
sins, must be a monster reserved for Westons own club, and none but his. And
whereas every fidling Exorcist in his holy coniuration, did use the holy amice;
Weston for the solemnity of the action, and his better grace, must come upon
the stage more solemnly adorned with the holy Albe, or an holy Cope, and other
consecrated gear. And the devil many times of his own good nature, or else
upon some special acquaintance between him, and the priest, expressly tells by
whom, and by no other he will be cast out: and then he alone must be gotten to
come, and (to make the devil no liar) he must gippe the Gudgin, and hit the
Woodcocke on the bill, and the other scuruie crew of Exorcists must hold him
the candell. Learned Thyraeus tells us, page, 67, de Demon: that the foul
devil that possessed one Malachia, had vowed he would not out, till Fa:
Benardine were gotten to come, who no sooner appeared, but the devil showed
himself a man of his word: for he slinkes closely away, like a dog at the
sight of a whip.

A second use they have of this huge difference of casting out sometime one
alone, sometime a whole million of devils, far more passing, and precious,
then the former. And that is, to grace by this drift, and to blaze the virtue
of some new Saint, and new green relics, as yet not grown into credit in
the world: Marie it must be especially of such a Martyr, or Saint, of whose
virtue and sanctity, there is greatest cause of suspicion abroad, whether the
good man were a slye Iugler, or a holy man in deed. And this suspicious Saint,
or his cast relic, shall work you a wonder beyond God his forbid clean.

It was sufficient for the gracing of Campion amongst the Catholics in
England, with whom he was in especial reputation, that his girdle, which came
from Jerusalem, and was worn at Tyburne, should at the first touch of the
party possessed, stunt the devils wits. Where-vppon Westons acclamation to the
Spectators, was this: Testes estote clarissimi patris Campiani Martyrij, cuius
hic vel minutissimus funiculus tantus illi faces miserat: Bear witness, I
charge you, of the most worthy Martyrdom of good Fa: Campion, whose simple
girdle has cast the devil into such a heat. Marie for that Ignatius their
founder has many enemies in the world, and is lately called into question for
a graund cheater: to grace this Monsignior, and to bring him into credit, he
must do transcendent miracles, strained upon such a key, as our blessed
Savior, and his holy Ap: never came near. And for this purpose to divulge
this Founders deity, there is composed a Diarie of all his diabolical (I
mean hyperbolicall) wonders, done by that worthy Mountebanke, both alive, and
dead?

First for his better credit, the devil himself proclaims him to Fa:
Baptista Peruso for a Saint in heaven, and I trust you will not doubt of it,
since it comes from so holy an Oracle, as the devils own mouth, and therefore I
wonder the Pope does so long stand out. At Maurisca he lay 8 days in a
trance, without all sign of life, save the beating of his heart: in his
prayer, he saw Almighty God, and his son, standing by him with his Cross
upon his shoulders, and he heard Almighty God commend him, and his company, to
the protection of his Son. Thus far agree Fa: Ignatius, and the devil.

At Sena the devils durst not look upon his picture, but hung their heads in
their bosoms for very pure shame. His picture in Malacia scared away a devil:
his picture in paper at Madena, pinned closely upon a wall, skared away a
whole troop of devils out of four women possessed: the bare pronouncing his
name at Rome, skared out 2 legions of devils. A piece of his coife that he
wore, heales a woman of the frenzy: a piece of leather, that he used at his
stomach, cures the plague: a piece of his hayre-cloth, purges an holy Nun in
the space of a year, of 100. stones: a piece of a relic of his, close shut
in a box, burns a devil, and makes him to roar the breadth of a chamber of:
a piece of a relic cast into the sea calmes the waves, and stills the winds.
But the bare subscription of his name in a morsel of paper passes all the
rest. This written in a patch of paper, and brought unto the party, heales the
toothache, the crampe, the gowte, the Sciatica, the Leprosy, the skuruies,
and being laid upon the belly of a woman, that has endured her pain of
travail two, three, or four days, and is past all hope of life, takes away
her pain, facilitates the birth, and recouers her life. A sweet protecting
Saint to that sweet sex, the syllables of whose name are of more potencie, and
saving health, then the sacred syllables of the blessed name of our ever
blessed Savior was ever read to be of. Spectatum admissi risum teneatis. Is it
not a wonder above all wonders, that any man should look upon these Antic
wonders, without a wondrous laughter: hic nebulo magnus est, ne metuas, this
foul wonder-maister is too full of wonders, ever to be good.

CHAP. 12. Of the secret of lodging, and couching the devil in any part of the
body that the Exorcist pleases.
THe great skar-buggs of old time, as Hercules and the rest, had a great humor
(as the Poets faigne) to go down to Styx, and to visit hell, to see Pluto,
and his ugly ghosts, and to behold the holes, and dens, where he lodged his
black guard. Our holy skar-deuils, if they had lived with the^, would have
eased them of that pains: for they would have showed them hell, and devils
here above, and have carried them with a wet finger to their cabines and
lodges: and you shall find very deep, and weighty reasons of this.

Mercury prince of Fairies had a rod given him by Jupiter his Father,
whereby he had power, not only to raise up, and drive before him, what ghosts
he pleased, but also to remaund, and still with the same rod, as many as he
list. The holy Roman Church has as potently armed her twelve Worthies of
hell, and Weston their Black prince, as ever Jupiter did arm his sweet son,
giving them a power not only to call up, drive, and puff out with their
breath, as many devils as they pleased, but also to control, cap, lodge, and
couch them as still as a curre at the sound of his Masters whippe is couched
under a table. By that time I have opened you the causes and secrets of this,
and have showed you their several lodges and forms, I doubt not, but you will
be able to tell me more news from hell.

It is a point in the black art of deepest skill, and power, not to raise a
spirit, but to be able to rule, and couch him safely and well: and in this holy
infernal science of casting out devils Thyraeus tells us, that devils be not
all of a nature, quality, and sise, some be watery, some ayrie, some fiery, and
some savor of the earth: the watery and ayrie, do taste of their element, and
be easily moved, the fiery, are more fierce, and the earthy, like
melancholicke men, more sullen, not easily controld. See this exemplified as
clearly in our patients, as the nose on a man's chin.

Soforce, Anne Smiths devil, was a sullen, and silent spirit (so she herself
records him) and could hardly be gotten by all dreadful co^iurations so much as
to speak. Captain Maho in Sara, was of a fell, and furious mood, and many
times, when he was hunted up into her body, grew there so unruly, and
outrageous, that the Exorcists seemed to fear least her bowels would burst.
Then was all have made to get him down again, which sometime was done with
good seeming toil, difficulty, and sweat, that when it fell out pat, as the
devil, and the priest would have it, it bred in the poor silly spectators a
wonderful admiration of the dignity of the priesthood, and power of the
Catholic Romish Church.

Sara their apt scholar, acted this scene commendably well: where after a sore
skirmish between the Exorcist, and the devil, or Sara, and the Priest: the
devil was with much a-doe commanded down into her foot: but in an another
scene she hit the needles eye, where after a hot, and sore encounter, all the
spirits with much ado being commanded to go down into her left foot, they
did it with vehement trembling, and shaking of her leg, to the great admiration
of many of the standers by, seeing the power of the Catho: Romish Church: the
party crying that her shoe would not be able to hold them all: here this act
of lodging the devil had a plaudite in the midst of the play.

Secondly, who can but mate his wit with wonder, having no more wits then one,
and stare out his eyes with amazement, having but two, to see the poor devil
brought into such a taking, and to savor so rankly, lying at untruss, that he
would feign be gone out; and shall see the tyrannical dreadful power of an
enchaunting Priest, by his remaunding might, to keep him in still in spite of
his nose, and to command him, for his more disgrace, to take up his lodge in a
homely place, of which you shall hear hereafter, if it be not too foul. Would
not some tender-harted body, in pure pity of the devils cry, take of the
priest, and let the poor devil be gone: as I have heard of a good natured
gentleman at Parish-garden, that cried, take off the dog for shame, and let the
poor Bear alone. Pitiful Hiaclito, would rather then his life, for pure
fear of the priest, have slunke out of Trayford behind, but it would not be,
he must be stayed until he had his payment. Yea Maho himself was taken down
so low with the deuil-squirting potion, that he would have given all the points
at his hose to be gone: and Dibdale would none, but co^maunds him to his lodge,
until the Brimstone by some dreadful enchau^tment were made hot enough, to
scald his breech soundly: here this lodging-power was more dreadful to the
devil, and astonishable to the people by ods then the dispossessing was.

Thirdly, this command to lodge would at no hand be spared, for by this they
made sure to have a devil ready at a trice at all assaies, to furnish out the
stage: who^, being safe lodged, they carried about with them from place to
place, as the Iuglers use to carry a Be in a box, or an ape in a string, or
puppits in a pageant, to squeale, skip, and tumble, wheresoever they pitch
down their trusse.

You shall hear an act of this puppet-play performed between a priest, and a
wench, as it is deposed upon oath, for a taste of the rest. There was a priest
not many years since in Lancashire in the habit of a gentleman, who carried
about with him (as Tynkers do their bitches) a wench, pretended by the priest
to be possessed: this wench at every safe station (where there was concourse of
simple people, the founders of miracles) he presents to play her pranks, and
his fashion was this. When it was a full Court, out brings he his Mattachina,
and places her in a chair, and then approaching demurely to her, takes her by
the toe, and then dialoguizes with the devil according to his pleasure. The end
of the dialogue between the priest, and the devil, is a remaund of the devil to
his lodge; which (to avoid inquam, and inquit) I have presented you in both
their persons, speaking sweetly together.

Pri: See the record.
I command thee to go to the place appointed, and that thou do not hurt her
in thy going down, nor make her sick in body, nor mind.


Woe: Fie upon thee, he is in my knee.


Pri: I command thee to thy place appointed, thou damned fiend.


Woe: Oh, he is in my great toe.


Pri: Go to the place appointed thou damned fiend.


Woe: Oh, he is in my toe next to my little toe.


Pri: Go to the place appointed thou damned fiend.


Woe: Oh fie upon him, he is in the toe next the great toe.


Pri: I command thee to go into the dead of her nail:


With that the devil gave a rush up into the woman's body, as though he would
have torn her in pieces: then the priest commanded him to go down damned
fiend as he was, otherwise his Judge would damn him into the bottomless pit
of hell: and with that the woman confessed, that the devil was in the place
appointed. Then the priest charged him that he should he there, till the next
exorcisme to be holden by him, or some of his brethren.

I do verily suspect this wonder was acted somewhat near Gotham, and that the
spectators were the posterity of them, that drowned the Eele: that never an
unhappy fellow in the company showed so much unhappy wit, as to offer to take
a knife, and pare away the devil, lying in the dead of the nail, and throw him
into the fire, for acting his part so baldly: but I nothing doubt, but the
deuil-maister priest would have had an eye to this, least he, or some of his
brethren, at the next exorcisme holden, should for want of a devil, have
spoiled a good play. And would not this have spighted any devil, to be thus
hardly handled by a priest, to be turned out of his warm nest, where he
cabined in the wench, and to be lodged at little ease in the edge of her nail,
next to wind, and weather, where he must lie for a skout, like the Sentinel in
a watch, and suffer every boy to play bo-peepe with his deuilship, and he not
able to stir either out or in. O that Will Summer had come to this pleasant
bargain between the Exorcist and the devil, how handsomely would he have
belabored them both with his babble, for playing their parts so handsomely.

But this was but a pedling Exorcist of the rascal crew, who wandered like a
chapman of small wares, with a wench, and a trusse, being never free of his
company. Our wardens of the science had a little more art to lodge their
devils. Such an art of lodging they had, and some of their lodges so obscure,
and retrayte, as none but a priest, or a devil could ever have sented it out.
Some of these deuil-lodgers, in Sara, and Fid, without a praeface of
deprecation to your modesty I must not once name, for fear of check from your
chaste ears, and a change of color in mine ink and paper, at such uncouth
terms. I will only leap over this kennell of turpitude, with a note of
unsavory smells, and remit you to that clause of Sara Williams relation, who as
a woman has touched it as modestly, as she can, giving us to understand, by
her timorous declaration, that our holy order have a ticket from his Hol: of
Rome, to harrow hell it self, and be never the worse.

It was wisely cauteled by the penner of these sauory miracles, in the end of
his book, why Sara being a seely young innocent wench of 16 years, should be
more deuil-haunted, then any of the possessed men: there was a pad in the
straw, the poor man would feign have out. But a Sceptike will make an other
Quaere to our holy order to soil: how it comes to pass, that we read in
ancient possessions of old, of moore men to be possessed, then women, and now
in these novel vpstart miracles from Rome, still it is the ill hap of more
women to be haunted, then men. This sore being salued with a little blessed
oil from Rome; an other doubt will arise, what the cause is, why our holy order
having under their holy hands, not only Fid, Sara, and Anne Smith, women, but
Trayford, Marwood, and Ma. Maynie, that were men, there is no mention at all of
common lodging, and couching the devil in a peculiar part of the body, but
only in the wenches.

Let us go to old Lockwood, Mengus their master, and look upon his Canon, for
couching, and lodging of the devil, and happily we may thence pick out some
English to this purpose. Mengus, Flag. Daem:
In the seventh formidable exorcisme of his deuil-whip: his Canon lies thus.
Si energumenus non fuerit liberatus, et tamen vrgente necessitate dimittenda
sit coniuratio, tunc praecipe omnibus spiritibus remanentibus in corpore, eos
cogendo vt recedant a capite, et cord, et stomacho, et desce^dant ad parts
inferiores corporis. Here you have the Canon for lodging the devil, that you
be sure to lodge him not in the head, nor stomach, but in the inferior parts.
An excellent prouiso, teaching us, that the devil is of the nature of a cup of
new strong Sack, that cannot hurt a man, if it be kept out of his stomach, and
head. But old Lockwood knew, what he did, in assigning the inferior parts for
a peculiar lodge for the devil. This was the traynd sent, he knew his dogs
were old suers-by at this, this was the haunt they would not be hallowed of. Let
Sara Williams be my Interpreter for the rest: Sometime (she says) they lodged
the devil in her toe, sometime in her leg, sometime in her knee. Sometime,
etc. Let the devil, See her exexamin:
and his holy charmers make up the rest.

Fie holy Fathers fie, is this the trailed sent you so greedily pursue with
full cry, and open mouth? Is this the game you hunt, called gayning of souls?
Is this the hau^t you quest on in Italy, Spain, and England? Is this the foil
you sent so hotely, that neither Sea, nor Land will make you at a fault, but
that you call upon it still, over hill, and dale, through thick, and thin, and
make good the chase through Colleges, Cloisters, Palaces, houses: yea even
into hell it self, and thence start the devil, and hunt him a fresh, and lodge
him with Sara Williams, in such muses, conny-beries, and holes, as the poor
devil, but for your hot pursuit, would never have come in? It is well that you
quit the devil with gaining of some store of souls for hell, else can I not
easily see, how you could readily make him amends. It is high time to call of
from this unsavory trayle. A lack poor honest devil, in this case far more
honest, then the priest, that would not down into his lodge, without much
adiuration, toyling, and sweat: was it any marvel, considering he was to be
commanded into so unseemly a lodge.

CHAP. 13. Of dislodging, rouzing, and hunting the devil, by the dreadful
power of the presence, approach, and bodily touch of a Priest.
THey that delight in hunting, being men of quality, and sort, when they would
entertain their friends with that pleasing sport, do use to have an
Hare-finder, who setting the Hare before, does bring them speedily to their
game. The company was many times great, and the strangers of note, that
resorted to see, and wonder at this coursing of the devil, and it was
accordingly provided by the Hunt-maisters of the game, that they had a devil
ready lodged against any solemn hunting day, that the spectators might not be
delayed with tediousnes, before they came to their pastime. Thus all being
seated, and standing at gaze for the game, the next office was to stir, and
rouse the devil, that the people might behold, how he would bestirre himself.
Unto this they have many potent Engines, and means, some whereof had the
ability both to course, and expel the devil: but of the fearful act of
expelling I mean not here to speak, but only of their various powerful
virtues of rouzing, chasing, and chafing the devil.

These dreadful super-infernall powers do flow either from the priests own
person, or his adjuncts. In his person we consider his bodily presence, and
approach toward the possessed, his breath, his touch, his parts. His adjuncts
are either belonging to his person, as his hose, his gloves, his girdle, his
coyfe, his rags; or common to his office, as holy water, holy oil, the holy
candell, hallowed brimstone, the holy potion, Auemaries, invocation of Saints,
the holy Cross, the stole, the amice, the blessed Sacrament, and the corporal
presence of our blessed Lady. Of these infernal whips, according to their
several dignities, and worth.

For the first, we are to understand, that it is otherwise between a Priest,
and a devil, then it is between an Hound, and an Hare: For an Hare, if she be
formed, will sit sure, though the Hound do trayle near her, and call hotly on
the sent: but the devil stands in such bodily fear of the presence of a Cath:
priest, that as soon as he comes in to the room, where the possessed is, he
begins sometime to startle, and if he approach near, he rages as he were mad.
Nay, many times he will not endure his presence at all, (notwithstanding we
read that the devil is so bold, as he dares to come into the presence of
Almighty God) but he skuds out of the possessed, as soon as ever he hears but
tidings of the priests coming.

Gordianus the Emperor had a daughter possessed with a devil, and hearing
that they had sent for Tryphon to come, and exorcise the maid, Thyrae: 181.
the devil did not endure forsooth to look him in the face, but trusses up,
and away, ere the holy man could come. Some stay till the Exorcist be come
within view, fearing (as seems) cosenage, least for one an other should come:
and as soon as he sees by his nose, that it is his good Master in deed, he
slips closely away, without taking any leave. Thus did a whole legion in a
young man serve Bishop Arnolphus: Quae mox viso Arnolpho episcapo discessit,
Ibid:
says Thyraeus: no sooner had the devil descried his good face, but he was
gone.

Some punie rash devil does stay till the holy priest be come somewhat near,
as into the chamber where the daemoniack does abide, purposing, as seems, to
try a pluck with the priest, and then his heart suddenly failing him (as Demas,
when he saw his enemy Clinias approach) cries out, he is tormented with the
presence of the priest, and so is fierd out of his hold, to his greater
disgrace.

This is an huge virtue in a priest, that casts so far off: we do not read
that the daemoniacks in the Gospel, did ever thus skud from our Savior Christ;
but that is to little purpose. God needed not so much to grace his son, who
by the power of his Divinity, was able to manifest himself, to be the power of
God: but our Exorcists being deemed in most places of the world, for no better
then iugling mates, there is great reason pardy, they should be graced with
more graceful miracles, then ever were accomplished by our Savior Christ.

This frighting, and tormenting power in presence of a priest, is not given
equally to al a-like, as the devils themselves are not all of a pitch. If he be
an old sturdy devil, and stand out the priests presence, then as the priest
has this tormenting power in more especial measure, and approaches in person
nearer to the possessed, the more is the devil in the party afflicted, and
tormented. Trayfords devil being a tough weather-beaten spirit, was not much
moved at the presence of Stamp the priest, who had this tormenting power as
seems but remissis gradibus. But when Edmunds came, and had invested himself
in his holy roabes; hear how the devil fared, in Edmunds own terms: Iubet
sacerdos ita vbi erat sacris indutus vestibus, ante se infirmum constitui.
Edmunds commanding in his sacred gear to bring in the daemoniack, and set him
in his presence. And mark what followed: Hic ille toto corpore contremiscere,
et horrere, et aestuare caepit. Instantly began the possessed to tremble, to
have horror, and rage thorough out his whole body. This the devil suffered, at
the mere presence of Edmunds, not only before any dreadful Exorcisme were
thundered against him, but before any word was spoken by the Jesuit.

Dibdale the priest remoues from Hackney to Fulmer in the night, and caries his
trincket Sara behind him on a horse: she felt her self so tormented with
heat, sitting behind him, as she had much ado to be kept from falling from
her seat.

Here the object was near, the power wrought the stronger, but you shall see
this power extended it self much farther, then thus. Trayford comes behind
plodding upon a Jade, and this tormenting heat from the person of the priest
reaches unto him: he felt such an exceeding burning in his head (says the
Author of the miracles) as he cried all the way as he rode water, water, and
yet we find this remove was the 8, or 9, of November, when men do not commonly
surfeit of heat. This sprite-tormenting virtue, is so top full in the body of a
priest, and of so potent an actiuity, as many times it runs over, and many
times issues from his person, as beams do from the sun, without his own
priuitie, or sense. And it has not the qualities of Stygian fire alone, to
scoreh, burn, torment, and fugate the devil, but it has a power Antiperistian
besides, to repel, and bandie back the devil into his kenel again: and this
without any action, motion, or intendement of the priest: so as a priest may
baffle a devil standing stone still, without stirring hand, or moving a foot.
This befell to Hilcho, Trayfords sneaking devil: who finding his corner grew too
hot by the bodily approach of the Exorcist, would feign to refresh himself
have come out at Trayfords mouth, but peeping out, and finding the priests
mouth approaching somewhat near, suddenly bolted back again, as a cony from
a net, and was feign to slip out closely at his right ear, in the fashion of a
Mouse. This Dibdale the priest neither knew, nor dreamed, that he had
reuerberated the devil with the direful power of his holy hellish mouth, but
Sara, Trayfords deuil-felow, saw the attempt of the devil to come forth, saw
his bandie back again, and saw his going out at Trayfords ear in the shape
of a Mouse, and discovered the true cause, why he came not forth, for the
neerenesse of the priests mouth, to the mouth of the possessed.

Now if any man will ask me, how it comes to pass, that any devil could stay
in the body of any party possessed, whom the priests did visit, considering
this frightful scorching heat, that issuing out of the body of the priest,
did scald, and torment the devil, when the priest drew near, and did make him
to tremble, quake, and rage, as you heard in Marwoods devil: I answer, that
the devils, as you have heard out of Thyraeus, were not all of a temper, and
constitution alike, but some could endure these scorching flames of the
priests, better then some. Next, the priests had not this hell fire all in a
degree, but some burned the devil near at hand, some a far off, according to
the proportion of hell fire, that was in the priest: and thirdly the priests
did many times by their sovereign power of priesthood, hold the devil in by
force, for his greater torment, and manifestation of the power of the Romish
Cath: Church, and first did toast, and broyle him well with their own hell fire
within the body of the possessed, and then did lay cart-loades of fire, and
Brimstone upon his back, and sent him to be broyled 1000. years in the pit
of hell.

The Lancashire devil in the wandering wench, of whom you heard before, cries
out, that he was scalded, and tormented by the priest, and desires he might
be gone: the priest tells him he shall not, but that he would torment him still:
and when he had so done, lodged him (as you have heard) in a most dangerous
desperate place. Now it may be wondered by some plain witted folks, how the
body of an holy priest does catch such a fire, that all the parties possessed
did still complain they burned: and this burning was so sore in Fid, and Sara,
as the marks thereof are at this day to be seen.

These questionists must be sent to the Cath: Church to school, to learn to
believe, and to make no curious speculations: and sure it is without doubt,
that a fell-burning heat they had in their bodies indeed, and the nearer they
did approach to Fid, and Sara, the more they felt their heat: yet not to let
any reasonable man go away unsatisfied, we will take a little pains to open
the case. True it is, that this deuil-burning heat in the priests, could not be
any elementary fire: for that no element can effectuate beyond his own
Sphaere, and a devil having in his nature no elementarie combination, it is
not possible he should receive from any element any sensible impression. Much
less can it be in the power of any natural innate heat, to torment a devil,
for it fits not to calor natiuus, to scald, or broyle at all. A caelestial
heat least of all can it be conceited, for that his influence is sweet, and
helpful, tending to generation. There is but a fourth fire left, and that is
the fire of hell, which being disputed, and resolved by deep Divines, to be
neither natural, nor mixed of elementary condition, but the coals of Gods
wrath, and fearful indignation, if they carry in their bodies an heat, that
does vex, and torment a devil, wheresoever they find him, it can be no other,
then the heat of hell: for what other fire can vex, and torment the devil? I
would be sorry they should be concluded of so hellish a disposition: it is far
better to take it, as Sara, and all the rest of her fellow Comaedians do
contest: that all was a Stygian comedy to make silly people afraid. A fire
indeed she felt, from the spritly power of the Priest, but it was of a more
gentle, and pleasing impression. And for that other part, that she played,
feigning that she was burned, and tormented at the presence of a Catholic
priest: that had she learned from the wise prompting of her skilful masters
the priests, who did still harp of that string in their ordinary narrations of
strange possessions beyond seas, that the possessed could not endure the
presence of a Catholic priest, which she as an apt scholar observed for her
cue, and acted it as comely, and gracefully, as you have heard. Thus much of the
power of their bodily presence.

CHAP. 14. Of the strange power of a Cath: Priests breath, and of the admirable
fire that is in a Priests hands, to burn the devil.
Pliny in his natural story, tells us of certain people, that do anhelitu
oris enecare homines: Kill men with the breath that comes from their mouths.
Scaliger recounts a whole lineage of men, that could oculis fascinare: bewitch
with their eyes, though they did not touch. The Leno in the Comaedy, is noted
to be of so strong a breath, that he had almost blown down the young
gallant, that stood in his way: but the Poets tell us, that hell has a more
deadly breathing then all; so as if a bird do by chance fly over the Stygian
flood, she is queled with the smell, and falls down stark dead. We have here
to acquaint you with a breathing company of priests, that for potency of
breath, do put down Pliny, Scaliger, the bawd, hell, the devil and all:
For the devil, who can well enough endure the loathsome odours, and
euaporations of hell, is not able to endure the vapor issuing from the mouth
of a priest, but had rather go to hell, then abide his smell.

Now what a monstrous coil would six or seven igniuomous priests keep in
hell, if they should let loose the full fury of their blasts, as Aeolus did
upon the Sea, and distend their holy bellows in consort amongst the poor
ghosts, were it not a plain danger, that they were likely to puff all the
devils out of hell? Mengus the Canonist for hell, gives us a rule, that if the
devil be stubburne, and will not obey the formidable exorcisme of the priest,
then that the priest shall os suum quam-proxime ad energumenum admouere: bring
his mouth as near to the possesseds mouth, as he can, and by that time the
devil has tasted on his breath, if there be any life in him, he will be glad
to stir.

Here now you see the reason, why Trayfords devil rebounded at the dint of the
Priests breath, and was so glad to get him out at Trayfords right ear like a
Mouse, rather then he would come out iump against the priests mouth. The little
children were never so afraid of hell mouth in the old plays painted with
great gang teeth, staring eyes, and a foul bottle nose, as the poor devils
are skared with the hell mouth of a priest.

Take an example from Sara Williams of the vigorousnesse of their breath, she
lay (says the penner of their miracles) past all sense in a trance, being
utterly bereaved of all her senses at once, the priest no sooner came near
her, but she discerned him by the smell. Was not this (trow you) a jolly rank
smell, that was able to awake a poor wench out of a trance? Verily these do
out-smel the devil by far. For though the devil has (as is commonly reputed)
a fell rank smell, yet I never heard of any, that could discern a devil by his
smell.

The like sovereign smell is in the sacrament of their Mass, for Sara could
always (says our Author) very exactly reckon up how many had communicated,
by discerning them by their smell. But for this they may have an easy evasion,
happily they had been so deep in the Challice, as a quick sented man might
have sauoured them a far off without help of the devil. Their breath which is
nothing, but air exhaled from their lunges, being as you see of this
affrighting power over the devil: what may we deem of the power of their
holy hands, if they come once to be applied to the devil?

First, their holy fingers had in them the same divine power, if not in an
higher measure, that we read to have been in our Savior Christ, with a bare
touch of their finger without any other ceremony used by our blessed Savior
in like case, they restored hearing, and sight to their patients being blind
and deaf. So has the Miracle-Maister clearly set down, that Sara being
bereaved of all her senses, as in a trance, the Exorcist touches her ears,
and eyes with his finger, and she sees and hears.

This is but a flea-biting to that which ( Ignatius his great grandchild)
Edmunds exploited with his holy hand. Jupiter armed with his dreadful thunder,
never made hell so to crack. Hear it thorough the Jesuits own trumpet, as
himself has proclaimed it to the world. Vix dum exorcismos in choare manusque
imponere capiti, cum ille statim furere, in altum erigi, manibus pedibusque
elaborare, sacerdotis manum depellore, omnia complere vocibus, iuramentis,
maledictis blasphemis. Edmunds had scarcely begun his adiuration, and laid his
hand on Marwoods head, but he presently falls into a fury, stretches out his
body, beats with his feet, and hands, snatches at the priests hand, makes all
to ring with crying, swearing, and blaspheming. This was well roared of a young
devil for a praeludium to the play, upon the bare touch of Edmunds hand. But
mark when the devil grew hot with the continuing of this holy trick, and of
hell ( Edmunds hand) on his head still, Sacerdos officium reparat manum in
capite tenens, the priest falls a fresh to his work, holding still his hand on
the possesseds head. Now begins hell to work. Hic nouae tragoediae, inusitatae
voces, and verba in omnium auribus insonant. Quid non venitis, daemones
(inquit) et tu Pippine (quod nomen erat infestantis daemonis) non vindicas?
nihil opis, nihil auxilij in inferno reliqui est? auferte oito miserum, flammis
tradite, sin minus communem hanc contumeliam vos non vultis, aut non potestis
vindicare, tum iacula, gladij, cultri confodite me, ignis, pestis, canes, malu^
confumite. Domus non corruis? neque dehiscens me vult terra absorbere nec de
caelo fulmen aliquod pessundare? Quis hoc tolerare, quis tantum incendium pati,
quis ita (vti mill vnguibus) discerpi vnqua^ visus est? that is: Here strange
tragical exclamations filled all our ears. (Devils why come ye not? and thou
Pippin (which was the name of the tormenting devil) do thou not revenge my
quarrel? is there no aid, no succor left in hell? Take me miserable caytife,
and hurl me into the infernal flames: but if either you will not, or cannot
right this disgrace, then you lances, swords, and knives dash thorough me:
fire, dogs, plague, mischief consume me, house fall upon me, earth swallow
me, lightning from heaven devour me: who can bear my burden? who can endure
my heat? who can be thus torn in pieces, being rent with a thousand nails?
Who would not think that he heard Hercules furens, or Ajax flagellifer newly
come from hell? Was ever Prometheus with his Vulture, Sisyphus with his stone,
Ixion with his wheel in such a case? Did ever the God-gastring Giants, whom
Jupiter overwhelmed with Pelion and Ossa, so complain of their load? Or
Phaeton so bellow when he was burned with Jupiters flames, as poor Marwood
here bellows, and roares under Edmunds fiery flames, and all with the only
touch of his head with his Ignatian hand? Was it not by divine Oracle, that his
masters name should be Ignatius, when his disciple carried such an
unsupportable weight of hell fire in his hand? Will not his hand be an excellent
instrument for Lucifer in hell, to plague, broile, and torment his infernal
fiends, that has such a fiend-tormenting power here on earth? Now here
pitiful Marwood go on in his direful notes.

A page (inquit) manum illam cum omnibus daemonijs. Take away that dreadful
hand, in the name of all the devils in hell. Vt me vexas et torques, nunquam
sine cruciatibus sine incendio esse patiens? How do thou vex, how do
thou wring me? thou art never but plaguing me with torment and fire: Then cries
he out of his head, his heart, his bowels, his bones. Manum tamen non dimittit
sacerdos: Yet Edmunds would not be moved to remit his hand: but begins a new
chase. In sequitur manu per tergum, and cet. He pursues the devil down along
his back, his reins, his close parts, his thighs, his legs, vsque ad
talos, down to his ankle-bone: Thence he fetches him back again, with a
Susurrare, down his knee, his belly, his breast, his neck, and there graspes
him round about the neck, with both his holy hands, which cast the devil into
so strange an agony, and passion: as Edmunds himself breaks forth into an
exclamation: Deus imortalis quanta tum ille passeus fuit? nec mill hominum
linguas explicare posse existimo. Good God! into what a passion was he then
cast? not the tongues of a thousand men (I imagine) can express it.

A little taste of the inexplicable agony he gives us by this, that the sweat
that flowed from Marwoods face, was in such current streams, as it was the
office of one man, to stand, and dry them up. Digitus Ignatij est hic: this was
the finger of Ignatius devil indeed, to teach a young Popish Rakehell so
cunningly to act, and feign the passions, and agonies of the devil; that the
whole company of spectators shall by his false illusions be brought into such
commiseration, and compassion, as they shall all weep, cry, and exclaim, as
loud as the counterfeit devil; and the end and plaudite of the act, must be
this. O Catholicam fidem! O fidem Catholicam, veree fidem, sanctam, castam,
operatricem fide^: tu daemonibus terribilis, inferno formidabilis, tibi cedunt
cateruae, legiones daemonum contre miscunt ad tuas voces, tuas voces
insuperabiles fugiunt, horrent, and te audire nolunt. That is: O the Catholic
faith, O the faith Catholic, truly faith, holy, pure, powerful faith: Thou
art terrible to devils, formidable to hell, troops submit to thee, legions of
devils do tremble at thy voice, they fly from thy irresistable command, they
quake, and dare not abide thy sound. Now by that time Sara, and her
play-fellowes be come upon the stage, and have told you, how they were burned,
and handled likewise, I doubt not, but you will help their plaudite with an O
to: O diabolicam fraudem! O fraudem diabolicam! O diros actores! O ineptos
spectatores!

Sara was content to play the she-deuil, touching your presence, and approach,
and to grace you with an Oh I burn, oh I cannot abide the presence of a
Catholic: mary when you came nearer, then in manhood you should offer, or she
in modesty suffer, as to hunt her with your holy hot hands, she could in her
woman-hood have been content you would have forborne: but that way lay your
game, and therefore there was no remedy, but you would have your hunting sport.
Your game being by hot chase embossed, did commonly take soil, and there you
let him lodge, and hunted him a fresh upon the old foil, and counter too,
which none but Curres of an impure sent will do.

Sara says, you began with your fiery hands at her foot, and so up all along
her leg; so her knee, her thigh, and so along all parts of her body: And that
you followed the chase so close, that it could neither double, nor squat, but
you were ready to pinch.

Was this a fair chase for holy anointed priests to make, especially with
those holy hands, that had instantly before celebrated the holy Mass, blessed
the chalice, made (as they suppose) a new God, elevated the Host, handled, and
divided the very body of Christ, to bring the same holy hands piping hot from
the Altar to the chair, where Sara sat at Mass, to seize with the same hands
upon her toe, slip them up along her leg, her knee, her thigh, and so along
all parts of her body, till you came near her neck, and by the way with the
same holy hands, to handle, pinch, and gripe, where the devil in his black
modesty did forbear, till you made her cry oh: and then you to cry, O, that
oh is the devil. Now the great devil pinch you all for me, and that I may say
without malignity; for I well know he dares not: you are so devil holy all over,
head, heart, and hands, that the devil dares not come near you: and therefore
you need not to care a rush for either devil, or hell, for you will either with
your holiness make holy both the devil, and hell, or make him cry oh, when you
come there with your holy pinch.

Fid Williams does complain (look in their own confessions) that with your
holy hot burning hands, you did hunt the devil counter in her too: and did
toe-burne, shin-burne, knee-burne her, and so forth, till you made her cry oh:
for they were the sweet pair of your holy devils, that were always in chase.

And here we see the cause, why Trayford was soon dispatched of his devil
after a bout, or two, and was never devil hunted from toe to top, with your
holy hot hands: nor Ma: Maynie was never troubled with this pinching sport:
but Sara, and Fid stuck long in your fingers, or your fingers about them; and
ever and anon they were at the holy chair, and this dislodging, coursing, and
pinching, the devil was still in their Parkes. Alack, the poor souls had no
worse devils, then Tray-ford and Maynie had: for Maynie had the sovereign
Dictator of hell in him; but their walk was fair for your course, their game
pleasing, their suit hot, your sent fuller: and therefore no marvel, though
your dogs being curres, did hunt riot so often after this fallow Dear.

And here I must remember you, that you were so fiery hot, and so sharp set
upon this game, that you forgot your Masters, Mengus, Thyraeus, Sprenger,
Nider, and all; and did as schoole-boyes do, when they have an otium to play,
give a showt, and for have of their sport, cast satchel, books, and paper,
behind at their heels. For in your graund probato, when Sara at my L. Vaux his
house, was to receive her solemn graund exorcisme, and so be quit the Court,
this high day being held for her final quietus est: where you should have had
special regard to have dignified, and graced every holy Engine in his due
order, and place, serviceable to this great work, (as the Amice, the Albe,
holy water, holy candell, the Cross, Brians bones, and your Ma: Mengus his
formidable deuil-whip above the rest) you having Sara your game set fair in
her form, for joy, and showt of your sport, could not abstain, but like
Lycurgus his Hound, that having an Hare, and a kitchen pot set both before him,
left the Hare, and ran to the pot, and thrust in his head up to the ears: so
you having in your hand your Ma: Mengus his dreadful book of Exorcisme,
entitled worthily Fustis, fuga, flagellum daemonum: the cudgel, the whip, and
the flight of the devil: (lo the furious force of your fiery heat) threw
Mengus your deuil-whipper away, and ran unto Sara, and with your burning
hands catched Sara by the foot, and so fired the devil along, till you made
him slip out, where on man must name.

Now a few questions I must soil, See the book of miracles.
and then I will proceed to your holy gear. 1. It may be asked, how your hands
came so holy, as to shine at the top of your fingers, like unto the sun.
Wherein you shall hear a piece of a Dialogue between Fid, and Ma: Maynie, their
Captain scholar: who sitting by Fid his pue-fellow, and a priest hard by
them: did affirm, that unto his sight the priests finger, and thumb, did shine
with brightness, especially on the inner sides: whereunto the priest answered,
that it might well be so, because (quoth he) they were anointed with holy oil,
when I was made priest. At which words Fid laughing, and calling Ma: Maynie
dissembling hypocrit; the priest said, It was not Fid, but the devil, that did
so laugh, and rail. Here you see a plain reason, how the priests hand comes
shining, and holy, and has this pinching holy quality in it, to cause a wench
cry oh, and he that will laugh at this reason, may hap to catch a devil. 2, If
any curious merry head will demand, what needs the Amice, the Albe, holy
candle, holy cross, holy brimstone, Brians bones, the sacrament the cross,
Salve Regina, S. Barbara, Mengus his deuil-whip, his deuil-club, his
fray-deuil, and the rest of that infernal rabble, since the only holy hands of
Edmunds the Jesuit alone, has power alone to rouse, hunt, chase, baffle,
broyle, and toste the devil, and to make him to roar, that hell it self did
quake, and tremble, skudde, and fly from his holy hand alone, more fearfully,
and ghastfully then ever poor Mouse did tremble, and fly from the sight of a
glaring Cat.

To this I answer, that as all stars do not participate alike the light of
the sun, so all holy priests do not receive alike the influence of this
hel-tormenting fire, but as they come nearer to that Fons caloris, Origo
luminis, Oculus caeli Ignatius, the fountain of this holie-deuil-driuing
heat, as his name does import, (as Edmunds his grandchild did) so are there
more potent, and abundant beams of that miraculous fire communicated unto
them, able to fry, and broyle all the devils in hell: and as they stand farther
off from the pure rays of his hell-fiering face, so they are as the Moon, but
spotted, and sprinkled with this satanicall flame. 3, If this will not content
you, but you will pursue me with questions still, and know why Edmunds, Dibdale,
and some other, who had the devils plenty of this deuil-frying heat in their
holy hands, did not dispatch the devil quite, and fire him out of his den at
once with their holy hands alone: but elongated their work, and took in the
Albe, the amice, holy candle, holy host, and all the lousie holy wardrop to
assist in the holy work: I answer, this was their good nature, to take in
those petty implements, and to do them some grace, that their mother holy
Church, whose hangings they are, may thank them for their labor, especially
considering they grow now adays somewhat fully for want of clean use. And
lastly, if they should have dispatched hastily, much good hu^ting sport had
been lost, the pleasure had been short, the action by facility would not have
been so admirably esteemed; the holy Church had lost their applause, and the
grace of the action by sudden quick passage, would have received much eclipse,
and diminution. And so I proceed to view their holy implements.

CHAP. 15. Of the admirable power in a Priests gloves, his hose, his girdle,
his shirt, to scorch the devil.
GEntle Reader, thou must not marvel to hear those supernatural powers,
spoken of before, to have been lodged in the bodies of holy priests:
considering that as the plague does infect, and hang in implements and
garments, and the leprosy upon walls, and beams of houses; so we find those
powerful virtues, which showed themselves apparently in the constitution of the
Priests, to transfuse themselves, and inhaere as effectually, in the priests
gloves, their hose, their girdle, their shirts, their rags, their patches,
yea in the water that some of their powerful hands had been washed withal. So
as these holy companions, if they had been metamorphosed into Fishes, as
Ulysses folowers were turned into swine, they would have proved notable good
Codfish, of who^ the Fishermen report there is no part within them, nor
without, that is bad.

A little I doubt me old Thyraeus is to blame, who painting a whole chapter
with the glorious parts, and qualities of an Exorcist, intituling his discourse
De conditionibus Exorcistarum, he is silent in this Maister-qualitie infixed
in the temper, and mould of a Priest, or received from his splendent unction,
that he should have this dreadful fire, to burn out a devil, and so by
conuiuencie does smother it in his garments, and implements too. Thyraeus was
of some watery, and earthy constitution, and likely does cantle all Exorcists
by himself. Sure I am, we find them as lively, quick, and mighty in
operation in their exterior ornaments, as in their interior complexion, and
therefore we must not do them that wrong, to bury them in oblivion.

Maho, Saras chief devil, with much ado was compelled to tell his name: and
the first word he spoke, was out of Saras hand; then was one of the priests
gloves taken, and put upon her hand, Maho durst not abide it, Page, 12. of the
book of miracles.
but went his way straight: and he was so skared, as we do not find, that
ever he came there after. It seems he had stepped thither only to grace the
priests gloves: for you have observed, that her hand was none of his ordinary
haunt: or else, if he could not endure the glove by reason of some senting
quality, the priests hand had left behind him, we may imagine the priest had
been using his hand holily, and well: when it sauoured so strongly that the
devil could not abide it. And now it is not without great cause as you may see,
that our Catho: Gentlewomen here in England do hold in such dear esteem our
wandering Cath: priests, enriching them with guilt rapiers, hangings, girdles,
Ierkins, and coyfes more beseeming a noble man, then a iugling Impostor to
wear, if they receive no other possessiue kindness (whereof we all see they
be no niggards of their store) yet this recompense at their pleasure they may
entertain, to have a precious pair of priested gloves, so sprightly perfumed,
with the pure odour-spicing from the hands of a hot ghostly father, as they
may use for a sure preservative against any sparrow-blasting, or
sprite-blasting of the devil. This precious odor against a devil, that does
continually issue from their anointed complexion, does not only ascend, into
their upper, and extend it self into their utter ornaments, as into their
gloves; but it descends also, and distills into their inferior habit, and for
want of a fit receptacle, is ready many times to drop out at their heels.
Dibdale Saras ghostly Father, had of his fatherly kindness lent his ghostly
child a pair of his old stockins, that happily had seen Venice, and Rome;
Page, 5, miracle book.
she as a spiritual token of his carnal kindness, does wear them on her legs:
see this odoriferous virtue, in what exceeding measure, it had descended down,
and filled the very seames of Dibdales hose. Saras devil had been very
turbulent, and stirring in her body, and was to be delivered down to his baser
lodge, he passed quietly down til he came at her knee, and coming down hill
too fast, slipped ere he was aware into Saras leg, where finding himself
caught within the priests hose being on her leg, he plunges and tumbles like
a Salmon taken in a net, and cries barro ho, out alas, pull off, pull off; off in
all have with the priests hose, or else he must mar all, for there he could
not stay: and all have was made accordingly to ease the poor devil of his
pain, and let him lie at his repose: and was not this a goodly ginne to catch
a Woodcocke withal, and cause him to shoot out his long bil, and cry, O the
virtue of the priesthood, o the power of the Catholic Church, when they saw
with their own eyes the hose hastily snatched off, heard with their own long
cares Saras devil cry oh, beheld her leg quiet, when it was bare without the
house: and observed how reverently the priests touched, handled, and bestowed
the hose, when it was of, and with what elevation of their eyes to heaven, they
finished the wonder.

I cannot but wonder that in the heat of their zeal, love, and admiration of
the holiness of the priests, the spectators did not run upon them at once,
as the daughters of Scaeua the Jew, did upon the Exorcists; and of pure holy
zeal, rend, snatch, and tear off all their holy apparel from off their backs,
even unto their bare, and catch, and carry away some a piece of the Priests
coat, some a ragge of the amice, some a patch of his breeches, some a corner
of his shirt, and lay them up in an holy casket for relics, against a raynie
day. The priests themselves, do full devoutly casket up as homely, Page, 5,
ibidem.
and brayed wares, as these God wot. Here make you no doubt, but all more
then comely have was made, to pull off Dibdales hose, that the devil might
quickly cabin in his lodge; for there was the devils covert, where they were
said to rouse him, when they came to the next hunt, with their fiery holy
hands, which was not long intermitted (as the wenches do woefully complain)
the priests having a rank itch in their fingers, to be fidling at that sport.

You are next to be informed, that this deuil-killing virtue did not lie in the
priests head only, as the poison of an Adder does; nor yet in his tail alone,
as the light of a Glow-worme: but was universally diffused over all, and every
part of his body, and so transfused into all, and every part of the apparel,
that came near his body. See Edm: practat.
Campians girdle that he wore (as seems) at Tiburne, (and I wonder how they
missed the roape, that embraced his holy neck) being enritched with an
outlandish grace, that it came from Jerusalem, (as Fa: Edmunds tells us,) and
had there girded about the sepulcher of our Savior Christ, shall tell you
stranger news, then Dibdales stockins did.

Marwoods devil being a stiff resty spirit, of kin (as seems) to a malt-horse
of Ware, that will not out of his way: had been coniured at Hackney by Stemp,
and other priests, by the space of a month. Mengus his club, his whip, his
scare-deuil, had been many, and sundry times assayed, the invocation of the
blessed Trinity, many times used, Missa de spiritu sancto, ( Edmunds own
words) celebrata: A choice Mass of the holy Ghost had been celebrated,
dreadful infernal Exorcismes had been thundered abroad, Hic tamen nihil
quicquam sentire visus est: The sullen spirit, seemed not to care for it a
rush. But when Edmunds came in accepto bissino quodam funiculo, quem ipse
Edmundus Campianus semper secu^ gestabat, and in sacrificijs vtebatur (quem
Saluatoris sepulchrum vinxisse Hierosolymis solebat dicere,) hunc Sacerdos ad
latus applicuit: Ad cuius contactum hic statim trepidare, et conturbari coepit,
doloremque eius presentia in aliam corporis parte^ concessisse, qua ille re
perspecta energumenum esse manifesto deprehendit. Taking in his hand, a
certain silken twist, which Fa: Campion did always carry about with him, and
used it at the celebration of the Mass; and which he often said, had been at
Jerusalem, and girded our Saviors tomb: applied the same gently to Marwoods
side; at the touch whereof, he presently began to tremble, and turmoile, and
the pain of his side shifted into a new place, whereby Edmunds discerned, that
Marwood was a Daemoniack in deed.

What a wonderful Saint-maker is Tyburne by this, that in a quarter of an
hour shall miscreate a Saint, whose girdle, or twist (provided it be worn by
the old Saint at the gallows) shall put down at scaring of a devil, Mengus his
club-deuil, whip-deuil, scare-deuil, the Mass, the invocation of God our
Savior Christ, the holy Ghost, and all? I do very much marvel there were
never strange miracles performed by the wood of those trees, considering it
has been blessed by some of their sacred bodies, and bedewed with their last
spritefull breath, which have power to infuse their sovereign virtue into more
remote objects, and into things of as hard, and repugnant a consistence. It
seems they have changed courses with the transfusion of miraculous virtue,
imagined by their idle brains, to issue from our blessed Savior, at time of
his death: whose coats, that he wore at his blessed passion, thy leave as
bare, and naked, without any powerful miraculous virtue at all, and bestow all
his divine influences upon the holy Cross: Contrariwise, these communicate all
the riches of their miraculous graces upon their girdles, and cloutes: and
leave nothing for the poor gallows, to grace them withal.

But this holy potent girdle is not thus barely left: You shall hear Edmunds
gracing it in an higher strain. Patris etiam Camp: sacrum illum funiculum ad
latus, and os vnus ex circumstantibus admouit: quin ille iterum vehementer
execratur, et detestatur omnes eiusmodi res, ore discerpit, mandit dentibus,
conspuit, daemoni commendat illam rem, quae tantam ei molestiam faceret, tantum
excruciaret, corpori, and animae ad omnia extrema perpetienda causa esset. One
of the bystanders takes father Campian his sacred girdle, and with it touches
the mouth, and side of the possessed, he again curses, and detests all manner
such gear, he tears it with his mouth, bites it with his teeth, spits upon it
amain; wishes the devil take that ill-fauored thing, that troubled him so
much, vexed him so sore, and was the cause of his extreme torments, both in
body, and mind.

Now take with you, I entreat you, a short, and sweet Dialogue, between the
Jesuit, and the devil. Sed quid nam (inquit Sacerdos) pessime demon, fatere
veritate (non quod ego abs te, qui mendax ab initio fuisti, veritatem volo
discere) quid isto funiculo ita torqueris, qui vel fortissima quaeque mundi tam
facile contemnis? vnde ergo venit? Wicked fiend (says Edmunds) come on, go to
now, and tell true (not that I desire to learn truth of thee, that have been
a liar from the beginning) what is the cause thou art so cruelly tormented with
this girdle, who do not care for the potentest things that are in the
world? whence then proceeds this? Thus far Edmunds the devil senior: now
hear Edmunds devil Junior, or Marwood, Edmunds ghost? Hierosolyma (inquit)
been nouit, ad quem pertinuit; Tiburnus non ignorant (qui locus erat, vbi pater
ipse Camp: martyrio coronatus erat.) Tum Sacerdos astantes compellat: testes
inquit estote, patris Camp. clarissimi martyrij, cuius hic vel minutissimus
funiculus, quem ipsi prius in vita nunquam viderant, tantas illi faces miserat.
Jerusalem (quoth the devil) knows whose girdle it is. Tiburne (the place where
Fa: Camp: received his crown of martyrdom) is well acquainted with it. H^^re
Edmunds calls aloude to all the standers by; bear witness my masters of Fa:
Campians most glorious martyrdom, whose smallest cord, which before that time,
they had never seen with their eyes, has cast the devil into such an heat.

See here three most grave, and authentike witnesses of a Romish Saint:
Jerusalem, Tyburne, and the devil. And the poor gulls, that held the candell
to the devil, called in for the fourth, to make up a mess. Campians Saintship
had been in a fair taking, but for the gallows, and the devil; and would it
not do any man good, to be thus Sainted from hell?

And now the devil was a Sainting, and that his hand was in, it was much
ouer-seene of Edmunds the Presenter, that he did not name him, Story, Felton,
Sommeruile, Arden, Parrie, and Lopez, and the rest of that Saint-Traytorly
crew, whom Tiburne, and the devil were as familiar with-all, as with S. Campian
I wis; and knew as well the causes, motives, and end of their Saint-ships alike:
the devil himself having been the Author, and inspirer to them all, and
therefore no doubt but he would have been as kind to them, as to S. Campian;
and the more the merier, and the greater shout, and applause would have been
of the holy Traytorly rout, that were lookers on, and the Echo the shriller
when they cried: O Catholicam fidem! O fidem Catholicam! and if they be not
already sainted with the devil, (as I trust if they be dead, God gave them
better grace,) but if they be living, and stand as lewdly affected to these
diabolical cosenages, as here they did, when they held the devil, alias
Edmunds the candel: it is to be heartily wished, they were sent to the Creator
of the Romish Saints, Tiburne their Coronator, by him to be conuayed, where
Gods mercy shall design.

But the close of this Dialogue between Edmunds, and the devil, or the devil
Edmunds, and Edmunds the devil, for he played both parts himself, is the
pretiest of all. Campians dreadful girdle had so heat the devil, and
intoxicated his brain, as it made the devil to cry out, as you have heard. O
me stultum et infelicem, qui ista dicerem! O fool, and wretch that I am, for
saying thus much! Here you see the devil was clean gone, and confesses
himself to be out of his wits. And this was but an admotion, or touch of the
girdle; what would this sacred twist have done, if it had girt the devil about,
as it girt our Saviors Tomb at Jerusalem: verily it cannot be imagined, what
hel-work it would have wrought: the devil had certainly become a bedlamit at the
least, and then his keeper would have had somewhat ado; the club, and the
whip, and all must have walked.

Mean while Campians Saint-ship comes of a fair house, and hangs by a goodly
threefold thread. For the devil here now when he dubbed him, and proclaimed
him a Saint, is in Edmunds censure a lier, in his own confession a fool, and
by imputation a devil: and so he was created by a devil, a fool, and a liar:
and these three in one was none, but Edmunds alone, the Author, Actor, and
penner of this play, who deserves as worthily to be crowned at Tiburne, for
this foolish, fond, impious diabolical fascination, and to be proclaimed from
hell for an infernal Saint, as ever Campian, and his accomplices did.

I have their shirt behind, as the last service to the devils nunchion. Which
because it is not so cleanly, as I could wish, Fid (the Laundresse to these
devils incarnat) shall serve in this dish. Fid was washing in mistress Peckhams
kitchen, a bucke of foul clothes: See her examine:
amongst the which, was one of the priest-Exorcists shirts: the devil comes
sneaking behind her, trips up her heels, and pitches her on her hip, and upon
that advantage, takes possession of her (as it seems by the story,) for from
that fall she grew to be possessed: And wot you why the devil played her this
unmannerly sneaking trick. The Miracle-maker tells us, it was because she was
washing out a foul shirt of one of the priests, and what further matter, their
examinations may with less offense to your modesty report, then my self. I
proceed to their priestly attire.

CHAP. 16. Of the wonderful power, in a Priests Albe, his amice, his maniple,
his stole, to whip, and plague the devil.
THe Heathen, who saw not God, and things intelligible with a clear eye, but
with the owle-light of nature, and glimse of their own discourse, did deem of
spirits, and devils, that they were aereae substantiae, of an ayrie patible
substance, or else that they were the spirits of naughty men departed this life.
According to their dim conceit they had superstitious devises, by sacrifices,
and charms, placandi manes, and imperandi both; sometime to please them,
sometime to command them, as you may see by Virgil, and other Poets, in Aeneas,
and Theseus descensions into hell. Their pleasing, and soothing their angry
daemones was by sacrifice: their controling, checking, and commanding them,
was by charms, fumigations, execrations, lights, sacred vestments, and
scepters of their consecrated priests.

Our Papisme, the corruption of the sincere worship of Christ, being naught
else but a perfect apisme, and imitation of Gentilisme, and Hethenish
superstition, does naught else but play over all the toys, tricks, and
trumperies, of Ethnic superstition again: especially in this matter of
scaring, torme^ting, and afflicting of the devil, not only with the body,
breath, smell, touch, but with the ordinary apparel, as hose, gloves, girdle,
shirt, and as you shall now hear, with the exterior ornaments of a sacred
priest, as his amice, his albe, his stole, and the like.

The difference between a Pagan, and a Popish priest, as I take it, is this,
that the one does seriously, and in good sadness persuade himself, that his
hallowed person, charms, and consecrate attire, as his scepter, his crown, and
Albe, does awe, terrify, and depel the devil indeed: the other does not in
earnest so think, or dream, but does know the clean contrary, that there is
neither virtue, ability, nor proportion in any of these gewgawes, to move or
still the devil no more, then there is in a white sheet to scare a sober man;
but does only of impious policy act, fashion, and play them, ad terrorem
incutiendum, and fucum faciendum populo, to gull, terrify, and amaze the
simple ignorant people, and by bringing them into an admiration of the power of
their priesthood, the sanctity of their attire, and the divine potencie of
their Romish Cath: church, by this means to enchaunt, and bewitch their
innocent simple souls, and so to offer the^ up for a pray to their great Idol
at Rome.

See Tirrell, Stemp, and Thomson, three Rectors of this devil tragaedie do put
off their Roman visards, See Tirrels exam: and Fids.
and tell us iumpe as much. It was their good nature, or rather Gods good grace,
they should deal so plainly with us: but we need not be beholden to them, for
this necessary kindness one jot: for by that time all the parts of this
tragaedie have been acted on the stage, you have never a child of ten years,
that is a looker on, but will see, and discern their gross packing, rude
bungling, and palpable iugling so apparantlie, as he will dare to take the
devil by the visard, and play with the fools nose, and cry: away with the
priest, and the devil, they have marred a good play.

We are now come to their hunting, and chasing the devil with their holy
attire. In a well sorted cry of hou^ds, the dogs are not all of a quality, and
sise: some be great, some of a middle, some of a low pitch: some good at a hot
chase, some at a cold sent: some swift, and shalow, some slow and sure: some
deep and hollow mouthed, some very pleasant, and merry at traile. So is it
in this consorted kennel of hell, and in these direful engines, and Machines of
the Romish Church, to rouse, chase, and torment the devil. The body, and hand
of a sacred priest, ye see are greater torments to the devil, then hell. His
girdle, gloves, and hose, they are the devils scorpions, and whyps (as nearest
unto the origin, and fountain it self) but his exterior ornaments (though
ornaments of his office, as his Amice, his Albe, his stole: yet being more
remote, and so participating the virtue of the priest, but in weak degrees) be
in this deuil-hunting sport, in stead of little beagles to fill up the cry; and
yet by your leave, sometime they give the devil a shrewd pinch, and therefore
they be worth the whistling out, and not to be left in the Popes kennel at home.

It is not a light argument of the sacred power of an Amice against a spirit,
that the reporter of the Miracles tells us; that a priest laid it upon Saras
face to prevent illusions: and that a spirit puffed at it, Page 32.
and could not endure to let it alone. It had as seems a choking quality to
suffocat a devil: and indeed Lusty Dicke, that devil, for all his lustier
parts, had endured a shrewd chase by a long exorcisme a little before, and
showed himself a lusty stout devil of a large wind, and lasting breath, that
he sunk no sooner, and now being clean spent and lying at bay, it was but
an hard part of the priest, when he found him panting, and gasping for air,
after so hot, and sore a chase, not to breathe the devil a little, but to come
upon him with a suffocating Amice, to quel him outright.

Now Sara tells us, that it was she her self, that puffed at the holy Amice, as
being none of the sweetest. But who was likest to know best, whether she, or
the devil puffed? I hope the priest, who knew the devil as readily by his
puff, as the devil did him by his smell. The priest showed a good wit in taking
the devil so soon. This holy relic lay pent for want of a grace from the
devil, and the devil being brought so low, had nothing but a puff, or a worse
air to vent upon it.

The holy Stole was brought three or four times upon the stage, and showed it
self an Antidaemoniack of special account, manifesting it self to be a true
implement, See Edmunds tract.
and hanging of the deuil-quelling church. First it served in the nature of a
stop-deuil, in Fa: Edmunds own hand, who after he had belabored the devil with
his holy hands into Marwoods head, and finding his hands heavy with the massy
weight of virtue, that was compacted in them: he took the sacred Stole, and
wound it about Marwoods neck, and so begirt the devil in Marwoods head, where
the devil lay so pent, by the virtue issuing out of the blessed Stole, as he
stared, fumed, and fomed, as he had been stark mad, and in the end was
squeased out with pure violence, as water out of a squirt.

Page, 14.
The Miracle-master, tells us of an heroical combat performed between Maho, and
the priest, during seven hours long, when Maho the devil standihg upon his
guard, would not come in. He was summoned by the priest first with Mengus club,
then with his whip, with holy water, Salve regina, Aue maria, the great Heralds
for hell. Maho stood out, till the priest prepared him self (says the
Author) to afflict him with the Stole, and then he came in, and yielded to
parley, or dialogue with the priest, in a mild, and temperate voice. See the
power of the Catholic Romish church, whose seeliest ragge has power to
change the devils roaring note, and to cause him to speak, in a mild moderate
key.

This blessed implement has in it, as you see, a stinging cord for a devil,
more then Mengus whip: and how was the poor devil then rent, battered, and
torn, may we deem: when for not telling his name, he was enjoined untruss,
and to take quietly five lashes with the Stole, and (that which was worst of
al, and I am sure went most against his stomach, being an haughty spirit) was
commanded to kiss the rod, and to say over, with a lamentable trembling voice
15 Aue mary's, five for our Ladies five sorrows, five for her five joys, and
five for her five glories. And all this the devil most dutifully performed,
like a dutiful obedient son to his cursed holy Mother, the holy church of
Rome. But hear you fellow Comaedians: here you had like to have spoiled the
play, for you be labored your Fid, your fellow she-deuil, with your Stole so
hard, as she whined indeed, and in choler had like to have pulled off her
devils vizard, and showed her own face, and to have told the Spectators, that
she was Fid, your kind fiddler in deed, and no he-deuil, God wot, and that she
knew the time, when you would have labored her more kindly; for she felt this
stole-whipping, three or four days after: See her exam:
and had the marks of it upon her arms longer to be seen. But she remembered,
you would find time, and place, with kinder usage to make her amends,
therefore she was content for once to bear it.

Latet anguis in herba: a man would little suspect, when he meets with the
Amice, the Stole, and the Maniple, wound up in a little casket, that there were
such black hel-mettal within them, to excoriat, and lancinate a devil: and it
grieves me, I confess, when I see our little children, when they have them,
how they in a natural childish instinct, do take the^ for fit gawdes to trick
up their babies with-all: and themselves do put them for sport, some upon
their own fingers, some upon their breasts, some upon their foreheads: and a
little I muse when I see it (considering the infused divine virtue, inherent in
this sacred gear, to discover, manifest, and torment the devil) how it comes
to pass that we, and our children being in Edmunds, and the Catholics
opinions all of us possessed, that these potent Engines, do not show forth
their manifesting, tormenting virtue in none of our little children, and cause
them to tumble, foame, and speak fustian, as they do in their own.

To this may be answered, that we, and our children be out of their church,
and so out of the sphaere of the actiuitie of these holy Jewels: and then that
this is not a seated fixed virtue in these nouels, but a moving transitiue
grace, that goes out, and in, in them, like a shittle in a Weauers loome. But
Sara, and Fid do furnish us with an apter, and fuller answer, then both: that
is, that we are not idonea subiecta, not fit matter for these deuil-powers to
work upon, till we have been at their school, and have learned to spel our
horne-booke, and the Cross row with them: For they themselves at first, were
no more moved with an Amice, and a Stole, then they were with a dish-clout, and
a malkin, til they had taken out an holy lesson out of the priests play books,
and then they felt an heat, that they wist not of before.

It is a current tale of Achilles, that his mother Thetis dipped him in the
Sea, all but his heel, and so made him impenetrable against the point of any
weapon. Our holy Exorcists have surely been plunged in the River Styx, in
their holy attire: for they have neither speck of their body, nor ragge
belonging unto them, but it is hel-proofe, and deuil-proofe altogether; and
that which Achilles had not, it has besides a power destructive, and
triumphant over hell, and the devil. The Priests poor Maniple that an ignorant
Landresse would scarce have bestowed the wrincing upon, put about Trayfords
neck (says the miracle-founder) baricadoed up the devil in Trayfords head,
that he durst not stir, and there he stood so distressed for want of
prouant, that with a penny Mouse-trap you might have caught him without a bayt
at Trayfords right ear.

These priests ditements being severally so many infernal serpents and
Scorpions, to sting, and bite the devil: what would you say, if you see the
poor devil ensnared in them altogether, and entangled in this sacred gear, as
Mars was in Vulcans net? How pitifully, imagine you, would he look, to see
himself so priest-bitten, as Aesops Fox was flie-bitten: Page. 45.
and how would he winch, skip, and curuet, having so many fiery needles in his
skin at once? In this woeful plight the (wonder-writer) presents him to your
view, telling you, that for increase of his torment, they stripped Sara of her
garments, and put upon her body, all the priests implements at once; and then
how they tricked Saraes devil, being adorned with their priestly robes, let the
devil, See her exam:
or Sara tell: I have other Cod-fish in water, that must not be forgotten.

CHAP. 17. Certain questions answered, concerning the Church of Rome her
making, and accumulating yet more dreadful tools, and engines for the devil.
THere is no good natured man (as I think) that should hear of these various,
and dreadful whyps spoken of before, to be inflicted upon the devils back in
a fiery consort at once, but would have some feeling remorse of the pains of
the devil, and say with the woeful man, nunc non est nouae plagae locus: there
is no free place left upon the devils skin for any new lash. But when this
good natured man shall hear of the more various, and more direful not whips,
but scorpions, stings, and fiery serpents of the holy Church: the black
gloomie armor, embellished with the thick smoke, and vapor of hell; the
swords, darts, and spears of fire, pointed with grisly death, that the Church
does arm her infernal soldiers (the Exorcists) withal, against the
princedome and power of hell, he will cry out with Marwoods tormented devil,
terra dehisce, ne sentiam illas plagas, earth swallow me up, before I come
near the scorch of those flames.

And these are in a black row, as they stand in the black Miracle book, holy
water, holy candle, hallowed frankensence, hallowed brimstone, the potion, the
cross, the sacrament, Tiburne relics: the picture of an Ass burnt in fire,
nicknames to the devil, the picture of our Lady, Aue Mary's, salve Reginaes,
the presence of S. Barbara, and the presence of our Lady: which you must read
over very silently, least the devil hearing the names, you hear him presently
roar upon you for fear.

The Poets, to strike us with a terror of the torments of Styx, do present
before our eyes, the three Eumenides sisters, the Furies, and tormentors of
hell, with black ugly visages, grisly with smoke, with whips of blood, and
fire in their hands, their arms gored with blood: and a huge bunch of a
thousand snakes crawling down their hair. Let me present you an Exorcist,
armed by the Church at all points, to encounter hell, and the devil, you will
laugh the Eumenides from of the stage. First I must set him before your view
(as he is in show) a thumbe-annointed priest, accomplished in his holy gear,
in his albe, his amice, his maniple, and his stole: now imagine him as he is
indeed, and as you have heard of him for hell: his body a pillar of burning
brass, his hands flames of fire, his gloves, his girdle, his hose, his shirt,
lumps of sea-coales of hell: his amice, his maniple, and his stole, streamers
of scorching smoke, the sacrament of gore-blood in one hand, the cross of
tormenting coals in the other: sprouting out holy water with his mouth,
breathing out fire, and brimstone at his nostrils, euaporating frankincense at
his eyes, the picture of an ass burning brimly at his ears, his head crawling
with dead-mens bones: the picture of our Lady flashing at his breast: nicknames
of fire, and blood running upon his back, aue-maries, and salve Reginaes
sparkling down to his heels: what a little hell do you imagine walking upon
the earth? And ere you stir your imagination, do but imagine him a little
further, walking in our London streets a little before day light, what time the
Chimny-sweepers use to make their walk, and crying in his hellish hollow
voice, hay ye ere a devil to drive? hay ye ere a wench to fire? hay ye ere a
boy to dispossess? What a fear trow ye would the spirit be in to hear young
hell thus roar, and how would he labor to get out at the parties breech, a
Hiaclito did at Trayfords, before he would dare to look this hell-mouth on
the face?

Here now comes in a bundle of Quaeres, that step over our way, and will
needs have parlie with us ere we go any further: first, whence derive these
fiery weapons their vigor, and strength of goring the devil; which you call
the public arms, and ensigns of the Church? To this I answer, that these
public weapons of holy Church, that you have heard, some have their strength,
and power of themselves, as the sacrament, and the Cross: some of the
institution of holy Church, as exorcismes, aue-maries, salve Reginaes, and
caet. some from the conservation, and halowing of the Church to these potent
ends, and effects: as holy water, holy candle, holy brimstone, holy
Frankensence, and the holy potion, nicknames, and the Asses ears.

And if heereuppon a Quaerist will demand, ad quid perditio haec? what needs
the holy Church to open her Armorie for hell, and muster out her fiery weapons
in such troops, and throngs, considering, that every one of their
thumb-annointed priests (as ye have heard) does at his holy unction, receive
this heat, and fire into his hand and his body, by the oil of his thumb,
whereby he is able with all his holy implements, that hang upon his back, to
fire out the strongest devil in hell, with his own proper hands, and his hot
holy gear: as Edmunds did Marwoods devil, and Dibdale did fire Maho out of
Sara with his fiery engines: this Quaerist I see does not well observe.

I have touched before, that though every priest be indeed anointed with holy
oil on his thumb, and by that oil does receive in that deuil-burning heat,
that does dilate it self through his body, garments, and all: yet because
every priest does not bring his thumb prepared, and qualfied alike, but some
have a Millers, some a souters, some a Coliers thumb, that will not take in oil
well, and then some stand remote, and a squint, from the sun of light, and
miraculous heat of Fa: Ignatius, the Miracle-maister; it falls out, that their
burning glasses do not so readily take fire, and their deuil-worke by their
holy hands, and holy gear, does not always fortunatly succeed. Yea, it falls
out many times by your leave, that the subject where-vppon they should work
being indisposed, as not well managed, and prepared by the priest (as what fire
can burn where the matter is not combustible, and of touch) the priests fire
is stricken, and no great combustion does ensue: and this seems the cause
there was so little fire-worke between Anne Smith, and them: and sometime the
priests powder it self, for want of good looking to, is danke, and then though
the stroke be good, no great sparkles do arise.

It was therefore wisely foreseen by the providence, and deep insight of
their kind Mother their holy Church, to provide them copias succedaneas,
seconding and fresh supplies of fire-workes; that if their own fire do fail,
they may light, and fire it again at the Churches holy candle. Yea sometimes
they light upon such a laxe, watery, and reumaticke devil, that he squirts out
the priests fire, the holy brimstone, holy candle, and all: and goes laughing
away. This is when they are too busy, and imprudently apply their fire-worke
to oppositely, and directly against the devils spouting place: and then there
is no way but to wind up all their holy trinkets in a capcase, and to air
them handsomely again at the next pitch for a devil.

If the Sceptick will pry higher, and demand, whence the Pope, and his
consistory do borrow that divine power, to consecrate water, candle,
brimstone, Frankincense, potions, Exorcismes, nicknames, and asses ears, and
to sublimate their nature, and put into them such a fiery scorching flame, as
shall turn the^ into serpents, and scorpions, to bite and sting the devil, and
to fire him out of his hold, as men smoke out a Fox out of his burrow: these
being of their own nature, and in show, silly poor stuff to hold such
divine faculty in them? This is a saucie question, and deserves to be
answered with scorn. But because we will give reason of all that proceeds
from that sacred head; well may his holiness, and his Chapter, do as much as S.
Peter did: for as for our Savior, and his holy Apostles, we never read that
they hallowed candle, nor dealt with nicknames, and Asses ears, in casting out
devils, but of Peter, by your leave, there lies a tale, and that is this, as
Thyraeus does tell it out of one Martinus a Saint.

Simon Magus the Sorcerer, sent unto Peter the Apostle certain devils in the
likeness of dogs, to devour the blessed Apostle S. Peter being taken on a
sudden, not looking for such currish guests, (as being belike at dinner)
consecrates on a sudden certain morsels of bread, and throws them to the
dogge-deuils, and by the power of that bread, they were all put to flight. And
is not this a fair tale of Simon and his hel-dogges, that would have snapt up
S. Peter, but only for a soppe of bread? and is it not a fair strong thread to
hang a whole castle of fireworks upon? Martin has a black brain, conceiting
bul-beares, and black band-dogges of Saint Peter, Ergo the Pope, and his Church
have authority, and power, to consecrate and hallow water, oil, salt, wax,
brimstone, frankensence, potions, Exorcismes, nicknames, and asses ears, and
to put in them a scorching fire to sindge the devils beard. Because the
consequence is so validous, we will look a little into these holy fireworks,
but very sparingly, and cursorily, for holding you too long, in these unsavory
perfumes.

CHAP. 18. Of the dreadful power of holy water, hallowed candell, Frankincense,
Brimstone, the book of Exorcismes, and the holy potion, to scald, broyle, and
to sizle the devil.
IF you look upon the bare face of these holy Engines, you will take them for
very trifles, and toys: but I must say unto you in good sadness, as the wise
Orator of Rome said of omission of like trifles in another sense; Istis
minutijs concidit resp: Romana: the commonweal of Rome fell by omitting, and
neglecting those petty things: so istis minutijs constitit Eccles: Romana:
the Church of Rome has been founded, pillard, and propped up, only by these
gawdes, trifles, and toys: so as Anthony told Crassus, when he had carried a
cause by affecting the people with his gesture, and tears, nisi pueris, et
lachrymis vsus esset, paenas dedisset. But for little boys, and he Orators
fained tears, his Client had lost the day: we may truly, and plainly tell the
Church of Rome, nisi naenijs, tricis, and puppis vsa esset, paenas iam diu
dedisset: If it were not for puppets, apes-faces, and gaudes, with which she
allures, maskes, and disguises the poor seely people, she had long since sung
the doleful song, mentioned in holy writ: Desolatione magna desolata est, and
turpitudo eius gentibus reuelata: That is she had lien clean desolate, and her
turpitude had been opened, to the eyes of all the world.

It is a point of high sapience in the Church of Rome, to choose, and select
out these poor base, and impotent Elements, as water, oil, candel, and the
rest; for her champions, tormenters, and monster-beaters of devils. First, for
that these elements be obuious, easy, and common, so as deuil-Comaedy may be
played in a chimnies end, with an half penny worth of cost. Next, for that every
kitchin-maide, Hob, and John, does well see, and know, that a spoonful of water,
a cursie of oil, and a candels end can have of themselves no power, and
strength; to scald, broyle, or torture a devil: now when this good Hob, John,
or Sisse shall bring a spoonful of water, a cursie of oil, or a candels end to
the priest, and he shall cross, bless, and chaunt over it a few broken words:
and then presently after, Hob, John, and Sisse shall see the very same water,
and candels end applied toward the nose of a supposed Daemoniack wench, and
then shall think, they hear the devil to roar, fume, and tremble, is it any
marvel that the poor Conies do wonder, and cry out. O Catholicam fidem! O
fidem Catholicam! O the Catholic faith! O the power of the faith Catholic!
Many devises they have to grace these puppets, and toys, for the gayning, and
winning this applause, and acclamation of the people, which is one of the
chief ends, whereunto the actors, and Comaedians aim. First, it must be so
acted, and handsomely conveyed, that it may seem, and appear, that as the
devil cannot abide the name, the approach, the sight, the smell, the breath, the
touch, the apparel, or the ornament of a Catholic priest (which is one of the
demonstratiue signs of a devil in the party:) no more must the devil abide
the sprinkling of holy water, nor the approach of an hallowed candle. Book of
miracles, page. 24.
This, Saras she-deuil acted well in the beginning of her part, crying. Away
with holy water, holy candle, and the Cross, they make mine eyes sore.

The next grace we find of this holy element, is to allay, and mitigate the
force of the devil, and to bring the party out of an ecstasy to her self.
This Sara performed very laudably to, being in a very strange fit, past
hearing, seeing, smelling, and all, after three draughts of holy water, Page.
23.
she came unto her self: and therefore the Author tells us, that the ordinary
remedies to be applied in a fit, were holy water, relics, and the Cross.

And see the wondrous Antipathie between this sacred element, and the devil,
if it come near the devils nose, he finds it straight, first by the smell:
for you must remember, that all this consecrate holy gear have one, and the
self same smell; as the church, the priests body, his neather-stocks, and all:
that is, such a rank senting savor, Page. 5.
that as soon as they come near, the devil sents them straight, and cries out
oh. So says the miracle-blazer that there being so small a drop of holy water
put into Saras drink, as no mortal man could discern the taste; as soon as it
came near Sara, she writhed her face, and bad, Have it away. And two glasses
being brought her, one of consecrate, the other common water, this rank savor
was so validous, and strong, that it sented through the glass, and stroke her
on the nose, so as she pointed directly to the hallowed glass. 2, Whereas water
of it own nature is refreshing, and comfortable to the eyes: your holy water,
has a piercing pernicious quality, so as the devil complains at first sight,
as you hear, that it makes his eyes sore: and indeed you watered him so much,
that you made him stark blind, so as he could not find the way out of Sara,
but foiled himself like a beetle, where he should not have come. And the noter
of these gay miracles says, that Sara, or her devil, became a sprinkler too,
(she had been so long amongst priests, as she was entered into their holy
orders) and that she, or her devil, by the pure virtue of holy water, made a
devil let go his hold upon Trayfords lege, where he was fast seized, Page. 27.
in the likeness of a Toade and that she, or her devil likewise, with a few
sprinckles of the same, made the devil that came to Trayford into his chamber,
in the likeness of an Ehglish Minister, and was dissuading him from the
Catholic Romish church, to betake him to his heels, and for have to leap out
at the window, without taking his leave. I see your church will entertain
he-Exorcists, and she-Exorcists both, and Saras devil for a need, for an
exorcist too: and yet the poor wench, or the devil, that by the virtue of holy
water, could scare away two devils from Trayford, (one in the likeness of a
Minister, the other of a Toad:) had not the grace to besprinckle herself, but
kept her devils still. Marie this was of no ill meaning, be sure, they were
reserved for your own fingring, kind indigiting holy priests.

And is it not great pity, that all this fair water should be spoild, and
tainted, with one crap of a word, dropped out Sara since: that all this holy
water grace, was (as all the rest) bare coggery, and devised ad ornandam
scenam, to furnish out the play, and to bring into request again these old
water glasses of the church, that for want of sale, had stood so long on their
shelues, as they grew fusty, and naught.

Let not good father Edmunds be discouraged for all this, for he shall be
believed never the worse; who in his learned treatise, prefixed to this Diarie
of miracles (touching the power, and custom of the Romish Church, for
dispossesing of devils,) in enucleating the divine virtues, powers, and
dignities of things, consecrated by holy Church, for command over devils, sets
out holy water for his graund champion, to encounter all comers: telling us
that worthy memorable story of Saint Macarius, for demonstration of all: who by
the only sprinckling of holy water did remorphize an old woman, that had been
turned into a Mare. The miracle had been stronger, if she had been turned into
a horse.

And yet I trust you will not say, but that this holy water was strong enough
thus: for Circes drench could do little more, that turned Ulysses men into
Swine: and yet that was feign to be taken down, ere it could do the feate;
this only besprincked, did turn a Mare into a woman again.

Lucians ointment I confess (that he got a little of by peeping in at a
creuise, and spying the Witch annoint her body withal,) came near the force
of this forcible water of Rome. For Lucian tells us himself, that by that time
he had anointed himself all over with that enchaunted oil, he was turned
into an Ass, and that he so lived by the space of six, or seven years in
the shape of an Ass, under very cruel masters that whipped him sore, as
under a Gardener, a tyle man, a Corier, and such like: and that at last he was
metamorphosed into the shape of a man by eating of Roses. What would a little
of that Asse-making oil do, if it had the good hap to be blessed, and
super-charmed by his Blessedness at Rome?

Well, this holy water of Rome had as fair a descent, as that Lucian oil, for
that did come from a Witch of Thessalia, and this holy water does come from the
witch of Delphos, of whom the Roman Poet says thus, Spargit aqua captos
lustrali Graia sacerdos: whence Numa Pompilius the grand sorcerer, and the
Popes grand founder of holy trinckets took it: and of him the Roman Wisard
Pope Sixtus, or Pope Alexander begged it, and has left it for an holy
deuil-whippe to his dear mother Church.

And here I must needs confess a slip of my memory, (as who can bear all
this dreadful hel-geare in his head without a surcharge) that before I had
recounted you the wonderful powers of this Aqua fortis to scald out a devil,
and make a woman of a mare, I should have acquainted you how the Miracle-minter
in his miracle book does solemnly tell us, that the devil himself did
solemnly proclaim from hell, that there were four dreadful deuil-scourges in
the priests holy budget: holy water, hallowed candle, frankensence, and the
book of Exorcismes: whereby you may plainly see, that with their intoxicating
potions, they had confounded the devils wits, and made him as wise as goodman
Buttons boy of Waltham, who having been used to be beaten, sometime with
birch, sometime with apple tree twiggs, sometime with Willow, tells his Master
wisely, that of all three apple tree was the worst, whereby his Master knew
how to sting him the more soundly. And what needs now any more wier-drawing,
and profaning of holy scripture, for the founding, and crediting of your
enchaunted water? it has the same warrant of his sovereignty, as Campian had
of his martyrdom, hell, and the devil, ipse dixit, who you know does not use to
fail.

But Sara Williams tells us, that she said no such thing, and that the priests
themselves, for the better gracing of those four holy scourges, were the
devils Heralds, and did proclaim them in her name, or the name of the devil,
and so put it down in their Miracle-booke as the devils own words. As they
were feign at every turn, in her fits, pageants, and traunces, to help out the
devil in her part being often non plus, and many things falling in better
extempore, to grace the play withal, then that which was meditated and set
down in her part. And therefore they would often say, and write down, that
Saras devil said thus, and so, where none but the priest-deuil himself, who
played three parts in one, sometime the priest, sometimes the devil, sometimes
the devils prompter, or Interpeter (as the puppets have always a mimicall
prolocutor to tell what they mean) said one word.

And why might not they to keep the stage full, cog in a devil when they
listed, as gamesters cogge in a Die: when Agazarius the Jesuit tells us, that
he having brought from Rome certain hallowed, holy grains, and having given
them to his holy children for their several necessities and wants, they by
misfortune lost the said grains, and he comforts his holy shriuelings, his
ghostly good children, telling them in honest terms, that a little pretty peble
stone taken up out of a gutter, would serve the turn even as well, so it were
received and kept, with humility, and devotion. But our holy tragaedians were,
as seems, afraid, that these old brayed gear (holy water, hallowed candle, and
frankensence) would not hold out, and play their parts well, and therefore they
thought good to cry them out of hand, as they use to cry Mackerels, when they
are afraid of smelling. This fear was very needless, for as you see holy
water in this deuil-pageant has acquit it self well, especially in the miracle
of the Mare: so you shall see holy candle, frankincense, and the rest, play
their parts no worse: for they were all deuil-whippes of the maker, of a
staight stock, clean cord, and sure twist, as true and wel-knotted stuff,
as ever Wades myll did afford.

You shall have holy candle play his part, in the Author his own phrase and
penning, for his better grace. The whole house at Denham, says the
Miracle-maker, was so haunted with spirits, that a maid could not carry a
candle lighted in her hand, except it were hallowed. No marvel though the
candles went out so thick at Denham: for there the devils kept their acts in
tenebris so thick with the poor maids, as Sara confesses she durst not go
to Dibdales chamber alone, for fear of deuil-puffing, as little gessing by his
unholy handling, he had been an holy priest. Yet the baudy Poet tells them,
that sometime a little candlelight does not amiss at that deuil-worke, and
therefore not amiss inserted by the Author, that an hallowed candel should
sometime burn before the devil.

But in an other passage, the miracle-noter tells us, that the devil puffed at
the holy candel, as hard as he could, and could not get it out: this Sara
says, was puffed in by the penner, to puff up a part for the holy candel to
play: But I am verily of opinion, that the devil puffed indeed, and that the
priests had a just scantling, and size of the devils breath, to know how
strong, and deep the devil was able to puff, and when he puffed his best:
themselves having often out-breathed, and out-puffed him, as you have formerly
heard: and therefore they knew, how to hallow a candle so high, and to such a
pitch, as the devil with all the breath in his belly, should not be able to
puff it out. And why not as easily, and with as good a grace, as to hallow a
candel, to such a sublimitie, abstract, and quintessential nature, as does this
day burn before the blessed shrine of our Lady at Arras, without wasting or
diminution, without receiving any adition of matter, to feed, and preserve the
light, except nutriment only. It was no great disgrace to the devils puff,
that could not blow out the holy candel, being happily supported, by the holy
candlestick of the priest.

But you must be informed, of a far greater foil, sustained by the devil, at
the hands of a young child, by the virtue of this holy candel, holden in his
hand. Hear the Miraclist report it, in his own gracious Idiome. Sara being
set in a chair, she raged more then ere she did before, especially at the
presence of an infant, holding a holy candell, crying often with terrible voice,
and countenance, I will eat thee, but the child nothing abashed thereat, was
brought to hold the candell to her nose, and to put him to silence. O
Catholicam fidem! O fidem Cathoticam! that have such a check, and sovereignty
over all the power of hell, as that thy priests lead about devils after them,
as men lead Bears by the nose, or Jack an Apes in a string, and enduest thy
young Infants, with such heroical magnanimity, as they dare play with the
devils nose, and cry Jack devil, ho devil, blow out the candell devil: and
the poor devil stands like a mute in a black sanctus, with a bone in his
mouth, and dares not speak one word.

The two next deuil-scourges proclaimed from hell, were Frankincense, and the
book of Exorcismes: the former whereof though it pleased you not to grace with
any special miracle accomplished alone, having many new initiats to advance,
that stood you in more stead: yet to show that your dear Mother Church did not
bestow her blessing upon such a jewel for naught, you gave him his due time,
order, and place, and marshalled him very honorably according to his descent,
sometime with the powerful potion, sometime with brimstone, sometime wirh holy
water, sometime with holy candle, showing us by the worthiness of his companion,
that he was none of the rascal crew.

Indeed you needed be the less careful for this, by reason it is always of
worth very sufficient to grace, and advance it self, both in regard of the
antiquity, as also of the honorable descent thereof, as springing from no
meaner stem then the three Kings of Cullen, that brought it with gold, and
Mirrhe, for a present unto our Savior Christ. And therefore it has been
worth the keeping, and esteem in your Mother Church ever since, and has
received her dear motherly blessing, by consecration, and benediction.

And so we find that your holy Mother has laid her holy hands upon gold
likewise, and consecrated, and blessed that amiable metal to, whereby it has
had, and showed as much power, over devils haunting houses, walking in
Churchyeards, and speaking out of images, as Frankincense, holy candle, and
holy water have. But little did those three good Kings of Cullen know, what a
powerful rich present they had brought unto our Savior, when they presented
him with Frankincense, as little deeming of fuming any devil in their way, or
profugating a devil from the body of our blessed Savior. But your eyes pierced
farther the^ these 3. Kings could, (notwithstanding it is generally accounted
they had eyesight enough, as coming from the head, and fountain, of
wisdom, understanding, and wit,) and you clearly saw, that the Egyptian
priests, perfuming their two grand Idols, Isis, and Osiris, with this holy
smoke, and hearing Tully proclaim of their Images at Rome, in omnibus vicis
statuae factae, ad eas thus and cerei, that they hallowed them, and their Altars
with frankincense, and candle: you have very wisely, devoutly, and
heathenishly, smoaked your Altars, your images, your Churches, your vestments,
your relics, your beads, your books, your breeches with this perfume, for
fear of deuil-blasting; and therefore you needed not upon our devil Theater
to grace it with any new wonder.

The fourth fearful whip hallowed out of hell, was the book of Exorcismes:
which though Stemp the priest showed Sara a little corner of out of his pocket,
when he was new come from London to Denham, telling her he had brought her
Master a whip, and that Sara knew it as well by the crosses, and figures, as a
beggar knew his dish, or an old curre a kitchen whippe by a corner of the
steal, it had been so often thundered upon: yet we find in our tragaedie, that
this played not the most tragical monster-part, nor did not the greatest
wonders, and that upon very wise, and important considerations. First this
book was sicut fortis equus, spatio qui saepe supremo vecit Olympia. It had
played so many worthy parts, and carried away the garland so often, in all the
Lists, Tournaments, and Iusts, with the devil, that it needed no new Io paean,
to be honored with-all.

Secondly, it has hanging on it all the seals, and stamps of holy popes, for
many hundred years, with all their potent benedictions: and it has had the
dear, and loving mothers blessing, with privilege of birthright, and priority
of honor besides, and therefore it might well stand, and breath a while without
any new addition, or title of advancement. Thirdly, it served wondrous aptly,
ad terrorem, et stuporem incutiendum populo: in steed of thunder, and
lightning to bring Jupiter upon the stage, by these dreadful frightful
Exorcismes, thundering, clapping, and flashing out the astonishing of Gods
names, Jehovah, Tetragrammaton, Adonai, and the rest: to amaze, and terrify
the poor people, and to possess them with an expectation of some huge
monster-deuil to appear. Who standing at gaze, with trembling, and fear:
hearing the huge thunder crack of adiuration fly abroad, and no devils to
roar; and then seeing the Exorcist, in a rage to throw away his thunder book
behind him, and hunt the devil with his own holy hands, and instantly hearing
the devil rouse out of his cabin, as a Lion out of his denn; and bellow out
with his roaring voice, Oh, oh, oh, I burn, I burn, I scald, I broyle, I am
tormented: This must needs make the poor Madge Owlets cry out, in admiration
of the power of the potent priesthood. O Catholicam fidem! O fidem Catholicam.
O the Catholic faith! O the power of the faith Catholic.

Brimstone, and the holy potion, needed no Herrauld from hell, to proclaim
their potency, and might: for where so ever they went, they carried hell before
them, both for ugly blacknes, smoke, scorching, broyling, and heat: As you
may see in the poor she-deuil Sara, that bore in her face the very Idaea of
hell imprinted, and branded in her, by these dreadful fumigations. For the
force, use, and application of this Engine, I refer you to the tenth chapter:
not that you must think, that the loathsome hellish potion of Sack,
Sallet-oyle, and Rue mashed together, and by force poured down into her
stomach a full pint at a time; did of their own natural qualities, fume up,
and intoxicate her brain, as Tobacco, Giniper, and Henbane mingled together
would do: or that the own unkind fulsomnes of Sack, Oil, and Rue, did
distemper her stomach, and enforced her to strain, vomit, and cry: or the
pestilent, choking, stuffing, pernicious fume of Brimstone, filling her eyes,
mouth, nose, and scorching her with the coals, and fire, til she looked as
black as hell mouth; did of their own proper force, cause her to cry,
scritch, and howl: for what hellish Butchers would ever put a poor wench to
such pain: but you are to imagine, that these loathing, intoxicating,
piercing, broyling, choking, qualities were suspended in their proper
subjects, by the sovereign consecrating power of the kind mother church of
Rome, that these consecrate Engines made the poor devil in Sara, to tremble,
fume, vomit, strain, scritch, and roar, by the pure virtue of the kind
churches sweet benediction. And hoping you will be thus kindly affected for
their sakes, who wish you as well, as they did Sara, and would use you as
kindly, if they had you in their fingrings, as being persuaded, that you are
all, and every each one possessed with devils: I will spend no time to entreat
you, but proceed to my farther task.

CHAP. 19. Of the astonishable power of Nicknames, Relics, and Asses ears,
in afflicting, and tormenting the devil.
WHen a Lion, a Fox, and an Ass were met together in pilgrimage, it was much
wondered at by the commonwealth of beasts, what that consociation meant,
considering the dissimilitude and disparitie of the beasts. So when a man shall
meet with these three in a rank, Relics, Nicknames, and Asses ears, he
may perhaps muse at this unequal combination, but when he shall understand
quo iter vna capiunt, whether they bend their course so lovingly together, and
shall be advertised, that they march hand in hand in an aequipage to set upon a
devil, to afflict, torment, and cast him out of his hold, he will muse much
more. This gentle muser must be put out of his dumpes, by taking out his first
primer lesson, Ignorantia causarum genuit admirationem; It is nothing but
ignorance of causes, that is the mother of admiration; and therefore when we
have instructed this admirator in the secret causes, and principles of this
unseemly connection, we shall ease him of his labor, and cause his wonderment
to cease.

The maine ground pillar, and principle of all, is the bottomless deity of
the holy Church of Rome, who as she is able to make Gods of bread, Saints of
devils, and to place them in heaven, so is she as able to change flies into
Serpents, fleas into Scorpions, Nicknames into whips, Asses ears into
scourges, to chastise, and chase away all the devils in hell. So as that these
two Nicknames, and Asses ears, are indeed but two crystal looking glasses,
wherein you may behold lively represented unto you, the authority, and divine
prudence of the holy Romish Church: Authority in choosing out such shadows,
and (...)hileities, to control the principalities, and powers (...)nes;
prudence in selecting the base, and ridiculou^ (...)gs of the world, to
confound all the wisdom, and policy of the devil.

I am therefore in gentle, and kind wise, to advise, and entreat you, that you
use these looking glasses carefully, and aright, thorough-out the whole course
of this our admirable black Art, and that you measure not our proceedings
herein, by the scale of sense, understanding, or wit, judging of things
according to their own nature, qualities, and forms, for so we may be
thought to have dealt, not only childishly, and ridiculously, but many times
impiously, and blasphemously to; but to esteem of things used, and employed in
this admirable science, according as they are improued, sublimate, and
advanced by the authority of holy church of Rome, and according to the
secrets, and mysteries of the Art.

As for example, what man judging according to wit, understanding, or sense,
can imagine that a Witch can transform her self into the likeness of a Cat, a
Mouse, or an Hare: and that she being hunted with Hounds, in the form of an
Hare, and pinched by the breech, or whipped with scourges, in the similitude of
a Cat, the same pinch or mark, shall be found in the breech of the Witch, that
was before made by the Hounds in the breech of an Hare, and yet shall you see
this senseless, witless, and brainlesse conceit, verified, and made sooth in
the practice of our holy coniuring crew, the thing being really acted, and
performed indeed.

Look in Fid Williams Deposition, and there you shall find, that the whole
Quier of our twelve holy priests, had a solemn assembly at the whipping of a
Cat, and did whip the Cat so long in a Parlor at Denham, til she vanished out
of their sight; and sending next day to Bushie, to see in what case the Witch
was, whose spirit they had Cat-hunted over night, the Witch was found in
childbed, and her child newly dead. Whereby it plainly appears, that the
whipping of the Cat, so it be done by Catholic priests, is no jest, nor the
hunting of the Witch here, no fabulous apprehension; but a good Catholic
sooth, agreeable to the majesty, gravity, and wisdom of that venerable holy
Church.

And so will you judge likewise, of nicknames, and Asses ears, by that time I
have showed how gravely, and reuerendly, the holy Church has set them upon the
devils head: and how by her sovereign authority, and command, she has made
him to wear, and bear them in spite of his fuming nose. First, you shall have
the Canon, and constitution, as I find it set out in Mengus, the Licentiate,
and authorized Master for Hell; and next the practice of the Canon, by our 12.
holy legates, according to the constitution of their dear mother Church.

The Canon for nick-naming, and railing on the devil, Me^gus fust: demon:
exorcis:
runs thus in Mengus his fourth Exorcisme, of his dreadful devil club. If
after the Mass celebrated of the holy Ghost, signing the possessed with five
signs of the Cross, sprinkling him with holy water, inuocating over him the
name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, which Aue maria, and thundering out
the potent Exorcisme, armed with all the dreadful, and astonishable tytles of
God; the devil show him self refractarie, and will not depart, nor express
his name, tum sunt in eum dicenda improperia: then you must come upon him with
as many nicknames, as you can possibly devise. Now if you will learn to
nickname the devil in print, and cum priuilegio, under the signet, and seal
of the holy Church at Rome: take here a mess of nicknames, as they are
dressed, and served in from the Popes Maister-Cooke, and scalder for hell: and
let hell it self be raked, you shall never find the like: Audi igitur
insensate, false, reprobe: daemonum magister, miserrima creatura, tentator
hominum, deceptor malorum angelorum, fallax animaru^, dux haereticoru^, pater
mendacij, fatue, bestialis, insipiens, ebriose, praedo infernalis, serpens
iniquissime, lupe rapacissime, sus macra, famelica, immundissima, bestia
Scabiosa, bestia truculentissima, bestia crudelis, bestia cruenta, bestia
omniu^ bestiaru^ bestialissima, spiritus Acherontine, spiritus fuliginose,
spiritus Tartaree: That is, Hear therefore thou senseless false lewd spirit,
master of devils, miserable creature, tempter of men, deceauer of bad Angels,
defrauder of souls, Captain of Heretics, father of lies, fatuous, bestial,
Ninnie, drunkard, infernal thief, wicked serpent, ravening Wolf, lean
hunger-bitten impure Sow, seely beast, truculent beast, cruel beast, bloody
beast, beast of all beasts, the most bestiall, Acherontall spirit, smoakie
spirit, Tartareous spirit. Is not this pretily well rayled of an old Mother
Church, that has nere a tooth for age in her head; but has lived these seven
hundred years, and more, of pure milk of our Lady? Clap on here the Canon,
for the long Asses ears, and sear them to the devils head, with a little
holy fire, and brimstone, and let us see how the seely hunger-bitten
Sowe-deuill will look. Hic exorcista proijciat imaginem pictam in ignem: Here
take the picture of the devil, that you have drawn in paper, and cast it into
the fire: and what turmoyle these wrought in hell, our holy Exorcists by their
practice, are pressed to tell you.

Hear the Miraclist report it, who himself was an Actor. The Priest having
placed Sara in a chair: he commands the devil to tell his name: the devil
answered Bon-iour and began to make a show of speaking French: the Exorcist
then reuiling the devil, and calling him Ass in the French tongue, he said, I
am no Ass, I will not be mocked. This was a sober reply to the Ass, without
much ado. But when Maho trifled, and mocked the priest in Sara, and would by
no dint of adiuration, be brought to tell his name, hear the Miracle-teller
again. The Exorcist seeing the devil thus to trifle, and that he would not
tell his name, for abating his pride; caused to be drawn upon a piece of
paper, the picture of a vice in a play, and the same to be burned with hallowed
brimstone, whereat the devil cried out as being grievously tormented. No
marvel, when he had a pair of vices ears clapped red hot to his head, with
the soader of holy brimstone.

Here have you both rule and practice of this tormenting the devil with
nicknames, and glowing ears: now we must a little for our benefit, observe the
sweet documents, that do flow out of this nicknaming vain. First we see by
Mengus her proloquutor, that our holy mother church being in her last breath,
has not lost her lungs, but has both breath, and stomach at will, and dares
speak more lustily, and swaggering-like to the devil, then ever Michaell the
Archangel durst. For he having an opposition, and contention with the devil,
and the devil playing (as seems) the part of our swaggering old Mother with
railing, and reuiling terms, durst not revile again, but only prayed GOD to
rebuke the foule-mouthed fiend.

Secondly we see, that our Catholic priests devils, stood in more awe of
Nicknames, and the paper-vice then they did of the dreadful names of our
blessed Savior, or the high and astonishable titles of almighty God: whereby
it is apparent, that the old, and ancient way of calling upon the Name of
Jesus over the possessed, at whose blessed Name we read the devils in the
possessed did tremble and quake, is an obsolete, antiquated way with our holy
Mother Church, and not worth the naming: and that her devils be new vpstart
spirits, of the queynt cut, that stand upon their reputation, for fear least
their fellow devils in a quarrel should take them by their long ears in hell.

It was a pretty part in the old Church-playes, when the nimble Vice would skip
up nimbly like a Jack an Apes into the devils neck, and ride the devil a
course, and belabour him with his wooden dagger, til he made him roar, whereat
the people would laugh to see the devil so vice-haunted. This action, and
passion had some semblance, by reason the devil looked like a patible old
Coridon, with a pair of horns on his head, and a Cowes tail at his breech;
but for a devil to be so vice-haunted, as that he should roar, at the picture
of a vice burnt in a piece of paper, especially being without his horns, and
tail, is a passion exceeding al apprehensio^, but that our old dear mother
the Romish church does warrant it by Canon. Her devils be surely some of those
old vice-haunted cassiered woodden-beaten devils, that were wont to frequent
the stages, and have had their horns beaten of with Mengus his clubbe, and
their tails cut off with a smart lash of his stinging whip, who are so skared
with the Idaea of a vice, and a dagger, as they durst never since look a
paper-vice in the face.

Or if you will needs hunt us into a demonstration to let you plainly see, how
a morsel of paper burnt, with a vices long ears, should enforce a devil to
roar: remember I beseech you Aesops courageous Lion, lying in the
Hunters-nets, after his fresh wounds, how he roared at the nipping of silly
ants, biting him on the bare. Was there ever Lion in our devils case, before he
comes to be vice-bitten with a piece of burnt paper, scalded all over with holy
water, burnt with the cross, seared with Aue mary's, rent with relics, torn
with the stole, battered with the amice, stung with the maniple, whipped from
top to toe with exorcismes, and being thus excoriated, and all over raw, a
burning vice, with the least drop of brimstone falling upon his bare, would
make a stout Lionly devil, I ween, for to roar.

For his ill bearing of Nicknames, I must needs take the devils part: for
though that I could have wished, he had borne those contumelies, and
indignities with a better aequanimity and grace, for that none but children,
and fools, are distempered with nicknames, and taunts: yet considering the
devil looked into Denham house, as Prestons dog looked into his neighbors
door, of no malicious intent to eat any Christmas-pie, but to see how
Christmas went: and seeing a play toward, and that they wanted a devil, was
content to make one in the play, and to curuet, foame, and tumble with a very
good devils grace. Now when he was surbatted, or weary, and could no more woe
penny ho, to be come upon with such strange nicknames for his good-wil, as
Bedlam could never spit out worse, and be called Ninny, drunkard, scabby beast,
beast of all beasts, and hungerbitten sow, especially the Exorists being
pleased for want of better recreation, to play all Christmas games with those
sowes, as laugh, and lie down, and my sow has pigd, and the devil being but
a prompter, and candle-holder to that sport; would have moved impatience in a
right vvell-stayed devil.

And withal to deal plainly with the devils to, and to tell them of their
ouer-sight with their deuilships good leave: it is a folly to be laughed at by
some, and to be wondered at by many, that any devils in hell should be so stark
mad, as to come in the Exorcists way, to appear within his circuit, or to
cross his walk; considering that Aeacus, Minos, and Radamanthus, the three
Judges of hell, be nothing so inexorable, nor in any part so cruel,
tyrannical, and tormenting over the devils, as our Exorcists are, who carry
about upon their backs the whole Panoplie of hell, Styx, Phlegeton, Cocytus;
clubs, bats, whips, scourges, serpents, scorpions, brimstone, coals, flames,
besides the bottomless power, that every Exorcist has, (every one having (as
seems) a privy key to the bottomless burning pit, to let out, and in,
according to their liking) to multiply the torments of helfire upon any devil,
unto immensity of weight, and infinity in perduration: take but a little say of
this from the parlie between Dibdale and the devil.

The devil was a little Colli-mollie, and would not come off. Dibdale lays
upon him by his sovereign command, and his privy key to hell, 20000. years
torment in the deepest pit of hell, with fire, and brimstone on his back, and
for the multiplication of his pain, and torment which he had in hell before,
he tells the devil it shall be fifteen hundred times as much. Now then let us
make up our audite but at guess, and cast in a gross sum, how many legions of
devils have been thus served by all the Exorcists in the Roman Church, since
their first creation, and commission for hell, and what an huge heap of
millions will this make, of poor tormented devils, stacked up top-ful in hell,
with twenty thousand years torment, and that fifteen hundred times doubled
upon them, and all these lie yelling, and grinding their teeth in hell, under
this immensity of weight of torments, and these innumerable chains of darkness,
that the Exorcists have laid upon them.

And these their fellow devils, friends, and companions, our Christmas devils
here in Sara, Fid, and Anne Smith, must needs know, and daily see, and behold
with their eyes, and hear with their ears, their most lamentable estate: and
for them for all this, to come out of hell, where they were fifteen hundred,
and twenty thousand times in better case, and to stand in our Exorcists walk,
and meet them at Fulmer, Hackney, or Denham, are they not justly served, to
have a volley of nicknames discharged upon them, and to be tricked up in the
vices coat with long ears, and so to be sent back into hell to their
fellows, to be tormented equally with the^, and this torment of advantage
above all the rest, to be mocked, flouted, and ieared at by their fellows, and
to be taken by the coat, and ears, for not having thus much wit, as by other
devils harms, to learn to beware?

I come now to the third champion mustered in this worthy rank, with
nicknames, and Asses ears, and that is holy relics, which march last of the
three, not in regard of their unworthiness, but in respect of their worth. For
these three woorthies in this black field against hell, nicknames, etc. are the
last, and final rank, of our infernal camp, excepting the two maine Standards
for all, the holy Cross, and the blessed sacrament, which are yet to display,
and then you have your Army royal for hell. And the order of our infernal
battle, is the old ancient order, observed by the Romans, who placed their
Triarios last, unto whose lot it never came to fight, till the day grew
dangerous, and the victory very doubtful. Semblably the worthiest, and most
approved rank of our Triarij against hell, are nicknames, asses ears, and holy
relics, which are drawn up into the vant-gard, and front of the battle, at
a dreadful pinch, when holy water, holy candle, the amice, the maniple, the
stole, exorcismes, Auemaries, and all have retired, and in some sort have
abandoned the field: and the devil stands strong at shock, and gives not an
inch of ground.

These dreadful tormenters for hell, we have here in hand, are not the
ancient, famous, renowned, glorious relics, iewelled up in the Popes
Propitiatory at Rome (as the sacred violl of our Ladies milk, a piece of S.
Paul's breeches, and chair, the tail of the Ass, whereon our Savior rode to
Jerusalem, and the rest) but our relics here used for the most dreadful, and
tyrannical tormenters of the devil, were native homebred relics, sprung out
of our soil, and so most likely to be of greatest force, and command,
against the devils of our own Horizon. Which (as we find them recorded, and
advanced, in the golden legend book) are the thumbs, bones, and joints, of
the three worthy Champions sent from his Hol: and from Hell, for fireworke here
in England, about anno 82, Cottam, Brian, and Campian: who for heinous, and
unnatural treasons against our Sovereign, and the state, were executed at
Tiburne, canonized at Rome, and Sainted by the devils own mouth from Hell: as
you have formerly heard of Campian, and now shall hear of Brian in the devils
own voice: as the Miracle-father has recorded it.

Exor: I charge thee to tell me whose bone this is. Devil. It is Brians bone:
he is a Saint indeed, he never came in Purgatory. Lo here Brian as fully
sainted from hell by the devil, as S. Campian was: and what timorous, scrupulous
Catholic can now make any doubt, but these be infernal Saints, considering
Maho, the Prince of hell, has here dubbed them with his own mouth? Now for
the grace that the devil showed unto these new Hel-created Saints, of the
devils own making, and to their hellish relics, you may be sure it was not
mean. Let the Recorder of hell report you, who was both mouth, and Notarie, for
the priests, and the devils.

By often invocation of the blessed Trinity, of our Savior there present in
the blessed Sacrament: by often calling upon the blessed virgin, with salve
Regina: and by calling on all holy Martyrs, especially blessed Fa: Campian,
with the rest of the Martyrs, that had suffered at Tiburne, and by applying of
their holy relics, unto the afflicted body: Frateretto, Fliberdigibet,
Hoberdicut, Cocabatto, with forty assistants, were expelled. Here you see
our blessed Savior, and the Trinity, are winged out before, in the forelorne
Hope, as of little value, and account. And the dreadful kilcowes come behind,
with especially Tiburne, and relics blased in their banner, and these do the
dreadful feate upon the devils of the round. We never read in all the
Miracle-booke, that the devil trembled at the name of our blessed Savior: but
Brians bone being applied (says the Author) and S. Cottam being called upon:
the devil answered in a trembling quiuering voice; thou shall not have thy
prayer. And he was scarcely to be understood, the poor devil chattered his
teeth so sore. What then should I tell you of Campians thumble, put into Fids
mouth; Brians bone pinched hard to Saras bare leg, as hard as a priest could
hold it, the great old rusty nail crammed into Fids mouth, amongst an handful
of other choking relics, what wonders they wrought with these poor
she-deuils: how these made them to vomit, scritch, and quackle, like Geese
that had swalowed down a gagge?

Hear Fa: Edmunds for all: like Julius Caesar, the commenter of his own
worthy exploites, in his monster-miracle, acted upon Marwood.

Hic patris etiam Camp: corporis quaedam reliquiae mirifice vsserunt: vt omnia
omnium sensuum organa dissolui sibi, et dissipari viderentur: modo enim oculos,
modo aures, tum linguam sibi diuelli, and abripi exclamat, inter quos etiam
cruciatus insolito vomitu, ita vt etiam viscera de ore eijcere putaretur,
vexatus est. That is: Here certain pieces of father Camp: body, did
wonderfully burn the devil. All the organs of all his senses, seeming to be
broken, and rent asunder, crying out one while his eyes, one while his ears,
one while his tongue was rent out, and rent into pieces, and besides other
excruciations, he was tormented with such a strange vomit, as though he would
have spued out his very entralls, and guts.

Here the devil was on the rack, by the virtue of Camp: relic: now hear
his coming down. Extrema tamen omnium (quae laus deo sit) omnibus
miserantibus and prae mi sericordia lachrymatibus, ipso etiam, Edmunde,
Edmunde, clamante, liberatus est. That is: Last of all, (thanks be to God) all
of us pitying, and weeping for remorse, Marwood crying out, Edmunds, Edmunds,
he was quit of the devil.

The sound had been harsh, and the period not worth a point; if it had run
thus: O Christ, Christ, O Saluator, Saluator. O Christ, o Savior, but o
Edmund, o Edmund falls with a goodlyer grace. Very wisely sure: As who would
say, that our Exorcists ever meant to do God, our Savior Christ, or the holy
Ghost so much honor, as to cause any one devil, amongst all the devils in hell,
that they had in hammering, once to name either God, the Father, the Son, or
the holy Ghost. These (I trust) need no grace, nor honor from the devil: but
these Tiburne semideuils, sainted from hell (Brian, Cottam, and Campian) were
the Gods, that stood in need of their holy helping hand.

And herein I commend their wisdom, in choice of their relics very much.
First, in that they took fresh green new relics, that were not antiquated,
and out of date. For relics (for often we see) work like an Apothecaries
potion, or new Ale: they have best strength, and verd at the first; and
therefore Campians girdle, now like old Rubarb, begins to allay. Secondly, for
that if they had brought of the old renowned relics from Rome, some unstayed
body would have made question, whether they had been Saints bones indeed, or
rather the bones of dogs, Cats, or Rats, or else of an old Sow: especially
now we have learned Agazarius wholesome rule. Thirdly, our devils being
home-deuils, and our Saints, sainted here from hell: it was no reason that
foreign relics, should obtrude themselves into others possessions, and rob
them of the honor, that they worthily deserved. But the last, and best point
of their wisdom, is this: that we should have had some scruple of the
Saintship of Brian, Cottam, and Campian, if we had not heard them thus
solemnly, lowdly, and ceremoniously sainted from Tiburne, hell, and the devil.

Here I had concluded this part of the Pageant, but that Sara nips me by the
ear, and tells me, that I have forgotten a special point of relique-seruice,
and points me to her deposition, which when I had turned my book, and read
over, I pointed at her again, and willed her to pen that point her self; and
therefore thus she tells her own tale.

See her exam:
At one time (says she) when it began to be with me, after the manner of
women, the Priests did pretend, that the devil did rest in the most secret
part of my body: whereupon they devised to apply the relics unto that place?
Good God, what do we hear? or is it but a dream? or have we ears to hear
such impious unnatural villainy?

S. Campian, S. Brian, S. devil, or sainting devil help out with this, for I
am at a stand. Relics to that place? It is able to possess a man, with
Marwoods fury, to cry out, terra dehisce, infernum absorbe. Earth gape, and
hell swallow such deuil-saints, such deuil-reliques, such deuil-priests and
all. Was it ever heard, that any heathen durst ever abuse, the vilest thing
consecrated to their Idol devils, in such execrable manner? Holy Saints, holy
relics, holy priests, holy devil that made them, and moved them to this. It
was no marvel they made so much have with the devil, to Saint their
Champions, Campian, and his crew from hell, and to deifie, or hellifie their
relics; since they were to be applied to such a diabolical service, as the
devil himself without such a relic, could never have accomplished: nay, we
never read, that the devil durst abuse any thing consecrated but in show, to
any so despicable employment. Tiburne does blush, that bare the^, the devil
does shame, that made such deuil-saints, and hellish relics; and yet the
priests, the consecrators, deuisers, and appliers, do show their bare
hel-burnt faces, without blushing at all. Diris deuoueo, and actores, and
spectatores. So I proceed.

CHAP. 20. Of the dreadful power of the Cross, and Sacrament of the Altar, to
torment the devil, and to make him roar.
AS far as the holy Fathers do deem of the Cross, so far do we
affectionatly embrace, and esteem of the same, as an honorable, and reverend
monument in our Christian profession. But the common enemy of mankind, not
brooking any moderation, taking advantage, of the procliuity of our nature unto
superstition, has so far bewitched the minds of some, as they have brought
into the Christian Church, that which Tertullian does so much protest against,
in the name of all Christians staurolatrian, a performing of divine honor
before a piece of wood: then which the Heathen never did perform more before
the statue of Jupiter: and another branch likewise springing from the same
root, that is, stauropoisan, a feigning, counterfeiting, and stamping of
signs, miracles, and wonders to be done, not only by the Cross, but by the
expression, and signification of the same: after the very same fashion, that
the Heathen did fabulously imagine, and devise, strange fountains of
delicacies to flow from the horn of Jupiters Goat.

These two superstitious delirations have made us partly odious, partly
ridiculous to the profane Heathen people. Lucian found this doting humor
betimes, in some Christians of his time, and makes himself, and the world
sport with it, as he did at the fancies, and exorbitancies of all other
religions: telling us a tale of one Eucrates, who had a ring, made of a piece
of old Iron, which had sometime been a piece of an Iron cross, and that ring
was an amulet against all malignant spirits. And blind Thyraeus the Jesuit,
repeats the same rustie tale of the ring, as if scoffing Lucian had meant
nothing but sooth. But he may as good cheap afford us the tale of Eucrates,
as he does the story of S. Margaret: who with the bare sign of the Cross
afrighted a devil, that was coming unto her in the form of a great Dragon. Or
that of Martian, and Julian, who with the sign of the Cross, went up and
down killing of serpents, as Hercules did Monsters: or that of the old man,
who spying an Aspe in the bottom of a fountain, did front the entrance to the
fountain with so many signs of the Cross, as he went down to the bottom,
filled his pot with water, and returned from the Aspe without any harm: or
that of Bishop Sabin, who having poison mingled in his cup by an Archdeacon,
who meant to make him away, signed himself with the Cross, drunk off the
poysond cup, and felt not the least grudging or distemper after the same. I
doubt the Pope his Master would hardly believe him in this, who would give
some good store of crowns, to be secured by crosses from the danger of poison.
I do not see poisoning any where so rife as in Italy, and especially at Rome,
where Crosses are not dainty.

And what becomes of that goodly ancient Poem made, and sung in honor of the
Cross?

Ista suos fortiores
Semper facit, et victores:
Morbos sanat, et languores:
Reprimit daemonia.
That is, The Cross, in battle is a shield,
Which who so bears, still winnes the field:
Against diseases it is a spell:
A charm against the power of hell.


It is very great reason they should do it divine honor, called Latria, and
sweat, and spit, and clamor in their Sorbone for the same, since they give it
the divine supreme power of our blessed Savior. For what did our Savior
here on earth, or what could he do more, or what did he adorn his own style
withal to S. John, sending his disciples unto him, to know whether he were
Christ: he said no more then this: Go back unto John, and tell him what you
have seen, and heard: how that the blind see, the lame go, the deaf hear,
and unto the simple is the gospel preached. And does not this bring us
plainly within compass of the heathen challenge, that we be lignei dei
cultores, worshippers, and servant to a wooden god?

Our deuill-comaedians, whose aim was (as you see) by playing over all the
trinkets, toys, and pedlars ware of the Popes holy budget, and by gracing them
with some seeming quality against the devil, to advance the credit, of the
Catholic church, and to bring into admiration their own persons, and
priestly power, that so they might catch the poor Gudgins, they fished so
industriously for; left out no old ceremony, nor Engine of the Roman Church,
that had any name, or reputed faculty that way: and therefore they mustered the
Church standard amongst their fiery troops, but they did advance, and adorn
with more miracles, their new relics, and their own proper persons, their
hands their gloves, their stockings, their priestly ornaments, as their amice,
stole, maniple, and albe, then they did the old approved coate-armour of the
Church: and that upon a right wise ground; in regard, that these did more
properly, nearly, and effectually work for the magnifying of themselves, and
their priestly authority.

Therefore the holy Cross was often presented on the stage, but never with
that acclamation, and plaudite, that their other forenamed holy implements
were. The first honor the Miraclist does bestow upon it, is this: that it
served to discover Sara to have a devil, in that she could hardly be brought
to sign herself with the sign of the Cross. Next it, holy water at a pinch,
when it would not go down, past Saras mouth into her throat, but stuck in
the way, her throat was signed with the cross, and then it slipped down, as
easily as a draught of Ale. It seems that holy water was old; for you see when
it was fresh, the devil himself was not able to come within the smell, but
leapt out at a window for have to be gone. Thirdly, it restored speech to
Sarah, when it was lost. Sara could not speak (says the Recorder) till the
priest had signed her throat with the cross. Sara was now a scholar of some
standing (as she says) and knew, when her cue came to say over her gear.

Fourthly, Sara knew a piece of the cross by the smell, and that might she do
right well, for they kept it so sweet in a box, See her examina.
(says Sara) that she must have had a shrewd pose, that should not have found
it. Fifthly, it brought Sara to her self when she was in a trance, or opened
her eyes when she was broad awake. Yet old Edmunds bestows more grace upon
it alone then all these: for when he had hunted up the devil into Marwoods head
with his holy hands, meaning to barricado him there, that the people might see
him look out at Marwoods eyes, ears, and nose, as a prisoner does use to
look out at an iron grate: he signs Marwoods throat with the sign of the
Cross, with this holy adiuration, hic Christi limen est, hos limits ne
transcende: this is Christ's own limit, see that ye step not over this line:
and yet as seems, for fear the devil should have adventured, to put his foot
over the line, he claps on the sacred maniple to, and winds it about his neck,
that if there were need, the Cross might call to his good neighbor, to help
stop the thief. For these holy hunting Engines were better managed, then our
ordinary cry of hounds, that will fly out, every one striving to lead away the
chase, and leave his fellows behind: our hunting dogs had been managed to
stay for each other, that the cry might be full, and that one might help out
another at a dead fault. And thus they dismissed the holy cross the stage,
without any great alarm, or sound of the common drum: Enters the holy
Sacrament upon their stage, deformed by these hell-monsters into a most
detestable Idol of the mass, with a far more solemn grace, (worthy of a
far better place, if these miscreants had not played so long with hel-smoake,
that it had put out their eyes clean) but they that have played with God,
Christ, and the holy Ghost, the devil must give them leave to play with
Christ's blessed institution to. I say they present it with great pomp, in
regard of the thrice glorious state, impiously, blasphemously, and chimerically
conceited by them to be in royal person within. Such a monstrous
metamorphosis, as Homer, Pindarus, Hesiode, nor all the fabulous Grecian wits
put in a mash durst never feign, forge, or dream of any their despicable gods,
that any God should be made of a morsel of bread.

This new molded masse-Idoll, laughed at by some, loathed by many, detested of
all pious, and ingenious spirits, that have not intoxicated their wits with
that enchaunted Babylonian chalice; wanting witness in heaven, and being
hissed at on earth, must be brought upon our deuil-stage, to be graced,
honored, and confirmed from hell. And the same devil, that sainted Campian,
and Brian, must with the same black breath, and foul mouth, deifie this
bread-Idoll, and make it a God. And that it may be a perfect Chimaera,
compounded all of fiction, and fantastical imagination; the smoke, the fire,
the stench, the roar, hell, and the devil must be cogged, feigned, and played,
to help out with this infernal, and diabolical fascination.

Would it not cause men, and Angels to wonder, at the desperate boldness of the
Ethnic Romish Church, that should dare so impiously, and blasphemously to
profane the most sacred reverend Supper of our blessed Savior, whose end, and
Essence is, to be taken, received, and eaten, as the bread of life, the
strength, health, and sweet comfort of our soul: all whose divine energie,
power, and virtue, is to the receauer only; the promise of life to the worthy
receauer, the menace of death to the unworthy receauer; all matter, form,
effect, and end, directed to the receauer. To disguise, difforme, and
monster-like to mishape the nature of this thrice blessed communion, as to make
it a Monster-Engine of all prodigious signs, cogged miracles, and gross
Heathenish conceited wonders, and to blaze this their hellish impiety, before
the eyes of all the world: they have compiled a book, containing no less then
four and forty several chapters, Tilman: De mirac: Eucharist:
treating only De miraculis very Sacramenti. Sci. Eucharistiae. That is: Of
the Miracles, that the venerable Sacrament of the sacred Eucharist has
performed: transforming the nature of the blessed supper, into a prodigious
monster of wonders. Some of the heads of which Chimaera, for a sample of the
rest, I will point out unto you, Cap. 1. De praedio ab infestatione malignorum
spirituum liberato, per oblationem sacrificij corporis Christi. Of a Farm
house freed from the haunting of bad spirits, by celebrating the Mass. Cap. 2.
De Saxoniae Duce, qui sub sacrificio Missae vidit speciem elegantis pueruli in
Eucharistia. Of a Duke of Saxony, who at the time of the celebration of the
Mass, saw the form of an elegant young child, in the Eucharist. Cap. 5. De
quodam cuius vincula soluebantur tempore, quo pro illo offerebatur sacrificium
missae. Of one whose shackles fell off, at the time when a mass was said for
him. Cap. 6. De Baraca Nauta per salutarem hostiam Eucharistiae a naufragio
liberato. Of one Baraca a Mariner, that by the Eucharist escaped a tempest.
Cap. 20. Quomodo Satyrus diui Ambrosij frater, Eucharistiam collo appensam
habens, in naufragio incolumis seruatur. How one Satyrus, S. Ambrose his
brother was saved in a shipwreck, by having the Eucharist hanging about his
neck. Cap. 29. De Eucharistia, quae a terra suapte virtute sublimata per era
ferebatur ad altar, ibidemque in specie venustissimi pueri apparuit. Of the
Eucharist flying in the air unto the Altar, and there appearing in the form
of a most beautiful child. Cap. 36. De hostia tertio ab altari diuinitus
proiecta, eo quod cimice esset contaminata. Of an Oast thrice skipping from off
the Altar, by reason it was defiled by a little fly. Enough for a taste, the
whole tun is of the same liquor, color, and tang. And who would after this
deem Mahomet an Impostor, for carrying the Moon in his pocket, and mounting
up, when he was dead, thorough the air, unto the roof of a Chapel?

Hear our own Miracle-monger, and his crew, how handsomely they act the
masse-monster from hell. First, Saras devil finds the Communicants that had
been at mass, by the smell. The Roman Church, and her implements are of one,
and the same perfume, that do out-smel the fuming lake, spoken of in the
Apocalips, nay hell, the devil, and all. Next the blessed Sacrament, was
presented in a Pix: here Saras devil roared like a Bull: It should have
been: bellowed like a Cow, for hers was a she devil. Here the real presence
is roared out by Saras devil. Then Saras devil was brought unto the Altar, at
the time of elevation, and could not behold the Sacrament, for the brightness,
that shined about it. Here the glorious presence of our Savior in the
Sacrament is spied out by the devil. At an other elevation Saras devil could
not abide to look upon the Sacrament, and when she looked up, she could see
nothing, but the priests fingers. Here is an evident daemonstration, that our
Savior was there present, in that he made the host to vanish out of Saras
devils sight.

When nothing would do, the presence of the Sacrament made Maho tell his name,
controlled him, calmed him, couched him, as quiet, and gentle, as a dog under
a bench, Maho Saras devil, being commanded to kiss the blessed Sacrament,
durst not disobey, but kissed it very reverently, as children kiss the rod.
The devil being commanded to take his oath, upon the blessed Sacrament, he
durst not refuse, but swore very devoutly, that he would tell his name, and be
gone: and yet like a false rake-hel, perjured himself, and stayed still: and
when he should be brought to his book again, he swore he would break his
own neck, ere he would swear the second time, and for fear (as seems) that
the devil should make away himself, and so the play be mard before the
plaudite, they let him alone.

These are demonstrations, by deduction from the devil, of our Savior his real
presence: but will you hear the devil put you out of doubt, by his own
authentical asseueration, Dibdale the priest, put his finger into Saras mouth,
and bid the devil bite it, if he durst: the devil answered, says the
Miraclist, that it had touched the Lord. See her exam:
But Sara tells us, now she has put off her devils vizard, that had she not
stood more in fear of a box on the ear, then of any Lord there, she would
have made so bold, as to have had a snap at the priest finger. Saras devil was
brought by a new command, to kiss the Sacrament more sure: And being asked,
what he had kissed, he answered, The body Christ, and that it had eyes in it.
Here you have the devils own testimony, what needs any more witness, and yet
if you will have it fuller: hear Saras devil again, when the priest holding
him the blessed Sacrament, and bidding him to adore his Lord, and God: the
devil answered male partly, He is thy God indeed: and if thou do not
believe, cut it with a knife, and thou shall see it bleed. Was not this part
well played, to prove the eyes, the body, the blood of our Savior in the
Sacrament, from out of hell. Were it not great pity, this devil, hell, and
oath, should be cogged, and not a true devil indeed? For what a great deal of
labor, expense of candel, beating of brains, forging of fathers, counsels,
and authorities, wresting of Scripture, falsifying of Authors, coining of
wonders, would this one Comaedy spare? If you will not believe, that our Savior
is in the Sacrament, go to Sir George Peckhams house at Denham, or my L. Vaux
his house at Hackney, and ask the devil, who saw our Saviors eyes (as he
says) with his own eyes, touched him with his finger, kissed him with his
mouth, and to make it past doubt, took his oath upon the Sacrament, that it
was true. Or else try if the argument will not run in better mood, and figure
thus. The very same devil, that Sainted Brian, and Campian at Tiburne: that
proclaimed himself a Dotrel, a Ninnie, and a mad fool at Hackney: that had
the Asses ears clapped close to his head at Denham: has said, roared, and
sworn so, therefore it is true. Or else thus. The same Edmunds, and his twelve
holy disciples, that have feigned a devil Tragaedies, sorted it into acts, and
scenes, furnished it with hangings, set up a stage of forgerie, replenished it
with personated actors, adorned it with fictious devises, dreams,
imaginations, and ridiculous wonders, have cogged a new hell, new devils, new
roarings, new oaths, new kisses to cogge our Savior into the Sacrament:
therefore you may be cock-sure to find him there.

CHAP. 21. Of the strange forms, shapes, and apparitions of of the devils.
IT is a question moved by Scaliger: Why men of a melancholic constitution be
more subject to fears, fancies, and imagination of devils, and witches, then
other tempers be? His answer is, quia ab atra bile, atri and fuliginosi
generantur spiritus, qui cerebrum pingunt turbulentis phantasmatibus, because
from their black and sooty blood, gloomie fuliginous spirits do fume into
their brain, which bring black, gloomy, and frightful images,
representations, and similitudes in them, wherewith the understanding is
troubled, and oppressed. Men of this duskie, turbulent, and fantastical
disposition, as they are very stiff in their conceit, absolute in their own
apprehension, extreme violent, and peremptory in their resolution, (which al
grow from the earthy dry stiffenesse of the discursiue melancholicke spirits,
that do possess their brain) so are they so full of speculations, fancies,
and imaginations of spirits, and devils, and those so Chimaericall and strange,
as the Philosophers old aphorism is, cerebrum Melancholicum est seeds
daemonum, a melancholicke brain is the chair of estate for the devil. And an
other aphorism they have founded on experience, nullum magnum ingenium sine
dementia, there is no great wit, without some mixture of madness. John Bodin
the Frenchman, is a perfect Idaea of both these, who being in his younger
years of a most piercing, quick, speculatiue wit, which grew of a light,
stirring, and discursiue melancholy in him, fell (as Hermogenes the mirror of
wit did) in the middle of his age to be a pure sot. The cause whereof is the
cooling, and thickning of his melancholicke blood, and the spending, or going
out of that lightsome, active, and stirring spirit, which the heat of blood in
his youth did better maintain.

This man, though during the prime of his wit he was of a most, pregnant, ripe,
and subtle discourse, yet his wit being deep woaded with that melancholic
black dye, had his brain veram sedem daemonum, the theater, and sporting
house for devils to dance in: for he has in his brain, such strange
speculations, fantasmes, and theoremes for devils, as a man may see a great
deal of madness mixed with his great wit. For he holds that devils may
transform themselves into any shape of beasts, or similitude of men, and may
eat, drink, and converse familiarly with them, and may have the act of
generation with women, as they please. And not that only, but that a Witch by
ointments, and charms, may transform herself into the shape of any beast,
bird, or fish: that she may fly in the air, that she may deprive men of their
generatiue power, that she may transfer corn out of one field into another,
and may cause hail, thunder, and wind at her pleasure. And he defends
lycanthropia, and the change of Ulysses men into swine by the Witch Circe, to
be real, and true: and above all tells that unsavory, melancholicke, ridiculous
tale of an Egg, which a Witch fold to an Englishman, and by the same
transformed him into an Ass, and made him her Market-mule three years, to
ride on to buy butter: and how that at last, she remorphized him into the
native shape of a man again.

This man's cerebrum melancholicum, is a notable forge for our popish Ethnicks,
to hammer a motly devil out of. But they have more ancient, and authenticke
records for their Night-owles, then this: as namely, that canonical story in
Virgill, of Creusa, Aeneas his wife: how Aeneas, flying with Anchises his
father, and Creusa his wife, thorough the streets on Troy, being all on a light
flame, lost his wife Creusa in a crowde, as he posted thorough the City, and
how that Creusa appeared to him in her ghost, as Aeneas went out at the gate,
and told him that she was dead, and was become one of the walking night-ghosts,
bidding him to take his father Anchises, and shift for himself. This is a most
redoubted record of the walking of women's ghosts. And for the appearing of bad,
and hurtful spirits in ugly, and monstrous forms, they have their president,
and original in the history of Mar: Brutus, who having put all his Army in a
readiness, for the last fatal field to be fought betwixt him and Augustus, and
being alone at his book in the deep, and silent night, suddenly he hears a
great rushing in the room, where he sat, and casting up his head, sees a
foul, ougly, monstrous shaped ghost standing before him: and asking it angerly,
Quis tu? Deus aut demon? what art thou? a God or a devil? The ghost answers,
sum malus tuus genius, I am thine evil angel: the Capt: asks fiercely again,
and quid me vis? and what do thou here? the ghost says, cras Philippis me
videbis, to morrow I will meet thee at the fields of Philippi: the captain
answers resolutely, videbo, I Will meet thee: and so falls constantly to his book
again, not bidding it God night. Brutus recounts this spectrum to Cassius, his
fellow in Arms, and Cassius persuades him, that it was but a dream. But out
of this, and such like Heathenish dreams, what a world of hel-worke,
deuil-worke, and Elue-worke, had we walking amongst us here in England, what
time that popish mist had befogged the eyes of our poor people? How were our
children, old women, and maids afraid to cross a Churchyeard, or a three-way
leet, or to go for spoones into the Kitchen without a candle? and no marvel.
First, because the devil comes from a smoakie black house, he, or a lewd friar
was still at hand, with ougly horns on his head, fire in his mouth, a cowes
tail in his breech, eyes like a basin, fangs like a dog, claws like a
Bear, a skin like a Neger, and a voice roaring like a Lion; then boh, or oh,
in the dark was enough to make their hair stand upright. And if that the bowl
of curds, and cream were not duly set out for Robin good fellow the Friar, and
Sisse the dairy-maide, to meet at hinch pinch, and laugh not, when the good
wife was a bed, why then, either the pottage was burnt to next day in the pot,
or the cheese would not curdle, or the butter would not come, or the ale in the
fat would never have good head. But if a Peeter-penny, or an houzle-egge were
behind, or a patch of tyth unpaid to the Church (Jesus Maria) the^ ware where
you walk for fear of bull-beggers, spirits, witches, vrchins, Elues, hags,
fairies, Satyrs, Pans, Faunes, Syluans, See Scots book of Witches.
Kit with the candlestick, Tritons, Centaurs, Dwarffs, Giants, impes, Calcars,
coniurers, Nymphs, changlings, scritchowles, Incubus the spurn, the mare, the
man in the oak, helwayne, the fire-drake, the puckle, Tom thumb, hobgoblin,
Tom-tumbler, Boneles, and the rest: and what girl, boy, or old wisard would be
so hardy to step over me threshold in the night for an halfpenny worth of
mustard amongst this frightfull crew, without a dosen auemaries, two dosen of
crosses surely signed, and half a dosen Pater nosters, and the commending
himself to the tuition of S. Vncumber, or else our blessed Lady?

These be the Popes, and his holy Legates, and those of his holy mission, and
commission from hell their frightful crew, their black-guard, with which they
work wonders, amongst a faithless, fencelesse generation: these shoute about
them, attend them, and are of their guard, and train, wheresoever they go, or
walk, as Styx, Phlegeton, and the Eumenides do guard Aeacus in hell: with
these they work their wonders, making Images to speak, vautes to sound,
trunks to carry tales, Churchyeards to swarm, houses to rush, rumble, and
clatter with chains, highways, old graves, pittes, and woods ends to be
haunted with lights, owls, and poakers; and with these they adrad, and gaster
senseless old women, witless children, and melancholic dottrels, out of
their wits.

These Monster-swarmes his Hol: and his helly crew have scraped, and raked
together out of old doting heathen Historiographers, wisardizing Augurs,
imposturizing South-sayers, dreaming Poets, Chimaerial conceiters, and coyners
of fables, such as puff up our young gallants with big looks, and bombast
phrases, as the book of Lancelot du Lake, Guy of Warwick, The Mirror of
Knighthoode, Amadis de Gaul, and such like their Legends; out of these they
conceit their monstrous shapes, ugly bug-beares, hydeous apparitions of ghosts:
out of these they conform, their charms, enchauntments, periapts, amulets,
characters, wast coats, and smockes of proof, against hayle, thunder,
lightning, biting of mad dogs, gnawing of Rats, against botches, biles,
crosbiting, sparrow-blasting, Owle-hunting, and the like.

Out of these is shaped us the true Idaea of a Witch, an old weather-beaten
Croane, having her chinne, and her knees meeting for age, walking like a bow
leaning on a shaft, hollow eyed, vntoothed, furrowed on her face, having her
lips trembling with the palsy, going mumbling in the streets, one that has
forgotten her pater noster, and has yet a shrewd tongue in her head, to call a
drab, a drab. If she have learned of an old wife in a chimnies end: Pax, max,
fax, for a spel: or can say Sir John of Grantams curse, for the Millers Eeles,
that were stolen: All you tbat have stolen the Millers Eeles, Laudate dominum
de caelis: And all they that have consented thereto, benedicamus domino: Why
then ho, beware, look about you my neighbors; if any of you have a sheep
sick of the giddies, or an hog of the mumps, or an horse of the staggers, or
a knauish boy of the school, or an idle girl of the wheel, or a young drab
of the sullens, and has not fat enough for her porredge, nor her father, and
mother, butter enough for their bread; and she have a little help of the
Mother, Epilepsie, or Cramp, to teach her role her eyes, wrie her mouth, gnash
her teeth, startle with her body, hold her arms and hands stiff, make anticke
faces, girne, mow, and mop like an Ape, tumble like a Hedgehogge, and can
mutter out two or three words of gibridg, as obus, bobus: and then with-all old
mother Nobs has called her by chance, idle young huswife, or bid the devil
scratch her, then no doubt but mother Nobs is the Witch: the young girl is
Owle-blasted, and possessed: and it goes hard, but ye shall have some idle,
adle, giddie, lymphaticall, illuminate dotrel, who being out of credit,
learning, sobriety, honesty, and wit, will take this holy advantage, to raise
the ruins of his desperate decayed name, and for his better glory will be-pray
the iugling drab, and cast out Mopp the devil.

They that have their brains baited, and their fancies distempered with the
imaginations, and apprehensions of Witches, Coniurers, and Fayries, and all
that Lymphatical Chimaera: I find to be marshalled in one of these five
ranks, children, fools, women, cowards, sick, or black, melancholicke,
discomposed wits. The Scythians being a warlike Nation (as Plutarch reports)
never saw any visions.

The frightful fancies, and fond gastful opinions, of all the other dotrels
arise out of one of these two roots; weakness of wit, or vnstayednes in
religion. Horace the Heathen spied long ago, that a Witch, a Wizard, and a
Coniurer were but bul-beggers to scare fools: writing thus to one that had so
much wit, as to discern a poled sheep, from a parlous beast.

Somnia, terrores Magicos, miracula, sagas,
Nocturnos Lemures, portentaque Thessala rides.
That is, Dreams, and Magical affrights,
Wonders, Witches, walking sprights,
What Thessalian Hags can do,
All this seems a jest to you.


And Geoffry Chaucer, who had his two eyes, wit, and learning in his head,
spying that all these brainlesse imaginations, of witchings, possessings,
house-hanting, and the rest, were the forgeries, cosenages, Imposturs, and
legerdemaine of crafty priests, and leacherous Friars, either to mask their
venerie, or to enritch their purses, by selling their Pope-trumpery (as Medals,
agnus dei, Blessed beads, holy water, hallowed Crosses, periapts, amulets,
smocks of proof, and such) at a good rate; as who would not give soundly for a
Medal defensive against the devil? writes in good plain terms of the holy
Covent of Friars thus: For there as wont to walken was an Elfe,
There walks now the Limitor himself:
In every bush, and under every tree,
There nis none other Iucubus but he.


Now see our holy Comaedians, if they have not dressed their Denham devils,
after the old Roman fashion, fit to amaze Will Summers with-all. Hear the
grave Miraclist, how aunciently he attires the devil for Sara. She had been
diverse times affrighted with ugly visions. You shall never hear a prologue to
a Popish possession, but it begins with that style. As she sat by the fire
somewhat late with an other maid of the same house, Sees (...) beginning of
her examine:
being both in a readiness to go to bed, they fell into a slumber, and drousing
thus by the fire, there approached near unto them three Cats, making a
terrible noise, and sprawling about this young maid, one of them leapt over
her head, and an other crept betwixt her legs: (by Melleus, and Mengus his
rules, this might be a priest in the likeness of a Cat: their hunt was all that
way) whereat she suddenly looking behind her: (as having been used to such
creeping Cats,) she beheld a strange huge Cat, of the bigness of a
Mastiffe-dogge, staring in her face, with eyes very great, and bright, to the
bigness of a sawcer. Here is a right priests Hobgoblin, or Tom Spanner in the
dark. And will you hear Sara her self uncase you this bugge: Look in her
deposition. She was looking for eggs in a bush by her Masters house, and
suddenly a Cat leapt out, whereat she gave a startle: and this Cat, by this
priestly power (O Catholicam fidem) is suddenly Hobgoblinizd, and has gotten
a shape, as big as a Mastiffe, and eyes as big as a sawcer: O monstrous
Catholic faith, that can turn ordinary Cats in a moment into Mastiffes.
You shall have them rancked together, as they came from the Popes tyring-house:
that ye may see, which devil you like best, to set the Asses ears upon. At
supper the Cat aforesaid, was turned into a dog, of two colors, black, and
green, and therewith-all, a Spaniel bayed, (and therefore Maho was certainly
come.) At another time the devil came down the chimney, in a Wind, and blew
the ashes about the chamber: Page. 20.
Sometime he appeared in the likeness of a Man: sometime of a Bright thing, that
sat upon our Ladies image: sometime in the likeness of an Irish boy, with a
black curled head: sometime of a great Black dog: sometime he came flying
like a Sparrowe, with a Woodcocks bill: sometime like a Toade, with a nose like
a Moale: sometime like a Mouse: sometime like a Minister: sometimes like an Ey,
without a head: sometimes like a Ruffian, with curled hair: sometimes like an
Old man, with a long beard: and above all, he came in with a drum, and seven
motly vizards, dancing about the chamber. This was at the L. Vaux his house at
Hackney, to conclude their holy Christmasse, with the devils motly mummerie.

And which of all these shall we choose to wear Mengus his Asses ears? The
Hedge-sparrow is furnished already with the Woodcocks bill: the Toade is
preferred to wear the Moales nose: the Ruffian with the curled hair, would
swagger, the Irish curled pated boy, would likely run away with them: we had
best reserve them for Edmunds the Miraclists own wearing; for fancying,
cogging, and faigning such comely cases, and faces for the devil, whereof Sara
saw neither hide nor hair, top, tail, nor shadow; except the motly vizards,
which happily she dreamed of in a Christmasse night, having seen Maskers in
the day, and feasted the priests highly next day with this feigned relation.
The rest are all of the deuil-priests own devising, and therefore he may take
his Master Mengus long ears, to make up a full suit.

CHAP. 22. Of the admirable final act of expelling the devils, and of their
forms in their departing.
IT is a rule in Mengus, the deuill-mastix, and Thyraeus the deuill-varnisher,
that the devil which is to be dispossessed, must be commanded to go out in a
visible form, and for the evidence of his departing be enioynd, to crack a
quarrie in the glass window, or to blow out a candle: which being two such
supernatural actions, as by a consorted conspirator with the Exorcist, without
the help of a cherry-stone, or the sudden puff of a wenches breath, or the
swinge of her sleeue, cannot cleanly be conveyed, it is no marvel though they
be made a demonstration, that the devil is surely gone. The penner of our
deuil-tragaedy has not forgotten to keep good decorum in this, for he has
fancied, and feigned diverse well seeming forms, and similitudes, for his stage
devils to wear at their taking their leave.

The first devil that was disseised was Smolkin, Trayfords spirit, whom Sara
espied (says the Miraclist) to go out at Trayfords right ear in the form of
a Mouse, and it made the poor wench at the fight of the Mouse almost out of
her wits. The next devil dispossessed was Hilcho at Vxbridge, who appeared
(says our Author) to the possessed parties at his going our, like a flame of
fire, and lay glowing in the fire in Trayfords sight, till he had a new charge.
The third was Haberdidance, Saras dancing devil: who appeared to the patient,
like a whirlwind, turning round like a flame of fire, and his voice was heard
by a Cook, as he flew over the Larder. Captain Filpot went his way in the
likeness of a smoke, turning round, and so took his way up into the chimney.
Lusty Dicke (as seems) did slip a button in one of his turns above ground:
for he went out in a foul unsavory stench. Delicate, and Lusty Jolly Ienkin
went out, one whirling like a snake, the other in a vapor not very sweet.
Lusty Huffcappe went out in the likeness of a Cat. Killico, Hob, and the third
Anonymos, all Captains, went out in a wind. Purre went out in a little
whirlewind. Frateretto in a smoke.

Master Maynie had in him (as you have heard) the Maister-deuils of the seven
deadly sins, and therefore his devils went out in the form of those
creatures, that have nearest resemblance unto those sins: as for example; the
spirit of Pride went out in the form of a Peacocke (forsooth) the spirit of
Sloth in the likeness of an Ass: the spirit of Envy in the similitude of a
Dog: the spirit of Gluttony in the form of a Woolfe. But it is to be wondered
at, that General Maho, at the last, and most dreadful exorcisme of all, when
he was expelled with 22000. years torment laid upon his back, he slunke
out without any similitude at all. And more, an ordinary Reader will wonder,
that Maho, being Dictator of hell, is said in the Legend of Miracles, and so
noted by Sara, to have chosen such a strange part in Sara for his passage out,
as I dare not name: and yet devils, comaedians, and their reporters may have
license in all Courts to call all things by their name. And indeed here lies
the wonders of all, considering that that namelesse part, the devils port-gate
in Sara, was the priests quest and haunt, which they had hunted sore, had
crossed, recrossed, and surcrossed with their holy hands, had sacred, or seared
with application of their reverend strong relics, and other their potent
holy parts, (as you have heard poor Sara herself confess:) the devil should
once dare to come near that part, that had been harowed, (I would say hallowed)
and enriched with so many precious Jewels from Rome: but you shall find the
Author noted that part, and assigned it for Maho the devils passage, upon
very sage, and prudent consideration. For they had kept such revel rout
thereabouts, as they themselves gave out to such as were suitors to Sara, (as
you read in her deposition) that they, and the devil, (O fidem Catholicam!)
had taken such order, as marry her who would, she should never have child.

But to return to our similitudes, and devil visages again, the
Miracle-minter deals here with these forms, and faces of devils, as Sosia in
Amphitryo dealt with the battle at Telibous, who ranges two maine Armies,
deuides them into squadrons, wings, and flanks, and makes them meet, and
encounter, and none but himself alone is upon the stage. And indeed it is good
decorum in a Comaedie, to give us empty names for things, and to tell us of
strange Monsters within, where there be none. When a man hears of these
frightful similitudes, wherein the devils are conceited to depart, as flames,
whirlewinds, snakes, cats, fire, and smoke, he would imagine the spectators
should be much gastred, and skared at the going out of the devils in these
fearful forms, and that the chambers and rooms, where the daemoniacks and
the company are, should be shaken with the whirlewind, scorched with the
flames, and soiled with brimstone and smoke, and that the assembly should
tremble, to see the devil whirle about in the similitude of a snake, as a
fire-dragon spoutes, and whirles in the air: but at our gentle devils
departure, there was neither shape seen, nor wind heard, nor motion felt, nor
flames, nor smoke, nor whirling fire-snake perceived at all, and therefore you
must heedfullie observe, the Authors clause always annexed, (as Amen to a
mass) unto the end of the sentence: As seemed, or appeared to the possessed.

So as the out-casting of these ugly devils visards, lies thus. The priests do
report often in their patients hearing, the dreadful forms, similitudes, and
shapes, that the devils use to depart in, out of those possessed bodies, which
they have dealt with-all beyond Seas: and this they tell with so grave a
countenance, pathetical terms, and accommodate action, as it leaves a very
deep impression in the memory, and fancy of their actors: so as when it comes
to their cue, to play the same part over, (as namely, when after dreadful
adiuration the devil is said to go out) then does the Exorcist very soberly
ask the party, in what form or similitude, the devil appeared unto him at his
departing: and he having conned his lesson of forms, and shapes before from
the priest, lights upon some such form, and shape, as he has received from
the priest. And then the Echo is: Thanks to the blessed virgin, and the whole
Quier of heaven. And if the Exorcist do suspect the wit, or memory of his
scholar, as being nothing perfect in his Calendar of forms, he will not stick,
to prompt him by his question (being before an Auditory of Romish guls, whose
brains swarm with bul-beggers) as to ask him, if the devil did not depart in
such, or such a form; and then the actor either for fear, or flattery of his
good master dares not but say yea.

Another rule you must learn in a Comaedie well acted, and conuaied for the
devil: that the daemoniacks be so nearly placed (yet in several rooms) each
to other, that one may hear without benefit of Midas long ears, what is said
unto, or by the other; and so the second may be yare and ready, to take his cue
and turn of the former, and put to a little of his own wit, for the better
gracing the wonder. Or else if propinquitie, and fitnes of the rooms will not
serve, for one to be the others Parrat, and Echo, touching the shape; let the
shape be handsomely agreed of by the deuil-actors before, or else provide a
mistress Plater, for an intelligencer, or intercursitor between them, that may
in a trice relate to one, what the other has done, and said.

Lusty Jolly Ienkin was conceited, and given out by the Exorcist to go out of
Sara in the similitude of a whirling snake: Marwood was in another room, yet
so near as he caught the snake by the tail, and cries out, where he lay, at
the dreadful sight, adding that he saw it come whirling by his window, with a
wind in most terrible wise. Hear Master Maynie for all report you this
devise, the daintiest actor, that ever came upon deuil-stage. And as I answer
to this point, so do I unto that other, as touching the devils supposed
similitudes, in their pretended departing out of me. Eytber it is altogether
false, and devised by themselves, or else they led me to say so by their
questions, as if they asked me whether Pride did not depart from me in the
likeness of a Peacock, it is very probable that I said, he did, and so of all
the rest. Or otherwise they told some in my hearing, that such devils did use
to depart from such, as they possessed, in such kind of forms. I pray GOD
forgive them for all their bad dealing with me.

Thus you have these Romish deuil-vizards of forms, similitudes, and shapes of
the devils departing, laid open unto you, by their own scholars and actors,
to be naught else, save squibs, crackers, and fireworks forged out of the
priests own fancy: and that there was no devil, but Edmunds, or Dibdale the
Priest. Now let us a little look upon the last, and most artificial act of
this infernal Tragaedie (namely, the final dispossessing, and extruding the
devils) by which of their ghastly dreadful Engines, this conclusion was best,
and most cunningly performed.

The first honor of this great, and admirable act of final dispossessing the
devil, did by great providence fall upon a little casket of relics; wherein
there falls out wonder upon wonder. For Trayford, the possessed party, espying
a casket of relics in Saras hand, snatches them suddenly from her, and
applying the casket to his own, did expel Smolkin his own Mouse-deuil. Where
the super wonder is, that a man should without Exorcist, Albe, Aue marie, or
Salve Regina dispossess himself of a devil, as we find Trayford did: or
rather the devil dispossess himself. For Trayford, the possessed, was moved,
ruled, and carried by the devil, as a wheel is by a turnspit curre, that is put
into it: so as it was not Trayford, that snatched the casket, but the devil,
nor Trayford that applied them to his mouth, and expelled the devil at his
right ear, in the likeness of a Mouse, but the devil.

This does plainly instruct you in these two excellent points: first, the
dreadful power of relics, when they lie pent, and packed close together in a
little room, that they work like bottle-ale, that is close kept from vent,
ready as soon as they be stirred to spout devils, dragons, and all in a man's
face: next, it reads you a plain Lecture of the bodily fear of the devil at
the approach of an holy priest, who chooses rather to make his own squib, fill
it with Gunne-powder, and setting it on fire, to burn, and blow up himself,
as Sardanapalus did, then to attend the coming of a scalding Catholic priest.

The next expulsion of the devil was by holy water alone; wherein the power of
the holy relic is the more advanced, in that it came not from the hand of
any anointed priest, but was taken by Sara, and sprinkled upon the devil, in
the likeness of a Toad, and toward the deuil-minister, that came into Trayfords
chamber, and they both vanished away. So as by these powerful instruments a
devil may not only dispossess himself, (which a man must imagine he had
need of great help to do) but also put to flight any other devil that stands
in his way, or will presume to come within his walk, without his good leave.
For else what reason had Saras devil to be displeased at his fellow devils
coming into Trayfords chamber, and to sprinckle him away, but that it seems
he came rudely in, without by your leave.

The holy Cross put to flight a whole Quier of Puppets, that appear dancing
the Morris at the end of a gallerie; and dissolved them so clean, as there
appeared neither flame, smoke, nor ill odor from them: and this wonder was
accomplished by Sara, for Sara (says the Miraclist) signing her self with
many signs of the Cross, the devils in the likeness of Puppets, vanished out
of sight.

Here our wonder like Amphitryos goblet, begets an other wonder still. Sara by
Crosses puts to flight a whole troop of Puppet-deuils, and yet the devil
within Sara cared not for the Crosses one jot. These (as seems) were but
punie vrchin spirits, that for want of good cheer at Denham house were pined,
and made feeble, before the Exorcists came thither. But Purre was a spirit of a
tough mold, and in reasonable good plight: he held the Exorcist good tacke,
til at length (says the Reporter) by often invocation of our blessed Lady, and
the whole company of heaven, with Aue mary's, and other Anthemes, of our
blessed Lady, especially Salve Regina, Purre was cast out. Here Church
Anthemes, as you see, carried away the bucklers, in expelling the devil. Sara,
the devils sweet dancing school, had chosen amongst all the heavenly Quier S.
Barbara, for her patroness, and Saint: who pitying her poor Client, seeing
all the devils of hell in the poor wench, and Maho their commander, came down
her self from heaven, to show her grace she had there, and that Saints may
come from heaven a deuil-hunting, if it stand with their good pleasure, and
assuming the office of an Exorcist into her own hands, casts out Maho, the
black Prince.

Maho takes this as no fair play: and therefore himself complains of it in
his Dialogue with Dibdale: that a woman had cast him out before, Page 5. book
of Miracles.
upon her own feastiuall day.

This is no mean office, you may be sure, nor of little moment, and weight,
when the glorious Saints of heaven come down to discharge it: nay you shall
see, that for the dignifying of this coniuring profession, and to stop the
mouths of all carping obloquutors, our blessed Lady her self vouchsafed to
grace it with her presence in her own proper person, and to come in state,
with a princely train of caelestial virgins attending upon her: whom the
devil in scorn calls by a by-name, Saffron-bagge; Lo yonder (cries the devil
to the Exorcist) comes Saffron-bagge, with her company of tripping-mayds, thou
can do nothing without her. And the Miracle-maister sticks not to tell us,
that she played the Exorcists part too, in helping of Sara. After a long, and
painful combat (says he) Sara said somewhat cheerfully: now our blessed Lady
has known my need, and has helped me: for the devil was gone out. And it
shall, I trust, be no disparagement to our Lady in this case, to have a simple
word in show matched unto her highness, which with the very sound,
pronunciation, and name had the same virtue in expelling a devil, that her own
gracious presence in proper person had: and that is in the Creed, neither the
name of God the Father, God the Son, nor God the holy Ghost, nor the name of
the virgin Mary (which as you see, is notwithstanding dreadful to the devil)
but the bare naming, and pronouncing of this word Catholic alone: with the
sounding of which sillables only, Sara (says our Author) did put to flight
all her pernicious devils. So as this word Catholic in the Creed is as deep
a deuil-coniurer, as ever Mengus was.

These several Champions (as you see) do severally triumph, and erect their
several Trophies, with spoils of several devils. But it falls out sometimes,
that the graund Prince of darkness does combine, and unite his forces, calling
to his aid his Leaders, Colonels, and Captains for hell, as Hiaclito,
Helcmodian, and the rest, and pitches a maine field: so as his forces stand
strong against any one of these alone. Then hear the General of our ghostly
Camp, how he marshals his bands, and troops, against the front of hell. But the
blessed Sacrament being brought, invocation made to our blessed Lady, and all
the Quier of heaven, by the help of Aue mary's, Salve Reginaes, and calling
upon the blessed Martyrs, and applying their holy relics, especially of Fa:
Camp: Fa: Brian, and the rest, that had been martyred at Tiburne, hell it
self quails, the devils roar, and the Prince with all his assistants, and
commanders, are finally cast out. These are the troops, that prevail against
principalities, powers, dominions, and all the kingdom of darkness: these laded
Maho, and Modu (the two Generals of the infernal furies) with fire, and
brimstone, and banished them, for a final doom, to be tormented in the
bottomless pit of hell.

And thus closed up our worthy Author his worthy tragaedie, with the confusion
of the great Maister-deuils, and the consolation of his pitiful possessed
captives, and that loud famous acclamation of the spectators, O Catholicam
fidem! O fidem Catholicam! But the lamentable Chorus, and Nuntios of this
tragaedie (Master Maynie gentleman, Fid Williams, Sara Williams, Anne Smith,
and Master Tirrell) do tell us another tale, ending this devil tragaedie,
with their own tears, sighs, exclamations, and hideous outcries, against the
deuill-priests, the coggers, coyners, mynters, and actors of this wicked lewd
play. Who were not content to play Maho, and Modu, the grand devils themselves,
to play at bo peep with Almighty God, our blessed Savior, his holy Angels,
and blssed Saints in heaven, presenting them on this feigned Theater, and
making them to squeale, pype, and tumble, like puppits in a pageant after their
own impious fashion, and to profane, and prostitute the blessed Sacrament,
making it a Pandar to their foul and monstrous lust, but partly by flattery,
partly by fear, partly by the bond of violated chastity, partly by their
loathsome potions, and unnatural fumigations, brought them into the same
dissimulation with themselves, and to act the chief, and principal parts in
their diabolical legerdemaine: and when they had once masked them in their
popish nets, and gotten them into their holy ginnes, they did so unmanly, so
vnpriestly, and so unnaturally use them, as the devil himself, if he had been
indeed in presence, could not have used them worse.

And these misguised bewitched creatures, now of better remorse, do tell us
that the trussing up of their iugling sticks, winding up their Pope-budget, and
packing up their Roman pedlarie grew from another cause: which was, because
they understood by some of their Sentinels, that their iugling, packing, and
legerdemaine did peep out abroad in the Country, and occasioned diverse
opinions, and constructions of the same, whereby present danger to their
persons, and stage-robes was like to ensue. This moved them, to let Maho the
devil slinke out of Sara in that homly manner as you have heard, that they
might (though vncleanlie) rid their hands of him. And now I pray you observe
how sutably to their former affairs they sorted themselves thence.

It is the fashion of vagabond players, that coast from Town to Town with a
trusse and a cast of fiddles, to carry in their consort, broken queanes, and
Ganimedes, as well for their night pleasance, as their days pastime: our
deuil-holy consort at their breaking up house at Denham, departed every priest
suited with his wench after the same good custom. See the last end of Fide
examine:
Edmunds the Jesuit (says one of their own couey) had for his darling Mistress
Cressy, Anne Smith was at the disposition of Ma: Dryland, Sara Williams of Ma:
Dibdale, Mistrisse Altham of Cornelius, and Fid Williams of Ma: Leigh. And was
not this a very seemly Catholic complement trow you, to see a Fiddler and his
case, a Tinker and his bitch, a Priest and his Leman, a devil and his damme,
combined sweetly together? I trust our devils would never make suit to go into
any herd of swine, so long as they had such kind tender cattle to possess,
dispossess, repossesse, and surpossesse at their pleasure. And this in the
holy dialect is called gaining of souls: scilicet for the devil.

CHAP. 23. Of the aim, end, and mark, of all this pestilent tragaedy.
THe end of a Comaedie is a plaudite to the Author, and Actors; the one for
his invention, the other for his good action: of a Tragaedie, the end is moving
of affection, and passion in the spectators. Our Daemonopoiia, or
deuil-fiction, is Tragico-comaedia, a mixture of both, as Amphitryo in Plautus
is: and did by the good invention, and carriage, obtain both these ends. First
it had a plaudite often; O Catholicam fidem! and O that all the Protestans in
England did see the power of the Catholic Church: and it moved affection with
expression of tears. Marwood did tumble, foame, and rage so lively, when he
was touched with Campians girdle, as the gulld spectators did weep to see the
iugling knave, in such a supposed plight. But our Roman Authors, Edmunds, and
his holy crew (his twelve holy disciples) the plotters of this deuil-play, had
a farther and deeper end: which by this impious devise they had achieved
pretty well, and that was (after the Popes dialect) the gaining of souls for
his Holiness, and for Hell, the bewitching of the poor people, with an
admiration of the power of their Romish Church, and priesthood, by these cogd
miracles, and wonders; and thereby robbing them of their faith toward God, and
their loyalty to their Prince, and reconciling them to the Pope, the Monster
of Christianity. And for the obtaining of this maine mark and end, they used
two chief subordinate ends. The one was to bring in the devil on the stage
(thorough the whole course of their tragaedie) as the father of us all, and as
the founder, protector, and favorer of us, and of our most Christian
profession. The other, by causing their devils to speak, act, and behave
themselves, as an hostile and sworn enemy to them, and to their Romish
superstition. Which the besotted people conceiving as the very true voice of
the devil indeed, were brought to phancie and imagine of us all, as of the
grand children, and heirs of Satan, and of hell, and to esteem of them, as of
the children of light, and the undoubted heirs apparent to the celestial
kingdom of heaven. In this their bewitched conceit, they were brought to
renounce their duty, love, and allegiance to their natural Sovereign, and to
swear their fealty and obedience, to the unnatural monster of hell.

Unto the atchieuing of this impious, and treacherous design (namely, the
revolt of the besotted people from their Prince, and the most Christian
Religion, by the pure profession, and swearing their obedience unto the Pope of
Rome) they spared no person, no condition, no calling, no profession in either
our Church, or common weal, but abandond them all in their deuil-comaedie to
the bottomless pit of hell. Page, 42.
And that the 7. horned Babylonian beast might appear in his lively orient
colors, to be he that durst open his blasphemous mouth against the Almighty,
and his Saints, his accursed brood here do that in the assumed feigned person
of the devil, which the devil himself (though a spirit of blasphemy) never
dared to do: that is, to curse, and blaspheme, (o hellish impiety, my heart
does tremble at the sound) the most beloved, thrice-blessed anointed of the
Lord, the sacred person of our dread Sovereign, making her no other in this
deuillish tragaedie, then the devils principal darling. Book of Miracles.
Page, 43.
Hear the devil, or Edmunds in the devils person (who yet draws his breath
from the beams of her princely mercy, who^ himself accursed to the pit of
hell) in his own dialect, if your Christian ears dare to hear that, which
those Popish miscreants dare proclaim upon their stage.

Behold your loyal Priests. Page, 43.
Oh (cries Maho the devil in Sara) yonder comes Saffron-bagge (meaning our
blessed Lady) she is come to help thee: but she cannot away with a
principal person in this Realm, and therefore I cannot away with her. Here
the play-deuil is conceited so to love the Queen, as he must needs hate our
Lady, for not loving her Majesty. And to express his deuilships good will
(forsooth) unto her Majesty: on S. Hughes day he threatens the Exorcist,
Page, 34. See Saras examine:
that he would go ring for the Queen: and in another fit tells Dibdale in a
rage, that he would go to the Court, and complain of him to the Queen, and
cause his head to be set upon London bridge. In another fit he cries out of
Sara in a loud voice, God save the Queen, Page, 7.
and her Ministers, expressing his deuilships not only good affection, but
zealous devotion to her Majesty, and her Clergy. But that which shows their
diabolical impiety, and opens the treasury of their hearts, fraught with
treachery, and treason, they solemnly present the devil in Sara upon their
stage, roaring out an oath touching her Majesty in this wise, by my troth she
is mine, and the Queen of heaven being called upon, he said aloude, Page 7.
ibi:
another Queen is my Queen. O detestable Romish villainy! et tamen viuunt, and
are at this day plotting a new invasion to set up a new Queen, who have and
do thus desperately blaspheme God, and the King.

And is her Majesty's Court more beholden to this Romish hellish Consort, then
her Majesty's sacred person? Hear Modu, Maynies devil, vaunting in his devils
voice, upon S. Georges day, Page, 43.
that he would go brave it out at the Court: for they were all his friends.
This is the gentle quittance, your holy renegadoes do return you, for the
favor, or conuiuencie which they find, in that her Majesty's Laws are no
more severely executed against them. They bring you home a placard from his
hellishnes at Rome, to assure you, that you are all in league, and amity with
the devil. For so the devil, or Edmunds does proclaim you from hell, or Rome.

Those famous renowned Worthies of her Majesty's privy Counsel, whose bodies
sleep in peace, and their souls (as I trust) repose in Abraham's blessed
bosom; how our infernal tragaedians have disturbed their rest, profaned their
happy memory, violated their tombs, and called forth their spirits, like the
Witch of Endor, making them tennis-bals, for their devils to bandy on their
stage; take a true view of, in the passage of a Dialogue between the Exorcist,
and the devil.

Yonder (cries the devil in Sara) nodding her head toward one part of the
chamber) stands such a one (whom he had named before) full of devils: Page. 32.
and Leicester at this present hour; even now, now, under the right arm of
that one (before mentioned) and all the Court are my friends. Then went he
forward with his speech, naming certain persons, and said, that they are now
gone to the devil: and amongst the rest, named Bedford already departed, and
that his soul is even now with me in this chamber, Page. 43.
and so passed on his talk, and passed on to matters of treason, and therefore
they are not to be mentioned. Thus far their own Recorder, in his own sweet
terms. And were not those matters of treason, uttered by the devil, strange
matters from hell trow ye, that the penner durst not commit them to writing,
having written so much, touching our most sacred Prince, her Court, and Counsel
before, as the devil himself durst not inspire more into his pen? And who does
not feel this palpable legerdemaine, at his fingers ends? The devil speaks
treason against the Prince, and state, for the winning, and gaining of Subjects
from her Majesty to the Pope, and making them become traitors, by his
treasonable persuasions; and this stands for good Romish Rhetoric, and popish
Divinity, whilst it was spoken, and acted by the Popes Orator the devil: and
the devil showed himself an absolute powerful speaker, for his graund master
the Pope: See Fids and Maynies exam:
enchaunting by his sweet eloquence 500, or as their own disciples confess
upon record, four, or five thousand souls in a short time, whom he won
from the Queen, and reconciled them to the Pope by this well acted tragaedie.
And might the devil speak treason so aptly, distinctly, and elegantly on the
stage, that it enchaunted the hearts, and affections of the poor bewitched
people, and chained them to the Pope: and is not this sweet enchaunting treason
to be mentioned in writing? Page 23.
Quis causam nescit? You were afraid, good deuil-tragaedians, to be sainted at
Tiburne, for this sweet enchaunting treason, uttered by your proloquutor the
devil: and it must be committed to none, but your sworn new proselytes, that
knew how to keep it from straggling abroad: whom you have by this one sentence
of your wise Orator the devil manteled in the same degree of horrible
unspeakable treasons with your selves, not only for concealing, and
entertaining treason not to be mentioned, or spoken for the abomination of it;
but for yielding themselves, their faith, and fealty to the Pope; the true end,
and aim of all those unspeakable treasons. Et quis hic demon? And who was the
devil, the brocher, herald, and perswader of these unutterable treasons, but
Weston the Jesuit, the chief plotter, and the arch-impostor, Dibdale the
priest, or Stemp, or all the holy Couey of the twelve deuilish comaedians in
their several turns: for there was neither devil, nor vrchin, nor Elfe, but
themselves, who did metamorphoze themselves in every scene, into the person,
either of the devil himself, or of his Interpreter, and made the devils names
their Puppet, to squeake, pipe, and fume out what they pleased to inspire. And
thus, Page 43.
as the devil would have it, by a deuilish inconsiderate clause inserted, that
the devil spoke treasons, not once to be mentioned: have you proclaimed your
selves, and your 5000 new adhaerents, for unspeakable, unutterable, detestable
Traitors.

The estate of our Clergy, Page 29.
they have adorned with a special grace: The devil appearing unto Trayford
(says the Miraclist) in the likeness of an English Minister, and dissuading him
to leave the Catholic Romish Church, etc. This was a sign (say they) of our
especial favor with the devil, in that he pleased rather to put on our habit,
then the vestments of a Catholic Romish Priest: and yet all circumstances
considered, this was no great favor done unto our profession, in regard their
holy gear was too hot for the devils wearing. A suit of purgatory fire had
been much easier for the devil, then an Albe, or vestment of that consecrate
attire. But a greater argument of love, and mutual good affection is the
liberal commendation, which Saras devil does very frankly bestow upon our
Ministers, affirming by his devils honesty, that he likes them well, and that
they be much better then the Catholic Romish priests. Which the poor Idiot
spectators took to be sooth indeed, and deemed us to be too great in the
devils books, ever to be good. And above all, General Maho being straightly
charged by the Exorcist, to tell his name, he standing upon his dictatorship,
tells the Exorcist plainly, that he cannot command him, Page 44.
but that the English Ministers may. What, and their wives too? quoth the
Exorcist: Marry thou a wife too, quoth the devil. Lo here (good gentle Conies,
that come to wear the Woodcocks bil) you hear the devil, alias Dibdale
plainly tell you, that the English Ministers, and their marrying of wives come
both out of hell, and are the devils, alias Dibdales own counsel to the priest,
and so cannot be good. But hunting, nipping, and cros-biting a pretty wench on
the bare: crossing, recrossing, surcrossing her with priestly hot holy hands,
per honesta, and in honesta: giving her such a Catholic close pinch, that you
make her cry oh, and possessing her with a she devil upon the same:
afterward dispossessing, repossessing, and super-possessing her again, til
the poor wench is so handled amongst you, See Saras examina:
as the devil, and you give out, Marry her who will, she can never have child:
This is but his Holiness own hunt and chase, for his holy hellish disciples, in
which Catholic sport the devil himself making one, he can take no just
exception thereunto.

After the devils gracing our several callings by his deuillish commendation,
he must needs, of his good nature, speak something in favor of our religion
to, especially in behalf of those points, wherein we have opposition with the
Church of Rome.

Page, 17.
First, therefore for his, and our better credit the devil tells the priest, that
himself is an heretic, and that heresy came first into England, in the
reign of King Henry the eight. That he teaches the Protestants, to call
themselves Catholics: Page, 23.
His good deuilship, caused Sara to weep for her father, and mother, because
they went to the English Churches, and tells the Exorcist very kindly, that
young children, though they want understanding, must be kept from the Church:
because they may be plagued for so going, for their parents faults, that suffer
them to go. Here we must suppose, that the devil had taken so much of the
priests blessed potion, (Sack, Galbanum, and Rue) that he was Maudelen-drunke,
and in his kind drunkenness, of pure compassion, and good nature, does reveal
thus much against himself, to have children, and good folks saved: For being
sober, and in his right wits, you shall by and by find him in another key.

Sara was tempted (forsooth) to say first that there was no Purgatory. This was
a sore temptation indeed, Page, 2.
to wish Sara to say that fire was not, whereof there is not one sparkle to be
seen in all the book of God: which fire the pillars of Gods Church have
always held for an Heathenish dream, and a Platonic fiction, whose coals,
brands, and skorching flames have been purgatiues for men's purses, houses, and
lands, and have annihilated more metal, and euaporated it into smoke, then
all the conceited fireworks of our Chymicall Impostors have done. And here I
fear the devils brain was a little too much heated with the smoke of holy
brimston, and grew somewhat adle, in aduising Sara to go about to put this
enchaunted fire out of peoples heads: for that the conceited opinion of this
imaginary fire has brought more sooty-soiled souls into hell, in a fancied
hope of a purge after this life, which they can never meet withal, then any
one cheating devise besides in all the Popes budget.

Saras second temptation was to say, Page, 3.
the priest said naught in saying of Mass, A Christmas temptation after the
devil was well whitled. This was a pretty gul of your merry Christmas devil, as
your selves had gulled and impostured the world. For what can be greater glee,
and pleasance to the devil, then to behold you the Archiuglers, and Impostors
of the world, to put down in this craft the Sorcerers of Egypt, the Heathen,
Mahomet and all. To see you first iugle with Almighty God, and our blessed
Savior, and then with all his saints, turning his most blessed institution
into a masse-monster, a Chimera of puppets, and gaudes. Approaching unto the
holy celebration like Bacchanall priests, with a stole, an albe, maniple, an
amice, a tunicle, and such fantastical attire: putting upon the blessed
institution of our Savior, a foreign Babylonian name of a mass: making it a
night catch, or round to be chopped up between a boy and a priest: perverting
the nature of the holy communion, to a private nunchion for a priest alone:
seuering those two maine pillars of our souls comfort, the body and blood of
our Savior, and renting them in sunder, which God had so nearly conjoined:
making the reverend celebration a pageant of moppes, mowes, eleuations,
crouches, and ridiculous gesticulations: euacuating the power of that perfect,
and absolute oblation of the body, and blood of our Savior, by a quotidian
imaginary oblation of a sacrifice without blood: offering up in a blasphemous
conceit the body of our Savior, which sits for ever at the right hand of
GOD, giving it for the dead, which our Savior did to and for the living
receivers only: and above all sacrilege, and heathenish blasphemy, offering
up our Savior unto God his father thus; beseeching him that he, with a
merciful pleasant countenance, See the missall.
will behold the offering up of his only begotten, and living son Christ
Jesus, and that he will accept the same, even as he accepted Abels offering,
and the sacrifice of Abraham, and of Melchisedech the high priest. Hereby
sacrilegiously making your selves not only the true Melchisedech (an honor
appropriat unto our Savior; by the saying of the holy Ghost) but most
blasphemously intruding your selves as Mediators, not only between God and
man, but also between Almighty God, and his son; beseeching him to accept
of the oblation of his son with a pleasant countenance (O hellish blasphemy)
at your intercession! Page. 2.


Thirdly, Sara was tempted by the devil to say, the blessed sacrament was
bread, and not to be adored. This was an old potent temptation indeed. The
blessed Apostle was thus tempted 1500. years ago, to call it expreslie by the
name of bread, and to will us to remember by the breaking of it, that it was
none other but bread, Platoes Idaea of an essence subsisting in nature, without
existence in individual substances (long since hissed out of the schools for
a fantastical fiction) is nothing unto this Popish brainsick imagination: that
the color, form, taste, savor, and dimensions of bread should subsist, and
exist real objects to our senses, without the substance, and nature of bread:
that all these sensible accidents should be made pendulous in the air, like
Archimedes Dove, or else stripped from their proper substance, and adhaere to an
indeterminate, vagrant, unbounded being: which all the subtle wits of all the
Eagle-eyed Schoolmen in the world, could yet never christen with a name. These
are the Italian Monsters, hatched of the eggs of school Crocodiles; the
winding serpentine wits of profane uncircumcised spirits, that take liberty
to themselves to descant upon Almighty God, upon his beloved son, and his
blessed institution, as they descant upon haecceitie, nihileitie, and all those
conceited schoole-tricks.

Our Savior Christ I suppose would have had somewhat ado, to have instructed
his twelve holy disciples, at the first celebration of the supper, in this
Lecture of flying forms, and vagrant substances: and if our Savior had told
S. Peter, that the bread which he brake and gave him, was no true bread indeed,
but the accidents of bread, (who could not conceive of leven, that our Savior
mentioned, but he thought of household bread) it would have caused him to move
many odd questions, and have troubled his brains, and hindered his devotion
much in that reverend, and sacred action. But our Saviors blessed disciples
were but grossa capita to our subtiliated, sublimated new spirits of the
Sorbon. The blessed Apostle Saint John, did think he had brought an argument
of good assurance to the Jews, when he began his Epistle thus; That which
we have seen with our eyes, handled with our hands, and been conversant
withal, the Lord of life: which if he had written, to a quirking Sorbonist, or
a scoffing Lucianist, that had his brain puffed up with this theorie of
forms, he would say, the Apostle wrote like a good plain John a nods: for
those accidents of speech, favor, proportion, and feeling might be in
indiuiduo vago, in a wandering Hobgoblin, that had no similitude of nature
with the Lord of life. Verily, neither this new coin of conceited forms, nor
the imagination of any Idolatrous adoration was once in their understanding,
who received the blessed sacrament, leaning one upon another breast, and
therefore this temptation was as ancient as the original institution, that
the sacrament was bread, and not to be adored.

Fourthly, Sara was tempted by the devil to think that our English Ministers
were as good, as the priests. If the devil had not tempted Sara to this, he
had been much too blame: for he being one of their chorus, and a principal
actor in their play, and so familiar with all their legerdemaine, did well see,
that if hell it self had been raked (as they say) and 13 of the devils most
deuilish Ministers fetched from thence, they could not have passed Weston, and
his twelve deuilish tragaedians, in any degree. Dissemblers, iuglers,
impostors, players with God, his Son, his angels, his saints: deuisers of new
devils, feigned tormentors of spirits, usurpers of the key of the bottomless
pit, whippers, scourgers, batfoulers of fiends, Pandars, Ganimedaeans,
enhaunsers of lust, deflowrers of virgins, defilers of houses, uncivil,
vnmanlie, unnatural venereans, offerers of their own mass to supposed
devils, deprauers of their own relics, applying them to unspeakable,
detestable, monstrous deformities: prostituters of all the rites, ornaments,
and ceremonies of their Church to impure villainies: prophaners of all parts of
the service, worship, and honor of God: violators of tombs, sacrilegious,
blasphemers of God, the blessed Trinity, and the virgin Marie, in the person
of a counterfeit devil: seducers of subjects, plotters, conspirators,
contriuers of bloody and detestable treasons, against their anointed
Sovereign: it would pose all hell to sample them with such another dosen.

Fifthly, Page 4.
Sara was tempted by the devil not to say her prayers in Latin, because God
had not so commanded, but in English, as she had learned of the Minister, in
her mothers house: Dearly beloved brethren, the Scripture moves us in sundry
places, humbly to acknowledge, and confess our manifold sins, and wickedness:
God save the Queen, and her Ministers.

Are not these men's faces sorely scorched with the flames of hell fire, and
their consciences seared with those hot burning coals, that dare publish this
desperate impiety to the world, that the confession of our sins, according
to Gods holy will, and fatherly admonitions in the Scripture, (which is the
first beginning of our worship, and service of almighty God, appointed and
established in our public form of prayer in the Church) is the devils
temptation? Was it ever heard of before, from either Heathenist, or divine,
that the devil did tempt any, humbly to acknowledge, and confess his sins,
before almighty God. Which are the express words of our service book, derided
by these hellish Impostors, and fathered upon the devil? What are our faith,
our hope, our charity, our zeal, our worship of almighty God, but Pharisaical
clouds, and wandering stars, accursed of God, without true, and unfeigned
humiliation going before? And what shall become of their much-commended
mortification, penance, affliction, and taming of the body, to bring it into
due obedience, under the government of Gods holy spirit, or in what order, and
rank, shall we place these, if deiection of mind, and humiliation of spirit,
the acceptable sacrifices unto God, be the cognisances of the devil? Blind,
and desperate malice cares not, what it speaks, so it may speak. For that
addition, in scorn and superbious contempt annexed by you, unto our public
prayer, God save the Queen, we do glory in it, and pray unto God, from the
bottom of our hearts, that we long so pray. It demonstrateth plainly to the
world, with what spirit you are led, namely by the spirit of Satanical pride,
and desperate disobedience, that dare refer that pious loyal prayer to the
devil.

Thus has the devil (forsooth) spoken in favor of our Prince, her worthy
Counsailors, her renowned Courtiers, her learned Ministers: in favor of the
Sacraments, and public service of almighty God, established in our Church:
now let us hear the same devil, as you have presented him on the stage,
pleading for your Church, and patronizing your heathenish superstition, and
diabolical inventions in the same. Dibdale to the devil. Book of Miracles
page. 16.
What say thou to the virgin Mary? Devil. Oh she had no original sin, I
had not a bit of her, neither within, nor without. Here you see a plain
blasphemy of the Church of Rome, that could never before be warranted by
Scripture, reason, nor ancient Father, that any (except the unspotted son of
God) should be borne without original sin, now warranted, and stamped with
the signet of the devil for good, namely, that the virgin Mary was borne
without sin.

Page, 15,
Dibdale: What say thou to Gregory the thirteenth? Devil. Oh, he is a Saint
in heaven, he never came in Purgatory. This favor the devil bestows on that
Pope, because he had been a bountiful founder, and benefactor, to the English
renegadoes, and a most pestilent deviser against the life of our Sovereign:
who for this good service, was carried on the devils back, as seems, over
Purgatory into heaven.

Dibdale. What say thou to Brian? Came he into Purgatory? Devil. Oh no, he
is a Saint in deed, Page. 43.
he is in heaven. This man was one of the arch-traytors, that came over with
Parsons, and Campian, with special designs of treason from the Pope: and
therefore the devil ought him a special good turn, and could not requite him
better, then to enroll him amongst his Saints.

Dibdale. What say thou to the blessed Sacramant of the Altar? Devil. It is
the very body of Christ cut it, Page 17.
and thou shall see it bleed. It had been an easy experiment to have tried,
whether that the devil would have been true of his word: but Dibdale had an
evasion ready twined for this: and that was; He would not cut it, for
tempting his Creator. It was no tempting of God, to ask counsel of the devil
touching the Sacrament: but it had been a sore temptation, to have made proof
of the bleeding, and yet there was no man of good sense, but would rather have
given credit to his eyes, if he had seen it to bleed, then to the devils bare
affirmation in so weighty a case. But whom should the children of lies,
coggeries, and Impostures believe, if they should not believe their father, the
graund father of lies?

Weston. What say thou to Campians girdle, Westons Tractat of Marwood.
whence has it this virtue, being a seely twist, to afflict, intoxicate, and
amaze thee? Devil. Jerusalem nouit, Tiburnus nouit. Jerusalem, and Tiburne can
tell you.

Thus far the worthy dialogue between Dibdale and the devil, wherein are
many points of high and prudent consideration. If we may be so bold with his
deuilships good leave, we would gladly ask a question or two: first, why
cutting should make the sacrament to bleed, and not breaking do the same, if
the body of our Savior be really there? For veins being the vessels of
blood, there is flux of blood caused as well by rupture of a vein caused by
violence, (and for the most part in greater abou^dance) as by dissection of the
same. And again I imagine, that (according to their most monstrous opinion)
our Savior had been in the Sacrament, as the soul is said to be in the body:
that is, totus Ch: in toto sacramento, et totus in qualibet part sacramenti.
So as whether you cut, or break the sacrament after consecration, the part
that you distribute, does co^taine whole Christ, and every part of him; then
can no incision divide our Saviors body, and cause it to bleed, no more then
cutting of an arm can divide the soul. I fear his deuilship was too sudden
in this resolution of bleeding, or else that his wits were troubled with smoke.

Secondly I wonder (considering the deep wit, and policy of the devil) how it
stands with his wisdom, to resolve so clear and easily on the Romish
Catholics side, all the deepest matters depending between us and them:
considering (as Edmunds, the devils priuado, affirms) that Protestants be all
friend to the devil, and Catholics his sworn enemies. This is to weaken
himself and his forces, and to cause his friends to forsake his colors, and
fly unto his enemies; as we find, by these his temerarious resolutions, he
lost 4 or 5000. long-bild birds at a clap. Either all is not well with the
devil in his wits, or else the priests had so scalded him in the breech, as he
durst do no other. And what a strange advantage have the Romists of us
Protestants, that have gotten them two heads, whereof neither can err, a Pope,
and a devil?

The devils aunswers and resolutions here to cases propounded by the priests,
are divine Oracles, far passing the old Oracles he was wont to make in
Apollos Temple at Delphos, or the Trophonian den: for they were mixed with
aequiuocation (the new Iesuitical, and old diabolical trick) but these are
clear, direct, and plain. Dibd: What say thou to the Sacrament of the
Altar? Devil. It is the very body of Christ, cut it and thou shall see it
bleed. And herein the devils headship surpasses the Popes headship by far:
for the Popes head-peece may ache with strong wine, stirring choler, or strong
poison; and his Holiness must have a counsel called, and he must be placed in
his Consistorian chair (as Caiphas in the seat of the High priest) ere he
can prophecy certain and right; and it must be in causis fu^damentalibus
fidei to: and then he shall speak truth whether he will or no, like Balams Ass:
but the devils headship needs none of these molestations, solemnities, nor
exceptions. His censure is in actu vltimo, ready, quick, certain, sound,
infallible, clear, admitting no interpretation. Who being always ready at
hand to command, by Mengus his whip, his club, or his deuil-bugge, or an
Exorcists holy hands, more potent then all these, and having his tail well
sizled with brimstone, or scalded soundly with holy water before, what a
good-yeere needs all this leuel coil, and stir, for determinations of
counsels, resolutions of Popes, allegations of Fathers, disputations of
subtilissimus, angelicis, Seraphicus doctor ex ordine minorum, that do cramp
men's wits, and turn them out of their sockets. Ecce your subtilissimus,
angelicissimus, Seraphicissimus Doctor the devil: and it is no more then thus.
Exor: Devil, what say thou to the Pope? Is he Antichrist, or head of the
Church, yea or no? Devil. Oh no, he is the head of the Church. Exor: May he
excommunicate Princes, and diuest them from their crowns? De: Oh he may, he
may. Exor: Has he the temporal sword directly or no? and is he Rex regum of
the world, and all the Emperors, Kings, and Princes his Lieutenants, to place,
and displace at his pleasure? De: Oh they be all his vassals. Exo: May the
Jesuits (his spirits) in ordine ad Deum cog, lie, aequiuocate, adulterate,
murder, stab, poison Christian Princes, for aduauncing the Popes Monarchy,
and the King of Spain, or no? De: Oh they may do what they list in ordine ad
deum. This is a short cut, it is but an Oh for a preface, and the rest is an
Oracle: and so all the grand cases for either Church, or Commonwealth are
dispatched.

And if they want devils in Italy, to exorcise, and ask Oracles of: let them
come but over into London in England: and we have ready for them, Darrells
wife, Moors Minion, Sharp, Skeleton, Euans, Swan, and Lewis; the
deuil-finders, and deuil-puffers, or deuil-prayers: and they shall start them a
devil in a lane, as soon as an Hare in Waltham forest, that shall nick it with
aunswers, as dead as Westons, and Dibdales devils did. And we shall as easily
find them a route, rabble, and swarm of giddy, adle, lunaticke, illuminate
holy spectators of both sexes, but especially a Sisternity of mimpes, mops, and
idle holy women, that shall grace Modu the devil, with their idle holy presence,
and be as ready to cry out, at the mowing of an apish wench, and the lowing, or
bellowing of a brainlesse empty fellow: O the glory of God: O the power of
prayer: as the Romish guls did troop about Sara, Fid, and Anne Smith, and cry
out at the coniuration of the Exorcist: O the Catholic faith! O the power of
the faith Catholic. Haec tempora, hi mores. These are the times, wherein we
are sick, and mad of Robin good fellow, and the devil, to walk again amongst
us: and (I fear) the latter times, wherein lying signs, feigned wonders,
cogged miracles, the companions of Antichrist, shall prevail with the children
of pride, giddines, and misbeleefe.

We do not asseuer, that the devil cannot say a troth, or that he has not
some-time proclaimed the truth: we know he cried, and said to our Savior
Christ, We know thee, who thou art, the holy one of God: wherein he said, and
cried truly: but this was upon coaction, from the mighty hand of God, and not
upon questioning, and dialoguizing with the devil, which we never read, that
either our Savior, or his holy disciples did. Nay, we see that our Savior
checked the devil, so saying truly of him, and commanded him to hold his
peace, as not accepting of any witness, or testimony from the devils. If
Edmunds, and his twelve deuilish tragaedians could in deed have coniured a
devil: (as the devil of devil there was, but the cogging, coniuring knaves
themselves) that would have given testimony to the prayers, Sacraments, and
service of God, established in our Church, (as they feigned Modu their devil to
do:) we would have disdained, and rejected his testimony, as our Savior
Christ did.

But see Westons great wit, the Author and contriuer of this deuill-sport. When
the cogge-deuill speaks of us: O that is our disgrace, and confusion: when he
speaks of the Romish church, and the bleeding of the Sacrament: O that is Gods
oracle, and their triumphant exaltation. O despicable heathenish beggerie, to
go a begging good words and credit from the devil. And lo here (good
Christian Reader) plain Gentilisme, without welt or cover. The Gentiles being
forsaken of God, and given up into a reprobate mind, did resort unto their
Oracles, to ask other counsels, and resolutions from the devil; and what do
our Romish Impostors less, or in other sort, then Croesus, Alexander, Pyrrhus,
and the rest of the heathen Captains did? Let some subtle Sorbonist give me
an essential difference between them. They asked the devil questions; so do
our priests: they asked about matters of their commonweal; our priests do
more: they ask about matters of God, and the Church, they took the devils
word for a graceful divine favor unto them; so do our priests: they accounted
the devils answer as the oracles of God; so do our priests: It is the body of
Christ, (cries the devil) cut it, and thou shall see it bleed. Why now it is
cock, or deuil-sure, against all the Protestants in the world: except the
difference be this: the devil never answered the heathen Captains in any
matter of import, but in amphibologies and clouds, for fear of being taken
tripping in a lie: our Romish devils, do give their answers barefaced,
without any circuition, or aequiuocation at all: and therefore our Romish
devils are sure the sons of their sweet Sire the Pope, and the darlings of
their dear mother the holy Church of Rome. But o lamentable desperation of the
church of Rome! When King Saul for his disobedience, was deprived of the good
spirit of God, and had a bad spirit sent from God, to haunt and afflict him,
and that Almighty God in his heavy displeasure, would neither answer him by
Vrim, Thummim, nor revelation from heaven: he then in a desperate mood goes to
the Witch at Endor, to ask counsel of her. Quid dicis? What say thou to my
state? The loathsome abominations, and Ethnike Impostures of the Church of
Rome, wherewith they have gulled, and made drunken the Kings of the Nations,
being by the piercing glorious light of the Gospel displayed, and uncovered to
the open view of the world; and that church for her whoredom being deprived of
the holy spirit of Almighty God, and given over to the spirit of darkness,
giddines, and iugling deceit; having now neither testimony from Gods divine
Oracles, nor breathings from that heavenly clear fountain, nor presence of
holy Fathers, to countenance their monstrous deformations; do in a desperate
fury, and hellish resolution, resort unto the Oracles of the devil, and would
conjure up from hell the Prince, and power of darkness, to be their proloquutor,
and to grace them with a wonder.

Hear their lamentable voice, fraught with despair, quid dicis? Prince of
darkness, what say thou for our Mass? What say thou for our Sacrament of
the Altar? And now (good Reader) observe the top of hellish resolution, and the
gulf of despair: wherein the Romish church is plunged: when neither God,
Angel, nor devil, can be gotten to speak for them (for here was neither
Angel, S. Mary, S. Barbara, nor devil, nor spirit, in all this feigned
tragaedie, as we have let you to see, thorough the whole course of the same) O
lamentable desolation! Weston, and his twelve Priests, do play the devils
themselves, and all to grace from hell, (being now forsaken of heaven) their
pope, their Mass, their Sacraments, their Medalls, their agnus Dei, their
charms, their enchauntments, their coniurations, their relics, their hellish
sorceries: et praeualuit hec potestas tenebrarum: This power of darkness, played
by the children of darkness prevailed, to the gayning unto his holiness, and to
hell, four or five thousand souls, and that in a very little, and short time.
Whose heart will not bleed for pity, and his eyes gush out with tears, for
compassion, of our blinded, besotted, bewitched poor Nation? The rather, when
he shall cast his eye upon the maine work, shape, and end, of all this
deuillish devise, which was this. One of the chief impediments, that have
hindered from time to time, the designments of the Pope, the King of Spain,
and their agents, against her Majesty, and this Kingdom, has been the want
of a sufficient number of Catholics here in England, to assist them: for the
supplying whereof, his Holiness has from time to time set on work all his
instruments of hell.

When the Lords in the North, were to take up arms against her Majesty, and
the state, the Pope denounced his Excommunication against her, and against all
that should take her part: and sent his Priests hither, not only to intimate
unto the^, what the Pope had done therein; but likewise to solicit as many
Catholics, as they could, to unite themselves in strengthening that
rebellion; assuring them, that they were absolved from their duty, and
allegiance, and that they were bound, under pain of the Popes displeasure, and
of incurring the like censure, if they should refuse so to do. And Saunders is
confident, that if there had been sufficient notice in time of the said
excommunication, the number of the Catholics, that would have taken part with
the said Earl, would have been so great, as that her Majesty, with all the
forces she could make, could not have been able to have withstoode them.

At what time the second attempt (as I have touched in the beginning) by force,
was in plotting betwixt the Pope, and the King of Spain, for the sending over
into England of the Duke of Guise: ( Saunders being gone about that time into
Ireland, to animate, and assist the Traitor Desmond, and likewise to incite,
and allure her Majesty's subjects there, to take his part) the fear of want of
sufficient assistance here at home, did greatly perplex them: whereupon,
about the year 1580, and a little after, many more priests (and some Jesuits
also) were sent into this Realm, then at any time before, to labor by all
means possible, for the withdrawing of her Majesty's subjects from their
duty, and allegiance, by reconciling, and uniting their hearts to her mortal
enemy, the Pope. To which purpose, it were hard to recount their false, and
alluring enticements, by exclaiming without all civil modesty, and truth,
against the doctrine of the Church of England, now established: by deprauing
her Majesty's government, and the whole estate of the Realm, in most
barbarous, and outrageous inuectiues, and libels, and by terrifying of some,
and perverting of others, with strange reports of the strength, and preparation
of the King of Spain, and the Pope, ready to invade this Land. About this time
also their traffic, and merchandising, by pardons, medals, grains, Crosses,
Agnus deies, was exceeding all measure, wherewith they deluded, and inueigled
many of the simpler sort. But all these devises notwithstanding, either for
that the number they labored for, did not so increase, as they desired, or
that the Jesuits had an ambitious desire, to carry away the garland from the
rest of their brethren, and companions in this service. Fa: Weston, then the
Provincial of all the Jesuits in England, devised this hellish trick of
casting out devils: by the which they so prevailed, as they gained in a very
short space, four or 5000 to be reconciled to the Pope. And such was at that
time the zeal, or rather fury of these new gained Proselytes, and the elder
sort of Pharisaical hypocrites, so kindled, and enflamed with the admiration of
the divine power, which they supposed to be in these priests, as (besides the
large contributions, which they gave the^) no marvel if they would have
followed them through thick, and thin, fire, and water, purgatory, and hell, to
assist any foreign, or domestical power against her Majesty, and her
Kingdom. I wish, and earnestly pray for these, gulled, deluded, bewitched
poor souls, that they may now at last lay their hand on their hearts, or that
God would open their hearts, to loath those despicable Impostures, and return
unto the truth: assuring them selves, that never any true religion, did assist,
and credit it self by such diabolical dissimulation.

FINIS.
THE Copies of the several Examinations, and confessions of the parties
pretended to be possessed, and dispossessed by Weston the Jesuit, and his
adherents: set down word for word as they were taken upon oath before her
Majesty's Commissioners for causes Ecclesiastical, and are extant upon Record
in the same Court.

The examination of Sara Williams, taken upon her oath, the 24 of April 1602.
before the Lord Bishop of London, Ma: Doctor Andrews, Deane of Westminster,
Ma: Doctor Stanhop, and Ma: Doctor Mountford.
THE beginning of the history taken with Barnes being read unto this
examinate, The book of miracles extant upon record.
how she began first to be possessed, being about the age of 15 or 16 years,
viz: how she had been diverse times scared with ugly visions: how sitting one
night late by the fire, three terrible Cats sprauled about this examinate: how
one leapt over her head, another crept between her legs: how a strange huge
Cat as big as a Mastiffe, stared upon her with eyes as big as a saucer: and
how afterward the same wicked spirit met her in the likeness of a Cat, coming
out of a hollow tree, as she was seeking for eggs. She says, that all these
things thus written of her, are most false: and that she greatly wondreth,
that any man would so write: only she says, that from a child she could never
endure the sight of a Cat. And that when she dwelt with Master Maynie at
Denham, (which was about a year before she went to Mistress Peckham) she
walking one day in a wood by the house, and looking for some Hens (as she
remembers) she espied a Cat coming out of a hedge, which did fear her
greatly, and made her to tremble, and shake, (as she often does when she is
afraid) but she says, that she was the more scared then, because she was
alone. This tale, she thinks, she told first to her Mistress, and afterward
to certain Priests, and further says, that if any Priest, or other Catholic
has been the author of those words, before read unto her, they have falsely
contrived them, as she thinks, upon the occasion of the said Cat. For she
denies, that ever she had been used, before she fell into the priests hands,
to be affrighted with any ugly visions, or that ever any Cat (to her knowledge)
did either leap over her head, or run betwixt her legs, or that she heard
any such terrible noise, or that she ever saw any Cat as big as a mastiffe,
with eyes as broad as a saucer.

She says, that when she came to Fulmer, to dwell with Mistress Peckham,
which was about Michaelmas (as she remembers) she had not been there long
before she heard, that the house was troubled with spirits, so as every noise,
and thing that she heard or saw, did fear her.

She further says, that the tale read unto her out of the said book,
concerning her leaving of her supper, being greatly afraid, the 12 of October,
Anno 1585, is most false: Page 20.
as that she perceived being at supper a puff of wind coming in at the
door, that she saw a dog of two colors, black and green: that therewith a
spaniell of the house bayed once: that she this examinate, was then pulled by
the eyes, that the thing that pulled her by the eyes, went into her mouth, and
resting at her heart, burnt her intolerably: and that therevppon she cast away
her knife, and would eat no more meat for that time. At the hearing of these
things read unto her, she used these words; O Jesus that any body should report
so of me. That which happened at that time, was as follows.

She says, that being at supper, here was great thunder and lightning, and
that there happening one great flash of lightning, and a great clap of thunder,
the dogs therewith ran out of the hall barking. And herewith she confesses
that she was greatly afraid, left of her supper, and grew to be sickly after
it. And more then this she denies to be true, and maruaileth that any should
be so wicked, as to write in that sort of her.

She further says, that after her coming to Mistress Peckham, (GOD having done
his part for her) diverse men did attempt, to offer her some injury; and that
amongst the rest, she was very loath to go into any place, where Ma: Dibdale
the priest was, not knowing him the^ to be a priest. Insomuch as when her
Mistress would send her with water to his chamber, or upon any other business,
and she showing herself unwilling thereunto, they told her afterward, that
out of doubt it did proceed from a wicked spirit, that was then in her, that
she could not at such former times well endure to be in Ma: Dibdales company,
or to go into his chamber, he being a priest, as afterward she perceived.

Concerning her Mistress moving of her, Page. 21.
to bless herself with the sign of the cross, she says, that when she
came to dwell with her, she taught her to bless her self in Latin, and at
some words to make a cross on her forhead, at others on her belly, at others,
first on one shoulder, and then on the other shoulder, and with the last words
upon her breast. This prayer, and manner of blessing herself she says, that
being dull to learn, it was a good time before she could do it rightly. So
as when her Mistress, and Ma: Dibdale willed her to bless herself, and to use
the signs of the cross, she being very evil at ease that night after the
lightning, she could not easily hit upon the words. Also she well remembers,
that in saying the Creed, she stumbled at the word Catholic Church.
Otherwise she says, that all these particulers are most false, as that she
could not abide M. Dibdales presence for burning, especially when he laid his
hand upon her diseased place: that she should say, her Master had commanded
her, that she should not bless herself with the sign of the cross, or that
she could not endure a casket of relics, or that she ever so much as dreamed
at that time that she was possessed, or that the devil was her Master, or
that she ever said, our Lady did not love her, or that our Lady was with her,
and chid her, and said she loved her not. These things she says she verily
belieueth to be false, and that it was very evil done of them, whosoever they
were that writ them.

Page, 22.
She also says, that those things are most false, which are written to have
been uttered by her upon the 17. of October, as that she should say that her
father, mother, and friends, were in a damnable case by going to the Church.
For at that time she this exam: was not a recusant, nor disliked going to the
Church: or that she affirmed that it was dangerous for little children to go
to the Church. She further says, that about this time they began to give her
things to drink, which she could not endure, for that she perceived they made
her sick, as holy water offended her because it was salt: and at such times
she says, that they (Ma: Dibdale, and such others as were present) would say,
it was not she that disliked the^, but the devil in her.

Further she says, that within about a fortnight (as she reme^breth) they
prevailed with her to make her a Romish Catholic, and then notwithstanding the
devil was in her, as they said, yet they caused her to receive the blessed
sacrament, as far as she remembers.

Page. 23.
She further says, that in the book concerning the sights, which are
pretended that she should see at mass, all that therein is set down, is most
false, as that she should see a black man standing at the door, and beckning
at her to come away: that she could hardly look up in the elevation time: or
that she saw nothing then but the priests fingers. But she says, that she
does not certainly know, whether she told them any such thing, or no:
confessing, that she did very often tell them those things, which were untrue,
after she perceived, how she could please them.

Also she says, that it is likewise very false that is written of her, as that
she should upon the 30 of October see the likeness of a Wrenne upon the top of
the priests fingers. Page 24.
This examinat further hearing the report out of the book how it is said, that
she was troubled upon All Saints day, she says, she does not remember the
particular times when they bound her in the chair, and applied their relics
unto her. But adds that they troubled her very often, praying God to forgive
them, and saying, that when she came to the chair, she was so used, as that
every time (if she might have had her choice) she would rather have chosen to
have ended her life, then to have gone into it.

And concerning her dumbnes, and coldness, Page 23.
that she could not speak till they had signed her throat with the sign of
the cross, and applied holy relics unto it. She says that she does not
remember any such thing, but thinks it is altogether untrue. At the least, if
at any time she were past the use of her senses, it was by reason of such
waters and drinks, as they compelled her to take: and that if she were at any
time silent, and did afterward speak, it was not because they had signed her
throat with the sign of the cross, or applied holy relics unto it, albeit
she confesses, that whatsoever she did or spoke, they would ever expound it,
as they list themselves, and say it was done or spoken by virtue of holy water,
and other consecrated things.

Further, Page 23,
touching the report of that which is pretended to have been seen, and spoken
of by this examinate upon All Souls day after dinner: she says, she is
ashamed to hear such things to be written, God almighty knowing that they are
very false. And this she affirms (she says) as in the sight of Almighty
God, and would so say, if all the priests, that were there, were here present.
And she further affirms, that she is well advised, that she never saw any
devil in the form of a man that should depart from her, when she used these
words as is pretended, Credo sanctum ecclesiam Catholicam, Almighty God forgive
them.

Page 24.
She further says, as concerning the byrd mentioned in the book: she
confesses that a bird came suddenly flying in, whereby she was scared, and
struck it with her beads, and that the bird did afterward (being a Robin
red-breast) escaped out, being on the floor at a hole in the boords, there
being light to be seen, and wide lathes underneath vnmorterd, so as the bird
might easily escape. But for the rest, she says that it is most false, as
that a black man should persuade her to break her neck down a pair of
stairs, and another time to cut her own throat with a knife, and that she saw
the form of a rough dog upon the communion table, or that there was any
grunting in her like swyne, or croaking like a toade, or that she ever received
her sight by the priests fingers, or by their breathing upon her. It pittieth
(she says) her heart, that any, that pretend to have any conscience, should so
write of her.

Page 25.
Touching the report, that she should affirm, that one of the servant in the
house was sore haunted by the enemy, (meaning as she thinks, Ma: Trayford)
and that she could never abide the sight of him, because of a thing that
followed him, she says, it is utterly untrue, adding that she was so far
from disliking the sight of him, as that she rather thinks, she loved him
too well.

Page, 25.
Concerning the ceremonies of baptism mentioned, she says, that the priests
did persuade her, that her baptism could not avail her, except she also were
partaker of their ceremonies, which were holy oil, holy salt, and holy
spittle, as she remembers. The salt they put into her mouth, and with their
fingers, wet either with spittle or oil, did touch her lips, her nose, her
eyes, and her ears, as she thinks, and in the mean time she had a Chrisome
cast over her head, being of half an ell of holland, with a cross in the
midst of it. At that time they changed her name from Sara to Mary, whereunto
she was the more willing, because they told her, there was never any Saint was
called Sara, and the name of Marie pleased her better.

She also says, that neither by the feeling or smelling of a Priest, she
either received at any time her hearing, or sight, Page, 25. Ibidem.
never having been hitherto blind or deaf, (she thanketh God) only she
says, that through their evil usage of her, she grew to be troubled with the
passion of the heart, because she conceived very great grief, by their bad
using of her, and that through the said passion, she has diverse times
swounded. At which times upon her recovery, they would usually say, that she
received her sight, and hearing, and other senses again, by the virtue of
their relics, and touching of her. And at that time she partly believed them:
but since having been diverse times troubled in that sort, since she was
married (as her husband knows) for the which she may thank the said priests;
she has by Gods goodness recovered her health again, without any of the
priests helps, whereby she now persuades her self in her heart, that she was
then greatly deluded by them. She further says, that she well remembers, that
Ma: Trayford one night did seem so be greatly troubled, and afterward did
pretend to be suddenly well, Ma: Dibdale the priest having catched him in his
arms: but she utterly denies, that she ever saw any Mouse offering to come
out of his mouth, Page. 28.
or after going out at his care, or that the Priests mouth did hinder the
devil from coming out at Ma: Trayfords mouth. These things, she says, are
all fained, and false, and farther adds, that she well remembers, when she
was with them, they would tell many things of her, which she knew to be false,
but durst not say any thing against them, for offending of them.

Page, 29.
Where it is said, that one devil persuaded Ma: Trayford, to have hanged
himself, and that another moved this exam: to go out at Mass time, and that
she thereby hindered Ma: Trayfords ungracious purpose. Jesus have mercy upon me
(quoth this exam:) what wickedness is this? God is my Judge, that it is most
false.

Also, she says, that it is a shameful untruth, where it is reported of her,
that she by crying upon God, and her blessed Lady, and by casting holy water
upon Ma: Trayford, made the devil to leave his hold, having (as the book
says) in the likeness of a Toad, catched him by the leg.

Page. 32.
Touching the child George Peckham, she confesses, that one time, the priests
holding of her hands, he did beat this Examinate with one of their Stoles,
pitifully about the face, in such sort, as she did not love him ever since.
For though the Stole could give no great blow, yet it made her face to smart
exceedingly. But this, she says, was at Denham, and denies, that for ought
she knows, or remembers, he ever kept the devil from her at Vxbridge,
either with holy water, or holy candell.

Page, 32, Ibidem.
Thus much also of Hobberdidaunce (as it is in the book) she well remembers,
and says, that her Mistres, as they were at work, had told them a merry tale
of Hobberdidaunce, that used his cunning to make a Lady laugh: which tale she
this examinate, does very well yet remember, and therefore is fully persuaded,
that when the priests did pretend, that the spirit was gone out of her, and
urged her to tell, what name it had, she affirmed it to be called Hobberdidaunce.

There being read to this examinate, out of the same book, the pretended
names of diverse spirits, which the priests gave out, that they cast out of her,
and that the said priests delivered, whilst they were in her, as Lusty Dick,
Killico, Hob, Cornercap, Puff, Purre, Frateretto, Page. 33,
Fliberdigibet, Haberdicut, Cocobatto, Maho, Kellicocam, Wilkin, Smolkin, Nur,
Lusty jolly Ienkin, Portericho, Pudding of Them, Pour-dieu, Boniour,
Motubizanto, Bernon, Delicate, this exam: says, that there were very strange
names written upon the walls at Sir George Peckhams house, under the hangings,
which they said were names of spirits. And adds, that she perceauing still,
that when they said it was the devil, that spoke in her, and that they would
needs have her from time to time, to give it some name, she to content them,
did always devise one name or other, and verily thinks, that she came near
sometimes to some of the names, which were written upon the wall, because she
had often heard them, and says, that they run then in her head. And she
further thinks, that the priests themselves did set them down in better
order, then she did utter them. But amongst the rest, she says, that the name
of Maho came into her mind; for that she had heard before her uncle read the
same out of a book, there being a tale therein of Maho.

The tale of Lusty Dick, mentioned in the said book, she says, is set down
falsely, even as he that made the book list. The Amice therein mentioned, was a
cloth, Page, 33. Ibidem.
that the priest had put over his head, when he went to Mass, which did
signify the cloth, wherewith the Jews did blindfold Christ, and says, it
is likely, that if they did lay it over her mouth, she might blow it up, least
it should stop her wind. And for the other speeches, she says, it may be, that
when they urged her to answer those questions, she answered, as it came in
her mind accordingly. And for the stink of brimstone, she verily thinks, it
may be true, for that the chamber did still stink of it, they used it so much.
That which is reported of her in the said book of three Captain devils, Page,
34.
that should go out of her ears, having every one of them 300 with them,
which this exam: should have felt, in diverse parts of her body. She says, it
is an abominable untruth, and that she meruaileth, what they that so have
reported of her, should mean, in that manner to abuse her a poor wretch, that
never meant them any harm. Touching that which is written of the pretended
spirit named Puff, as that he should say upon S. Hughs day, Page, 34. Ibidem.
he would go ring for the Queen: She verily believes, that either those
words have been devised by the writer of the book, or else that if she this
exam: uttered them, it was because she heard them speaking of ringing that day,
in honor of the Queen, and knew that thereby she should please them. For (as
partly before has been touched) she always framed her self to use such
words, as she thought would content the Priests. And where there is mention
made, that she should say, that spirits have been raised up by a Coniurer to
keep money: She confesses, it may be she might use such speeches, because she
had heard talk, that there had been coniuring about the house for money. As
touching that tale of the xviij. of November, how Purre was cast out of her,
how she was bound fast in a chair, and how the Cross being laid upon her
head, Page, 35.
did so burn the devil, as that she thought it would have burnt out that
part of her head, which it touched: She answers, that all of it almost, is
either falsely devised (as she perceaueth a number of things are in the said
book) or else that it may be that she her self did then pretend something of
it to be true. But she does not now remember it. For she says, there were so
many things done, and so long since, as she thinks, she cannot remember a
great part of them: only she adds, that she cannot forget her binding in a
chair many times. The manner whereof, was as follows.

When the priests were purposed to make the wicked spirit to show himself in
this exam: and to expel him (as they said) they would cause her to be bound
fast in a chair, and then give unto her a certain drink, which as she
remembers, was a hallowed drink, consisting of Oil, Sack, Rue, and some
other things, which are now out of her mind. But this she well remembers, that
look what she most disliked, and hated, they would still compel her to take,
pretending that it was not she, but the devil, that disliked it. And although
she knew that therein they did abuse her, and that few women there are, that
would not indeed abhor such a drink, yet she durst not but seemed to yield
unto them, but indeed they did compel her still, alleging that whatsoever she
said, or did against it, it was the devil that did it, and not she, whereas in
very deed, she took such a dislike at that time of those thing, as yet to
this day she cannot endure them. In so much, as about three years since, this
exam: having a pangue of sickness in the Market at Oxford, some of her
neighbors gave her Sack at unawares unto her, which as soon as she perceived,
she fell to be very sore sick upon it, and was constrained to lie there all
night: the offense of the Sack being the only grief she had, after she was
recovered of her said pangue.

At some times also they would burn brimstone under her nose, at another time
feathers, and diverse such loathsome smells, which they said were hallowed, and
then they would with very maine strength, though she strugled very much, bend
her face just over the smoke, which was by the burning of the said brimstone,
and other things in a chafing dish, which they would hold so near her nose, as
sometimes besides the smell, the very heat would trouble her. When she was
thus holden, she says, that the very pain she felt, caused her to cry, and
scrich very loud, and to struggle as much as possibly she could till her
strength failed her. At one time she was so extremely afflicted with the said
drinks and smoke, as that her senses went from her, and she remained in a
swoune as afterward it was told her: upon her recovery, she remembers that the
priest said, that the devil did the^ go down into the lower part of her body,
and that commonly when her strength failed her so, that she could struggle no
longer, they would say, that then the devil grew quiet. At such times when she
cried, they would say, it was the devil, and not she, that so cried. When
she was in this taking, and so bound in the chair, her head being giddy with
the said drink, and her senses troubled with the smoke, she doubts not, but
she spoke many idle and foolish words, which the priests would expound as they
thought good, which she does now perceive especially by hearing those things,
which are written of her in the same book.

Page, 34.
As touching the fit, that it is said she had upon the 15. November, she says
that it may well be, that she used hard speeches against the priests in the
heat of her grief. And she well reme^breth that diverse times, though she was
loath to displease them, yet when they handled her so extremely, she did
sometimes use some hard words toward them, and threatened to complain of them.
And then their common saying was, that it was the devil, and not she that
spoke, because he could not endure any Catholic priest. Her sister Frauncis
being then in the house, and seeing how badly she was used, did diverse times
persuade this exam: to steal away, and go home, and complain hbw she had
been handled by the said priests.

At one time she was so vexed, as indeed she ran away toward a little
brook, that was not past half a yard deep, meaning to have run through it,
and so to have escaped from them, thinking that they would not have followed
her through the water. But they catched her before she came to the brook, for
they watched her so diligently at all times, as they would not suffer her to
go out of their sights. And their pretense was for so doing, least she should
have made away her self: which she says (she thanketh God) she never
intended, but only to have been delivered out of their hands: whereas she
says, it is very likely, that they had such a watchful eye over her, least she
should escape, as fearing she would complain of them. At the same time she
ran away as before is expressed, one of them that ran after her, which was
her Master Ma: Peckham, (as she remembers) gave it out, that she was carried
above ground, and the priests affirmed, that the devil did mean at that time
to have drowned her. And it is not unlikely this exam: says, but that she
herself to please them, did confess as much. Her pretended carrying in the
air, was made amongst them a kind of miracle, whereas this exam: does know it
to be a lie, and does perfectly remember, that she ran indeed, as fast as
she could, but for any flying, it is a mere fable: although at that time she
was content to sooth them in it.

Concerning the casting out of her of Captain Frateretto, Page 35.
with all his company of evil spirits (as is pretended in the book) upon the
21 of November, she says, that it was the ordinary custom of the priests to
be talking of such, as had been possessed beyond the seas, and to tell the
manner of their fits, and what they spoke in them: also what ugly sights they
saw sometimes, and at other times what joyful sights, and how when relics
were applied unto them, the parties would roar: how they could not abide holy
water, nor the sight of the sacrament, nor the anointed priests of the
Catholic Church, nor any good thing. But how they would greatly commend such
as were heretics, and many such things besides she has heard them report, as
how the devils would complain that when the priests touched the parties, that
they burnt them, and put them into an extreme heat, and how sometimes they
could smell the priest. These things (she says) she now remembers by hearing
those things which are written in the book of her self, and confesses that
by the said tales she well perceived how she might please them, and did frame
herself accordingly at such times, as she well perceived it was their intent,
she should so do.

Also she well remembers, that at one time they thrust into her mouth a
relic, being a piece of one of Campions bones, which they did by force, she
herself loathing the same, it being as she thinks against nature to have a
bone of a man put into ones mouth.

As touching the pretended trouble, that she should have upon the 25 of
November, Page 36.
she says, that there were so many such speeches amongst them, as she does
not herself remember, whether any such things were at that time, otherwise
then as before she has confessed. Also she says that it was no marvel
though they made her talk, after they had given her the blessed potion they
speak of. And touching her smiling, she confesses that when she was well, if
she did either smile to herself, or upon occasion of some speech that she
had heard, or at other times if for grief to consider how she was dealt
withal, she sometimes wept, as often she did, they would ordinarily (when they
thought good) say, it was the devil that did so smile, or weep: which put this
examinate almost to her wits end, desiring nothing more then to be rid from
them. She also further says, that she well remembers how one time walking in
the garden with one of the priests, who led her by the arm, because she was
weak, she began to complain unto him of her hard usage, and told him, that
she verily thought they did her injury, and that she was not troubled with
any wicked spirits in her more the^ they were. Whereupon he cast his head
aside, and looking fully upon her face under her hat, What (quoth he) is this
Sara, or the devil that speaks these words? No, no, it is not Sara, but the
devil. And the^ this examinate perceiving she could have no other relief at
his hands, fell a weeping, which weeping also he said was the weeping of the
evil spirit. By hearing of that which is written of her, she says she
remembers these stories, which she thinks she should not otherwise have
thought of.

As touching the report, Page 37.
that Maho should bid her pray unto him as to a Saint, and tell her that it was
but madness to become religious, or to use penance toward her body: also that
the priest said naught in Mass: and that she this examinate must pray as the
Parson taught her at her mothers, Dearly beloved brethren, the scripture
moves us in sundry places, God save the Queen and her Ministers, that she
must not pray in Latin, because God had not commanded her so to pray. She
this examinate says, that she does not remember, that ever she used those
words, but rather thinks they are devised by him, that writ the book.
Howbeit she confesses it may well be, that she did use them upon such
occasions as they gave her by their own speeches, she being always ready
(as she has said before) to speak and do, as she thought might please them.

Furthermore, concerning the pretended vision of things like puppets at the end
of a gallery, she says, that she verily belieueth it is all fained by the
writer of the book, or by some that gave him directions so to write. For she
says, she does not remember any one part of it, but yet dare not upon her
oath affirm, that she told the priest no such thing: for it might be that
she dreamed of such a matter, and that she told the priests of the said
dream, who have made such a matter of it.

Again, that which is written to have been spoken by her upon the Thursday,
Page 38,
as though she understood some Latin words: she well remembers, that at one
time the priests were talking of some such things to those, that were present,
as though this examinate understood Latin, which they said was the evil
spirit in her: but she then knew, that therein they said untruly, and says
that she perceived, they made what they list of any thing. For the word
Saffron-bag, it may be (she confesses) that she used it, but she does not
remember it.

Page. 38. ibid:
Likewise, where it is said, that she often threatened to raise the town, and
country against the priests, and to cause their heads to be set on London
bridge, and threatened the Exorcist to complain on him to the Queen: she
says, that they who have so written of her, may say what they list. She does
not think, although she was often angry with the priests, that she durst use so
hard words of them, as to threaten them with hanging. And touching her roaring,
it may be, if they mean, that she cried, when they had her in a chair, or
gave her the holy potion, and burnt brimstone under her nose, that they say
truly: but for roaring like a Bull, she says it is false.

Page, 39.
As concerning that which is pretended to have happened unto her upon S. Barbaraes
day, she verily belieueth, that the Priests might wish, that all the
Protestants in England did know the power of the Catholic Church: but she
does not remember that she said so herself.

Page 45.
And touching her coat that was pulled off, she well remembers, that it was a
new gown, which her mother had given her, being laced upon the sleeves: which
being a good pretty fair gown, the Priests did pretend that she was proud of
it, and therefore took it from her; and putting upon her an old gown (she
knows not where they had it) bestowed hers she knows not where, but she
could never see it after. But that she should say her gown was naught, and
full of spirits: she believes it is untrue, or that, if they put any of their
consecrated attire upon her, that she should cry, I burn, I burn: she
believes that she did it only to please them, knowing that she felt no more
burning, by any of their consecrated things, then she did by the rest of her
own apparel.

Likewise, as touching those things, Page, 33.
which are reported to have been uttered, and done by this exam: upon the
xviij. of November: she says, that she does not remember any one part of the
pretended vision of a Lady, accompanied with Gentlemen all booted, that should
offer her to be a Lady, if she would go with them, nor of the dog of two
colors, that should terrify this exam: from yielding to her motion: but she
remembers, that they would oftentimes bring the Pix with the sacrament in it,
for her to kiss, which she did always very willingly, and confesses, that
she believed the Host in the Pix, to be the body of Christ, and that it is
therefore very likely, if any of the priests did ask her, what she did kiss;
that she answered, it was the body of Christ. But she meruaileth why they
write, that the devil should say, it was the body of Christ: and thinks,
that the priests would never have caused her to kiss it, if they had thought,
that it had been the devil, that then had kissed it, and not this examinate.

She remembers, Page, 43.
that she did fear the corne-chamber, (that the book speaks of) in Sir
George Peckhams house; because the report amongst them was, that there had
been coniuring there for money. And as touching the rest of that long
discourse, which was read unto her, how she should say, that all the Court were
her friends, that the Earl of Bedfords soul was in hell, that the English
Ministers had power to cast out devils: she says, she does not remember any
part of it. But acknowledges, that for as much as it is said in the said
book, that she was constrained to take the holy potion, which she so much
detested, and other their slibber-sawces, and that they burnt brimstone under
her nose, she verily thinks, she might utter much tittle-tattle, that now she
cannot call to mind. And amongst the rest meruaileth, that any priest would
write or say, that ever he caused the devil to take an oath upon the blessed
Sacrament. And whereas it is reported, that now this spirit, and now that
spirit went out of her; she says, it might be, that they then said so, and
that she this exam: was contented they should say, what they list, as now she
perceaueth (as she says) that they have written.

She further says, that whilst she was at Denham, one Richard Maynie being
there also, pretended himself to be possessed, and the Priests had dealings
with him. This Maynie did behave himself in the presence of the priests, as
though he had been a Saint. It was marvelous to consider, what devotion he
did pretend. One time being at Mass, this exam: does well remember, that at the
elevation time, he fell down secretly backwards, and lay a while, as though he
had been in a trance. And when he came unto himself again, he said, that
the glory, which he saw about the Altar, did strike him into that trance. But
for all his pretenses, this exam: says, that he was but a dissembler, and a
man but of a lewd disposition. He would needs have persuaded this examinates
sister, to have gone thence with him, in the apparel of a youth, to have been
his boy, and to have waited upon him. He dealt with this exam: to have
confessed her self unto him, saying, that he had as good authority, to hear
confessions, as any of the priests had. Also he urged her this exam: diverse
times, to have yielded to his carnal desires, using very unfit tricks with her.
There was also a very proper woman, one Mistres Plater, with whom this exam:
perceived, he had many allurements, showing great tokens of extraordinary
affection toward her. By which his courses she perceived, that he was very
wickedly bent. Of all these things concerning the said Maynie, this exam:
informed Ma: Dibdale, and told him, that out of doubt he did but counterfeit all
his holiness, and that except he, and the rest of the priests took heed to
themselves, he would in the end bring them to some trouble: whereupon Ma:
Dibdale was very sorry, that ever he had had any dealing with him.

She further says, that at such times, as they pretended, that she had fits,
which was either, when she had any fit of the mother (wherewith she was then
troubled) or when she had been constrained, to drink their holy potion: or
when she was otherwise evil at ease, by reason of their bad usage of her, they
would in the end (when they were weary with dealing with her) say, that the
wicked spirits were gone down into her leg, and sometimes into her foot,
and that they should rest there for that time. And again, when they took her
in hand the next time, they would begin so hunt the devil from the foot, to
bring him upwards of purpose, as they said, to cause him, when they had him in
her head, to go out of her mouth, ears, eyes, or nose. And the manner of
their hunting of him, was to follow him with their hands (as they did pretend)
along all the parts of her body. At one time, when it began to be with this
exam: according to the manner of women, (as since she has perceived) whereby
she was much troubled, the priests did pretend, that the devil did rest in the
most secret part of her hody. Whereupon they devised to apply the relics
unto it, and gave her such sliber-sawces, as made her (as she was persuaded)
much worse then otherwise she thinks, she should have been. At some times
they would cause a maid, that served the Lord Vaux, to apply the relics unto
the place: the which their dealing with her (she says) she does now loath the
memory of it.

Furthermore, this exam: says, that after she was delivered out of the priests
hands, and that they had no further dealing with her, upon pretense, that she
was possessed, she has diverse times, being in speech with Ma: Yaxly a priest,
but her especial friend, said unto him to this effect: Jesus Ma: Yaxly I
marvel, what Ma: Dibdale, and the other priests meant to deal with me, as
they did: I am fully persuaded, that I was never at any time more possessed,
then they themselves were, and yet you have heard, how they have used me. And
he shaking his head, would will me to be contented, seeing the matter was past,
and that I should trouble my head no more about it, and saying, that he was
very sorry for it, and that he hoped, they had repented themselves for dealing
so with her. Why but would this exam: say, tell me I pray you Sir, what you
think of if, whether was I possessed, or no, in your opinion. And still he
would give her no other answer, but shaking his head, will her to be contented,
seeing all was now past.

She further says, that the first time that the priests began to have dealing
with her, one day they had given her certain things to drink, that had made
her very sick, and being in that respect troubled, Ma: Stamp coming from
London, viewed with a flearing countenance this exam: in the face, and said
unto her, as though he had spoken unto a spirit within her: Ah Sir, I have
brought a thing for you: I have a whip in my pocket that will bridle thee. At
that present she understood him not, what he meant, but within a while after,
he pulled a book out of his pocket, which was of Exorcismes, which was the
whip he meant. She also well remembers, that the rest in the house told Ma:
Stamp, how greatly she had been vexed all that day, and that they said, it
was because the spirit was afraid of that book, which he brought with him,
and the devil knew that it was coming.

Whilst she was in the priests hands at Denham, one Haines was a suter unto
her, and although Ma: Dibdale commanded her in no sort to entertain him, yet
her sister bringing unto her a black Iet ring from him, as a token, she put
the same upon her little finger, which being somewhat too little, caused her
finger to swel, as now she beleeeueth: And there-vpon this exam: in her
confession acknowledging that she had received that ring from Haines contrary
to Ma: Dibdales commandment, they said it was the devil under the ring, that
caused her finger to swell: and wetting her finger, and making crosses upon it,
they pulled of the ring by little and little, and said, that it came of by
virtue of those crosses, the devil having no longer power to keep it on.

This examinate also further remembers, that coming toward London from
Hackney in a Coach with Ma: Dibdale, she espied in the way a ragged Colt, and
being the first, that she had ever seen so ragged, she asked Ma: Dibdale,
what it was? And he said it was the devil: which put this exam: into a great
fear, whereas since she has seen twenty such ragged Colts, and is therefore
fully persuaded, that Ma: Dibdale did abuse her, in saying the Colt she then
saw was the devil.

She also says, that one Sherwood a priest, while she was at Denham, and tied
in her chair, would usually pinch her by the arms, and neck, and hands, and
the places thereupon remaining blew, he and the rest would say, that it was the
devil that had so pinched her. At such times as this exam: when he so pinched
her did complain of it, and reproved him for it, they would say it was the
devil, and not this examinate, that so reproved him. Of this injury she has
complained to Ma: Dibdale being well, and he would say unto her, that he was
sure Ma: Sherwood would not use her so, and that she was deceived, in that she
thought so of him.

She also further says, that she well remembers that she could neither do
nor say any thing, but when they list, they would say, it was the devil. At
some times when she was well, if company came in, to whom they meant to show
any thing, they would take occasion, to peep in her face, and use such foolish
words unto her, as might make her to laugh. And if she did but so much as laugh
upon that occasion, or look away, turning her head from them, they had then
enough, it was the devil (they would say) that laughed in her, and then
sometimes she must to the chair, and at some other times, they would conjure
the spirit, as they did pretend, commanding him to go down into her body,
and be quiet. And when this exam: held her peace, which was when they spoke no
more to her, then they would say, the spirit was gone down. At these, and such
like times, when they gave her nothing to make her sick, she found her self
no worse, then she was before, but was content to sooth all what they said.

She further says, that a maid, that came from the Lord Vaux, was appointed
at Denham to keep this exanimate, who did always tell the priests, what she
this exam: either did or spoke, and of herself would always tell this exam:
that it was the devil that so did, or spoke: when this exam: did very well
know, that she did, and spoke at such times, according as she was wont to do,
before she came to the priests hands. By reason of such her bad dealing with
this exam: she this exam: did not love her, and talking of her hard dealing
with her, she this exam: said, she had thought one day to have thrust her
down the stayres. And hereof the priests made a great matter, but did not
blame this exam: for it, because (as they said) it was not she, but the devil,
that meant to have thrust her down the stayres.

Also she says, that if at any time she did belch, as oftentimes she did by
reason that she was troubled with a wind in her stomach, the priests would
say at such times, that then the spirit began to rise in her. Whereas diverse
times since she has been likewise troubled with such wind in her stomach and
rifting, and thereby perceives that they said untruly, when they said that
that wind was the devil. But as she says, if they heard any croaking in her
belly, (a thing whereunto many women are subject, especially when they are
fasting) then they would make a wonderful matter of that. One time she
remembers, that she having the said croaking in her belly, or making of
herself some such noise in her bed, they said it was the devil that was about
the bed, that spoke with the voice of a Toade, and therewith they seemed, as
though they were greatly afraid. But this examinate, though she knew, there
was no such cause of their fear, if they were indeed at all afraid, as they
did pretend, yet did she let them alone, and said nothing unto them.

She further says, that one night whilst this examinate was in bed, there
was a scraping in the corner of the chamber about the feeling, as if it had
been the scraping of a rat, whereupon some that were in the chamber ran forth,
saying, it was an evil spirit, that made that noise. And Ma: Cornelius a
priest being in the next chamber, came presently forth in his gown, with his
book of Exorcismes in his hand, and went into the corner, where the noise was.
There he began to charge the devil upon pain of many torments, that he should
depart. He flung holy water upon the walls, and used such earnest speeches, as
this exam: was very much afraid. Howbeit she says, she well observed, that for
all his speakings, and sprinckling of holy water, the noise did not cease, till
he had knocked with some thing upon the feeling, whereby she since has verily
thought, and still does, that it was either a rat, or some such thing that
made the noise, and not the devil.

She further says, that she never dreamed in the night, but she did tell the
priests of it in the morning, for it was their commandment, that she should so
do. And such her dreams she has learned by their speeches, to call them
visions. Of these visions they would make of the^, what they thought good.
Whereas this exam: confesses, that diverse of them were such toys, as came
into her head being woken, and that she meruailed, how they could make such
matters of them.

This exam: further says, that oftentimes when she was well, and that the
priests upon her laughing or words, would say: It was not she, but the devil,
she did verily suspect, that they did not say truly therein, and that she was
not at all possessed: marry she confesses, that being young, and
unexperienced, when they came unto her in so devout a manner, with their holy
vestures upon them, with holy water, holy candels, and with the Pix, having
the sacrament in it, and prayed, as it seemed so earnestly; she did then
always suspect, that there was something amiss in her, as supposing, that
otherwise they would never have dealt in that sort. But afterward when she was
well again, she had ever a great desire to be gone from them, being verily
persuaded, that then she should be well.

She further says, that except it were at such times, as by giving her the
holy potion, and burning brimstone under her nose, she knew not oftentimes what
either she did, or spoke. The greatest fear, which she had at other times,
when they used their Exorcisme, was least they meant thereby to conjure up some
spirit, they kept such a stir, and made mention of so many names, which they
said, were names of so many spirits.

Whereas in the aforesaid book, there are a number of things reported of this
exam: what she should do, see, and speak in her fits, she verily thinks,
that (some foolish things of her own devise excepted) she neither did speak,
nor pretended to see any thing, but in such sort, as she had heard the priests
report, that other women beyond the Seas had done, seen, and spoken: According
to which reports, she this exam: being in the priests hands, did frame her
self to do, and speak, and report she saw this, and that, as she had heard
of them, that those parties did, that thereby she might please them.

Concerning the reports in the said book, that this exam: should see upon
Christmas even at night, Page 1.
after twelve of the clock, when Masses do begin, viz: great beams of
lightning, to proceed from the Sacrament, as it had been some beams shining
out of a cloud: that upon Newyeares day, she should see fire to flash in at
the window, and a brown dog, as big as a Bullock: that the Sunday after the
Sacrament being reserved, and lying upon the patten, she could not see it, for
a great brightness: and that at the same time, the Priest seemed to be clothed
in silver, that stood by the patten: She this exam: answers, that she is
persuaded in her conscience, they be all untrue reports of her. For she says,
she doubts not, but that otherwise she should have remembered some of them, as
well as she has done other things in the said book. Only she confesses, that
she has heard such things reported of Richard Maynie, that he should have such
sights: but sure she is, she never saw them.

Concerning the report of her, that she should say, Page. 2.
that the blessed Sacrament was but bread: that there was no Purgatory: that
the service in England, being in English, was as good as the other in Latin:
and that she should commend some Ministers: She says, that it may well be, that
she has asked some questions touching the Sacrament, Purgatory, and the
English service, and that she has spoken well of some Ministers: but she is
fully persuaded, that when she demanded such questions, she did it of her
self, to be instructed, and that it was not the devil, that spoke so in her.
Also she says, that when she commended some Ministers, she said therein truly,
and that she thinks there are of them, as there are of the priests, some
good, and some bad.

Page. 3.
Where it is reported of this exam: that upon the third day of January, she
should see Christ in proper form, when she received the Sacrament: that she
found ease of the pain in her stomach, by the application of a holy relic:
and that she flung away her beads, saying to the Priests, fie on you: She
says, that she well remembers, that one offending her, she threw her beads at
the party, but she denies, that ever she received any ease, by applying of any
holy relics unto her, for ought that she perceived, how so ever the priests
have reported, or that she ever saw any such thing, when she received the
Sacrament: but thinks that the Author of the book has devised it of
himself, marry she says, it is not unlike, that she might well enough say,
Fie upon some of the priests, both because there were of them, that used her
hardly, and for that she knew well, that they disliked not such words; because
they would take occasion thereby, to show to those that were present, that the
devil could not endure a Catholic priest.

Page, 3. Ibidem,
That which is reported of her, of the fourth of January, as touching the book
of Exorcisme, she says, that she knew that book very well, from any other,
both by the Letter it self, because she can read, and by the great number of
crosses, which are in many places, a great number of them together. And no
other knowledge she had of any such book, although it be given out, that she
knew the book of Exorcisme, being lapt up in a paper, before otherwise she saw
it.

Where it is said, that this exam: should affirm there were four scourges of
devils, viz: the book of Exorcismes, holy water, the holy candell, and
hallowed Frankincense, she does not remember, that she termed them scourges,
but says, it is like enough that she said, that the devil could abide none of
them, because the priests had told her so.

As touching that, which is written of this exam: Page, 4.
of the fifth of January, that being exorcised, she used many idle words: that
she prated, and scoffed, cursed, and sung, called for a piper: when the Priest
bad the devil, tell him his name, he should make answer in her, Pudding of
Them: all which is said, to have been spoken by the spirit in her; she says,
that she might speak such words, when her head was so troubled, but she does
not remember them. And for the Pudding of Them, she says, she has often heard
it spoken of iestingly, when she was a child. And where it is said, that she
should affirm, that the devil could not tarry in her leg, or foot, as he
was commanded, because of her hose which had been worn by a virtuous, and
godly priest: she confesses, that indeed she ware a pair of Ma: Dibdales
netherstocks, and thinks it not to be unlikely, that when upon occasion, she
said, that the hose she ware, had been Ma: Dibdales; but that further hearing
some of the priests say, that was the cause, that the devil would not remain
in her leg, or foot; she did say as much her self.

Concerning that which is written of this examinate of the 6. of January, that
after consecration, Page 5.
she saw in the Challice a little head, as it were of a child: that she
should call for dyce to play with: that she should see two at either corner of
the Altar, glistering like silver: that she should tell a tale of a Mummery,
that came into the chamber, where she lay: that she scoffed at the Sacrament:
that a propper man in a short black garment, girt about him, having the rest
of his apparel also black, and long hair turned up, also great ruffes
starched with blew starch: that she complained, that the priests hand burned
her, and that his breath tormented her: she says she remembers no part of
all these. What she might speak, when her head was troubled with their drinks,
she knows not, but she does not remember, that ever she said, that she saw
such a little head in a chalice, or that if she had seen it, she should ever
have forgot it.

Page, 5. Ibidem.
Whereas also it is said of her, that there appeared unto her in a fit the said
6. of January a Mummery coming in at the door with a bright eye before them:
a drum sounding, and six in number with motly vizards, which daunced once
about her, and so departed. She answers, that she belieueth, that it is but
a made tale by some of the priests, or that if she told any such her self, it
was but a dream, or some such thing, as she had before heard of amongst them,
it being Christmas.

Also as touching the report of her, that she knew a piece of the holy Cross
by the smell: Page 5.
that a priest put his finger into her mouth, and bad the devil bite it if he
durst, and that the devil in this examinate should answer, he durst not bite
it, because it had touched the Lord: she says she well remembers, that she
heard them talk, that they had a piece of the holy Cross, but she does not
believe, that she knew it by the smell, unless it had been sweetly kept, and
that she might smell the savor thereof, when it came near her. And further
says, that it is not unlike, but that she refused to bite the priests finger,
for if it had been Master Dibdales finger, she knew he was very likely to
have given her a box on the ear, if she had bitten it. And it might be also,
that she said she would not bite it, because it had touched the Lord, she
being then well acquainted with those things: but whether she did so or no, she
does not now remember.

Page 5.
Whereas it is said, that in one of her fits she was senseless the same day,
until the blessed Sacrament was applied unto one of her ears, and that then
she felt a cold wind to come in at one, and a hot air to go out at the
other: she answers, that she remembers no such thing: as neither another
report of a vision, she should have that night, of a whole bench of devils.
Although she confesses, that as her manner was, the most mornings she would
tell the^ one tale, or other, or else (as she says) how should they have had
writing work, but she remembers not, whether she told them this tale or no.

That which is reported to have been done by her the seventh of January, Page
6.
as that she should (as she thought) let her beads fall down to the ground,
because they seemed to burn her hand, whereas the devil threw them directly
upon the Altar, and struck down the corner of the Chalice: this exam:
remembers no such thing, but meruaileth that the devil durst meddle with her
beads, because they were hallowed.

Where it is said, that the same day, this examinate or (as they pretended) the
devil in her, was unwilling to adore the blessed sacrament, because of the
brightness of it: that at the second elevation she should say, I will not be
blessed: At Pax domini sit semper vobiscum, I will none of that: At Agnus Dei,
qui tollis peccati mundi, miserere nobis, upon thee, and not upon me: At the
offering of the Pax to kiss: it stinketh: when the priest said, Domine non sum
dignus, and between the receiving of both kinds: I will not receive. This
exam: says, that the priests had taught her the English of the Latin words
before mentioned, so as she verily thinks, that she was not unlike to say as
it is reported of her, when she heard those Latin words. But she thinks
those things false, that are reported of her to have been done by her, the 8
of January, as that she should talk to the Exorcist in French, whereas she
knows very few words in French, but such as she heard amongst them, as
Boniour, or two or three more.

As touching the long reports of this exam: how she was handled the ninth, and
tenth days of January, viz: amongst many other things, Page, 10.
how the devil was removed out of her hands by the putting on of the
Exorcists gloves: how Maho the chief devil (that was pretended to be in her)
who had two thousand devils at his commandment, had been in England ever
since king Henry the eyghts time: how the said Maho should tell Exorcist, that
if he would cut the sacrament with his knife he should see it bleed: and that
he the said Maho, could not choose but be tormented at the offering of it: how
Maho did first swear upon the blessed sacrament, and kissed it, and then upon
the book of exorcismes, and then kissed that likewise: how this examinate was
vexed, when the priests labored with their holy hands, and by touching of her
with sacred relic, till they had brought Maho into her belly: she answers
with many tears, God forgive them, that thus did abuse me, there was never I
think poor soul so dealt with. And afterward for further answer she says,
that it appears by the book, that the said tenth day of January, they gave
her the holy potion, and burnt brimstone, and Frankincense under her nose,
which did so trouble her, as she thinks, that she might speak she knew not
what, and they likewise write, and report of her, as they thought good, and as
she perceived they had done, by the rest she had heard read unto her out of
that book.

She further says, that being at the L. Vaux his house at Hackney, the
priests a little before (as she remembers) that she was exorcised in the
chair, cause a woman to squirt something by her privy parts into her body,
which made her very sick. She was so used once or twice more at Hackney, and
once at Denham, whereby she knows as she says, that she sustained very great
hurt.

Furthermore she says, that the last time that she was exorcised at Hackney,
the priests gave it out, that the devil departed out of her by her priuiest
part. And upon her marriage some of them told her husband, that she would
never bring him any children, because as they affirmed, the devil had torn
those parts in such sort, as that she could not conceive, which she thanketh
God proves to be false, for she has had (as she says) five children. But
she says by hearing the book read, that is written of her, she has called
many things to mind, and does perceive that she has been very badly dealt
with. And further she says, that after she once came to be under their
hands, they used the matter so with her, as that she never durst do any thing,
but what she thought did please them: so as the longer she continued with them,
the more they wrought upon her, because she had learned, what words did best
like them, as her railing against priests, and commending of Protestants, and
speaking of many vain, and foolish words, whereof they would make what they
list. Likewise she could tell how to feed them with visions, saying, she had
seen this, and that, when she had seen no such matter, but only spoke to
content them.

Besides, in Christmas time there was gaming, and mumming at the L. Vaux his
house, and as she says, she saw the mummers dressed with their vizards:
whereby she learned to talk of such things, when they said, the spirit began
to ascend out of her foot: that is, when he began from time to time (as they
say) to trouble her.

Again, as before she says, that whilst she was at Denham, she told Ma:
Dibdale, that she verily thought, she was no more possessed, then any of them
were (meaning the rest of the priests.) And likewise as she perceived three or
four years after, by Ma: Yaxleyes words, and shaking of his head, when she
complained unto him, how she had been dealt with, that he himself did think no
otherwise of her: so she this exam: as well at other times, whilst she was at
Denham, as afterward many times still thought, but now (as she says) by
hearing of the book, they have written of her, read, she is not only fully
persuaded, that she was never at all possessed, but sees, that they have
written of her most abominably, and villanously, and she prays God to
forgive them, saying, that she needs not to wish them worse hurt, then has,
or will come to them, for their false, and dissembling dealing with her.

Whilst this exam: was in the priests hands at Denham, she well remembers (as
she says) that one Ma: Babington, and diverse other Gentlemen were there. Also
Ma: Edmunds the Jesuit was there, or at the least, such a man as they called
fa: Edmunds, who was a chief man amongst them, and over the rest (as she has
heard.) Likewise, she says, that there were many, both men, and women, that
came thither to see miracles (as it was given out,) who were daily reconciled.
She also remembers, that the priests would say, that those who came thither,
and would not be reconciled, were in great danger, whereas if they would submit
themselves, and reconcile themselves, then the devil should have no power of
them. The number, she says, that upon these occasions were reconciled, was
very great. It was an usual saying with the priests, that many Protestants were
possessed, and that if they were once reconciled, the devil would show himself
in them, and they brought her this exam: for an instance, saying, that til she
was reconciled, the devil was quiet in her. Whereas, she says, she well
knows, that she was (she thanketh God) as free from the devil possessing of
her, til she fell into their hands, as any of the priests were.

After the priests gave over the exorcising of this exam: she was at their
direction conuayed from place to place, for almost four years, and maintained
for the most part at their charges, saving so much as she had for her pains in
those places, where she remained.

When this exam: should be married, Ma: Yaxly the priest told her a story of
Tobias son, and wished her, that in any wise, she should refrain from the
company of her husband, for the first three nights, which counsel (she says)
she followed, being wholly at that time ruled by him.

She further says, that if Ma: Dibdale had lived but a month longer, she this
exam: had not been here, to have been now examined of this matter. For he
was purposed (as he said) to have sent her beyond the Seas, that she might have
been a Nun. And to that end he had provided forty pound, part whereof was in
Ma: Yaxlyes hands, and part in her own. But after Ma: Dibdales death, that
which this exam: had, Ma: Yaxley took from her, and promised her husband, when
she was to be married forty pound, whereof notwithstanding he never received
above five pounds, as she thinks.

Again, she says, that whilst she was in their hands, she had silver, and
gold given her of those, that came to see her, which she still gave to Ma:
Dibdale, because he persuaded her, that she might not have it her self, for
that the devil thereby would tempt her, and do her hurt. When he the said
Dibdale was afterward executed, this exam: had of his a purse full of gold,
which he left with her, where with Ma: Alexander a priest being acquainted, she
this exam: by his commandment, delivered it unto him.

She also says, that by one Hodgskins means, a Pursuiuant, she was a little
after Ma: Dibdales death, committed to prison at Oxford for recusancie, where
she remained about xiiij. weeks. At what time Ma: Yaxley caused diverse to make
earnest suit for her: much venison (as she has heard) was bestowed upon the
Scholars, and at the last she was called before a Doctor, and after some few
speeches delivered.

About nine or ten years since, this exam: was sent for, by two Justices of
the peace, Sir Anthony Cope, and Ma: Doily to be examined, partly about these
matters of possession. But she never did confess a word unto them of it. At
other times also she has been examined, but disclosed nothing. When upon
these occasions she was at any time in trouble, she was still maintained, and
her costs borne by the priests means. She also says, that because she would
confess nothing, she was very much made of. It was ordinary with the priests,
to charge her in any wise, that if she happened at any time to be examined, she
should never take any oath, for that was very dangerous, and told her, that
then she might say any thing, though it were untrue, to excuse her self. They
also warned her, to be very careful, what she said, and in no wise to confess
any thing, that might touch any priest, and do them any harm, saying, that if
she did, the devil would surely possess her again: because thereby she should
dishonor God, and his Priests, and be a slander to the Catholic Church. And
they told her an example of a woman, that after a priest had dispossessed her,
she dealt amiss, and there-vpon the devil came into her again, and continued
in her so long, as she lived. And so they said, he would deal with her this
exam: if she did, or confessed any thing against the^. But notwithstanding she
now says, that she is very glad she has discharged her conscience, and
unburdened her mind of these things, by telling the truth. Nothing doubting,
but that Almighty God will pardon her, in that she yielded so far, to be in
such sort abused by them, and that hereafter the devil shall never have power,
by the persuasion of any priests, or other persons what so ever, to draw her to
such wicked courses hereafter.

The examination of Friswood alias Frauncis Williams, taken upon oath the
second of March 1598, but augmented and repeated the 17. of May 1602. before
the Lord Bishop of London, Master Doctor Andrews Deane of Westminster, Ma:
Doctor Stanhop, and Ma: Doctor Swale.
She says, that about 17 years since, she being then about 17 years of
age, served on Mistrisse Peckham, the wife of Ma: Edmund Peckham, dwelling then
at Denham in Buckingham-shire. This Mistress Peckham, was the daughter of Sir
Thomas Iarret in Lancashire.

The cause of this examinats serving the said Mistrisse Peckham was, for that
this exam: sister Sara Williams, (that likewise served her) was then in the
hands of certain Priests, who said she was possessed. At that time also one
Trayford master Peckhams man was there likewise in the same cafe, with this
exam: sister. By means of these troubles there, this examinats father, being
Sir George Peckhams man, father to the said Ma. Edmund, she this examinate, as
now she verily belieueth, was thought a meet person, to be entertained in the
house, as one, who they thought, would keep all their counsels, howsoever they
should deal, and practice with her, or any other in that place.

This exam. further says, that as she remembers, the distinct time of her
coming to serve Mistress Peckham, was about 3 of 4 days after, that she the
said Mistrisse Peckham came from Fulmer to Denham, withal her household,
bringing with her the said two possessed parties, as it was then pretended.
Upon this examinats first entertainment, many priests resorted to Denham,
under pretense to cast the devils out of those persons. Amongst them all one
Ma. Edmunds a Jesuit was the chief, that bare the sway, and gave directions in
those matters, and Ma. Dibdale was the next, who took especial pains in
their exorcisings. The names of other priest, that resorted thither, as far
as she remembers, were these: Ma. Driland Ma. Midleton, Ma. Yaxley, Ma.
Sherwood, Ma. Stamp, Ma. Tirrell, Ma. Thomson, Ma. Thulice, Ma. Cornelius, Ma.
Brown, Ma. Ballard, Ma. Blackman, Ma. Green, Ma. Bruerton. There were
besides these a great number, whose names she has forgotten, that resorted
thither. And many, especially of the younger priests that were lately come
over, did not tell their names, at the least this exam: did not know them.

Upon her first coming to Denham, and so for five or six weeks, this exam:
heard much in the house of her sister, and Ma. Trayfords fits: and it was not
long after her Mistress coming from Fulmer, before one Marwood was brought to
Denham, and then shortly one Ma: Richard Mainy, who both of them did pretend
themselves to be likewise possessed. Ma. Ballard the Priest brought the said
Marwood thither, and in his company, there came twelve or thirteen as she
remembers, viz. Ma. Babington, Ma. Tichburne, Ma. Dun, Ma. Gage, Ma. Tilny,
and the most of the rest that were executed with Ma. Babington, they came
thither in four or five Coaches.

When this exam: first came to Mistress Peckham, she had before ever used to
go to the Church, but then the priests labored to persuade her to the
contrary. The parties that dealt with her, to that purpose, in the beginning,
were Ma. Edmund Peckham, and one Alexander an Apothecarie, but since a priest.

About the end of the said 5 or 6 weeks, the priests begannne to practice with
this exam: to make her believe also that she was possessed. The manner whereof
was in this sort. She being washing of clothes in the Kitchen at Denham,
master Dibdale the priest came in, and clapping her upon the shoulder, told
her that her mistrisse looked for her. To whom this examinate answered, that
she had almost done, and then she would come unto her. Presently after this
exanimate, and one of her fellows having filled a tub of water, to rince their
clothes, this exam: lifting up the tub, her feet slipped from under her, the
kitchen being paued, and having a shrewd fall, did hurt her hip, with the
grief whereof she was compelled to keep her bed, for two or three days.

Hereupon masters Dibdale coming to this exam: told her, that it was a
wicked spirit, that gave her that fall, and said, that the cause that moved the
spirit so to do, was for that she had washed his the said master Dibdales
shirt, which the wicked spirit took in evil part, because he was a Catholic
priest, to whom the devil could not endure, that any kindness should be showed.
And for that also the same his shirt was fouled with the sweat, which came from
him, in taking pains to exorcise the parties, supposed to be possessed. He did
also at the same time, and afterward, likewise deal earnestly with this
examinate, to persuade her to be a Catholic, and from the time of her said
fall, ceased not to tell her, that she was possessed; and so did the rest of
the priests, that then were there. The said master Dibdale did urge her to be
advised by him, promising that if so she would, she should receive great ease,
and comfort therein.

She also says, that upon occasion of speech with master Dibdale, of the ache
of her hip, he entered into a further examination of her, if she had not before
that time, felt some pain in her body. And she confessing, that sometimes, she
had a pain in one of her sides; Ah quoth he, I thought even so; out of
question, you are possessed, and so have been for a good while, the pain you
speak of, proceeding from the said spirit.

Thus laboring with this exam: to make her to believe, that she was
possessed, they told her, that before they could do her any good, she must
needs become a Catholic; and at the length, by telling her that she was in
state of damnation, and out of the Church; and that she must believe the
articles of the Creed, whereof one was, that she ought to believe the
Catholic Church, which was (as they said) the Church of Rome, she did yield
unto them to be reconciled, as she thinks they term it.

At the time that this exam: was thus become a Catholic, the priests told
her, that her baptism received in the protestants Church must be amended,
because it wanted many ceremonies of the Catholic Church. And thereuppon they
used such things as they thought good, to make her baptism perfect. They cast
a white cloth over her head, with a cross upon it, and using certain words,
they put salt into her mouth, and did anoint her lips, her nose, her eyes,
and her ears. At that time also, they caused her to change her name, so as she
being, when she was christened, called Friswood, from that time forward, she
has been called Frauncis. They told her diverse tales of S. Frauncis, that he
was so holy a man, that he might command the birds of the air to come unto
him, and that therefore his name was made common both for men, and women.

She further says, that after she had kept her bed two or three days, (as
before is mentioned) she did (notwithstanding her said hurt) follow her
business, as well as she could, though she halted. This her so halting, the
priests still said, that the devil caused it, and after omitted no occasion, to
tell her of the pain in her side, and anointing her hip, did always say,
that it was the devil that lay there; till at last this exam: began
(especially after she was a Catholic) to think they said truly, and that she
was indeed possessed. Although (as now she says) she afterward perceived,
that she had never any other trouble, after her hip was well, but now and then
a pain, as she was wont to have in her side, which pain does still continue,
beeng a grief of the spleen, as the Physicians tell her; for ease whereof,
she is commonly let blood once a year. And for any other vexation, or grief
whilst she was under the priests hands, she says she had none, but such as
they procured, by their drinks, and perfumes, and other bad usage of her.

Furthermore she says, that within a while after that she was a Catholic,
the priests told her, that according to their promise, they would now try, to
make her well, and to rid her from the wicked spirit. The manner whereof was as
follows. At the end of the first Mass that ever she saw, which was said by
master Dibdale, he told her, that now they would make trial what was in her;
and thereupon she being perfectly well, and telling master Dibdale, and the
rest as much, yet they would needs have her to sit down in a chair, which
she did. Then they began to bind her with towels, whereat she greatly
meruailed, and was therewith cast into a great fear, as not knowing what they
meant to do with her. Being in this case, master Dibdale began to read upon
his book of Exorcismes, and after a good while, seeing no other alteration in
her, then the tokens of fear, (for she confesses the same increased by reason
of his words, and other his dealings with her) then they urged her to drink
above a pint of Sack, and Sallet-oyle, being hallowed, and mingled with some
kind of spices. When she tasted this drink, which they termed a holy potion,
it did so much dislike her, that she could drink but a little of it at once,
(her stomach greatly loathing of it.) And then the prests said, all that came
from the devil, who hated nothing worse, then that holy drink. So as she was
held, and by very force, caused to drink it up, at diverse draughts. Heere-vpon
(as she says) she grew to be very sick, and giddie, in her head, and began to
fall into a cold sweat, verily then believing, that as the priests said, it was
a wicked spirit, that caused her to be in such case: Whereas afterward, when
she better had considered of their dealings with her, she easily perceived,
that the drink they gave her, was such, as might have made a horse sick.

Again, she says, that being thus in the priests hands, from a little before
Christmas, til two or three days before Whitsonday following, she was often
abused in this manner: and at some times when she was bound, (as is before
said) and had drunk the holy potion full sore against her will, they would burn
brimstone in a chafing dish, and hold her nose by force over it: by which
means, she nothing doubts, but that she did commonly grow into some great
outrages, and spoke the can not tell now what.

There was, (as she thinks) a discourse made of her fits, by some of the
priests, the which, if she could hear, she supposes, she should remember many
more things then now she does: But she cannot forget (she says) that many
times, she did complain of hard dealing, used toward her in her pretended
fits, and how injuriously they dealt with her, by giving her that loathsome
drink, and burning brimstone under her nose. Whereunto the priests would
commonly give this answer, either it was not she, that spoke, but the devil;
or otherwise when she was so well, that they could have no pretense, so to say,
then they would bid her be contented, and tell her, that she should, by that
means, merit heaven, and gain a crown of glory. And they would stand much
upon this last reason, in showing how much this exam: had merited at Gods
hands, when any by seeing of her in her fits, and the Priests dealings with
her, were reconciled.

She further says, that the priests would be often talking in this exam:
hearing, of certain women, that were possessed beyond the Seas: how the devils
in them could not abide the holy potion, nor the burning of hallowed brimstone,
nor the applying unto them of holy relics, nor the presence, or touching of
Catholic priests, nor holy water, nor the holy candel, nor the blessed
sacrament, but would start, say they burned, rage, and rail against the
priests, and commend upon every occasion those, that were the soundest
Protestants.

By this means, this exam: says, for her self, (and she thinks, she may
safely so say for her sister, and the rest,) that she learned what to say, and
do, when the priests had her in hand: that is, to start some times, when they
brought relics unto her: to pretend that she could not endure the presence
of the Sacrament, and many things besides: as if the treatise of her may be
gotten, will appear. Howbeit, she says, that after some six or seven weeks,
although at the first, she did not mark the priests doings, nor greatly
observe her own, yet then she began to find their iuglings, and how she her
self, in saying this, or that, spoke nothing, but what she had learned of the
priests.

The chief reason that (she thinks) moved her, not to mark them at the
first, was the good opinion she had conceived of them, being newly reconciled:
and yet as she says, when she saw before that time, into what case they had
brought her sister, she thought that they used her not well, and persuaded her
to run away from them.

This exam: further says, that she well remembers, how one time Ma: Sherwood
told her, that one Ma: Bridges had gotten one of his mothers mayds with child,
and bad her tell him of it, when he should come next thither, and, that this
exam: was troubled. Whereupon she says, that accordingly, as soon as she saw
the said Ma: Bridges, being her self in health, and no way troubled, and in
the presence of Ma: Sherwood, Go to, quoth she, Ma: Bridges, you have gotten
your Mothers chamber-mayde with child, and make no conscience of it. Which
words were no sooner uttered by her, but Ma: Sherwood, took hold of them,
saying; Yea sir, can thou tell that, thou shall be constrained to tell more
anon? And thus he said, pretending, it was not this exam: but the devil, that
uttered those words. Heere-with Ma. Bridges was greatly amazed, and afraid, and
much speech was of it, as if it had been some great miracle.

The said Ma. Sherwood, as this exam: says, at one time, as she was tied in
the chair, did thrust a pin into her shoulder, and she therewith crying,
and saying, what do you? O says he, hear you not the devil, what he says?
No, quoth this exam: it is not the devil, but my self, that spoke unto you.
But he still affirming, that it was the devil, this exam: could not be believed,
and so it was reckoned amongst them.

Again she says, that in one of the fits, where-into they cast her, by their
holy potion, and brimstone, there were two needles thrust into her leg, by
some of the priests, (as she is now persuaded in her conscience,) and upon her
coming to her senses, finding a pain in the place, where the needles were,
she complained of it, and would have put down her hose, to have seen, what her
leg ayled; but the priests would in no wise suffer that, but presently they
got holy relics, and tied them about her leg, affirming that the pain was
procured, by the wicked spirit, and could not be eased, but by those relics.
When they had so tied them about her leg, they charged her in any wise, not
to touch them; but yet notwitstanding this exam: says, that being greatly
troubled with pain, and desirous to case her self, she did now and then
attempt to slacken the relics, being tied too hard, (as she thought.) At what
time the priests still watching of her, as that she could do nothing, but they
would see her, they did blame her for touching of the relics, bad her let
them alone, and said, it was the devil that tempted her, to touch them.

The custom of the priests was, as this exam: says, to appoint a set time,
when they meant to have any solemn Exorcismes, and then this exam: was one,
when she was in their hands, that for the most part, must go to the chair.
After that the said needles had been in this exam: leg, from the fore-noone
the one day, until eleven of the clock the next day, she was brought up into a
gallerie, the Sermon being finished, and a great number there present. At her
coming in, and complaining of the sorenes of her leg, the priests bad her be
of good cheer, and said, they would see if they could help her: Whereupon
Ma. Dibdale, (as she remembers) said unto her, Go Frauncis, sit down, and
put down thy hose: which she did, and then Ma. Stamp, another priest, when her
hose was put down, came unto her very reverently, and with diverse ceremonies
untied the relics, which were about her leg, which being taken away, he
looked upon the sore place, and handled it gently, and in the end thrusting
down with his fingers the skin, and flesh, where one needle stuck so, as the
same appeared, he called unto him those that were present, and said unto them:
See what the devil had done, and so pulled it out. Then feeling her leg a
little while longer, and using his fingers, as is before mentioned, he also
disclosed the second needle; which the people that were present beholding, were
in a great maze, especially to hear what Ma. Dibdale, and Ma. Stamp made of
the matter: how they said, it was the devils doing, and much other speech to
that effect. As soon as the needles were taken forth, this exam: was carried
down again out of the gallerie, and feeling her leg very well eased, it began
to amend every day more, and more, which they said, was by reason of the holy
water, wherewith they washed her leg, when they pulled out the needles.

She further says, that the priests had a custom, to thrust certain things
into the mouths of such, as they said were possessed, under pretense of
relics. And she well remembers, that at one time, when she began to be
troubled with her drink, and brimstone, they thrust into her mouth, some of the
said relics: Whereof this exam: complained, and said, why do you put these
filthy things in my mouth? Ah, quoth they: hark how the devil cannot endure
these holy things. Afterward when this exam: put them out of her mouth, then
they asked her what relics they were? and she told them, This is a piece of
such a man, and this of another. And at one time, they put into her mouth, a
piece of Campions thumb, or his finger, she remembers not whether. When this
exam: at this time, and so likewise, both she, and others, at other times, did
name these relics, and showed their dislike, to have the^ put into their
mouths, the priests would bid the people that were present mark, how the
devil knew all holy relics, of what Martyrs they were, and how he could not
abide them: whereas this deponent says, that both she, and the rest that were
dealt with as she was, did know all these relics, that the priests had
there, having the sight of the^ almost every day, and hearing the priests tell
of whom they were. So that as soon as this exanimate saw any of them, she
could name them very readily, and say; This is such a piece of Father Campian;
this of Ma. Sherwin; this of master Brian; this of master Cottam; this of
mistress Clithero; and so of a great number more, which she has now forgotten.

At another time also, this examinate well remembers, that the priests filling
her mouth with relics, they conveyed in with them a big rustie nail, as she
is verily persuaded in her conscience, so as when they pulled out the relics,
she was almost choked with the nail, and much ado they had to get it out. They
made her mouth therewith to bleed, and affirmed to the people, that it came
out of her stomach, by virtue of the said relics.

Again she says, that being in speech once with master Dibdale concerning
master Richard Mainy, he told her diverse things of him, what wonderful sights
he saw about the Altar, and the sacrament at Mass time. And further said unto
her, that if she would say, when she was to be exorcised in the chair, at
the bringing of the Pix unto her, (as the manner was) that she saw the body
of Christ there in a great brightness, she should by that means greatly
glorify God. And therevppon, as she confesses, she said as he advised her, at
her next exorcising, and a great wonder was made of it.

She further says, that being brought up with her mother, she had learned
to sing by heart certain Geneua Psalms, and that being under the priests
hands, when now and then forgetting her self, she sung any of them, as she
sat at work, the priests, and so others in the house, when they heard her,
would earnestly blame her for it, and say one to another, Do you not hear,
how sweetly the devil sings these Geneua psalms.

Also she says, that when the priests had drawn her to be of their Church, as
is before mentioned, and that she should come to receive the Sacrament, they
told her, she must first vow, and promise, by the virtue of that holy
Sacrament, that she would ever afterward hold the Religion of the Church of
Rome, and never go again to any of the Protestants Churches, nor ever read
the English Service, or the English Bible, or any other English books, written
by the Protestants in matters of Religion. And this vow, she says, is
ordinarily made, by all that are reconciled.

She also says, that she has often times heard some of the priests affirm,
that it was an ordinary thing with the devil, which was in Ma: Maynie, that
when they the said priests, have demanded of the devil, (pretended to be in
him) why he troubled the Catholics with imprisonment, and many dangers,
whilst the Protestants lived in pleasure: his answer was, that the
Protestants were his already, and that he troubled the Catholics, because he
would draw them to himself, and make the^ Protestants if he could: adding that
he would never have troubled Job as he did, if he had thought he could not have
made him to curse God. This exam: also says, that she her self has heard some
of the priests, and (as she thinks Ma: Edmunds) ask Mainy that question, and
he the said Mainy so to have answered them. Also she says, that the priests
in talking of Protestants, have affirmed of them in her hearing, that the
greatest share of them were possessed, and that when England should be again,
as it had been, the devils would then show themselves in them, and they should
have their hands full of chaire-worke, meaning their exorcisings, to cast them
out.

At one time, she says she well remembers, that Ma: Green coming from beyond
the Seas, brought with him certain grains, medals, and Agnus dei; and that
seeing the priests, and others make so great account of them, she said to Ma:
Green, Good Lord, what mean you to make so great a-doe about these things?
What is that wax better then other wax? or that bugle better then another,
whereof you may buy a great number for a penny? Whereupon Ma: Green said, it
was the devil, and not she, that spoke those words. But this exam: told him
again, that she spoke those words her self, and that she meruailed, why they
labored so earnestly, to make both her, and all others believe, that
whatsoever she or they did, or spoke, it was not she, nor they, but the devil:
but he persisted, and said, it was the devil indeed, and not she, whatsoever
she thought to the contrary.

This exam: further says, that one Alexander an Apothecarie, having brought
with him from London to Denham on a time a new halter, and two blades of
knives, did leave the same, upon the gallerie floare in her Masters house.
That next morning he took occasion to go with this exam: into the said
gallerie, where she espying the said halter, and blades, asked Ma: Alexander
what they did there: He making the matter strange, answered, that he saw them
not, though he looked fully upon them; she her self pointing to them with her
finger, where they lay within a yard of them, where they stood both together.
No (quoth this exam:) do you not see them? and so taking them up, said, look
you here: Ah (quoth he) now I see them indeed, but before I could not see
them: And therefore says he, I perceive that the devil has laid them here,
to work some mischief upon you, that are possessed.

Heereuppon master Alexander told the priests what a strange thing had
happened, and a great search was made in the house, to know how the said
halter and knife blades came thither: but it could not in any wise be found
out, as it was pretended, till Ma. Mainy in his next fit said, as it was
reported, that the devil laid them in the Gallery, that some of those that were
possessed, might either hang themselves which the halter, or kill themselves
with the blades.

Now this exam: further says, that she herself did espy the end of the
halter, in master Alexanders pocket, the night before she saw it, and the
blades in the Gallery, at such time as he drew out of his pocket a certain
box of Wafer-cakes for Masses. Whereby she is fully persuaded, as she says,
that he the said Alexander, was himself the devil, that laid the halter, and
knife-blades in the said Gallerie, and as she says, she told master Dibdale
as much, when the search was, how they should come thither. Whereat master
Dibdale being much moved, said, it was not she but the devil, that spoke so
unto him, of master Alexander. And for this her report, and speeches, she
felt, as she says, some smart afterward. For within a day or two after they
had her again to the chair, and did use their exorcismes with her, the
manner whereof was something strange unto her.

They had in a readiness the picture of an Ass, and of the devil, and of Ma.
Fox, as if he were writing the book of Martyrs. The Ass (they said)
resembled this examinate; and the devil within her (being a malicious lying
spirit, that sought to slander the doings of the Catholic priests)
betokened Ma. Fox, who (as they said) had been a malicious liar. They had
there also a long girdle, made of whipcord (as she remembers) it was full of
knots, and termed S. Peter's girdle: this girdle was hallowed, and being lapped
into four doubles, was like a whip.

These things being thus readily prepared, this examinate was bound full sore
against her will in a chair: They compelled her to drink the holy potion,
whereof she made five or six draughts; they burnt brimstone under her nose,
and withal the said three pictures one after another. They pulled off her
gown, and whipped her upon the arms with the holy girdle, pretending that
they meant thereby to hunt the devil out of her. They gave her five blows, in
remembrance of the five wounds of Christ: and seven in honor of the seven
Sacraments, and three in memory of the blessed Trinity, and she knows not
now how many more. With these blows she being constrained to cry out, they
said, it was not she but the devil within her that so cried, because he was
not able to endure the virtue of that holy girdle. But this examinate says,
that howsoever the devil fared, she well knows, that she bare away the
smart, and that her arms were black almost a month after with the blows.

The priests also (she says) had another custom: At the end of every
exorcisme, they would say that the spirit was gone down, sometimes into the
foot, and sometimes into the great toe of the party exorcised. And when
strangers came, before whom they intended to work some great matters, they
would bring the party again to the chair, and being bound therein, they
would begin (as they said) to make the devil show himself, which they did with
this exam: in this sort. The Exorcist having a relic in his hand, as a bone,
or some such hard thing, would graspe her by the leg, and ask her if she
felt any pain that seemed to prick her, and this exam: confessing (as the
truth was) that she felt a pain, (the said bone, or hard thing in his hand
hurting her shrewdly:) Ah (would the Exorcist say) now he begins to stir.
Thus would the Exorcist go pinching of her leg twice, or thrice, before they
came to her knee, and then they would wring her indeed so hard, as that she
should sometimes screech, and sometimes start. And then the Exorcist, and the
rest of the priests that were present would say, now the spirit will up into
her body, you shall hear more of him anon. And have was commonly made at such
times to give us the holy potion, which being so loathsome a drink, diverse
Gentlewomen seeing it given unto us, have wept for pity to see us compelled to
take it. But the priests would tell them that there was no remedy; for
otherwise, except the strength, and force of the wicked spirit were thereby
abated, there was great danger, that he would tear their guts, and inward
parts in pieces, as he was ascending upwards to go out of them.

This exam: says, that when she had well considered of the priests-dealing
with her, and how all the troubles she had, was by reason of their intolerable
drinks, perfumings, and practices with her, wherewith her body was brought to
great weakness; she grew to some more boldness, and did now and then speak her
mind somewhat plainly, though it booted not: for they would say, it was the
devil that uttered it, whatsoever it was, that this exam: spoke, if they
disliked it. She well remembers, that sitting at her work one time, and Ma:
Sherwood sitting also by her looking on a book, she this exam: being very
angry in her mind, to consider how she was used, and with him in particular,
for thrusting a pin into her shoulder, and for diverse other his hard vsages
toward her, said unto him; that she very greatly meruailed, how he, and the
rest durst deal with her, and the rest, as they did: adding, that if she this
exam: or any other should complain of them, they would certainly all of them
be hanged. For (quoth she) how many of the Queens subjects, have you drawn
from her, by these your practices here? Heere-with Ma: Sherwood was much
moved, and went to the priests, to acquaint them with her words. Some of them
(as she has heard) were of opinion, that it were best to put her away from her
Mistres: but Ma: Dibdale liked not that counsel, fearing (as she believes)
that she should have disclosed their dealings. For these her said speeches,
she was within three or four hours very hardly entreated; Ma: Sherwood, and
the other priests, returning unto her, put her in mind, what she had said, and
told her, That it was not she, but the devil, that uttered those words, and
thereupon had her to the chair, and with their holy potion, and brimstone so
plagued her, as being therewith wonderful sick, she fell (as she thinks)
into a swound.

She further says, that whilst these matters were in hand at Denham, there
came very many thither, from time to time. The Catholics would bring with
them such of their friends, as they durst trust, being Protestants, of purpose,
to draw them to the Romish Religion. And she certainly knows, that there was
a very great number upon those occasions reconciled; sometimes an hundred a
week, at the least. Marry at one time, she remembers, that one Ma: Hampden
of Hampden (as she thinks) being brought thither, by Ma: Edward Ashefield,
now in prison, as she has heard, did greatly deceive the priests
expectations, and put them into a great fear. The manner was, she says, of
those who were pretended to be possessed, when any Protestants came in, to
commend them greatly, and to rail upon the priests: in so much as Ma: Mainy,
when he saw Ma: Hampden, did presently salute him, by the name of his fellow
Justice, and use such other words unto him, as when he heard, how they were
expounded, he was greatly discontented with them: and there-vpon speaking
aloude, said thus in effect unto him, that brought him thither (as far as she
remembers) being her self then present. Coosen Ned, I had thought you would
have brought me, where I should have seen some godliness, and not to have heard
the devil; but this dealing I see is abominable, and I marvel, that the
house sinketh not, for such wickedness committed in it: and so he departed. With
these his speeches, the priests were greatly amazed, and fearing the worst, got
them away for that night.

Furthermore, she says, that perceauing many things were false, that the
priests told to those, that came unto them, for the better confirming of her
judgment therein, she devised (of her self) this tale. She told them, that
being in bed, there came a morrice-daunce into her chamber, having these
persons in it, a man with Taber, and a Pipe, the Earl of Bedford that was dead
before, (but one that the priests did greatly hate) and some other noble men
also she named, who are now out of her memory: all these she told them, after
they had daunced about the table in the chamber, went out again as they came
in. When the priests had this by the end, they made great matters of it, termed
it a vision, and told it the Catholics for a very truth; whereat this exam:
laughed in her mind, but durst not gainsay it, and so it went amongst them
for a current vision. And she thinks in her conscience, it was even as true,
as the rest of their reports, both of this exam: and of the others there, that
were pretended to be possessed.

Also she says, that there was a notable devise amongst the Priests, to have
it thought, that the wicked spirits came into this exam: and her sister, by
witcherie. Ma: Richard Mainy before mentioned, being the notablest counterfeit
(as she thinks) that ever the priests had in their fingers, said in one of
his fits, or rather the devil in him (as it was pretended) that one good-wife
White of Bushie, had bewitched this exam: and her said sister: This good-wife
White, was commonly talked of in the Country to be a Witch: the said Mainy also
told the occasion, how they were bewitched. There were (as it was pretended,
that the devil said in Mainy) certain cattle bewitched in Denham, some two or
three years before, which could not be eased, except the two spirits which
troubled them, were sent into two Christian bodies; and there-vpon, quoth he,
to deliver the cattle, she sent those two spirits into this exam: sister, and
her self. When the priests heard these words, they seemed to conjure the devil
in Ma: Mainy, to bring the witches spirit (whereby she wrought) thither to
Denham. And the night following this prank was played by the priests. They had
gotten in the night a Cat amongst them in the Parlor, which they said was the
witches spirit. About the whipping of this Cat they pretended great pains, and
that they whipped her so long, til at the last she vanished away out of their
sight. Afterward they gave it out, that out of all question, the Witch,
whilst they were whipping of the Cat, was greatly vexed, and there-vppon they
sent a messenger to Bushie, to see in what estate the Witch was, who at his
return reported, that when he came to Bushie, he found the Witch in
childbed, and that her child was dead. When the priests heard this report, see
(quoth the priests) to those that were present, how it falls out to be true
that we told you, the whipping of her spirit in the likeness of a Cat, was the
cause that her child died: yea (quoth this exam:) is that true? Why then you
are murderers: whereat the priests were moved, but they knew how to answer
that, as they did, in saying, that it was not she, but the devil in her, that
uttered those words. Of this whipping of the Cat there was great speeches, and
many that believed them, wondered at it. The messenger that was sent to Bushie,
hearing what a marvel they made hereof, became a recusant, being at that
time a Protestant.

There was also another strange thing, that happened at Denham, about a bird.
Mistress Peckham had a Nightingale which she kept in a Cage, wherein Ma: Dibdale
took great delight, and would often be playing with it. This Nightingale was
one night conuayed out of the Cage, and being the next morning diligently
sought for, could not be heard of, til Ma: Mainies devil in one of his fits (as
it was pretended) affirmed, that the wicked spirit, which was in this exam:
sister, had taken the bird out of the Cage, and killed it in despite of Ma:
Dibdale. And further he told them, that the birds neck was broken, and did lie
under a Rosemarie bush in the Garden: whereupon three or four going down,
and finding the bird there, they made a great wonderment of it, whereat this
exam: does verily believe, that either Mainy had killed the bird, and laid it
there himself, or else that this exam: sister did it, and had told Mainy of
it; for she says, that her sister, and Mainy were very great.

Also this exam: says, that if the story, she had heard has been written of
Mainyes fits, could be got, there would appear very many notable practices.
Ma: Edmunds the Jesuit was the chief man, that dealt with Mainy, and has
written (as she has heard) a great book of them. This Edmunds, as has been
said before, was a chief man, and therefore whereas the rest had but their
Albes on when they exorcised any, he commonly had upon him either a vestment,
or a cope. She well remembers, that the said Mainy, sitting upon a time by one
of the priests, affirmed, that unto his sight the priests finger, and thumb
did shine with brightness, especially on the inner sides: whereunto the Priest
answered, that it might well so be, because (quoth he) they were anointed with
holy oil, when I was made Priest. At which words, this exam: laughing, and
calling Ma. Mainy a dissembling hypocrite, the priest said, that it was not
she, but the devil, that did so laugh, and rail.

Furthermore, this examinate well remembers, that Ma. Richard Mainy being
exorcised in the presence of a hundred people at the least, on S. Georges day
in the morning, the priests affirmed, that seven devils did the^ show
themselves in him, by such gestures, and signs, as declared them to be the
Authors of the seven deadly sins. This examinate says, that she has
almost forgotten the gestures, but she will set them down as near as her
memory will serve her. The said master Mainy being bound in the chair, did
lift up his head, looking highly, and made gestures with his hand, as though
he were tricking up himself; whereupon the priests said, that the spirit that
was coming up then, was Pride, as it appeared by the said gestures. Afterward
the said Mainy beginning to gape, and snort, the priests said, that the spirit
that then rose up in him, was Sloth. Then he fell to vomiting, and the priests
said, that the spirit that then rose was Gluttony, and drunkenness. Again, he
the said Mainy talking df purses, and thus much in the hundred, and of the
forfeyting of this, or that lease, the devil that then was risen, the priests
called Covetousness. And thus the priests and he went through all the deadly
sins. The said Mainy, or the devil in him, (as was pretended) commending the
Protestants for his good friends, because they had all the said seven deadly
sins in them, but railing at Catholics, for that they could not endure
them, but did ever and anon cut them of by confession.

The same day also she well remembers two things, that Ma. Mainy spoke of,
betwixt his descriptions of the said seven deadly sins. Oh (quoth he) this
is a great day of pomp at the Court, I will stay no longer amongst you rascal
priests, but will go thither amongst my fellows: they all love me there, I am
theirs, and they are all mine, or to this effect. Also one Robert Bedell of
Denham, being a very zealous Protestant, was buried the same day: in that
forenoone there happened a storm, whereupon Mainy pretended that the devil
spoke to this purpose in him, viz. Now they are about to bury Bedell, and
because he served me all his life time, I am sending of him into hell. At
which words many that were present wept, and prayed, that if it were possible,
he might be saved. This matter was so urged, and talked of, as afterward they
drew his wife to become a Romish Catholic, and so she died.

This examinate further says, that one Anne Smith, about the Christmas the
same year, came to Denham, where she had remained but a little while before
the priests had got her into their hands, and said she was possessed.
Touching this woman, a number of things has been written of her, as this
examinate has heard, all which this exam: says, she verily belieueth in her
conscience, (as also of all the practices, and tales of the priests, touching
both this examinate, and all the rest with who^ they dealt) that they were
altogether knaueries, and mere inventions, to deceive the people, by procuring
an admiration of their priesthood, and thereby to withdraw her Majesty's
subjects to their religion.

She well remembers (as she says) that at one time, Ma. Dibdale charged the
devil in Anne Smith (as it was pretended) to speak unto him, and answer him
to that which he demanded: but notwithstanding she held her peace. Then he
commanded her to speak, in the name of the Father, the son, and the holy
Ghost, and by the virtue of the holy Sacrament; but yet she was silent.
Heerewith Ma: Dibdale growing to be more earnest, charged her, (or the devil
that was pretended to be in her) to speak to him, by the power, and virtue of
his holy priesthood, and then she answered him. Whereupon this exam: being
present said to master Dibdale, Why Ma. Dibdale, is there more virtue in your
priesthood, then in the blessed Trinity, and the holy Sacrament? And he
answered, that though he were but a simple man, yet it pleased God, for the
honor of his Church, to show by this means the power of the priesthood.

Again this exam: says, that after she perceived the deceit which the priests
used, she would rather then her life, have gotten from them: but she was so
watched, and so were the rest, (she means the other women) as they could by
no means escape out of their fingers. Their pretense was, least the devil
should cause the^ to drown or kill themselves. But this exam: is persuaded in
her conscience, that the truth was why they kept them so straightly, least
going home to their friends, they should have disclosed their dissimulation,
and false pretenses, of casting devils out of those, who were as free from
them, as themselves. This exam: and her sister, did not see either Father, or
mother, being in the same town, all the while that they were in their hands;
neither would they suffer either their father or mother to speak with them,
though they desired it many times.

At one time this examinate remembers, that being in the Kitchen garden at
Denham, she heard a noise in her uncles garden on the other side of the wall,
and supposing that her uncle might be there, she cried out as loud as she
could, uncle, uncle, who being there by chance, and hearing of her, knew
her voice, and asked her what she would have, oh (quoth she) good uncle
help me from hence, for I am almost killed already amongst them here, and
shall not live if I continue here long. Upon this occasion, this examinats
mother came to have spoken with her, but she could not be suffered. The priests
told her that her daughters were bewitched, and possessed with wicked spirits,
and that they were thereby cast away, if they did not help them by their
authority, saying, that therefore she their mother might by no means speak
with them, until they had delivered them from the said wicked spirits. With
this, and such like aunswers, they sent away their mother diverse times weeping:
howbeit she says, that at sometimes her mother, not contented with those
aunswers, would grow to some earnestness, and hard speech, because she could
not be permitted to see her daughters. And then the Priests would shake her of
with angry words, and tell her, that she herself had as much need to be
exorcised as her daughters. And at one time Mistress Katherine that served
Mistress Peckham being present, when the priests and her mother had such
speeches, told her, that if the priests did well, they should deal with her,
as they did with her daughters.

After this exam: had been in the priests hands for a fortnight or three
weeks before Christmas(as she remembers) until after the Ascension day next
ensuing, and had long perceived their coosening practices with her, and
thereupon being grown to great weakness, and almost desperate, she told the
priests plainly at the end of one of her fits, whereinto they had cast her by
their drinks, slibber-sawces, and brimstone, that if she had a devil in her,
they were best cast him out, for (que she) if ever you torment me so again
(dispatch me if you list) otherwise I will certainly by one means or other,
get away from you, and tell my friends of all your proceedings, and dealings
here both with me, and others. Heere-vpon Ma. Dibdale willed her to be content,
and said, that the next time they hoped to dispossess her altogether: and
accordingly within three or four days after, they had her to the chair, and
there using her, as they had done many times before, when she came to her
self again, they told her, that now the devil was gone, and she was delivered.

This exam: further says, that the manner of the priests, was to say
oftentimes, that they had cast out this, or that devil out of the parties: but
still when they list, they would take a small occasion to say, that yet there
were some other devils remaining within them. And this examinate says, that
she doubts, they would have dealt so with her at that time too, but that
there began to be great speeches in the Country, about the priests doings at
Denham: in so much, as diverse ancient Catholics themselves did utterly
dislike them, and the priests them selves grew to be afraid. Howbeit, when this
exam: was thus at some quiet, yet they would not suffer her to go home to her
father, and mother, but carried her up to London, and placed her there with a
sure friend of theirs, one Mistres White: and so they dealt with this exam:
sister, not suffering her to see her parents, almost for four years after, as
this exam: remembers.

Also she says, that when the priests thought good to meddle no more with her,
they carried her to London, and placed her with one Mistres Dorothie White, as
has been said, a recusant, who then, and since has been so beneficial unto
them, as that she has clean overthrown her state, and undone her children.
The cause why they placed her there was, (as she verily thinks) least being
amongst her own friends, she might disclose their bad dealings with her.

It was not long after this examinate came to mistrisse White, but that one
Harrington growing into acquaintance with her, did afterward marry her, as
she belieueth. The marriage was in the Marshalsea, where after a Mass, one
Lister a priest (as she remembers) then prisoner there, used certain Latin
words, whereby they said she, and the same Harrington were married together.
There were present there five or six. After which time the said Harrington
lived with this examinate at times for the space of about 4 or 5 years, she
notwithstanding continuing her service with Mistrisse White.

After this examinate had kept company with the said Harrington for about 4
years, she grew to be with child, and therevppon went first to her sisters in
Oxfordshire, and then to her parents at Denham. Being at Denham, she was
presented for a recusant, and thereuppon committed to the gayle at Alesbury. At
her being there in prison, Ma. Harrington wrote a Letter unto her within three
or four days (as she remembers) after her commitment, the effect whereof
was, that if she were examined who was the father of her child, she should lay
it upon some that was gone beyond the seas for a soldier, but in no wise to
say it was his: and the rather to persuade her, he signified unto her, that it
was not only his advise, but likewise the counsel of Mistress White her
Mistress, and Master Blackman a priest.

With this Letter this examinate was greatly moved, and then calling to mind
how she had been used at Denham, and afterward kept at Mistress Whites from
her friends: and remembering also, how the priests were ever wont to persuade
her, that she should never speak any thing as touching her possessing, or
dispossessing, that might turn to their discredit, and to the dishonor of the
Church of Rome, she this examinate began to suspect, that the religion that
the priests professed, was like unto themselves. But the most principal thing
with the rest that made her so to think, was another point in Ma. Harringtons
Letter, wherein he persuaded her, that if she were examined upon her oath, it
forced not, the Church did dispense with her, so as she might answer what
she thought good notwithstanding: because an oath did not bind her to confess
any thing that might tend to the dishonor of their priesthood, or of the
Catholic Church.

When this exam: was first brought before the Justices at Alesbury, she
confessed that she was reconciled; and she is verily persuaded, that if the
said Letter had not come unto her afterward, and moved her, as is aforesaid,
notwithstanding all the abuses offered her at Denham, she had continued still a
wilful recusant, though it had cost her her life. Marry upon the occasions
before mentioned, this examinate having bethought herself better, desired to
speak with old Ma. Pigot of Dodersall, a Justice of peace in Buckinghamshire,
unto whom she signified who was the father of her child, and that she could be
contented to alter her course of life, and go to the Church again, as before
she had done. Hereuppon Ma. Pigot took this exam: in his Coach with him to Sir
John Goodwins, where she found the L. Gray, and diverse others, before whom,
after she had submitted herself, as she had done to Ma. Pigot, she was sent
to the Court by the L. Gray, with two of his servant to the Lord Treasurer.
At her coming to the Court she says she was examined of diverse matters
before the Lords of the Counsel, concerning her knowledge of sundry priests,
and Jesuits, and as touching one Stoughton, who was a notable spy, that carried
over young maids and boys, to be Nuns, and priests, and brought over Letters
as occasion served, and continues (as she thinks) the same trade still.

After that this exam. had been at the Court above a week, and examined in
that space three or four times, the servant of the said L. Gray remaining
there still, it pleased the Lords of her Majesty's Counsel, to send her back
with them to the Lord Anderson, and to writ their letter to his Lordship, that
he should send for this exam: father, and not only to deal with him, to see
that this exam: went to the Church, according as she had promised, but also,
that there might be no further proceeding in law against her, in respect that
she had been reconciled: the which direction the Lord Anderson did accomplish,
so as this exam. continued at her fathers until the year 1594.

After this examinate had remained thus with her father, about three or four
months, the said Ma. Harrington came unto her, and told her, he had been all
that while beyond the seas; and keeping company with her again, as a man ought
to do with his wife, sometimes at Denham, and sometimes this exam: coming to
him to London, he allowed her after the rate of about 20 marks by the year.
She likewise says, that when master Harrington suspected this exam: to be
with child, he put an hundred pounds into one Ma. Fits his hand to the use of
her, and her child if she had any.

This exam: further says, that within about a year after that the said
master Harrington had come from beyond the seas (as he pretended) and kept
company with her as his lawful wife, he was apprehended for a priest, and
first committed to the Tower, and then to the Marshalsea. Being in prison,
this examinate had a warrant from Ma. Young to go unto him; and at her coming
unto him he wept, and said, that if he might for shame, he would take another
course then he did. He cried her mercy for the abuse offered unto her, and
promised, that if she would be content, she should never want. Howbeit (as she
was informed) he told such Catholics as came unto him, (who had understanding
that this examinate did challenge him for her husband) that she this examinate
did greatly slander him, and utterly denied that ever he was married unto
her, or ever kept company with her as men do with their wives. Whereupon all
such Catholics as heard thereof, did greatly rate this examinate for
challenging of him to be her husband, and said she did belie him, and that it
was the devil that caused her to raise that slander of him, being a
Catholic priest.

She further says, that the said Harrington being condemned, and executed the
18 of February 1593 (as she remembers) she married again with Ralfe
Dallidowne a Smith in Holborne, the 20 of January 1594 as she thinks. And
having received herself the said hundred pound from Ma. Fits, her husband
Dallidowne had it all, except it were some 6 or 7 pound, which she had spent
before.

This exam: further says, that many times since she has conformed her self,
many priests have greatly blamed her, using words to this effect unto her, viz.
They have told her, that they wondered how she could be brought to go to the
English church, considering the great power of the priesthood, and of the holy
relics of the Church of Rome. To whom this exam: has sometimes answered,
that she was well before she came into their hands, and still so continues
she thanked God, and thereupon has desired them, that they would deal no
more with her, but let her alone.

When she has thus answered them, they have often said to her, that it was
the devil for a certainty, that still hunting of her, did persuade her to go
to the Heretics Church; and that if they had thought she would have taken
this course, they would never have dispossessed her. To whom this examinate by
way of answer has replied; A murren take you, I was well enough before you
dealt with me, and so have been ever since you left me.

She further says, that since she was first examined before the Lord Bishop
of London in March 1598, diverse priests have urged her greatly that she should
say nothing against the possessing, or dispossessing used at Denham, either
concerning her self, or any other, bidding her answer, that being then
young, she had forgotten all those things: and threatening of her, that if she
confessed any thing against the holy priesthood, or power of the Church in
casting out devils, she should be burnt for an Heretic, if ever the world
changed. The names of the priests that have thus dealt with her, both before
she was called for to be examined before the Lord Bishop of London, and since
(at the least some of them) are Ma. Sherwood, Ma. Gerrard, Ma. Blackman, Ma.
John Green, and Ma. William Bruerton.

This exam: also says, that about four years since, it happened that her
husband in a fray killed a man, whereupon she was compelled to borrow ten pound
of mistress White, to be used in her husbands business, certain priests
thought then, that they might peradventure have drawn this examinate unto them
again, and so resorting unto her, namely (as she remembers) master Blackman,
master Green, master Wells, with two or three other priests, whom she knew
not, they told her, that her falling from the Catholic Church was the cause,
that the devil had made her husband to kill the said man.

Of late also she says, that one Perry servant to master Roper that lies in
Southampton-house, challenging her for that she had revealed where her sister
Sara dwelt, said that she played the Ferret, and sought many men's lives, that
it was pity she lived, and that it were a good deed to shoot her through
with a pistol as she goes in the streets. Howbeit this exam: says, that she
never meant any Catholic in England hurt, (some priests excepted) who have
dealt hardly with her. But being now upon her oath to speak the truth, she
hops that no honest man or woman will be angry with her for discharging her
conscience: adding, that if it had not been so long ago since she was in the
priests hands, she could have delivered many more things as touching their bad
proceedings.

She further says, that the priests at their departure from Denham, took
every one thence his woman with him; Ma: Edmunds the Jesuit had for his darling
mistress Cressy then a widow, who was a daily guest there, and one that did
contribute very much both to him, and the rest of the priests: Anne Smith was
at the disposition of Ma. Driland: Sara Williams of master Dibdale: mistress
Altham of Cornelius, and this examinate of Ma. Leigh a priest likewise.

The examination of Anne Smith, alias Atkinson, taken by virtue of her oath,
the 12 of March, 1598.
SHe says, that dwelling with one Ma: Bold at Boldhall in Lancashire, the
year that the Earl of Leicester went into the Low Countries, she was sick of
a disease called the Mother, that she then having a sister, one Alice Plater,
that boorded at the La: Staffords, was sent by her Mistres to her said sister
at London, the said La. Stafford then lying at Iuie bridge, where she remained
(as she says) about a year, using the help of Physic for the said disease.
She says that Ma: Edmund Peckham did board at the said La. Staffords, from
about the Christmas that this exam: came to London, till about Easter following.

She says further, that about three weeks before Christmas next ensuing, her
sister being advertised by the said Ma: Peckham, that Sara, and Will: Trayford
were possessed at his house, she (her said sister) went thither, where finding
the manner of their troubles, she conceived, that this examinate was likewise
possessed, as they were.

There-vpon she faith, that upon the Christmas even, she went to Denham unto
her sister, where she found Trayford, but he did not make any show, as though
he were possessed, but did wait orderly upon Ma: Peckham his Master, and
Sara was then gone to the L. Vaux his house, being carried thither by one
Dibdale a priest.

After she had been at Denham about a month, she attended upon Mistres
Peckham, to a churching in Denham Town; where she says her foresaid disease
did trouble her, and likewise being then recovered, it took her again, as she
was going homewards, whereupon one White a priest that used much that house,
was sent to London for Cornelius another priest, (who kept at Sir John
Arundells in Clarkenwell) by the means of her said sister, who told this exam:
that she was surely possessed.

When her sister said she was possessed, she this exam: denied it, and so she
did, when the said Cornelius came unto her. She says that the said Cornelius
coming to Denham the same day at night, that he was sent for, brought in his
company one Stamp a priest, Thomson a priest (as she thinks) and one
Christopher Tulice a priest, with Mistres Cressey, Ma: Gardner, and his wife.

The day after the priests came unto her, they took upon them to exorcise her
from morning, till toward night, and then left her.

She says, that besides the disease of the Mother, she grew to be sick, and
received Physic by Doctor Griffithes prescription at Alexander the
Apothecaries hands; but not recovering her health thereby, after about two
months, her said sister procured her to be sent to Mistress Mainy in Channon
Row, with whom she was to dwell about the beginning of Lent.

She continued with Ma: Mainy in the Earl of Lincolnes house in Channon Row,
til after Easter week. In which time she says, only Eliza: Calthrope (as
this exam: remembers) dwelling likewise with Mistres Mainy, was supposed by
the priests to be possessed, and being there-vpon removed to Ma: Mainyes own
house in Greenes Alley, there she was exorcised, until she died there.

She further says, she was present, when Mainy did counterfeit himself, that
he should die upon the Good Friday; he the said Mainy the^ lying at the Earl
of Lincolnes house, against which time a great number came thither, to see him
depart.

The said Mainy came to her Mistres house (she being his sister) about a
month, or five weeks before Easter; and every Friday the said Mainy did
pretend himself to be wonderfully tormented, and when he was recovered out of
his trance, he would use to say, he had been in Purgatory: and there-vpon
gave it out, that he should die on Good Friday, and go immediately to heaven,
having been already in Purgatory.

She says, that all the said Lent she continued with Mist: Mainy, she was
still evil at ease, and that the priests that came thither, did still endeavor
to persuade her that she was possessed: saying, that she must believe the^
therein, that she was possessed, and that they could help her, and not
otherwise.

The priests names, as she remembers, were Ma: Cornelius, Ma: Dryland, Ma:
Tirrell, Ma: Stamp, Ma: Tulice, Ma: Ballard.

She further says, that about three weeks after Easter, the said priests still
continuing to persuade her, that she was possessed, and that if she believed
so, then they would help her: she this exam: continuing to be evil at ease,
and hoping by their means to be helped, yielded to say, that she thought she
was possessed, thereby to see, if she might be helped; although all the while
she had a conceit in her self, that she was not possessed.

She further says, that whilst she did withstand the priests said
persuasions, affirming that she knew she was not possessed, they told her, it
was the devil within her, that caused her so to say.

When she had thus yielded unto them, Ma. Stamp carried her to Denham,
accompanied with one Harris Ma. Mainyes man.

She says, that about sixteen days after the said Easter, this exam: and
Eliza: Calthrope, being both sick, and supposed by the priests to be
possessed, her Ma: left them both in the Earl of Lincolnes house, and went to
Babingtons house the traitor in Barbican: and the third or fourth day after
this exam: was carried to Denham (as aforesaid) where she, and all the house
were maintained, at the common charge of the priests, that resorted thither.

At her coming to Denham, they took in hand to exorcise her, and continued
that course with her til Whitsontide: about a fortnight after Whitsontide (as
she remembers) certain Pursuiuants came, and searched the house, and finding
there Ma: Dryland the priest, and other men, viz: Alexander the Apothecarie,
Swythen Wells (after executed in Holborne) and James Stanborow, Ma: Peckhams
man, they carried them to prison, leaving this exam: and two other women in the
house.

She says, that the rest of the priests when the Pursuiuants came, were gone
with Fid, and Sara Owen, alias Frauncis, and Sara Williams, as this exam: has
been informed.

It was Sunday when the Pursuiuants carried the said parties to prison; and upon
the Monday after the said Drylands man carried this exam: to London, where she
was placed that night by Ma: Maryne, at one Alexanders house in a little Lane,
going out of Thames street, and is (as now she is informed) betwixt Lions key,
and Billingsgate?

She continued at the said Alexanders house about seven weeks, her charges
being first defrayed by the said Ma: Maryne, and afterward by Ma. Pownd, late
prisoner at Wisbitch, her acquaintance with Ma. Maryne grew at Denham, and with
Ma. Pownd, at the said Alexanders house.

Ma: Pownd, in respect of the charge he was at with her at Alexanders, paying
ten shillings a week for her board, removed her thence to mistress Lowes to
Newington in Surrey: where remaining not past three or four days, the said
Pownd carried her to his Mothers house, one mistress Pownd, dwelling in the same
Town, where she remained til Ma: Pownd was taken, which was upon the day when
bon fires were made for Babingtons apprehension, viz: the 15 of July.

The said mistress Pownd was of her sons Religion, whereupon after he was
apprehended, she had no joy to stay there, but was carried thence by one Ma:
Goodmans direction unto mistress Leicester, dwelling in Fleetstreete, at the
figne of the dogs head in the pot: where she had not remained above two
days, but upon a search was taken, and committed to prison for reeusancie,
where she remained about a month, and then escaped thence.

In this mean while, viz: from Whitsontide before specified, Dibdale, Low,
and Adams, were apprehended, and being arraigned, this exam: was brought by
master Youngs means, whilst she was prisoner, to give in evidence against
them at their arraignment. The cause why she was brought to give in evidence
against them was, for that master Young hearing her name, did examine her,
whether she was not one that did pretend her self to be possessed at Denham,
with whom Dibdale, and the rest of the priests had dealt, and there-vpon
examined her touching her possession, and the devils dealing with her: and
particulerly of a piece of a knife, which the priests said came out of her body.

This exam: was prisoner in Bridewell, where the said Fid was likewise prisoner
with her: where this exam: found such favor, as having the liberty of the
prison by master Youngs appointment, and thereby being trusted with some
keys, she, and Fid by her means escaped thence, taking with them the Matrones
girl, which girl by the said master Pownds direction, was sent into
Hampshire, and placed with his Mother, who had a house in the said County, and
did then lie there.

After she was escaped, she was placed by Ma. Pownds direction first in
Cow-lane, then by her mothers means with the French Ambassadors wife, where
disliking, she was by masters Pownds means placed in a poor vvomans house by
the Marshalsea, and then again with his mother, and then going to the
White-Lyon to see master Pownd, with her mistress, she this exam: (whilst they
two were talking together) going to master Simpsons chamber a priest, was
again there apprehended, and committed by master Young again to Bridewell,
where she remained about 21 weeks, in which time the Queen of Scots was
beheaded.

She was discharged out of Bridewell by master Secretary Walsinghams means,
at the suit of master Dale a Merchant in Gracious-street, and then remaining
with her mother a while, was placed with the said La. Stafford, with whom she
dwelt about two years, viz. till she was married.

She says, that when first she fell into the priests hands, she was about 18
years of age, and that she is verily persuaded she never was possessed with a
wieked spirit, (for the which she thanketh Almighty God from the bottom of her
heart) but verily thinks, that she was very much abused by the said priests,
in that they did persuade her, (as is before expressed) that she was possessed.

Besides, she says, that where it was given out by the priests, that a piece
of a knife came out of her mouth when she was in one of her fits, she then was
fully persuaded, that they said untruly therein, although at that time, being
wholely addicted to Popery, she did reverence them very much, and durst not
contradict them.

She further says, that when Cornelius did first begin to exorcise her, the
manner thereof was this: She being well, and in perfect memory, and at that time
not troubled with her former disease called the mother, Cornelius, and the rest
set her in a chair, and bound her fast with towells: then Colnelius having
ended a short speech, or Sermon (the effect whereof she does not now remember)
which was made before she was bound in the chair, and being in his Albe, and
having a stole about his neck, began to read his Exorcismes, whereat this
exam: does now remember, that she began greatly to shiuer and quake, being
then struck with a great fear, as though the devil would greatly torment,
and tear her, because they had so bound her.

Besides she says (which did increase her fear) she had been told by
diverse, how others had been troubled, viz: how in their fits they were greatly
tormented, how they could not endure the Priests to come near them: how when a
priest did lay his hand upon any part of them, the said part would be so hot,
as though it would burn them to the bone, how the devil in them would rail
upon the Catholics, and greatly commend the Protestants, and many other such
things they reported, which this exam: has forgotten.

She further says, that she was then so zealous in Popery, and had such an
opinion of the said priests, that if she could have gotten under the
Altar-cloath, with a cross in her mouth, and a candel in her hand, she thought
her self safe from the devil. When she was exorcised the first time, and so
afterward being bound in the chair, where she seemed still to be well,
notwithstanding their Exorcismes, then they would pretend to give her somewhat,
either to comfort her stomach, (she seeming to faint through fear) or to
disclose the devil, which was hallowed, and was very loathsome to her to take.
This hallowed medicine, as she remembers, had Rue, and oil in it, and was
ugly to behold, such as she thinks they could not have taken themselves. Also
she says, they would burn brimstone under her nose, which she says, would
greatly trouble her, and as she supposes, did take away her senses from her.
Thus she says, they dealt with her, as she supposes, some five or six times.

She further says, that they did bind her so fast at those times in a chair,
as they almost lamed her arms, and so bruised all the parts of her body, with
holding, tying, and turmoyling of her, that she was so sore, she was compelled
afterward, by the space of three years to swathe her body.

She further says, that now she prays God for the priests that be alive,
that God would forgive them for dealing so with her, and is very heartily sorry,
that ever she came into their company.

She further says, that upon Wednesday in Whitson-weeke, whilst she was at
Denham, there came thither master Salisbury that was executed, Ma: John
Gerrard, and Ma: George Peckham.

She also says, that she thanketh God she never saw any thing that might
terrify her, but only the priests when they were exorcising, that she never
saw any visions: and whatsoever they write or affirm of her touching any such
matter, she affirms that they are all fained, and untrue. And she adds,
that she meruaileth that they should set down any thing of her, that she
should speak in her fits, considering that it was given out, the spirit that
was in her was a sullen, and dumb spirit, and would not therefore be brought
to answer the priests: and that the said spirit, that was supposed to be in
her, was such a one, the devil that was in Mainy (who was named Modion) did
affirm, as many reported.

This exam: further says, that she being present by Mainy, when he was in
exorcising, after that she the first time had been exorcised by Cornelius, Ma:
Edmunds the Jesuit did ask the devil in Mainy, whether she this exam: was
possessed or not; and the devil answered that she was. Then quoth Ma: Edmunds,
how chance he could not be brought to speak this other day, when she was
exorcised? He the said devil, as she then supposed, answered, that the reason
was, because the spirit that was in her was sullen, and dumb. Then they
demanding of his devil, what was the name of the spirit that was in this exam:
he answered Soforce. And this was betwixt Christmas, and Shrouetide.

She further says, that it was a common thing amongst them, to give out words,
as though Protestants were all possessed; and there-vpon the priests would ask
some that were pretended to be possessed, or the devil in them (as it was
supposed) whilst they were exorcising them, why they did not trouble them
before, whilst they were Protestants. And the devil would answer, that there
was no reason for them so to do, because the Protestants were theirs already.

She further says, that after the time she was out of the priests hands, her
former disease of the Mother did diverse times take her, and continued with her
as before it had done, until being married she had children. Since which time,
she has been rid of that disease, she thanketh God.

She further says, that she well remembers the morning when Alexander the
Apothecarie was to go to London to fetch more priests, the day before this
exam: was first exorcised, his horse prauncing, and flinging of him down, he
returned back again, and constantly affirmed, that the wicked spirit that was
in this exam: had caused his horse to fling him: whereat when this exam:
laughed, he the said Alexander affirmed, that it was the devil, that laughed
at him.

The confession of Ma. Anthony Tyrrell Clerk, written with his own hand, and
avouched upon his oath the 15 of June 1602.
Diverse interrogatories being propounded to this examinate, concerning the
pretended casting out of devils, by master Edmunds, alias Weston a Jesuit, and
certain other Seminary priests, in the years 1585, and 1586, at Hackney,
Denham, and other places, and as touching likewise the occasions, or
inducements that moved them at that time, to take such matters upon them, he
has set down his answer as follows.

I will first answer to the circumstance of time, which is here propounded
unto me. In the year 1584 I, and John Ballard priest, (since executed with Ma.
Babington, and the rest) coming together from Rome through Burgundy, found
there a great press of soldiers, and were advertised, that they were to
serve under the Duke of Guise. When we came to Roane, we heard then directly,
that the said preparations were against England. The same year (as I remember)
Ma. Crighton a Scottish Jesuit was taken at the sea, and after brought into
England, who by occasion of certain writings which he had, was driven to
confess at large (as I have been informed) what the whole plot was: and how
far both the Pope, and the King of Spain had engaged themselves in it. Hereof
I doubt not, but that sundry Catholics in England had sufficient notice from
beyond the seas, and especially Ma. Edmunds, alias Weston the Jesuit, who was
then the chief, as master Garnet (as I take it) is at this present, and
therefore could not be ignorant of such important matters, wherein principal
men of his own society were engaged.

Not long after my coming into England in the year 1585, master Martin Array
a priest, meeting with me at the end of Cheapside, as I was turning to enter
into Paul's Churchyard, took me by the hand, and whispering me in the ear,
bad me be of good cheer, for that all things went now very well forward. The
king of Spain (quoth he) is now almost ready with his forces, to come into
England, and we shall be sure to hear some good news thereof very shortly:
wherefore it stands us now in hand that be priests, to further the Catholic
cause, as much as possibly in us lies, or to this effect. And this was the
state of that time, nourished (I well perceived) with great hope of some great
alteration, by the means before expressed.

About the time of master Arayes aforesaid communication with me, master
Edmunds, alias Weston, had lately (as it was reported) cast a devil out of one
Marwood: whereupon he the said master Array, at the time before mentioned, did
highly commend unto me the exorcismes of Fa. Edmunds, saying that he (the
said Edmunds) would make the devils themselves now confess, that their
kingdom was near at an end. Upon the pretended dispossession of the said
Marwood, sundry other priests moved thereunto (I am persuaded) by the
instigation of master Edmunds, or for that they meant to show their zeal in
imitating of him, did take upon them to exorcise, and cast devils out of diverse
persons. viz. Sara and Friswood Williams, William Trayford, Anne Smith, Richard
Mainy, and Elizabeth Calthrop, whose neck was found broken at the bottom of a
pair of stayres (as the brute went then amongst us.) When I saw this course,
I liked it well, and was my self an Actor in it, and did well perceive, that
it was the matter whereat Ma. Array had aimed, when he told me, that it stood
us Priests in hand to further the Catholic cause, as much as possibly we
could. And indeed our proceedings therein, had for a time wonderful success.
I cannot in my conscience esteem the number fewer, that in the compass of
half a year were by that means reconciled to the Church of Rome, then 5
hundred persons: some have said three, or four thousand. As touching the
several manners of dispossessing the said parties, and of their fits,
traunces, and visions, diverse discourses were penned, amongst the which I my
self did pen one. Ma. Edmunds likewise writ (I am persuaded) a quire of
paper of Ma. Mainyes pretended visions. For he thought, as it seemed, to have
wrought some great matter by him, but was disappointed very ridiculously, so as
I think the said vision will hardly come to light. There was also a Treatise
framed to prove first, that in former times diverse had been possessed.
Secondly, that Christ has left to his Church certain remedies for the
dispossessing of such parties. Thirdly, that in the casting out of devils,
there has been great use of application to the Daemoniacks of holy relics.
In prosecution of the first part, amongst other points the Author shows, that
GOD permits some to be possessed, that thereby the faithless Atheists may
learn, that there is both a God and a devil: and that the faith of the
Catholic Church, may also be confirmed by the power left unto her in casting
out of devils. In the handling of the second point, he tryumpheth against the
Protestants, saying that for all their reformation which they talk of, to be
so near the order of the Primitive Church, yet they are not able either to
discern, who are possessed amongst them, nor how to give the^ remedy. The
third part is handled more largely, to the great advancement and power of
Relics. As for holy water: that S. Macarius thereby cured a woman, who by
Magical enchauntment seemed to be turned into a Mare. Likewise, how S. Peter
hallowed bread, against the assault of certain devils which were sent by Simon
Magus in the likeness of dogs, to devour him. For the power of priesthood,
there is an example alleged of S. Martin, how he putting his fingers into the
mouth of a Daemoniacke, the devil durst not bite him, though he bad him to
bite him, if he had any power so to do. There is also mention made of the
virtue of the blessed sacrament, of holy oil, and of the bones of Saints. The
use of all those things, was very frequent in the exorcising of the parties
possessed. Insomuch as we omitted not the relics and bones of Ma. Campian,
Ma. Sherwin, Ma. Brian, and Ma. Cottam, to have some little testimony by
implication from the devil, to prove them holy Matyrs.

If I be not deceived, Ma. Edmunds alias Weston, was the Author of this book,
and the examples by him alleged, were brought of purpose, to give the more
credit to his, and our proceedings with the said parties before mentioned. And
indeed he was not therein deceived, for we that were priests, were thereby
greatly magnified by Catholics, schismatics, and weak protestants; the two
former being confirmed in the Roman Catholic faith, and the third sort
thereunto reconciled, as has been before mentioned. And that cannot be
denied, but that in the course which we held with the said pretended
Daemoniacks, many occasions were given, and aptly taken, to scorn and deride
the orders, and service now established by her Majesty's laws in the Church of
England.

Likewise I must confess, that the course we held, was so pleasing to such as
saw it, or were informed of it by those that they trusted, as it proved very
gainful unto us all that were priests: we had out of question procured unto
our selves very great favor, credit, and reputation, so as it was no marvel,
if some young Gentlemen, as Ma. Babington, and the rest, were allured to those
strange attempts which they took in hand, by master Ballard, who was an Agent
amongst us. They saw, as they supposed, (for both master Babington, and diverse
of his company were oftentimes at the exorcisings) that we had a great
commandment over devils, which prevailed greatly with them, as I think. It
would have been a very strange thing (I am persuaded) that we could not have
wrought men at that time to attempt: which was prudently foreseen by Fa.
Edmunds of purpose (as I am resolved in my conscience) to prepare the hearts,
and minds of Catholics by those practices, that when such forces as were
intended, should have come into England, they might have been more readily
drawn by him, and us, to have joined their forces with them. And this is that I
can say concerning the occasions, or inducements, that such matters were taken
in hand at the time articulated.

Now as touching the substance of the general interrogatory it self, I have
perused the several examinations, and confessions of Sara Williams, and
Friswood her sister, of Anne Smith, and of Richard Mainy gentleman, and am
fully persuaded, that they have deposed the truth in such points whereof they
were examined, belonging to their pretended possession, and dispossessio^. The
effect whereof is, that they were drawn by our cunning carriage of matters, to
seem as though they had been possessed, when as in truth they were not,
neither were there any of the priests ignorant in my conscience of their
dissimulation, nor the parties themselves (as now it appears) of our
dissembled proceeding with them.

After I had been my self first at one of their exorcisings, it was my
chance to he that night with master Thomson a priest, and a great Actor in
those matters, at his chamber by the Spittle: and falling into some conference
about it, I used some such words, as though I doubted, whether the party were
actually, and really possessed. For I my self being not acquainted with any
plot devised by Fa: Edmunds, or any other, spoke my mind somewhat more
plainly, then I perceived Ma: Thomson well liked of. His answer unto me was in
effect, that he being my friend, did earnestly wish me to cast forth no such
speeches, whatsoever I did think. For (quoth he) the matter is judged to be so
by Fa: Edmunds, and some others that are Priests. Besides such Catholics, as
have been present at such fits, have received it for a truth, that the parties
are possessed. And although I for my part will not make it an article of my
Creed, yet I think that godly credulity does much good, for the furthering
of the Catholic, cause, and for the defacing of our common enemies, and their
proceedings: or to this effect. Not long after, also talking with Ma: Stamp, at
the Lo. Vaux his house in Hackney, concerning these matters, and demanding of
him seriously his opinion, what he thought of them: his answer was, that they
were things of such importance, as would further the Catholic cause, more
then all the books that had been written of late years, about the
controversies in Religion with the Protestants: with which answer, I seemed to
rest contented, because I saw thereby he was not willing to enter into any
playner course with me.

I would not have this my confession further extended then my meaning is, I do
not take upon me either directly or indirecty, to oppose my self to the three
points of the Treatise before mentioned, which are strengthened with some
authorities, both of the Scriptures, and of the ancient Fathers, and Writers.
How be it, as I account it presumption to deny all those Histories, as
touching the casting out of devils in the Primitive Church since the Apostles
times; so to believe all that is written thereof, I hold it a point of great
madness, and I doubt not but the soundest Catholics in Europe are of my
opinion. For be it true that is alleged in the said treatise of S. Ambrose,
that he never heard of any, that could counterfeit himself to be a Daemoniack,
yet later experience has taught us the contrary. And indeed, the artificial
skill considered whereunto priests have attained, it is a very easy matter to
bring a young girl, or a youth, to do, and speak those things, which the
Exorcists can readily color, and interpret; as if it were both done, and
spoken by devils, that did possess them. But yet this I will say, and give it
for a rule to all Catholics hereafter, that will not purposely suffer
themselves to be deluded: let them but mark diligently when they are present at
any such actions, what the parties, pretended to be possessed, do either act,
or speak, and then they shall perceive nothing, but may very well be dissembled,
or otherwise uttered in great distemper, procured by loathsome potions, and
violent fumigations. And they shall be very well armed against all such deceites,
if ever it be their haps to hear, or read the confessions, and examinations of
the parties before mentioned. Marry they must keep their own counsel: For I
am persuaded, that if any shall seem to be a curious beholder at such times,
and a mouer of questions, he shall not be any welcome guest unto them. Hereof
any may be further advertised, that will take the pains to read a little
French Treatise, of a Martha Broslier.
counterfeit Daemoniack at Paris, and how the Exorcists could in no sort endure
the questions, and doubts, that were propounded unto them, when they were at
their work, but pretended that such curiosity, and want of faith did greatly
hinder them in their proceedings.

There will be many exceptions taken to that, which here I have delivered upon
my conscience, to prove that the said parties pretended to be possessed, were
not counterfeits, as that some things fell out, which were not possible to be
dissembled. The chief objection will be as touching a piece of a knife, in
length about two inches, and a half, which was said to come out of the body
of Anne Smith, having been conuaied into her before, as it was pretended by
the devil. And to clear the matter, the devil was made (forsooth) to show by
Philosophy, that he was able to do such a thing: for to this effect it was
given out, that the devil should read us (as I may term it) a Lecture: I am
as you know by creation a spirit, and have lost no part of my knowledge, and
cunning in the secrets of nature, and that I can dissolve any Iron or hard
matter at my pleasure into a liquid substance, and so I did, and poured it into
her porredge, which she eating, swallowed up the knife in that liquid
substance, and the same being so in her body, I reduced it into the artificial
form which before it had. And thus much you may believe (quoth the devil) if
you be but Philosophers, or to this effect. Whereunto for answer as the truth
is, so far forth, as I know or believe. First as the piece of the knife came
out of her mouth, without hurting of her (if it came out of her mouth at all,
and that there were not a shift of legerdemaine used to make it seem indeed
to those that were present, that it came out of her mouth) so might it be taken
forth again, having been put into her mouth by the Exorcist himself, for
ought I know, as some of the said parties have acknowledged, that the Exorcists
sometimes would thrust bigge^^ ones, and pieces of relics into their mouths.
Amongst the which Friswood Williams deposes, that as she verily believes,
they thrust a rustie, nail into her mouth, and afterward pretended, that it
came out of her body. 2. Anne Smith has deposed, that she is fully persuaded,
that they have reported untruly of the taking of a piece of a knife out of her
mouth. Howbeit, she says, she durst not at that time contradict them: but it
is needelesse for me to answer this, or any such like objection. For the
things are in themselves so ridiculous, as I think no man will be so mad, as
to take upon him to defend them. And when we our selves that were actors in
those matters, thought we had won our spurs, yet diverse ancient priests,
as Master Heywood, Master Dolman, Master Redman, and some others hearing of
the course we held, did shake their heads at it, and showed their great dislike
of it. Likewise the grauer sort, that were then imprisoned at Wisbich, were
greatly offended therewith (as I have been credibly informed) and said, that
howsoever for a time we might be admired, yet in the end we would thereby
mar all, and utterly discredit both our selves, and our calling. Whereupon
we the younger sort of the Seminary priests, that were then dealers herein,
thought our selves hardly dealt with by them, and that they did but envy at
the commendation, which they saw we daily gained, themselves being no actors
amongst us. But now I see, that the said ancient Fathers had been acquainted
of likelihood with such devises beyond the Seas, and were greatly grieved to
have them brought into England: notwithstanding Ma: Edmunds, and the rest,
would needs proceed (as is before in part expressed,) and have thereby to
their perpetual shame, made them true Prophets.

I have my self before confessed, that my pen is in the book, that was taken
with Ma: Barnes, wherein I laid together those things, that Sara Williams was
pretended to have done, and said in one of her fits at Hackney, the 10 of
January, some things whereof I saw, and heard my self, others I received by
peece-meale of Master Thomson, Ma: Thulice, and others, and laid them
altogether, with the best skill I had, to make them seem strange, and
wonderful. For although both my self (as I said before) and so I think of
the rest, did know that all was but counterfeite, yet for as much as we
perceived, that thereby great credit did grow to the Catholic cause, and
great discredit to the Protestants, we held it lawful to do, as we did.

Shortly after I had first conformed my self to the state of the Church,
established here in England, and there-vpon disclosed many things to the late
Lo. Treasurer, concerning sundry very pernicious designments against her
Maistie, and this state; I fell again to my old course, by the persuasion of
some of my ancient acquaintance that were priests, having had small time to
ground my self by study, thereby to defend my said conformity. I was no
sooner come to my old byace, but they soon drew me, for the good of the
Catholic cause, to say that all in effect was false that I had before
confessed. Although not long after, the treasons did so break forth, and were
so fully confessed by Babington himself, that not only that, which I had
reported was justified by them to be true, but a great deal more then ever I
knew, or dreamed of. Likewise I having detected in some part the folly of the
said exorcisings, it is scarce credible how earnest the said priests were with
me, to avow them again for matters of verity. Whereunto for the reason before
mentioned, I did willingly yield, nothing doubting but that, if God should
once again so draw his grace from me, as that I should become to be as then I
was (that is, wholly addicted to popery, as I trust in his mercy he will never
do) I should be as ready again to deny all that now I have affirmed upon my
oath, as I was before. For the general conceit amongst all the priests of that
order is, that they may deny any thing, which being confessed does turn to
the dishonor of the Catholic Church of Rome. Besides, they have other
objections that serve their turns, as that the Magistrates in England are no
competent Judges, the Queen herself standing excommunicate, and that
therefore the examinations taken before them, are of no validity to bind the
examinats, but that all that they do confess, is tanquam coram non Iudice. A
number of other shifts they have, which I do not now remember.

The Apostolical rule is, that evil shall not be done that good may come of
it, but they do not account it evil (as I verily think) to calumniate the
Protestants by any devise whatsoever, that may carry any probability with it,
nor make any conscience to tell, and publish any untruths, which they think,
being believed, may advance and promote such points and matters, as they take
upon them to defend, for the honor of the church of Rome, and dignity of
their priesthood.

Anth: Tyrrell.

The confession of Richard Mainy Gentleman, written by himself, and avouched
upon his oath the sixth of June. 1602.
THe said Richard Mainy had read unto him some parts of a discourse, or two,
written by certain Seminary priests of a pretended possession, and
dispossession both of himself, and of certain others, viz. one Marwood,
Trayford, Sara, and Francis Williams two sisters, and Anne Smith. These parties
were said to be possessed, and dispossessed of many wicked spirits. The priests
that dealt with them, were diverse, but the especial men that had Richard Mainy
in hand, were Ma. Edmunds the Jesuit, alias Weston, Cornelius, and one Dibdale,
men wholly at the devotion and direction of the said Edmunds. It was in the
years 1585 and 1586, when these stratagems were executed. Such dealings as
they had with the said Mainy, were at Denham, at one Ma. Fittons, two miles
from Windsore, and at the Earl of Loncolnes house in Channon-row, where John
Mainy his brother did then remain.

Of these matters the said Mainy being demanded diverse questions, desired
that he might have leave to answer them after his own fashion, and not to be
tied to the order of the said demands, for that he thought he could set down
those things which he remembered, more plainly to his own understanding, then
otherwise he should be able, if he were bound to follow the order propounded
unto him by the said demands. And that which he has set down is the
discourse following, not much disagreeing from the order of the interrogatories
ministered unto him.

And has Ma. Edmunds and the rest of the priests thus dealt with me? I am
very sorry for it. It might have been sufficient for them, to have practiced
their purposes upon me and the rest, youths and almost girls, although they
had not published the same to the world. But of likelihood their glory, and our
discredit were so joined together, as the one could not stand without the
other. This course whereunto they have thereby drawn me, will procure me great
displeasure (I know) amongst my friends, and work me much hinderance in my
private estate: but what remedy? Being called by public authority, and
enforced by virtue of mine oath to deliver the truth, I cannot see how with any
conscience I can deny those things, which I find to be truly laid to my charge,
and could never have been thought of, if their writings had never come to the
Magistrates hands. The particulers which now of necessity I must deliver, I was
purposed to have concealed from all men living, although heretofore in
general terms I have been driven to say somewhat of these matters.

About 14 years since, the Lords of her Majesty's most honorable privy
Counsel, ( Henry Earl of Darby being one) having gotten some notice of the
pretended possessions, and dispossessions at the places before mentioned, and
that I was one of the parties that had been dealt with, did write their letter
unto Ferdinando then Lord Strange to examine me. It seems they had been
informed that I should publish, how I was possessed with certain wicked
spirits, and of them dispossessed by some priests of the Catholic Roman
Church, and that I should take upon me in company where I came, to justify
the same. So as being called before the said Lord Strange, he demanded of me,
whether I had given out such speeches. He examined me upon my oath, and my
answer was according to the truth, as I was persuaded in mine own conscience,
and as far as my memory did serve me: viz. that I was never possessed with
any wicked spirit, nor had reported any such thing; and that I was so far
from justifying of it, that I was fully persuaded, that in all the courses
which the priests took with me, when they pretended that I was possessed,
there was nothing but deceit, falfhood, illusions, and iuglings. This was the
effect of my answer at that time, if my memory do not much fail me, and
thereupon I was by his Lordship dismissed.

With this answer (I suppose) the Jesuits were long since acquainted, which
has greatly already hindered me, and alienated the hearts of some of my dearest
friends from me. And the same answer that I made then before his Lordship, I
must now make again to the substance of all those questions which have been
demanded of me, viz. that I was never possessed with any wicked spirit,
otherwise then all other sinners are, but ever as free (I thank GOD) from
having any devils in me, as either Ma. Edmunds himself, or any other of the
Priests that had to deal with me, for ought I know.

This answer I thought would have been sufficient to have satisfied all those
things which are objected against me, but I am urged with sundry particulers,
and therefore I must of necessity yield to the clearing of my self in them,
and yet no otherwise then the truth requires. When I was about 13 years old,
I was sent by my mothers direction to Rhemes in France, where there was then
an English Seminary: the intent of my mother, and other of my friends was (as I
think) to have had me to have been a priest. I remained in Rhemes about two
years, and was there maintained with my mothers exhibition and allowance.
Toward the end of the said two years, of a childish curiosity I entered into
the obseruances of certain religious men, termed in that country Bonhommes, or
fratres minimi, and became a young probationer amongst them. This order was
devised by Fraunces de Paula, who is canonized for a saint, of whom there is
mention made in the Roman breuiary, as having his place appointed in the
Calendar on the second of April. There his office and course of life is set
down, and briefly described.

After I had remained about a quarter of a year, or somewhat more in this
probation, I was sent by the Rector of the house with some other of my
fellows, to the house of the Bonhommes at Paris, where I had scarcely remained
a quarter of a year but I grew weary of that profession. Their rules seemed
unto me to be too strict for me, and their diet being nothing but fish, I
began to dislike it. Besides, I had a disease, wherewith I had been troubled
before I went out of England, that took me there again; and thereupon I gave
over that order altogether.

About that time, there was a proclamation published here in England (as I was
told) that all English gentlemen, and others, should repair home into their
Country within a certain time, upon danger of her Majesty's displeasure, and
loss of their goods and lands, or to that effect. Whereupon I was persuaded
by some of my friends, that saw my course of life there, having given over my
study, to return home again; and the rather, for that I had some land left
unto me by my father. Leaving therefore Paris, I took my iourny homeward by
Roane toward Diepe where I took shipping, and landed at Rye. At my arrival,
the Mayor offering unto me the oath of her Majesty's supremacy, I willingly
took it, and afterward repaired of mine own accord diligently to the Church,
and service of God established in England by her Majesty's laws. I continued
in Sussex, Kent, and other places, from Good friday (the time of my arrival)
until it was toward Alhallontide following, which time I spent as other young
Gentlemen did, with whom I fell acquainted, until through mere necessity,
having then no part of my living in my hands, I was constrained through want to
repair to my brother John Mainy at London, upon whom I did for a while
especially rely.

I had not been long in London, before it was my hap to dine at the L. Vaux
his house with my said brother, either at Hackney, or Hogsdon, (I do not well
remember whether) his Lordship was not then at home, but the table was kept,
and entertainment given by his son, and daughter. In that dinner while there
was much communication of the late possession, and dispossession of one
Marwood, by certain priests, and chiefly (if I do not forget my self) by
Ma: Edmunds. The tales which were told of that matter, seemed strange unto me,
as what extraordinary strength he had in his fits: how he roared like a Bull,
and many other things were then mentioned, which now I have forgotten? While my
chief continuance was in London, I rode sometimes with my brother to Denham,
the house of Sir George Peckham, and in the parish of Denham, (he having
married Sir George Peckhams daughters, and the whole furniture of the house
appertayning unto him, as part of his dowry with his wife.) At that time also
he kept servants there, I went likewise sometimes to Denham of mine own
accord, and remained there some two or three days at a time. It fell out
hardly with me (as now I perceive) that I came to London about Alhallontide
before mentioned: for then there was nothing in effect in the mouths of
Catholics, but of the casting out of devils. A little before there was much
to do with the said Marwood, as I find by the story that is written of him,
By Edmunds in Latin, extant upon record.
beginning Erat quida^ inuenis, etc. Immediately after (as also it is plain by
an other story, which I am informed, was taken with one Ma: Barnes) there was
at Hollantide great business at Fulmer with Trayford, and Sara Williams. And
such were then those times, as now I understand, and did then partly find by
experience, that a small occasion was matter sufficient for the priests to
work upon, to charge any one that they liked to deal with, that he was
possessed.

It seems also by that which is written in the said book taken with Ma:
Barnes, and by some other tales which I have heard, that the priests, or some
for them, understanding that I took no course to be a priest, and how I had
left the Bonhommes, and how I had been troubled with my former disease at
Paris, and how after my return, I had behaved my self youthfully amongst
other Gentlemen; gave it out that I was surely possessed, and afterward to
make the same good, have published in the same book, the testimony of the
devil himself, as it is pretended; whereof anon.

Upon this report I could do nothing (as I am informed) but it was said, that
the devil did direct me in it. In so much as when I rode to Denham my self (as
is before expressed) it was given forth, as I perceive, that the horse I rid
upon was a devil, and that I had devils attending upon me in liuerie coats, by
that which I find written, and reported of me: there was never young Gentleman
(I think) more abused then I have been.

After some time spent at Fulmer by the priests with the said Trayford, and
Sara Williams, they came all of them with Ma: Edmond Peckham, and his wife to
Denham (as it is mentioned in the said book) and I not knowing at that time,
what reports were bruted abroad of me, resorting thither (as I was wont) fell
into their snares, which I would surely have avoided, if possibly I could have
suspected, that they would ever have dealt with me, as afterward they did.

At my coming thither amongst them, I was kindly used, and lodged in the
furthest part of the house: the other chambers were then supplied with other
guests that I knew not of, until a maid in the house, who had been my
brothers Cook, did tell me of them. Upon the coming of Ma: Edmond Peckham to
Denham, my brothers servants departed, and left the house to him (as I think)
except it were this maid, to whom I was much beholding for her kindness toward
me. Within a day or two after this my coming to Denham, the said maid-Cooke
signified unto me, that there was great walking of spirits about the house, and
that diverse had been greatly affrighted by them. The first night that I came
thither (as I remember) I was somewhat evil at ease, and whether this report,
that did something astonish me, did make me worse or no, I cannot tell: but I
grew worse, and worse, in so much as my old disease at a very wicked time, did
there take hold of me.

The disease I spoke of, was a spice of the Mother, wherewith I had been
troubled (as is before mentioned) before my going into France: whether I do
rightly term it the Mother or no, I know not: but it is well known to the
Physicians in London, that be alive, and were then of any name, that my eldest
brother Thomas Mainy had the same disease, and that he died of it: and Ma:
Edmond Peckham (as I have been credibly informed) was likewise troubled with
it. When I was sick of this disease in France, a Scottish Doctor of Physic
then in Paris, called it, as I remember, Vertiginem capitis. It rises (as he
said, and I have often felt) of a wind in the bottom of the belly, and
proceeding with a great swelling, causes a very painful collicke in the
stomach, and an extraordinary giddines in the head. With this disease I am
still once in four or five years troubled, and I do greatly suspect that it
will end me, as it did my brother.

I began no sooner to be troubled at Denham (as is before said) but as now I
perceive the priests had that, which they looked for. The women of the house
(whose names I do not now remember) that came to help, and attend me, told me
first, as my brothers maid had done before, how greatly the house was troubled
with spirits, and afterward that there were two possessed in the house with
devils: the manner of whose fits they described unto me in such sort, as I was
much amazed therewith. Whether these women were required by the Priests to
tell me these things or no, I know not: but shortly after Ma: Dibdale, and Ma:
Cornelius two priests coming unto me, after sundry questions, and speeches
used with me, they fell to be of opinion (as it seemed, and so told me) that I
was possessed with a wicked spirit. I say, (as it seemed) for I am fully
persuaded in my conscience, that they knew well enough, that neither I, nor any
of the rest before mentioned were indeed possessed: but that they did pretend
so, to work thereby such matters, as they had propounded unto themselves,
whereof for my part I will no further judge. Of this my persuasion I have some
reasons, by that which I find written, and deposed by others to that purpose.

When I first heard them say, that I was possessed, I told them that I doubted
not, but that they were deceived therein. I acquainted them with the nature of
my disease, and how long I had been troubled with it: but they persisted in
their opinion. For that time leaving me, they came shortly unto me again, and
began where before they had left: then they told me what extraordinary
strength I showed in one of my pangues, which moved me little. For the nature of
that disease, is to cause ones belly to swel in such sort, as two or three are
not able (using any good discretion) to keep down the wind, that seeks to
ascend, as it is very well known to those, that have seen either a man or
woman in that fit, and as it is likely, the priests themselves knew by their
experience in Ma: Edmond Peckham, who was very often troubled with it (as is
before expressed.)

Diverse other reasons they used unto me, to cause me to suspect the worst of my
self, and these as I think were some of them: they put me in mind of giving
over my study beyond the Seas, of leaving the course I had begun with the
Bonhommes, and of my more youthful conversation since my return: these and
such like points they used, as arguments to convince me, that I was possessed.
But I replying for my self as I could, and telling them what a discredit it
would be unto me, to have it reported of me, that I was possessed with a devil,
and how it would be a blemish, and a disgrace unto me, whilst I lived: they
made little account thereof, saying, that it was a less discredit, and not so
hurtful for a man to have 10000 devils in him, then to have committed one
deadly sin: and to this purpose they alleged a place out of Saint Augustine
(as far as I remember.) Besides they reasoned with me, to prove it the safest
way for me, to submit my self to their trial, whether I were possessed or no:
for that (as they said) if the devil were not in me, I could take no hurt by
their trial, whereas if I were possessed, it could not but be very dangerous
unto me, that the devil should still continue in me. By these, and such like
means they persuaded me, to yield my self to be directed by them for the
trial of my estate. When they had me at this point, then they permitted me to
have access unto Sara Williams when she was in her fits, and informed me
likewise of the manner, how she, and others had been troubled.

This course held with me, they drew me to confession, and to promise that I
would go no more to the Protestants Churches: affirming that they could do me
no good, until I was become again a member of the Catholic Roman Church.
After I had been at one or two of Saras fits, and submitted my self (as is
before expressed) a pangue of my old disease taking hold on me, Ma: Dibdale
affirmed publicly to the company, that then it was apparent, that I was
possessed. Upon my recovery he told me, that by applying of holy relics unto
my belly, he had compelled the wicked spirit to give me ease: whereas I never
found benefit by any such things, but was eased (as I had been at other times
before, when the fit of the Mother left me) by bending of my body forward,
which is a cause of breaking of wind, and consequently of apparent ease. And
hereby (as I am persuaded) I was at that time eased, and not by any relics.
Within a day or two after (as I remember) they told me, that it was necessary
for me to be exorcised: where unto although I was loath to yield, because I had
seen their manner of dealing therein either with Sara, or Frauncis Williams,
who by this time was said to be all so possessed, yet I had submitted my self
so far, that now it was too late for me to draw back. All things therefore
being in a readiness, and I in good health, and no ways troubled with my
disease, they bound me fast in a chair, and fell to their Exorcismes with much
solemnity, and show of great devotion. Then they urged me to drink a very
unpleasant potion, which troubled me greatly; in so much as I desired them to
untie me, and give me leave to lie down upon my bed: but they regarded not my
words, or earnest entreaty, saying: It was the devil, and not my self that
desired such rest, that so he might not be disturbed in me. At other times when
they had me bound in such like manner, besides the said drink, they used to
burn brimstone under my nose, and some other things else, which vexed me
exceedingly. What I did, and spoke at those times, I do not now remember: by
that which I see they have written of Marwood, Trayford, of Sara, and Frauncis
Williams, I doubt not but many things have been reported of me, which are
untrue. It is not unlike but that when I found my self so entangled with them,
as that I could not rid my self from them, I did, and spoke many things which
were inconvenient, and whereof I think I should be ashamed, if I did remember
them. For after I had learned their humor, and perceived as well by the rest,
as by mine own experience, what would content them, I framed my self
accordingly.

Whilst I was thus at Denham with them, I was never almost suffered to be
quiet: but either I was to be exorcised my self, or urged to be with Sara, or
her sister Frauncis, or kept privately in my chamber, and one way or other
tossed, and turmoyled by them, till at the last after sundry Exorcismes, and
much further trouble procured by their drinks, and violent fumigations, they
gave it forth, that they had cast one devil out of me: but with such
intimation, as might breed a suspicion that there were some other left in me.
By this time Christmas drew near, and whether it was for that they meant to
deal with Sara at Hackney, or for what other cause they knew best, they gave
me over for a while, and sent me to Ma: Fittons by Windsor, where I suppose
they thought I should be well looked unto, and ready afterward when they should
send for me.

I remained at Ma: Fittons till after the end of the holy days (as I
remember,) and being free from their vexations, did solace my self with merry
company, as the time, and occasion served. In so much as some gave it out,
peradventure by the priests procurement, that I was still possessed with a
merry devil: and others said, that if I were possessed indeed, it could not
otherwise choose, but that he was a devil, that was not much troubled with
melancholy, or to that effect. Of these reports I heard nothing my self,
whilst I was at Ma: Fittons, for if I had, they would much have abated the
edge of my mirth, which they spoke of. But now it is meet to be considered,
how notably they joined their matters together. It greeueth me much that I am
constrained to deal in these matters thus far, but yet I see that if this
occasion had not fallen out, I should never have so well discerned their
dealing with me.

Although they gave it out, that they had cast a devil out of me (as is before
mentioned) and amongst many other reasons had alleged, that the devil entered
into me, because I gave over the order of the Bonhommes, and further, because
some might peradventure suspect, that notwithstanding all that they had either
done or said of me, yet all the disease that I had was but only the Mother,
now they have a devise to clear all these points, as it is apparent in the
said book so often before mentioned. On Monday the tenth of January, Sara
Williams is pretended to have a marvelous great fit at Hackney, and amongst
many other speeches which the priest that exorcised her then used, he comes
at last to these: There is one (says he to the devil as it was pretended)
that has the Mother, what say thou to him? The devil answers, that is a
Mother indeed. So hereby they would makes it plain, that it was not the
Mother that I was troubled with. But the priest goes forward saying, was there
any spirit cast out of him? and the devil answered,) yea a little one, but to
no purpose. So as now they have a sufficient testimony, that I was
dispossessed of one devil whilst I was at Denham.

Furthermore, it is pretended by Saras devil, that there remains still in
me the Prince of all other devils, whose name should be Modu, which gave them
matter enough to work upon again with me. But yet all doubts were not
cleared, and therefore the said priest demanded this question of Saras devil:
Came the prince Modu (says he) into him to bring him from the house of S.
Frauncis de Paula his order? Yea in troth (quoth the devil.) And thus they
thought they had sufficiently justified all that they had reported of him, as
appears by the said book. But all this notwithstanding, I am more and more
confirmed hereby, in my former opinion of their bad proceeding with me, and
the rather, because (as I am informed) Sara Williams upon her oath has
denied, that ever she used any such speeches of me, as far as she
remembers.

When the said priests had dispatched their business at Hackney, they then
returned toward me, upon pretense to cast the great Prince Modu (as I
suppose) out of me. I being at Ma. Fittons (as is before said) it fell out
that by reason of good company, I daunced that night so long, that I cast my
self into a very great sweat, and was weary. Afterward, whether before I went
to bed, or when I was in bed, I do not well remember, I had a fit of the
Mother, as I have had before, and often times since upon such violent
exercises. It happened that this night some of the said priests that were at
Hackney, (as I think) came to Ma. Fittons, who hearing of my fit, said it was
no marvel, for it was confessed by the devil in Sara, that I had the Prince
of many devils in me, or words to that effect. Heereuppon in the morning one
Mistress Anne More a gentlewoman, waiting upon Mistress Fitton came unto me, and
told me with weeping eyes, which of the priests were come that night to the
house, and what they had reported of me, and how much I was deceived, in that
I thought my self to be troubled with nothing but the Mother. I answered her
(as if she be alive she can well bear me witness) that I knew very well,
whatsoever they said, that the Mother was the only disease wherewith I was
vexed, and that I was free (I thanked GOD) from the possession of any wicked
spirit.

All the while they wrought upon me before, I found no other trouble in me,
but of mine old grief when I had it, saving such pain as they cast me into
by their drinks and perfumes. And when they said that the devil was cast out
of me, yet I found my self neither better, nor worse, which caused me to
think, that those things were most untrue which they reported of me.

I was so confident herein, that the better to color (as I think) their
future proceedings with me, they sent to a Physician, one Doctor Griffith, who
gave me, as it is said some Physic. But through their information (as I am
persuaded) the conclusion amongst them was, that there was no natural cause of
my disease: and so there was no remedy, but I must needs be possessed. Then it
was thought meet that I should be carried back again, whether to Denham, or
to Channon-row, I do not well remember, but rather (as I conjecture) it was to
Denham. And for as much as the report was, that the spirit supposed to be in
me, was the Prince of all the devils, which were in the parties possessed; Ma:
Edmunds the Jesuit, and chief of all the priests, that had to deal then in
these actions, was thought the meetest man (as I suppose) to encounter with
him. After that time, so far as I remember, none of the priests had to deal
with me, but himself, he was my ghostly Father, and to him (as it is given
out) I revealed many things.

When he had the managing of these matters with me, there was very great resort
to the place where we were, and a very extraordinary expectation, (as I have
heard) of some strange event to fall out.

The course which he held with me was much more rigorous, then at any time
before. When he had me bound, if I did not frame my self in every thing to
his contentment (as sometimes being angry with his usage of me I think I did
not) then he would say, the devil was obstinate in me. In which case sometimes
I was constrained by him to drink most loathsome draughts of such confections
as he had ready for me: and sometimes they burnt such abominable stinking, and
violent things, holding my nose by force over the smoke; as (I think) would
make a horse mad. No man (I suppose) is able to endure such a perfume without
extreme torment. He dealt thus hardly with me, as I think upon pretense that
the great Prince of devils that was in me, would not otherwise be tamed. I have
seen them sometimes so perfume Sara Williams with such like smoakes, as her
face has looked blacker, then ever I saw a chimney sweepers. Which heates, and
smells together with their potions, did make her to talk, and rage as if she
had been mad. And the priests would make some use of every thing she said: and
so I think I may by her esteem of mine own case, when they had made me in
effect mad, no marvel though I spoke, and fared like a mad man.

Being thus dealt with, I became very weak, and sickly. Little meat that I
took would endured with me above an hour or two, and I was at my wits end,
what I should do. The best means that I could think of for mine own ease,
was to frame my self in such sort, as might be most agreeable to Ma: Edmunds
liking: which then I began to do with some extraordinary care. I omitted no
occasion to go to confession, none showed more zeal at Mass time, then my
self: at the elevation I pretended to see extraordinary lights, as if they
had been the Sun beams, and that the same did so astonish me, as sometimes
I would fall backwards, when I was kneeling, as though I could not endure the
glittering of so glorious a sight: whereas I protest before God, I never saw
indeed any such light, or was astonished, but therein I did as I had heard the
priests report, that both Frauncis, and Sara Williams had done before me. And I
do verily think, they told me the same to no other end, but that I my self
should put the same in practice. For I found my self very apt to follow such
examples: and do suppose, that any being in that case, that I, and the rest
were, would assay to speak, and do as they should be informed, that others in
their estate had done or spoken.

Of my said pretended astonishments, Ma: Edmunds would make large discourses
concerning the presence of Christ in the Sacrament. And where it is reported of
me in writing, as these things last mentioned are likewise, that I did pretend
to see a glistering light come from the thumbs, and fore-fingers of the priests
at sundry times: I confess, it may be that I have so affirmed, either for that
they themselves have asked me, if I did see no such thing, or else have told
me, that the rest in my case had seen such lights, whereby I was induced to
say as much of my self: whereas indeed whatsoever I said thereof, was
altogether untrue. For I never saw other lights about their thumbs or fingers,
then such as is ordinary to all other men's hands, and fingers. The color of
the pretense of such lights (as I remember) was, for that the priests thumbs,
and fore-fingers are anointed with holy oil (as I have heard) when they are
made priests, and because they do with them at Mass time handle the body of
Christ.

Furthermore, I found it did well content Ma. Edmunds and the rest of the
priests, that I should sometimes rail very earnestly both against him, and the
rest of his fellows then present, and generally against all priests. And that
I should on the contrary commend as earnestly the service of the protestants,
the Magistrates, the Ministers, and the chiefest in authority. So I knew that
Sara Williams, and the rest had done, and so I did my self, no doubt as
artificially as any of them, if not in better sort. For we all knew how they
would expound them for their own glory, in that the devils (as they pretended)
could not endure them: and to the great discredit of the other side, because
the devils extolled them as their loving friends. And certain it is that the
Catholics that were present to my understanding, did take great contentment
by such our speeches, and their expositions of them. By this my readiness to
do, and speak whatsoever I found that Ma. Edmunds liked, I escaped sometimes
(as I think) their loathsome drinks, and intolerable fumigations.

After some time thus spent with me at Denham, (as I suppose) I was carried to
the Earl of Lincolnes house in Channon-row, where my brother, and his wife
were as I remember: I was then not past 16 or 17 years old as far as I can
guess, and therefore (to speak a little in mine own excuse) no marvel, all
circumstances duly considered, that I was drawn by the cunning practices of
the said priests, into these dissembling courses which now I utterly dislike,
and detest. I am fully persuaded, that there is never a youth in England, were
he of never so ripe and pregnant a wit, but if he should fall into the hands of
such priests, he would in a short time be so bewitched by them, as that he
would be soon drawn to stoop to their lure, and do as I did.

When I was going, and come to Channon-row, I was very much grieved, and in
fear (as far as I remember) of their further proceedings with me. For I was
then brought to such weakness, as I was scarce able to go alone, unless I
were vpheld. We were no sooner come thither, but that there was great concourse
of many Catho: to see (as I think) the event of things: especially because Ma.
Edmunds, a man of great account amongst them, was the only dealer in effect
with me. By those things which I find written, and reported of me, and which I
had otherwise forgotten of my self, at my coming to Channon-row, I did
pretend some traunces, and in them to have sundry visions, into which course I
was led (as I am fully persuaded) by some speeches of the priests, whom I had
often heard talk how Sara Williams, and diverse others, had many times certain
traunces: wherein they lay as if they had been senseless, and in them had
sundry visions, which upon their recovery they did usually tell unto the
priests, and diverse others, whereupon I verily think, that the first Sunday
after I came to Channon-row, (as aforesaid) I fained my self to be in a
trance, and afterward told Ma. Edmunds many tales of my being all that time
in Purgatory, and what I had seen, and endured there. I also told him at that
time (as far as I remember) that I perceived by one of the visions which I
then had, how I was every Sunday to have the like traunces, and visions about
the same hours, until Good Friday next ensuing, and that the I should depart
in a trance out of this life, and go immediately into heaven.

There are diverse things further reported of me as touching these my pretended
traunces, and visions, (as that after I showed my self to be recovered, I did
foretell of great afflictions, and persecutions, which should happen to the
Catholics in England, and of sundry such matters) but whether they be true or
no, I do not remember. If I used any such words, either Ma. Edmunds, or some
of the rest induced me thereunto, by some of their leading questions, or I had
heard them before speak themselves to that effect: or else the report is
altogether false, and devised by themselves to serve their own turns: for of
my self I do not believe that I had any apprehension of any such matters.

It is written also of me, how after some other of my pretended traunces and
visions, I used diverse times to fall into strange exclamations, making the
company to believe, that I saw Christ himself accompanied with a number of
Angels in such a corner of the chamber, and at other times the virgin Mary,
attended with a train of blessed virgins, and that thereupon my manners was to
urge them that were present, to fall down upon their knees to worship them,
and to pray unto them. These things I do in some sort remember, and do partly
believe them to be true, because I well remember, that upon my said motions,
and urging of them, both Ma. Edmunds, and the rest, did usually lift up their
hands, now in this corner, now in that corner, and prayed upon their knees,
with their hands holden up, as though Christ, and the virgin Mary had been
there indeed. Whereas I do faithfully avow it, that I never saw any such
sights, but did therein frame my self to do as I had heard by the priests and
others, that Sara Williams, and the rest had done before me. And I do believe
that Ma. Edmunds himself knew as much, and that he did but seem to worship,
(as is before expressed) thereby to induce the rest of the company so to do.

It seems that Ma. Edmunds has written a long discourse of about a quire of
paper, of all my said pretended traunces and visions, and it may be likewise of
all the rest of the proceedings held with me, either by him self, or the rest
of the priests: if ever that book come to further light, so as any in
authority do take notice of it, I will be ready (if I be called thereunto) to
give my answer truly to all the particulers, so far forth as I shall
remember In the mean time, as touching all my pretended visions in general,
(of my sufferings in Purgatory, and the rest) they were all feigned by me, to
please Fa: Edmunds, and it may be to gain to my self a little foolish
commendation, or admiration, because I saw how the Catholics that heard of
them, and were present at many of my fond speeches, did seem to wonder at me.

When Good Friday came, there was great resort to the said house where I was:
and of my bahauiour that day, a priest (I perceive) has written at large. Of
my self I should have remembered little that did happen at that time, but
being urged to answer something to that which is written of me, I will first
set down the authors own words.

Lying (says he) that day upon his bed, he made (as it were) a solemn
exhortation, and telling the Catholics present, that his hour was now come,
he willed them to continue constant in their profession, saying that they were
yet to endure the brunt of many persecutions, howbeit, they that perseuered
unto the end, should be saved: and so falling from his exhortations unto
prayer, he desired all the company to pray with him: whereupon he began to
recite the Letanie, and they that were present, followed in aunswering of him,
every person present being moved to great devotion. Thus continuing for a
while, he then seemed to fall into a slumber, and after that into a trance,
which endured above two hours: so as many that were present, did verily
believe he would never have awaked again, but in the same have given up the
ghost. At the last, of himself he did awake, fetching a great sigh, and a
groan, and then used these words: My time is not yet come: our blessed Lady
has appeared unto me, and told me that I must live longer yet: for that God
has reserved me for a further purpose to do more good, and to tell of strange
wonders. With that there began to be a great muttering among the company, many
greatly meruailing what this should mean. Whereupon Fa: Edmunds made an
exhortation to those that were present, and told them, that he thought it
convenient to prolong the time no longer, but to fall to exorcising of him,
whereby they should perceive, whether all were true that he had reported unto
them, or whether it had been the enemy that sought to delude them.

Thus far the priest, whose report (I think) is true in substance, though
peradventure he may err in some circumstance: but my memory is not so good, as
that I am able to control him in any particular, and therefore I will let it
pass as it goes. The fault is not mine, that these things are thus published.
What moved me to pretend that I should die upon Good Friday, I cannot set down
directly: but sure I am the devise was boyish, and foolish, and very suitable
(as I think) to the rest of my proceedings, being greatly besotted by them, as
may appear by my whole course, and by their dealings with me. As far as I
can guess my simple drift therein was, that when it should be apparent, that I
had lied unto them, they would for shame have then dismissed me from them: for
there was nothing in the world that I desired more. But I found I was deceived
in my simple plot, and do now perceive by the said priests words, that Ma:
Edmunds was provided, how to salve the matter, if the worst fell out. God
knows whether he supposed, that I would have taken some course, to have
shortened mine own time against that day, as constrained in some sort
thereunto by the great weakness, and indeed wearines of my life, whereunto
he, and the rest had brought me: but I will judge the best. This only I
perceive, that when he found my simple plot, he was ready to insinuate to the
Catholics present, that out of doubt the report that I made of my death, was
but an illusion of Satan; and this must be made manifest out of hand by an
Exorcisme: for as the said priest has in writing reported (although I my self
had forgotten it) being again exorcised in the presence of all the company,
before they departed I showed no signs of any distemper, but rather of great
devotion, and piety: whereby Ma: Edmunds collected, that out of all question it
was Satan in me that said I should die upon Good Friday, and so the company
departed very well satisfied. If he had given me at that time his holy potion,
and perfumed my nose with brimstone, Assa faetida, and I know not what other
vile smell (as before he had done) I should not surely have been so quiet: but
he had another drift, as well it appears.

From the said Good Friday, for ought I remember, until the three, and
twentieth of April (which was then S. Georges day) Ma: Edmunds suffered me to be
quiet, I think now to gather some strength, and imagined then that he would
never have troubled me further. But it fell out that a day or two before Saint
Georges day (as it should seem) that I had again a fit of the Mother,
whereupon they took occasion to have me in handling again, for as they said
Modu the Prince of devils was yet in me: and now they pretended (as I remember)
to do the best they could to cast him out of me, that so I might be rid for
altogether.

Ma: Edmunds, and the rest dealt with me at this time very extremely, and I
must confess that in hope to be now dispatched, I bent my self (as far as
possibly I could) to feign, and affirm every thing that I perceived they
expected at my hands. But what I then did or said, if I should have been
tortured upon the rack (had I not seen what was published in writing of me at
that time) I could not now have remembered so many particulers. After that Ma:
Edmunds had exorcised, and perfumed me (as oftentimes he had done before) the
devil that had lain secret long in me (as the writing says) began to appear.
But I will set down the effect of the said priests reports as touching this
matter.

By commandment of the Exorcist (which was Ma: Edmunds) the devil in Ma:
Mainy confessed his name to be Modu, and that he had besides himself seven
other spirits, all of them Captains, and of the great fame. There-vpon Ma:
Edmunds commanded that every one of the seven should come up in their degrees
one after another, and to declare his name by his principal quality. Then Ma:
Mainy by the instigation of the first of the seven, began to set his hands
unto his side, curled his hair, and used such gestures, as Ma: Edmunds
presently affirmed, that that spirit was Pride. Heere-with he began to curse,
and banne, saying: What a pox do I here? I will stay no longer amongst a
company of rascal Priests, but go to the Court, and brave it amongst my
fellows, the noble men there assembled. And then after Ma: Edmunds had said,
that he showed himself thereby to be the spirit of Pride: he went down
again, and Ma: Mainy became very quiet, and fell to his prayers. But Ma: Mainy
could not tell one word (as he reported) of any thing that had been then said,
only he affirmed, that he had all the while felt a great pain in his body.
Then Ma: Edmunds did proceed again with his Exorcismes, and suddenly the
senses of Mainy were taken from him, his belly began to swell, and his eyes to
stare, and suddenly cried out, ten pounds in the hundred, he called for a
Scriuener to make a bond, swearing that he would not lend his money without a
pawn. Ma: Edmunds demanding of that devil, whether he were the same that had
spoken before, he said no. But yet affirmed, that he was a good fellow, and a
companion of his, and one that bare as great rule in England as any other
devil. There could be no other talk had of this spirit, but of money,
bargaining, and usury: so as all the company deemed this devil to be the
author of Covetousness, not expecting any instruction therein from Fa:
Edmunds. After a while this devil goes down as the other did. Ma. Mainy
recouereth his senses, falls to his prayers, and ere long Ma. Edmunds
begins again his Exorcismes, wherein he had not proceeded far, but up
comes another spirit, singing most filthy and baudy songs: every word almost
that he spoke, was nothing but ribaldry. They that were present, with one
voice affirmed that devil to be the author of Luxury. And Ma. Edmunds being
not able to endure such lewd speeches, commanded him to be silent, and to get
him down forthwith again. The devil obeyed: Ma. Mainy recouereth, falls to
his prayers, and afterward Ma. Edmunds goes forward with the rest. And thus
he did proceed, till he had raised up all the seven Captains, and compelled
them to show themselves as the other had done. Envy was described by
disdainful looks, and contemptuous speeches. Wrath by furious gestures, and
talk as though he would have fought. Gluttony by vomiting: and Sloth by
gaping and snorting, as if he had been a sleep. Ma. Mainy at every time
recovering his senses, and falling to prayer as he had done before. After these
seven devils had thus showed themselves, and were again at rest in Ma. Mainy,
it seemed good to Ma. Edmunds to try what he could do with Modu their prince
and Captain. He begins again his exorcismes, and continued the same, till
after a while the said Modu rose up again, and asked Ma. Edmunds how he liked
his 7. Brethren before mentioned, who had appeared one after another? And
furthermore he fell a cursing, and said: A pox on you all for popish priests.
My fellows the protestants can make very much of my said Brethren, and give
them good entertainment, bidding them welcome whensoe-they come: but you scuruy
priests can neither abide them your selves, nor suffer them to be quiet
whenever you are conversant. Heereunto Ma. Edmunds answered, that they would
be enemies both to him, and them all during their lives. And commanded both
him, and the rest of his companions for to depart out of Ma. Mainy, urging them
with such several adiurations, as are see down to that purpose in the book
of Exorcismes. Whilst he was thus proceeding with him, he required Modu by the
authority of his Priesthood, and power left by Christ in the Catholic Roman
Church, to tell him truly concerning these visions that appeared unto Mainy:
with that the devil in Mainy fell out into a great laughter, saying that it
had done him very much good, that he had coosened so many priests, and made
all the company for to worship him: For (says he) all that time that you and
the rest seemed to pray unto Christ, and unto Saffronbag, it was I, and all my
company that you worshipped. Heerewith Ma. Edmunds being greatly moved,
defied him, and said that they had no intention of worshipping him: and that if
any we so deceived, it was of ignorance, and that his torments should be the
greater for so intolerable an illusion. Then Ma. Edmunds began again his
exorcismes with great earnestnes, and all the company cried out upon God, the
blessed virgin, S. George, and all the company of heaven to help, and succor
them in that holy action, so as both that wicked Prince Modu, and all his
company might be cast out of Ma: Mainy. And accordingly God heard their
prayers, for shortly after they were all cast forth, and that in such sort as
Ma: Edmunds directed them: which was, that every devil should depart in some
certain form, representing either a beast, or some other creature, that had
resemblance of that sin, whereof he was the chief Author. Whereupon the
spirit of Pride departed in the form of a Peacock. The spirit of Sloth in the
likeness of an Ass: the spirit of Envy in the similitude of a Dog: the spirit
of Gluttony in the form of a Wolf: and the other devils had also in their
departure their particular likenesses agreeable to their natures.

Hitherto the Author of the said Treatise, though in some more words, yet to
this effect. Concerning the which report, the world must needs bear me
witness, if ever it come to their public view, that I have great cause to
blame them, for making of these things common, which were wrought by themselves
in private, so much to my discredit. My charity shall deserve very great
commendations as I think, if I do not hereafter seek to be revenged, both
upon Ma: Edmunds, and the rest, that have thus dealt with me. But to the matter
it self as I am required. It is very likely that upon Saint Georges day here
mentioned, I railed against the priests, and spoke of the Court, as that time
gave occasion. But I do verily think that I used the said speeches, as being
led unto them by some words uttered either by the priests, or by some in the
company, and that they had some farther drift then I do know of, in appoynting
that day for their dealings with me.

And touching my describing of the said seven devils by signs, and gestures,
signifying the seven deadly sins. I do well remember that I used some such
like gestures to that end, but I am persuaded that they are here set down in
far better sort then I did act them, as their usual manner was in reporting
of any thing that was done either by me, or any of the rest. They would make a
fair tale of any thing, though it were never so simple, that any of us did or
said. But for mine own part, how I should be able to describe the said sins,
though it were never so simple, I cannot directly answer. This only I think,
and am persuaded in my conscience, that what I did therein, I was either led
unto it by some of the Priests instructing questions, or else I had been told
before, that others in my case had described such devils by such gestures, that
did signify such, and such sins. For being not then fully xvij. years of
age, as I take it, I do not think that any such things would ever have come
into my head, if I had not been cunningly instructed.

It seems strange unto me, when I remember diverse things concerning these
matters, as I may say of my self, so I have been informed concerning the rest,
that either had been, or were then in my case. We were never suffered to be
quiet: few nights escaped, but either Mistress Peckham when she was present, or
Mistress Plater, or some other of the women, where we remained, would be with
us, either to bring us news severally, what each of us had done or said apart,
when we were exorcised the day before: or else to tell us strange tales, which
they said they had heard of some of the priests, concerning diverse things which
had been done, and spoken by such, as had been possessed in other Countries:
whether they did thus by the direction of the priests or no, I cannot tell, but
I verily believe, that we all of us learned thereby to do many things, which
otherwise we should never have thought of. And whether I learned from them the
skill I had to do the gestures before mentioned, I know not, it may be I did.

And as I answer to this point, so do I unto that other, as touching the
devils supposed similitudes in their pretended departing out of me. Either it
is altogether false, and devised by themselves, or else they led me to say so
by their questions. As if they asked me, whether Pride did not depart from me
in the likeness of a Peacock, it is very probable that I said he did. And so
of all the rest, or otherwise they told some in my hearing, that such devils
did use to depart from such, as they possessed in such kind of forms: I pray
God forgive them for all their bad dealings with me. My chief comfort is, that
as I said in the beginning, I am fully persuaded that I was never possessed,
and that all I did or spoke, I did it, and spoke it my self, being sometimes
enforced, and sometimes induced so to do, as before I have mentioned. And also
that the most of those things which are written of me, are either utterly
false, or greatly altered in the telling. And that the priests themselves that
dealt with me, are of right to bear the blame for that which either I or any
of the rest said or did, that might give any just cause of offense, either to
her Majesty, or the state here in England.

Upon my speeches before mentioned to the Lord Strange, the priests, and
others, especially those that favor Ma: Edmunds as I think, did give it out
that I was still possessed. And I doubt not but if at any time they understand
of this my confession, it will be said that now I have many devils in me. I had
forgotten to set down how I have had a long time an ache in one of my knees,
which I think I got when I was a child by a cold, and how when I told the
priests of it first, they used that for one argument to prove that I was
possessed: saying, that it was very likely that the devil kept about that
place. Also I fear I shall be troubled with my old disease as I have before
said. So as if they shall determine to hold on so wicked a course, they are
like to have the same causes to say that I am still possessed, that they had
before. But I hope they will not dare to presume to have any further dealing
with me, and that God will deliver me from them. And this is all I can say to
all such points, and matters as have been propounded unto me.

Richard Mainy.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 5, line 27, for continue, read contriue.

Page 16, line 6, for Rat, read Cat.

Page 20, line 36, for hope, read two.

Page 95, line 35, for conservation, read consecration.


