A SHORT RELATION OF The departure of the high and mighty Prince Frederick
King Elect of Bohemia: with his royal and virtuous Lady Elizabeth; And the
thryse hopeful young Prince Henry, from Heydelberg toward Prague, to receive
the Crown of that Kingdom.

Whearvnto is annexed the Solempnitie or manner of the Coronation. Translated
out of dutch.

And now both together published (with other reasons, and iustifications) to
give satisfaction to the world, as touching the ground, and truth, of his
Maties. proceedings, and undertaking of that Kingdom of Bohemia: lawfully and
freely Elected, by the general consent of the States, not ambitiouslie
aspiring thearvnto.

As also to encourage all other noble and heroical spirits (especially our
own nation, whom in honor it first and chieffelie concerns) by prerogative
of that high, and sovereign Title, haereditarie to our Kings and Princes:
defendees of the faith) to the like Christian resolusion, against Antichrist
and his Adharents.

Si Deus nobiscum quis contra nos. At Dort, Printed by George Waters. 1619.

To the Reader.
THis was my meditation coming down the Rhyne, (the day after their Maties
departure from Heydelberg) written in my table book, among other observations;
which upon my arrival, I thought to have published; ut for some reserved
reasons (not hear to be expressed) as then not thought convenient. So deferred
till now (as may be thought also) unseasonable; after the news of their Maties
entry, Coronation and all other Solempnities past. Yet the two principal
motives remain still thearin mentioned; to wit, my zeal and affection, which
I can not supresse, but must crave leave upon so good a warrant (as my
conscience assures me of) to express And (perhaps) may be of some further use
to incense others. And hearvnto I have annexed some Anagrams which a friend of
mine gave me: yet not privy to my intent of publishing either the one or the
other. I say they are not mine, but a friend (whose name I conceal) did them.
The honor whereof I dare not assume, lest (perhaps) he should vnderwrite:

Hos ego versiculos feci tulit alter honores. If I have offended either in the
one, or the other; the two former motives shall excuse me: I take all to my
self: Me me, adsum qui feci.

John Harrison.

THE DEPARTVRE OF the high and mighty Prince Frederick King Elect of Bohemia:
with his royal, and virtuous lady Elizabeth: and the most hopeful young
Prince Henry, from Heydelberg, toward Prague, to receave the crown of that
Kingdom.
HIs Highness formerlie elected by the general consent of the Bohemian State to
this high honor, and dignity; afterward consulting with his fellow-princes
of the union, and by their approbation thearvnto encouraged: (the mayn motive
being the cause, and defense of religion, and the professors thearof,
oppressed, and otherwise, like to be suppressed, and utterly rooted out of
that country of Bohemia: and elswhearc also to be feared) Thearafter preparing
all things necessary for his expeditio^: (monday the 27 of September being the
day appointed for his journey) the day before being the holy Sabbath, betimes
in the morning, with the yo^g Prince and his whole house hold, and train he
humbly made his repair to the public assembly and Church in Heydelberg,
thear first to offer sacrifice to the god of heaven, and with the ioyntprayers,
and tears of his people (of whom at that time he took his solemn leave)
with strong cries to beseech Almighty god for his good success: the day also
all mournful and raynie suitable thear unto. No less religious, and devoute
was that worthy, and virtuous lady in her private chapel, and with her
private, and religious family, whear her zealous and godly chaplayne D.
Chapman taking a very fit text for that time, and occasion, handled the same
so effectually, with so many good, and godly admonitions, and in the end so
fervent and zealous a prayer as moved much: whearvnto all said amen which
sermon I wished at the same time had been preached at Paul's cross, and in all
the churches of great Britayne, that all the people (even the whole church of
god) might likewise have said amen. I was very earnest with him after to have
had the copy of it to have published it (so worthy) but the next day being the
day of remove, and the time so short, his books and meditations already
packed up, and sent away, I could not obtain; yet promised to send me: which
promise of his I hear challenge publicly. In the mean time. I will before
hand publish his text which was this, out of saint James 4. 13. Go to now ye
that say to day, or tomorrow we will go into such a city, and continue theare
a year, and buy, and sell, and get gain: wheareas ye know not what shall be
on the morrow. For what is your life? It is even a vapor that appears for a
little time and then vanishes away. For that ye ought to say: if the lord
will, we shall live, and do this or that. In the afternoon again this
religious Prince, with the young Prince, and the rest (in like humble manner as
in the forenoone repaired to church in his own palace, to sanctify the rest
of the Sabbath. which ended the next morning about eight of the clock, these
Princely personages (after manifold visitations the days be fore) with their
train, in their caroches, and some on horses, and wagons, without any vain
pomp or ostentation, but rather tears in their eyes lifted up to heaven,
quietly departed. yet not without strong cries, prayers, well wishes and
acclamations following them: whear unto let all true christians of all nations
(especially of ours as in duty more nearelie bound) say Amen. And not only
with their prayers and well wishes, but otherwise also as further occasion
shall be offered aid and assiste them. The glory of god and general good of
his church depends thear upon: pro qua quis pius dubitaret mortem oppetere si
ei sit profuturus. They that do, they are worse than the very heathens: and
well may these worthy personages, Debora and Barak now already on their
march, pronounce against them that bitter curse: Iud. 5. 23. Curse ye Meros
(said the angel of the lord, curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thear of
because they came not to help the Lord, to help the Lord against the mighty.
To help the Lord. I say it is the lords cause: yea and it is every man's
particular cause that fears god; for if religion be put to the worst, and
suffer, so of consequence must every one that professes the same likewise, of
what nation or condition soever. But it may be hoped rather these good
beginnings make way to the final destruction of that man of sin, and
desolation of that great City Babylon: according to that prophecy in the
Revelation, which of necessity must be fulfilled. Heaven and earth shall pass
away, but not one jot of Gods word be unfulfilled. Macte virtute Princeps.
Ride prosperously on the word of truth, of meekenes, and of righteousness, and
thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things. Even now (I say) it may be
hoped, god will put into the hearts of Christian Princes: (Princes of the
union) with one consent to fulfill his will, against that menstruous, and
monstrous whore of Babylon: that is, to burn her with fire for strong is the
lord god which will condemn her. And to this service of Almighty god against
the enemies of his church, this noble, and religious young Prince has wholly
devoted himself, having before his departure (as I was told) given away his
hounds and other things pertaining to his pleasure: minding (as it should
seem) to forbear even his ordinary, and lawful recreations, till such time
as he has effected this great work, and fulfilled gods good will and pleasure
in those things whevnto it has pleased god to call him, His demeanor so
religious, humble, and mild, with such a cheerful assurednes in the faith and
promises of Almighty god, imprinted even in his countenance, as promises all
good success. For god refisteth the proud, but gives grace to the humble. So
likewise in the face and countenance of that hopeful young Prince Henry,
methinkes, I observed some divine thing extrordinarie which ravished my heart,
and may give the world to conceave, he will one day make good all those great
hopes which wear dead in Prince Henry, but revived again in him. And no heart
but would have been ravished to have seen the sweet demeanor of that great
lady at her departure: with tears trickling down her cheeks; so mild
courteous, and affable (yet with a princely reservation of state well
beseeming so great a majesty) like another Queen Elizabeth revived also
again in her, the only Phoenix of the world. Gonne is this sweet Princess,
with her now-more-than-princelie houseband (and more and more may they grow
together in grace and favor both with god and men) toward the place whear his
army attends, to march forward: showing herself like that virago at Tilburie
in eighty eight: an other Queen Elizabeth, for so now she is: and what more
she may be in time, or her royal issue, is in gods hands to dispose to his
glory, and the good of his church: pro qua (as I said before) quis pius
dubitaret mortem oppetere? what good man would not adventure his life, and
run even in the face of death, Such a lady going before, and marching in the
front It is the manner of the Moors in their most deadly battayles, to make
choice of one of their chieffest, and fairest virgins, to go before them into
the field: her to be surprised, and taken from them they hold it an everlasting
shame, and thearfore will fight it out to the last man. And shall we suffer our
sweet Princess, our royal infanta, the only daughter of our sovereign lord
and king, to go before us into the field and not fol low after her? then (I
may say again) we are worse than the very infidels, and they shall rise in
judgment against us at that great day. The glory of God, and general good of
his Church depending hearupon; with a particular obligation besides, I owe to
her Highness (which in all duty I am bound to acknowledge) has urged me to
express my zeal and affection thus far, as a testimony of my thankfulness:
ready further to adventure my life, and spend my dearest blood in confirmation
thearof; as in a common cause, whearin (as I said before) all true Christians
are likewise obliged. And thearfore let us all join together in prayers to
Almighty God, for the good success of these princely personages, and namely
in that prayer which the people of God prayed for the good success of that
good, and Godly King, before he went to fight against the Ammonites, whear
with I will conclude; psalm* 20.
The Lord hear thee in the day of trouble; the name of the God of Iaacob
defend thee. Send thee help from the sanctuary, and strength thee out of Sion.
Remember all thine offerings, and accept thy burnt sacrifice, Grant thee
according to thine own heart, and fulfill all thy counsel. We will rejoice in
thy salvation, and in the name of our God, we will set up our banners. The Lord
fulfill all thy petitions, etc. Amen:

Amen.
Fridericus quintus Elector Palatinus
Anagramma.
Quanta fide prole inclytus is recturus?
Epigramma
Iure legant illum populi suffragia regem,
Cui sit chara fides, quem sobolesque beat.
Ecce cluit talis Rheno qui praesidet Heroes:
Omen eum talem nominis esse docet.
Nempe side quanta prole inclytus (vt sonat illud)
Is recturus ovans Regia Sceptra geret?
Aliud Anagramma
En qualis prudens viret, ac fortis cluit
Epigramma
En qualis prudens viret, ac fortis cluit Heroes
Inclytus, hoc faustum nominis omen habens.
Pectore, re, verbis, vireat cum vere iuventae,
Haud senibus prudens est minus ille catis.
Fortis and arma movens cluit aevi in flore tremendus.
Quale dein belli fulmen adultus erit?
Fredericus quintus Elector Palatinus
Anagramma
Qui stirpe it clarus, non fraud Electus
Tetrasticon
Qui stirpe it clarus, non fraud electus, an illi
Iure neget quisquam Regia sceptra dari:
Sic tibi dant, Heroes, Regnum suffragia iure
Hoc quoque ius firmant nomine fata tuo.
Aliud eiusdem nominis Anagramma
Qui clarus nuper est lectus ordine fati
Tetrasticon
Nominis augurio Rex clarus, qui ordine fati
Est nuper lectus gestiat vsque licet:
Vt pote qui iuvenis par tanto often lectus honori,
Imperij fato dum duce culmen adit.
Ferdinandus secundus Archidux Austriae
Anagramma
Nudandus servis ac foedandus ruit hic Rex,
Si qua sides laevo nominis Augurio.
^
A SHORT AND TRVE RELATION OF The Coronation of the King of Bohemia Fridericke
the first of that name. With the Ceremonies, and prayers accustomed at the
Crownotion, and receiving of the King. As also the Triumphs, and shows their
don in Honor of the Kings Majesty.
NOw when the day of the Kings Crownation was come, their assembled the
principal of the Court. And first, before the King was to go to the Church,
accompanied with the chief of the kingdom: the Administrater, and State
holder of the Bishoppricke of Prague, (by name Georgius Dicastus Mirzcovinus,
and Johannes Cyrillus Trebicensis Elder of the Consistory, both executing
Episcopal function) went toward the Church, and attended there for his
Majesty's coming in a by-chappell called by the Romanists the Sachristi. A
little after that, the Kings Majesty was led by the chief of the kingdom
unto the Church, into the chapel of S. Wonceslaus to put on the Royal Robes.
In the mean time, the King there staying at the door of the same Chapel,
for the coming of the Administrator, and the Elder. Now, the King coming out
of the Chapel, the Administrator gave him this blessing: Lord God bless this
our chosen King, that he going out, and in, may walk in thy way faithfully,
and constantly, according to thy holy word: through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Thus the King going, there went first before him they of the Consistory,
taking the way unto the high Altar. After these followed those that held their
Offices by inheritance, to wit: the chief Sewer, cariyng two loaves of bread,
the one covered with gold, the other with silver. And the chief Cup Bearer,
cariyng two vessels of wine, also covered with gold and silver. Then after
followed those which are set in the chiefest Offices in the Kingdom, cariyng
the Royal Robes, and garnishings. The Scepter, or Staff, carried the cheiffe
Secretorie: And the golden Apple the chief Judge. The Crown, the cheiffe
Burgraue. And the Red Myter, the chife Chamberlain. The Sword, the chief
Marshall: and these went before the Kings Majesty. The King following with the
Administrator on the right hand, and the Elder on the left.

Now his Majesty being come to the Altar, fell upon his knees; and the
Administrator and the Elder both on their bowed knees said this prayer
following. Almighty everlasting God, King of Kings, in whose power and
providence are all the kingdoms of the world. Thou which through thy wisdom
and free will, do translate them where it pleases thee, and give to whom
it pleases thee: bless Frederick our King, chosen through thy divine
providence, and mercy, and given us: that he not straying from the truth of thy
law, may walk all the days of his life in thy ways: through Jesus Christ
our Lord. The Chorus or Assembly answered Amen. This prayer being ended, all
kind of Music was song through the Church; the Kings Robes were laid upon the
Altar, and his Majesty was led to his Royal chair, by the Administrator, and
the Elder. And then after was the Sermon Preached, which done the Administrator
did sing this Letanie following. Kyrie Eleyson. Eleyson. Eleyson. Eleyson.

God Father of heaven, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

God Son Redeemer of the world, have mercy etc.

God Holy Ghost, have mercy etc.

Holy Trinity, have mercy etc.

That if it please thee to rule, govern, and defend, thy true Catholic
Church. We pray thee hear us.

That it will please thee to keep all her Bishops, Sheepheards, and servants
in thy holy word, and a holy life. we pray thee etc.

That it may please thee to give peace, and unity to all Kings and Princes, we
pray etc.

Lord God that it would please thee, to establish and strengthen this Prince
Frederick, whom we have chosen for our King. we etc.

That it would please thee through thy powerful hand to strengthen, and defend
his Royal throne: Son of God we pray etc.

O Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us.
three times over.

Kyrie Eleyson. Eleyson. Eleyson. Eleyson.



This last was song by the whole Chorus.

After this Letanie, was read the second Chapter of the first Epistle of Paul
to Timothy, from the first verse to the end.

This being ended, this prayer following was made by the Administrator: Lord
Jesus Christ, everlasting King of Kings, and only Savior of all that do
believe in thee, our Mediator and Redeemer, which calls men out of all Nations
to thy Kingdom, which set godly Kings in thy Church, and command we
should pray for them. We pray thy Divine Majesty for our chosen King
Frederick who forthwith is to be crowned. That it will please thee to govern
him through thy holy spirit, and to extend thy blessing over this solempnity:
the which we (with calling on thy name, before and after his Crownation). shall
accomplish. And moreover pouring out our prayers for our chosen King: as also
for our selves; that under his government, we may lead a a peaceable quiet
life, in all honesty and godliness, through our Lord Jesus Christ. And the
Chorus answered Amen. This prayer being ended, began all kind of Music, with
voices. After the Music, the Admonistrator and Elder coming to the Royal
Chair, led the Kings Majesty to the Altar: to whom the Burgraue spoke on this
manner: Most illustrous Prince, King of BOHEMIA, and gracious Lord, before we
set the Crown upon thy head, thou shall swear in our Language to the States
of this Kingdom this Oath. Then read the Burgraue the Oath before the King,
and the King did say it after him.

After the oath was done, the Administrator said this prayer following.
Almighty God, everlasting Lord, as thou art faithful in all thy promises, so
thy will is that all men should be faithful: namely those whom it is thy
pleasure to make Rulers over thy people, as well in Temporal as
Ecclesiastical Offices, and callings, grauut that our chosen King justly
ruling us and we humble, faithfully and constantly obeying him (both thee our
Everlasting King) may accomplish our promises, according to thy holy word
through our Lord Jesus Christ. And the Chorus or Assembly answered Amen. This
prayer being ended, all kind of instruments were played on, with sweet
melodious and musical voices. Which ceassing, the Administrator took the
Kings Robes from the Altar, and gave them to the King: But first was the
annoynting done on the tope of his head: and the Administrator spoke to the
King in this manner following. Most gracious King, seeing that also in the
Church of old, Kings were anointed (which annoynting, was a sign of Gods
lawful calling, wherewith God has sealed the godly and faithful Kings, to
the life which is prepared for us in Christ Jesus) so the same God annoint thee
with his holy spirit, that thou as a true anointed of God, may accomplish
his holy will, and council, through Jesus Christ our Lord. The Chorus or
Assembly answered Amen.

Secondly, giving him the Sword, he spoke thus unto him: Receive this Sword, O
King Elect of God, for thou art the scruant of God, called hereunto by God,
that thou may not carry that sword in vain, but therewith defending the
good, and punishing the evil, thou do accomplish his will: through Jesus
Christ our Lord. The Chorus or Assembly answered Amen.

Thirdly, the Ring, Receive the Ring as a sign and Gods earnest penny of thy
Kingly calling, and the faithfulness which thou must show unto God. The Holy
Ghost seal thee, which is the Gods penny of the heavenly inheritance, through
our Lord Jesus Christ. The Chorus or Assembly answered Amen.

Fourthly the Scepter. Most gracious Prince, like as thou have received the
Sword. so receive also the Scepter: for it is not seemly the King Majesty
should be garnished with the sword and arms only: but must also be armed with
the Scepter of the Laws, that he may in both the times, as well in peace as
war, duly rule and be watchful, defending the godly and faithful, and
affrighting, and punishing the ungodly and unfaithful: offering the hand to
those that are fallen and to raise up the humble: but the proud to abase
through Jesus Christ. The Chous or Assembly answered Amen.

Fifthly, the Golden Apple: saying. Receive the Apple, the which as it does
signify the power of the Kings of this world: so also it does signify unto us
the ficklenes of Kingdoms, and Empyers. Therefore also all Kings of the world
are admonished to seek after that vnchaungable kingdom: through our Lord
Jesus Christ. And the Chorus or assembly answered amen*

Sixthly the Royal Crown, which the two chief Princes of the Realm, standing
on the right hand of the King, and the Administrator with the Elder on the
left, setting it upon the Kings head, spoke these words: Receive the Crown of
the kingdom (O King Elect) which is set upon thy head in the name of the Holy
Trinity: and out of the free consent of the States, and chief of this
kingdom, throughthe providence of God. The which undoubtedly is a sure sign
of the favor of God toward thee: signifiyng that thou having power over the
people, art made Partaker of Gods Highness: for that thou being obedient unto
his holy will, in the end, with all Gods elect, art to receive the crown of
everlasting salvation, which our Savior Jesus Christ shall give unto all his
faithful ones, which do look for his glorious coming. unto him be praise
and thanks, for ever and ever. The Chorus or Assembly answered Amen.

When as now the Crown was set upon his head, his Majesty was led unto his
royal Chair, and the Burgraue spoke in the country Language these words:
Seeing that your King being lawfully chosen, and crowned, has given his oath
unto us, to defend you, and uphold your freedoms; so it becomes you also, to
swear unto your King. Therefore all you that can come near unto the Royal
Chair, lay two fingers on the Kings Crown, and the rest put up your fingers.
Instantly there was seen all the chief of the kingdom, with an excessive joy
thronging to touch the Kings Crown (as before ordered) and the rest of the
people they put up their fingers, in token of a willing, obedient, and
faithful oath. After this, followed presently melodious Music, and singing.
All which being ended; the Administrator concluded this solempnity of the
Coronation with this prayer following. O Lord our God, look here in thy
presence stands Frederick our lawful, chosen, and crowned King. We have
accomplished the solempnitie of his Coronation with calling upon thy name: most
humbly praying thee, that thou will hear and accomplish our prayers, which for
him we have powered out in thy presence. Bless our King as aforetime hear on
earth, thy illustrious instruments set in high places; that he may follow his
forefathers: to wit, Abraham the Father of many people, strong in hope faith
and fidelity. Moses the Prophet, and leader, in meeknes. Joshua in goodness, and
victories. David in Hymmes, and extolling thy honor. Solomon in wise and
peaceable ruling his people. Aza, Iosaphat, Ezekia and Iosia, godly Kings of
Judah, before times faithful and very-zealous in furthering thy true worship.
Grant him also a long continuing life, that in his days justice and judgment
may have dominion, and that all we being faithful and obedient to our King,
according to thy commandment, may cleave unto him. Finally with our King and
all the elect (after we have first furthered and done thy work, and fulfilled
thy counsel) may be translated into the everlasting kingdom of Christ: as thy
Son our Lord Jesus Christ shall wonderfully manifest himself in his glorious
coming again is all his Saints, that have believed in his Gospel. Let our
King live, let our King live: Let our King live. With the godly Queen his
wife, and children, and illustrious family: through thy grace and mercy, O Lord
our God who with thy Son, and Holy Ghost, one God rulest, and be praised for
ever and ever Amen. The Chorus or assembly answered Amen. And all the people
cried with joyful voices: Viuat Rex, Viuat Rex. Let our King live, Let our
King live. All this being done his Majesty (the spiritual order remaining in
the Church) was led by the States of the Land to his Palace; where was made
ready a great and costly banquer. The people making great joy, and iollitie,
with all kind of shows; triumpths and fires. So that the showed forth
sufficiently their inward joy, by these outward signs. And thus ended the
solempnitie of the crowning of the King of Bohemia.

Thus far the Dutch Relation.

Whereunto, I have thought good to add this Appendix or supplement, the time of
his Majesty's Coronation therein not mentioned, nor the Coronation of the
Queen.

THis Solempnity was performed, on Monday the 25 of October last 1619. The
Coronation of the Queen, on the Tursday after, being the 28. according to our
account: old style: the like solempnity used. Whereunto let the Chorus or
assembly even the whole Church of Great Britayne applaud in like joyful
manner. And as they cried with on consent Viuat Rex etc. so let us also answer
with like joyful voices, to conclude the sole^nity (as duty binds to our
Sovereign, and his royal posterity: with the Sacreed memory of that precious
name never to be now reviued again, to Gods glory, and general good of his
Church: all likewise applauding thereunto,) Vivat Regina Elizabetha. Amen Amen.

There is yet another more particular Relation in Dutch, containing diverse
other circumstances not here expressed: with a representation of the whole
manner of the solempnity, and Coronation both of the King and Queen in
Pictures. Which I make account w^ll also heare-after be translated, and
published, with other reasons more at large, to give the world better
satisfaction. Whereunto, it has pleased God to give testimony; and to confirm
this his sacred invnction, with the credible news of most joyful, and
succesfull beginnings, already atchiued against the enemies, about the very
same time, and since likewise, which God grant may increase more and more to
his glory: and run along still, like a train of gunpowder, till at length,
we hear the final report, of the sudden downfall of that great City
Babylon even to the ground. In one day, in one hour. Revel. 18. And a mighty
Angel took up a stone like a great Millstone, and cast it into the Sea, saying:
with such violence shall that great City Babylon be thrown down, and shall
be found no more at all. MACTE VIRTVTE. Courage my hearts, the day is ours: the
sign of victory already given by the Lord of hoasts himself, who fights
for us, as he did for the Israelits against the Aegiptians, for these
Aegiptians, whom ye have seen this day, ye shall never see them again any
more. The Lord shall fight for you, etc. Exodus 14. And therefore as I began, so
I will conclude, and english it, that every one may read it running.

SI DEVS NOBISCVM; If God be with us, and for us. QVIS CONTRA NOS? Who can be
against us.
FINIS.

