The cry of the poor for the death of the Right Honorable Earl of
Huntington.
To the tune of the Earl of Bedford.


O God of thy mercy remember the poor,
And grant us thy blessings thy plenty and store:
For dead is Lord Hastinges, the more is our grief,
And now up to heaven we cry for relief.
Then wail we, then weep we, then mourn we each one.
The good Earl of Huntington from us is gone.
To poor and to needy, to high and to low,
Lord Hastinges was friendly, all people does know:
His gates were still open the stranger to feed,
And comfort the succourles always in need.
Then wail we, etc.
The husbandles Widow he ever did cherrish,
And Fatherles Infants he likewise would nourish:
To weak and to sick* to lame and to blind,
Our good Earl of Huntington ever was kind.
Then wail we, etc.
The naked he clothed with garments from cold,
And frankely bestowed his silver and gold:
His purse was still open in giving the poor,
That always came flocking to Huntingtons door.
Then wail we, etc.
His tennants that daily repairde to his house,
Was fed with his bacon, his beef and his souse:
Their rents were not raised, their fines were but small
And many poor Tennants paid nothing at all.
Then wail we, etc.
Such Landlordes in England we seldom shall find,
That to their poor Tennants will bear the like mind,
Lord Hastinges therefore is joyfully crownde,
With Angels in heaven where peace does abound.
Then wail we, etc.
His wisdom so pleased the Queen of this land,
The sword of true Justice, she put in his hand:
Of York he was President, made by her Grace,
Her laws to maintain and rule in her place.
Then wail we, etc.
Such merciful pity remainde in his breast,
That all men had Justice, and none were oprest:
His Office in virtue, so Godly he spent,
That Prince and his country, his loss may lament.
Then wail we, etc.
And likewise Lord Hastings S. Georges true Knight,
Did wear the goold garter of England so bright:
The gift of a Prince, King Edward first gave,
A Gem for a Soldier and Counceller grave.
Then wail we, etc.
His coin was not whorded, to flourish in pride,
His Kings and his Jewels, and Chains to provide:
But gave it to Soldiers, wounded in wars,
That pike and the bullet, has lamed with fearres.
Then wail we, etc.
He built up no Palace, nor purchaste no Town,
But gave it to Scholars to get him renown:
As Oxford and Cambridge can rightly declare,
How many poor Scholars maintained are there.
Then wail we, etc.
No groves he enclosed, nor felled no woods.
No pastures he paled to do himself good:
To Commons and Country, he liude a good friend,
And gave to the needy what God did him send.
Then wail we, etc.
He likewise provided in time of great need:
If England were forced with wars to proceed:
Both men and munition, with horses of war,
The proud foes of England, at all times to scarre.
Then wail we, etc.
Our Queen and our Country, has cause to complain,
That death in his fury this Noble has stain:
Yet England rejoice we, rejoice without fear,
Lord Hastinges has left a most Noble heir.
Then wail we, etc.
A thousand poor Widows for Huntingtons sake,
As many poor children, their prayers will make:
That God may long prosper his heir left behind,
And grant him old Huntingtons true noble mind.
Then wail we, etc.
Then pray we for Country, for Prince and for Pears,
That God may indew them with most happy years:
Lord bless us with virtue, with plenty and peace,
And many more subjects like him to increase.
Then wail we, then weep we, then mourn we each one,
Our good Earl of Huntington from us is gone.
FINIS.
Printed at London for William Blackvvall, and are to be sold at his shop
nere Guild Hall gate. 1596.


