A dyspatche of vows and presthode, by the wurd of God. Compyled by Johan Bale.

A dialoge or Communycacyon to be had at a table between two children, gathered
out of the holy scriptures, by Johan Bale, for his.ij. young sons Johan and
Paul.

To be sold in Fletestrete at the sign of the Croune, next unto the white
Fryres gate.

Imprynted at London, for Richard Foster. Anno. M.D.XLIX.

The.c. and.xxx. Psalm of David, called De profundis.
FRom faith of soul, and hearts rejoice,
I call to the, Lord hear my voice.
Thine ears good Lord, enclyned be,
Unto the poor, complaynt of me.
If thu should way, our wickedness,
Who can abide, thy ryghtuousnesse.
Because I find, all health in the,
I doubt no fearce, extremyte
In my Lord God, is all my trust,
To walk as his word has discust.
The church for her contynuaunce,
Trust in the lords good governance.
For in the Lord great mercy is,
And full redempcyon after this.
He will redeem all Israel,
From devil and death, from sin and hell.
Johan Bale.
Anno M.D.XLIII.
A Dialoge or Communicacyon to be had at a table between.ij. children, gathered
out of the holy scriptures by Johan Bale for his two young sons, Johan and
Paul.
Paulus junior filius. FOr so much as God has co^stitute me a creature
reasonable, Gene. ij. Psalm. xv
and endued me with an understanding, I am naturally desyerouse to know, to
what end I am created.


Ioannes senior filius. Than will it be necessary for you to have faith. For he
yt shall have a do with god or with godliness, Hebr. xi. Joan. iij
must first of all believe after the sacred scrypturs.


Paulus. Than tell me whatfaith is, by those same sacred scriptures.


Ioannes. Hebr. xi. Gal. iiij.
After the saying of S. Paul, it is a certain assurance of godly things,
which we trust unto, and a grounded euydence in the sprete of heavenly causes
that never are seane with the eye.


Paul. What suppose ye most fytt to dyrect me in this faith.


Ioannes. The eternal Testament or Gospel of Jesus Christ, for that is ye
power of the Lord into salvation to all them that believe. Apo. xiiij Roma. i.
What shall I esteem the tradicions of men besides that gospel?


Ioannes. The leven of Pharisees, chafe, Iho^ xvij Luce. xij Mat. xiij Sa.
xiiij.
cockle, tares, stubble, swylle, swines draffe ydeluesse, ydolatry, whordome of
the sprete, fylthynesse, false worshyppynge, the call of strangers, the
fearful curse of God and abhomiuacion standing in the holy place. Ihon.iiij
and.x. ma. xxiiij



Paulus. Wha^ was this gospel first taught


Ioannes. Sone after the worlds beginning, wha^ Ada^ had ones offended, least
he should have fallen into utter despair and so have been lost for ener.


Paulus. Gene. iij Gala. iij
And has the Gospel continued euersens to the confort of man?


Ioannes. Yea, truly has it, and often sens that time been confirmed by more
earnest promises from age to age, till that meke lamb come, Genesis xxij Psalm.
cxxxi. Ihon.i. i. Petr. i. Luce. 1. Ma. xxij Luc. xiiij.
which took away the sins of the world, thorough the shedynge of his most
innocent blood. For the scripture says, that his mercy was plenteouse, from
kyndrede to kyndred to them that feared the Lord.


Paulus. Has all men been called to grace by that Gospel of salvation?


Ioannes, Yea doubtless have they, yet have they not al tha^kefully received
it. So well was it taught of our first father Adam to Cain, Ge. iiij. Genesis vi
as to Abel. So well to the fleshely children of men as to the ghostly
children of God. So well ded Noe preach it unto Cham, as unto Sem and Iapheth.
Genesis ix. Ge. xxi. Exo. v. ij. re. xiij iij. Reg. xviij.
So well ded Abraham show it to Ismael, as to Isaac. So well Moses to Pharao,
as to the people of Israel. David to Amnon, and Absolon, as to Salomo^, and
Nathan. Helias to Achab and Iesabel, as to the most faithful beleuers. No
less ded Christ open thereof to Judas, than to Peter Johan, and James. And so
forth the Apostles with other true preachers to this present day, Mat. x. Act.
viij Romans i.
so that non is without excuse,


Paulus. How comes it then to pass, that so many are lost, and still yet does
daily peryshe through their lewd co^uersacyon Hiere. l.
and lycencyouse living.


Ioannes. Romans i. ij. Co. xi ij. Tes. ij
No fault can be ascribed to the Gospel, but to their unthankful receiving of
ye fruits thereof, so freely offered them, as I said before. The disdayneful
spurninge a side or throwinge at their tails of that necessary health in
Christ is cause of their decay, and not the set ordinance of God, which
wills all men to be saved.


Paulus. If Adam thus received this gospel, i. Tim. ij Gene. iij
and so taught it unto his posterite, it has continued much longer then I
supposed.


Ioannes. The gospel is as yt Lord is, everlasting. Apa. xiiij Ihon.i. ps.
cxviij
For as witnesses the Apostle saint John. In the beginning was the word, and
the word was with God, and God was that word.


Paulus. The^ was not Matthew the first writer thereof with the other
Evangelists, as the popyshe church has taught us?


Ioannes. No, God wrote it first in the natural heart of man, Heb. viij Luc.
xvi.
and so yt remained here still till Moses and the prophets ded leave it in
outward wrytinge to the peoples farther erudicyon. i. Cori. x. Exo. xvij Mat. xvi
For as S. Paul does witness, all they ded eat from the first beginning of
one spiritual meat and drank of one spiritual drink, yt hard rock
folowinge the^ which was Jesus christ. And this is a clear toke^ that one
gospel has reigned in ye people of god sense yt worlds beginning.


Paulus. Young infantes departinge hence in their chyldehode, Act. vij. Hiere.
ix.
should seem to be no partyners thereof.


Ioannes. How so I pray you? Sapi. xij
What is your reason.


Paulus. For they never have it taught the^. And if they had, yet should it
little profyght the^ having so small understanding


Joan. God never distributeth his gifts to yt measure of age and discressio^,
for then had Annas been more faithful then Peter, Iacobi. i Io. xviij mat. xvi
and Caiphas more godly then Johan. For they were both elder and wyser. As
faith is an unknown gift of God, so is it of him secretelye ministered. Ephesi.
i Galat. v Joan. ij Luc. i
We know not from whence it comes when men are borne of the spirit. Johan
Baptist knew Christ in his mothers womb, and yet had he neither age nor
understanding that was seen. God is their secret instructour and preacher,
which taught it first without voice and wrote it without pen in the hydden
Psalm cxviij Sap. x Roma. ij
heart of man. As the spirit of prophecyded happen unto men by the fre gift
of god without age, so does faith to ye infantes. ij. Pet. i.
As he gave that benefyght of his grace to the babe Hieremye, so does he
secretly ministre unto the^ that necessary health of salvation. Hier. i.
He alone made ye child Daniel rightlye to judge ye ungodly. The Apostles
spoke not of them selves, Da. xiij. Mat. x. Marci. xvi.
but out of the abundau^ce of his eternal spirit also. The aged are left to the
outward gospel, the children are reserved to Gods secret workynge. And
therefore Christ said unto his Apostles suffer the children to come unto me,
Lu. xviij Mar. x. Mat. i.
for to the^ belongs the kingdom of heaven. Their angels are evermore
beholdinge the face of my father which is in heaven. Such secret doubts
ought not to be moved. Ecc. iij. pro. xxv
For nothing perteyne that unto us, which is above our compass.


Paulus. For the nature, time, Za. vij. Esai. v.
and passage of this gospel, I am well satisfied. But now tell me what shall here
after become of them which has not of all this long season in the true Ose.
ix.
fear of god, regarded the sweet promises thereof? Romans i. ij. these. ij Sa.
xvij Matthew. xxv.



Ioannes. As they have in their unfaithfulness here, been left to them selves
to work al ungodliness, and so departed hence with a desperate conscience. So
shall they at the latter day be condemned to eternal fire with the devil
and his angels.


Paulus. Our merciful redemer defend us from that malediccyon. But what
shall most spedylye bring me to that Gospel of health?


Ioannes. The meke knowledge of thy self, Act. xv. Luc. iij. Ephe. ij.
that thou art of nature the synnefull son of Adam, iustlye condemned in his
transgressio^ besides thine own wicked doings, and so lost for ever were not
that recover which thou have in Christ Jesus. Iaco. v. i. Co. xv



Paulus. Show me by what means I may come to that knowledge.


Ioannes. Seek first unto the law, Io. vij. Romans iij
which the Lord taught by Moses, and that shall declare the a sinner.


Paulus. Will the law do nothing else but manifest my sin?


Ioannes. Yes, Gal. iij.
it will show the also thy condempnacyon.


Paulus. If these be the only fruits of the law, I will not ones behold it,
least I by the search, thereof do fall into despair.


Ioannes. Then shall thu not do wyselye. Romans v. ij. cor. vij Gala. iij Romans
iij Gala. iij
For if thou know not thy sore, thou shalt not be occasyoned to seek the
remedy. When thu have therefore in yt law as in a clear myrrour beholde^ thy
manyfolde mysheues and considered the deep dangers of the^, thu shall of
necessite be moved to seek unto Christ as unto an only relefe, Act. iiij. i.
Cor. i.
health, comfort, peace, atonement, grace, righteousness, wisdom and
rede^pcion.


Paulus. Esa. liij Joan. i
Why, is there non other salvation, but that which is in Christ?


Ioannes. No surely frynde, he alone is yt lamb, which takes away the sins
of the world. ij. Pet. ij Ap. xviij



Paulus. What shall we the^ call our spiritual sacrifiars, which say they
deliver us from sin with their masses, absolucions, blessings, vnccions,
Matthew. xxiiij. Luc. xvij Coloss. ij
and holy water.


Ioannes. Not sauers but deceyuers, like as Christ of the^ has prophesied.
Many seducers (says he) shall come in my name and say: Here is Christ, and
there is thy maker. But beware they deceive you not.


Paulus. Where shall I then seek to open unto him my grefe, and so to have
remedy for my souls disease?


Ioannes. Not out of thy self, i. Io. iiij. i. Cor. vi Luc. xvij Ioa^. xiiij
to thy souls behoue. For thy faithful heart is the temple of God, or that holy
habitacio^ that Christ has promised to dwell in. The false worshippers seek
him in outward things, and never find him. Apo. xiij Joan. iiij
But seek thu him in spirit and verite, and thou shall have him present.


Paulus. Then is he not under the deliverance of men, nor yet bound to
their dispe^sacyon?


Ioannes. No truly is he not, ij. tim. ij. Esai. xi.
no more than are the other gifts of God, as wisdom, understanding, connsell,
strength, science, pity and the just fear of God. For as testifyeth saint
James. Iaco. i. Joan. iij Pro. ij.
Every perfyght gift is from above, and comes down unto us from the father
of light immediatlye.


Paulus. By this your hole protestacio^ it should seem than unto me, that I am
ordained of God to this end. First to acknowledge my self a wicked sinner,
Psalm. l. Romans vi
than to arise from it through true repentance, and so to lead a new life
after the gospel, ephe. iiij
till such time as my eternal father shall wy^saue to call me from this
corruptible mansyon, Job. x. To. vij. To. viij.
this foren land, this vale of myserye, this castle of sin, and this
habytacle of death, into the eternal heretage of his son Jesus Christ. To
whom with the holy ghost be everlasting praise, honor and glory world
without end.


Amen.
A confession of the sinner after the sacred scrypturs, collected by Johan
Bale, at the request of a faithful frynde of his
I Acknowledge unto my eternal and everlasting god, that of mine own nature I
am non other but a carnal thing and the miserable child of Adam, Ephe. ij
iustlye exyled with him in his transgression. I felt also that of my self I
have neither power, understanding, wisdom, knowledge, Esai. xi.
strength, grace, virtue, nor godliness, and that I can not do so much as ones
think a good thought. Here have I wandered in the regyon of dyssimylitude, all
contrary to his prescrypt rewles and admonishme^tes. ij. cor. iij
I have followed the filthy concupiscence of an heart all earthlye minded, the
wanto^ desires of eyes replete with all vanites, i. Ioa^. ij.
and the vain glory of this world comprehendynge al inordinate vices to the
utter dampnacion of my soul. Luc. xxij
Satan has suggested unto me the love of things corruptible, the desire of
fleshlye pleasurs, the appetyte of voluptuouse fedinges, i. Pet. v
the delyght of lasciuyouse fables, the coveting of ydell slothfulness, the
affeccions of riches, honor, bewtye, wantonness, and other execrable
fantasyes without nombre. And unto all these have I consented, nor regarding
the godly warninges of scripture to the contrary. So that I am now become
through mine own wickedness, a captyue presoner under the law, To. vij.
Iaco. i.
the world, the flesh, death, sin, hell, and the devil, all cruel, and
fearce adversaries unto me. When I have respect unto mine own nature, I find
it al synnefull in Adam, feeble, weak, and wretched. When I look toward
Moses, I find all to heuye for me. Eccle. i.
He burdeneth me with greuose yockes, he fears my conscience with
threttenynges, Deuteronomy. xxvij.
and utterly dampneth me with curses for disobedyence. I hear the law and
read the commandments, but when I confer them with my flesh, Hier. iiij
and assaye to do them in effect, I find it far unable to fulfill them.
Whereupon I despair in my self as one ready to fall into the most deep bottom
of hell. Than consydre I again by the light of the Lords calling, and by
the openinge of his grace, his confortable promyses in the prophets, Psalm.
xxxvij.
and the glad tidings of saluacyo^ in the Gospel. These does raise me up
again, they confort me gratly. They witness unto me of Christ. Esai. xxvi.
Joan. i.
They lead me unto him, throughlye assertanynge me that he is whollye mine
own, if I truly repent from the heart. To. viij.
Thus after the heaue^lye father has showed unto me the just cause of his
indignacyon, and utterly dejected me for sin, he calls unto mind his
eternal mercy. He remembers I am but flesh. Luce. i. Eccle. Psalm. cij
He consydereth that I am but dust. No loving Father can be more mercyfu^l to
the fruit of his own body, nor yet natural mother more pr^tefull to her
child, than he is unto me his wretched creature. Though I have most ryehtously
abused the gifts of nature, Isa. xlix
fortune, and grace, yet calls home again to repentance. And so causes me
to remember that I have sinned against heaven, that I have in his sight done
fylthynesse, Luc. xv Psalm. l.
and that I am not worthy from henceforth to bear name of his son. When he
beholds my wretched nakydnesse without good works or deservings, he
brings forth the best garment, which is the ryghtuousnesse of Christ. He
puts it upon me, and so hydeth my sin. He sets a rynyge on my fyngar,
so espowsynge me to immortalyte, in case I persevere in faith to the end. Mat.
x. ephe. vi
He puts shows upon my fete, so sequesteringe my carnal affeccio^s and so
preparyng my pathwayes into the gospel of peace. Christ resorteth unto me of
lou^. He descrybeth him self before me in the gospel. Luc. xix Mat. xi
He tells me, his office is only to save. He calls me unto him to refreshe
me. He receives me to ease me of my burdene. He conforteth me with promyses of
everlasting life. Ioa^. viij i. cor. vi.
He kuytteth me unto his own mistycall body, making me a member thereof. He
declares unto me all other offices of conforte heavenly. As that he is my
only wisdom, health, ryghteousnes, and rede^pcio^. And that if I believe in
him, i. Cor. i.
I shall not come into judgment, but pass through from death unto the life
everlasting. Thus being a fleshlye thing of nature, Ephe. ij
and thrown down by the law, I am raised up again by the gospel, and so
saved, no sin past being* imputed unto me from henceforth for Jesus Christ's
sake. To. viij,
To whom he glory with the father and the holy Ghost world without end.
Amen.

Psalm. viij.

Out of the mouth of babes and sucklynges haste thou made perfyght thy praises.

FINIS.

