TWO SERMONS: WHEREIN WE ARE TAVGHT, 1. HOW to get, 2. How to keep, 3. How
to use a good CONSCIENCE.

PREACHED IN ALLDERMANBVRY Church, LONDON.

Not heretofore Published.

By ROBERT HARRIS.

1 COR. 4.3. With me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you,
or of man's judgment: yea, I judge not mine own self.

LONDON: Printed by T.B. for JOHN BARTLET, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Cheape-side at the Gilded-Cup. 1630.

To the Printer.
WHereas you request me to enlarge my self in some passages of my former
Sermons touching Conscience, against this new Impression: I have resolved
rather to add two new Sermons of the same subject, than to alter any thing in
the old, and this I have been led unto upon these reasons. First, because I
would have you deal firmly with all men in the venting of Copies. Secondly,
because that labor would have been as tedious to me as this. Thirdly, because
I have now added something touching the use of Conscience, which my former text
would not so fitly bear; My request unto you is double; first, that you would
be careful in observing stops, interrogations and distinctions, which
neglected, the sense becomes sometimes dark, sometimes imperfect and none vt
all, as is tobee seen in some passages of the Sermons on Proverbs and Samuel.
Secondly, that you will sever these so from the former, as that who so pleases
may have them alone. Thus resting in your care for the due publishing of all, I
commend you and the work to the Lords blessing.

Hanwell, Oct. 8. Yours, ROBERT HARRIS,

TWO SERMONS, WHEREIN WE are taught, 1. How to get, 2. How to keep, 3. How
to use a good CONSCIENCE.
HEB. 13. 18. Pray for us, for we trust we have a good Conscience in all
things, willing to live honestly.


OF the Apostles motion so much: Follows now his reason; where, first, the
Assertion, I have a good Conscience in all things:] Secondly, the Evidence and
confirmation, I am persuaded:] so upon this ground, I desire to live honestly.
The points we note are two: First, the Apostle secures the thing (a good
Conscience.) Secondly, he rests in the confirmation of it.

From the first this:

Every Christian should so order the matter, that he may truly say, Doct.
I have a good Conscience: This the thing that must be made good, and assured;
to wit, a good conscience. Here, lest it be objected, that the point holds in
such as the Apostle was, (Preachers) who must be men of Conscience, not in all;
We, must do two things; first, see what warrant we have for the raising;
next, for practizing of the point. Our warrant for deducing a general from
this particular, is fetched; first, from the end and use of the word in
general, namely, our instruction, as appears, Romans 15.4. and 2 Timothy 3.16.

Every Christian should so order the matter, that he may truly say, Doct.
I have a good Conscience: This the thing that must be made good, and assured;
to wit, a good conscience. Here, lest it be objected, that the point holds in
such as the Apostle was, (Preachers) who must be men of Conscience, not in all;
We, must do two things; first, see what warrant we have for the raising;
next, for practizing of the point. Our warrant for deducing a general from
this particular, is fetched; first, from the end and use of the word in
general, namely, our instruction, as appears, Romans 15.4. and 2 Timothy 3.16.

Secondly, from that general precept of this Apostle, Phil. 4.8, 9.
Furthermore, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things pertain to love, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any
virtue, if there be any praise, think on these things, Which ye have both
learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me: those things do, and the
God of peace shall be with you.

Thirdly, from the like president, Heb. 13.5, 6. Let your conversation be
without covetousness, and be content with those things that ye have: for he
has said, I will not fail thee, neither forsake thee: So that we may baldly
say, The Lord is my helper, neither will I fear what man can do unto me.
Whence the inference is to all from one, Ioshuah.

Fourthly, from Reason, though examples (as examples) simply bind not, yet
reason and precept (that is to say, the Law of Nature and of God) do bind:
and therefore, when the Example is grounded upon common equity, and has
nothing private in it (unless happily for degree only) and is backed by precept,
then it is binding. Now thus stands the case here: First, A man, as he is
rational (much more as he is a Christian) is to regard his Conscience.
Secondly, the Apostle, not only in his Ministry, but in all other Relations
and passages of life, minded this, Acts 23.1. and 24.16. nay, further, as his
life was rifled into by the adversaries, with his Doctrine; so he Apologizes
for that, with this, and grounds his persuasion, as much upon his Christian
living, as his faithful preaching. Lastly, the precept reaches all, as well as
Preachers: and there is as good reason, why we as well as they, should assure
conscience. For the first, the precept is no less large, then plain; 1.
Precepts
first, for getting: secondly, keeping: thirdly, using of a good Conscience.

For getting: we are called upon to wash the heart, Ierem. 4.14. To wash off
all filthiness of spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. to study universal holiness, 1 These.
5. and the end of the Commandment is, a good Conscience, 1 Timothy (...). 5.

Secondly, for keeping: Salomo^a addresses himself to all and each particular,
Pr. 04.23.

Thirdly, for using: Heb. 10.22. In all our approaches to God, we must wash
the Conscience, as the Jews did their flesh and raiment.

For the second: 2. Reason.
1. Equity, 2. Necessity, 3. Vtility persuade the practice:
First, we are dependant, 1. Ab^oaesto.
and therefore accountable as well as Paul's; souls we have received, and for a
soul and spirit must every one answer: Laws we have also received, and by Law
we must be judged; we are under the same Judge, the same Law, the same censure
that others be, and must hold up our hands at the same bar; and therefore
must have the same thoughts, and care of Conscience: Books must be compared,
Gods and ours, Original, and counterpane; therefore we also must have our
Books fairly kept, and a readiness.

Secondly, 3. A necessitate.
there lies the same necessity upon us, as upon Paul's, of securing Conscience:
for first, if we look inward, we shall find our hearts as crazy, our graces
as feeble, our peace as unsettled, as theirs: and on the other side, our secret
guile, and guilt, and pride, and unbelief, as great as theirs. And next, if we
look outward; we find the world the world still, that is a Sea, our life a
warfare, wicked men as busy with others consciences as ever; the Devil as
malicious as ever; troubles without, terrors within, as stirring as ever: in
short, as much use and need of a good Conscience now, as 1000. years ago; a
Preacher may stand somewhat higher then our selves, but we are in the same
storms, there is none other difference.

Thirdly, It will quit cost for us also, 3 Ab vtili.
to get good consciences: for, these are the preseruers of all graces; (...)
Tim. 1.19.
the Conscience is that bottom that contains all our treasure; that casket
that holds all our Jewels; if this miscarry, farewell faith, hope, patience,
courage, truth, all. Secondly, Conscience is the root of all our comfort: the
fruit of righteousness (says Esaias) is peace: Esaias 32.
out of a clear conscience, issue those sweet streams of joy, comfort, etc.
Thirdly, Conscience is the antidote against all poy soned crosses; it is the
sting that is in our consciences, that steeles all our crosses, and makes them
stinging; there is little mudde raised in the soul, where the conscience is
clear and pure.

Fourthly, Conscience is the bulwark, Hic murus abeneus est etc.
and wall of brass, that keeps off all invasions and assaults, Ephis. 6. By
this a man reigns over all tribulations, Row. 8. and is enabled to look
flames in the face, Lions in the face, raylers in the face, slanderers in the
face, Devils in the face, God in the face, with an undaunted countenance, ^
John 3.21. and 4 17.

On the other side, take away conscience, and you pluck up the sluices, and
pull down the banks, you let out the soul into all licentiousness; for what
bounds has the ingenuous spirit, when fear and shame (the immediate issues of
conscience) are gone? where will a man stay? Man without conscience, is a wild
horse without bridle; the life and heart is filled with sin, after sin
comes guilt (from that light that is left) thence tormentfull shame, fear,
anguish; hence the least noise affrights him, the least crosle stings him, the
least danger appales him; in short, rest there is none, peace none, courage
none, comfort none; but conscience rages like an aching tooth: a man eats in
pain, drinks in fear; dares not go abroad, dares not go to bed, dares not
sleep, lest his dreams should prove terrible; dares not wake, lest his wounds
should bleed again, and his watchful cares and fears recoyle. By this little
said, you see how it imports us all, as well as S. Paul, to conno this lesson,
and to say readily, I, and I, and I, and every I, have a good conscience. But
all that can be said, is but an empty discourse, and a contemplation far off
from the matter; for the truth is, no man can tell what the benefit of a good,
what the misery of a bad conscience is, but he who has felt both; that man is
but a stranger to himself, and to conscience, that does not apprehend a
thousand times more, then he can utter in this kind. It suffices to say, that
no man knows the badnesse of a bad, the goodness of a good conscience, but
only he that has felt the weight of that, and worth of this; and he that
knows least experimentally and feelingly, knows more then his tongue, face,
eyes, hands, bones can utter, though they speak all at once, as usually they
do, when Conscience works strongly. But I pass to application; where, first,
three sorts come to be taxed: secondly, all to be taught.

For first, if all should aim at this, Uses. 1.
to say (and to say truly) My Conscience is good, three sorts of men are far
wide of the mark.

First, they who never trouble their thoughts with conscience at all; credit,
wealth, friends they will secure, if they can: but for conscience, it is only a
name, a scarcrow to affright children withal; but no wise man will stand upon
that: and lest they should seem mad, they plead reason for their practice.



is a wilful delusion, for first, What if all the world ran wild? Noth will
be Noah, upright in his generation still. Secondly, Is it well to strain? If
not, will thou be naught for company. Thirdly, Thou art deceived, there is many
a Paul, Luke 1.6.
Zachary, Elizah, that walk in all the Commandments of God, and would not
purposely live in the least allowance of the least sin, for all the world. 1
Cor 12. (...), etc.
indeed the most upright knows but in part, loves but in part; he may sin,
because he knows it not to be sin; he may sin again, being surprised in
some one particular, Gal. 6. against his general purpose. Thirdly, he may be
yoakt as S. Paul was, with those inward buffetings that may make his heart ache,
and his soul to cry out, Oh wretched man that I am, etc. Rom 7. But if thou
think that any upright man can thus resolve, I do, or may know, this course
I line in, to be sinful, and yet I must not, I will not taken tice of it,
make conscience of it, thou errest; a godly man cannot thus sin, and resolve.
Secondly, whosoever does, Verse. ^6.
decieues himself, sames 1. If any man seem religious, and make; not
conscience of every sin (even to a word) he deceiues himself; be not thou so
deceived.

end, a man shall nener enjoy himself, but there will be scruple upon scruple,
fear after fear, sin upon sin; it is an endless task to purge the
Conscience, I answer,



Secondly, the matter is feizable: S. Paul by travel may arrive at this happy
haven, first, I have a clear, secondly, I have a good Conscience.

Thirdly, dead flesh is not the best flesh, nor conscience awakened, the worst
conscience.

Fourthly, though Physic for the time stir humors, and playsters cause
smart, yet both that and this tend to health and ease: so think of the present
troubles and sits of conscience.



I answer, first, what if it were so? a man had better fast then ear poison;
beg, starve, pine, then sell his conscience: Ask them in Hell, ask them
that are upon this rack, they will say so: as for disgrace, I had rather have
all the world call me fool, then mine own conscience; and conscience will
befoole me, if I sell heaven for earth, kernels for shells, pearlos for
pibbles. But, secondly, what necessity in this consequence? Why may not truth,
and innocence, and conscience, maintain and credit me, as well as lying,
coozenage, flattery, baseness? Why should not I think Gods ways as good as
Satan's? Thirdly, What lost Abraham, Joseph, Daniel, Mor^ecai, David, etc. by
keeping a good conscience? Verily, if a godly man do not thrive, conscience is
not in fault: let him rather fault (if there be a fault) improuidence,
idleness, pride, distrust, admixture of ill means, not conscience.



upon these grounds, yet this is the first error.

A second sort; They labor the matter of Conscience much, but how? Their work
is not to persuade their own hearts with Saint Paul, but other men's. A strange
folly, for a man to be more careful of others then himself; to fear others,
to prize others above himself: yet this is ordinary: Men study rather to
seem, then to be conscionable; labor more to approve themselves to others;
then to their own hearts; and this appears thus: First, in that they stand
more upon the form, then the power of godliness. Secondly, in that they set
the best side outward, be more in profession then in action; better abroad then
at home; Satis est principem externa specie pium -- Videri, etc. de princ. c.
18.
a far off then at hand. To these I say but this: First, this is but
Machiauels Divinity: They have not so learned Christ. Secondly, this is but the
Hypocrites guise; He makes clean the outside, he iustifies himself before men
only. Thirdly, this is but a childs part, who makes his mother believe that
his sores heal, when they rankle, and shows his right hand for his left.
Lastly, this is a poor remedy, to cover a broken arm with a brave scarf:
Alas, thou must answer Conscience, when all friends be absent: time will be,
when death will snatch thee from men, and Conscience will follow thee to
Christ's bar; then if thou can not stand before thine own heart, how will thou stand before him, who is greater then thy heart? Poor man, poor man!
thou may easily deceive men, possibly deceive thy self: but if thou can
not approve thy heart to God, thou art lost; for him thou can not deceive. As
for those who make bold to father all upon Conscience, and upon God, who wipe
their impudent mouths with the Harlot, and say, What have we done? Who
appeals to God with innocent David and Paul, Judge me, O Lord: I lie not, my
conscience bears witness, God knows my heart: I take on my conscience, that
I am unjustly slandered, when it is neither so, nor so; what will become of these
men? with what faces will they look upon that conscience, that Judge, whom
they have made partakers, witnesses, Judges, reuengers of their damned
hypocrisy, and more then devilish impudency! But leave them to the rack.

Paul's confidence, We have a good Conscience. But would their confidence were
as well bottomed as his: but alas, Men build this their assurance either in the
air, or on the sands: some are persuaded without reason, some upon very weak
reason. For the first, they have (yea that they have) as good Consciences as
any of them all. But what is their proof? They are persuaded so. But upon what
reasons? Why, they hope so. But upon what ground? Why, their mind gives them
so. First, poor men! Conscience is reflectiue, knows its knowledge,
understands it self: Secondly, its rational, and can give a reason of its
hopes: Thirdly, its regular, and proceeds by the rule of Scripture: Show me
thy grounds in black and white, else it is fancy, not Conscience.

Secondly, others allege reason, but they cannot persuade a reasonable man who
is not willing to wink; they are chiefly these.

First, a good meaning: I am (says the ignorant) no Scholar, many can put me
down with words, and do make a greater noise, but I mean as well, and have
as good an heart to Godward, as any of them all?

Without some knowledge, the mind is not good, Prou. 19.2. If the eye be
stark blind, the whole man, and the ways of man are so too; and to speak of
Conscience without knowledge, is to speak of contradictions, and to talk of
seeing without sight, hearing without ears; such is knowledge without
knowledge, that is, Conscience. It Is certain, Conscience reaches no further
then knowledge, at least then habitual, and implicit, or general knowledge.
The confidences of an ignorant are but the fruits of his pride, and his
scruples, the issues of his trembling opinion and staggering judgment: it is
true, weak knowledge (joined with humility and care of growth) must not be
discouraged; but whosoever neglects knowledge, presuming upon Conscience, does as
if he should pull out his eyes, and trust to his hands for guidance.



Paul's, Differences betwixt conscience and conscience from the Text.
(that is to say) a Natural, but not a Spiritual Conscience. The differences
of which two, are wide, and for the discerning thereof;

Paul had a good Conscience in all things.

Paul's Conscience is joined with (desires and) endeauours of obedience for the
future.

Paul's conscience is troubled with the filth as well as guilt of sin, (...)
and his will is pressed to goodness for its beauty.

Fourthly, see whither this trouble drives Paul's carries him to Christians, to
Prayer, Watchfulness, Beware: A Natural Conscience proves a natural man, but
no more; thou can not claim kindred of Paul upon such a Conscience; with
Turks and Heathens thou may.







our dullness, distractions, coldness, and other failings in the doing; for
this is once, there is nothing more shames and humbles an upright man, then his
ouert and slight performance of his Masters work.



Balaam; or slothful and sleepy; and a very sore man may feel little in his
sleep; or else either seared or deluded: a deluded sense thinks it feels or
sees what in truth it does not; and seared flesh does not smart like other
flesh, not because it has more life, but less sense: so here.

Secondly, The means how thou come by it: there is no peace but in Gods
ways; if I win it not by praver, dig it not out of Gods saving wels and
ordinances, find not the Word speaking peace to my soul, I cannot have it;
our peace comes in at the ear, as the Church speaks, and out of Gods mouth;
God creates peace by his word and lip, 51.8. Esa. 57 19.
as Esaias speaks: unless it bear his stamp, and have Holiness to the Lord
written upon it, it is not right, twill not pass as current.

Thirdly, The effects of it: holy peace works thankfulness to Christ,
humility in us, mercifulness toward bruised spirits.





Paul speaks in both tables; consider, compare, and so pass sentence; and
here an end of this Use: now to Instruction.

Paul, his bonds excepted: It shall not be needful to say much to those who
have felt heaven and hell both in their consciences, they see the difference;
as for others, what can I say, when as men cannot believe me without
experience? If they would receive others testimonies, they may well conceive,
that a good conscience is beyond all created goods, and a bad worse then all
positive evils: for first, What so desirable to all living things, as life?
What will not men part withal for life, Job 2 4.
though it be from skin to skin? yet conscience is such a thing as wise men
prize above life; they will dye a thousand deaths, rather then lose conscience;
and whilst they live, they live no longer then Conscience speaks peace. Look
upon an experienced man, and when he has lost his peace, no meat, no place,
no wealth, no company, no life is pleasant; he only lives, because he dares
not dye.

Secondly, for an ill conscience; What more terrible and hateful to Nature,
then death? yet death is sweet to a wounded Conscience; did he think that
death would end his torments, he would not live; nay, though he apprehends a
judgment, a hell at the heels of death, yet many times he rushes upon it,
and concludes, that certainly hell can be no worse, and probably better then an
ill conscience.

Lo (my Brethren) what Conscience both ways is; one so sweet, that Heaven
would be no Heaven without it: the other so bitter, that Hell is no Hell to it
in the judgment of experience. I can say no more to persuade; me thinks now
nothing should remain but direction. And the way to set you in Paul's
circumstances, is to guide you; first, to the getting: secondly, to the keeping
of a good Conscience.

1. How a good Conscience is gotten.
For the first, resolve first on the thing, and thus conclude; What-euer it
cost me, what shift soever I make, I must have a good conscience. Videatur.
Aug. is Ps. 30. etc.
It is not necessary to have wealth; a poor man may be honest here, happy
hereafter. It is not necessary to have health, a weak man may to heaven. Nay,
it is not necessary that I must live, my happiness is not confined to this
life; but it is necessary to get a good Conscience; without this, I can neither
live nor dye, be neither rich nor poor, sick nor well; in few, I cannot
subsist, I cannot be (unless this be a being, to wish I never had been)
without a good conscience; and therefore what-euer it colt me, I Will go to the
price thus first resolve, and this done then hearke^; to the means, which are
these: First, go to the right means: there is but one Physician for souls and
consciences, and that is God; he only made, and he only remakes good
Consciences; none else can come at Conscience, can take out the poison that is
there; take off the guilt that is there; and therefore we must carry our
wounded souls to him, allege his own covenant and hand, and say; Lord, thou
have said that thou will take away our evil heart, and give us a better, now
for thy truths sake make good this Word, this Scripture. This done, thou must
attend his method, and run his course and dict he prescribes, and thou must
follow this method;

Paul faies, and darkness is timorous and staggering; a man can have no true,
no positive peace, whilst he lives in darkenesle, either all things, or
nothing shall be lawful; and where it is so, the heart cannot be comfortable,
therefore to those principles that yet stick in the soul, add some other:
add light to light, the light of the Word to the light of Nature; for the Word
is written to help that darkness, and that light is so dim and small, that
we must needs set up another by it, else we shall see nothing; and he that
sees nothing, enioyes nothing: therefore thou must get knowledge by reading, by
deducing couclusions from Gods actions to thy seife, by hearing and setting thy
self, if thou be free, under that Ministry that deals with Consciences, that
sets out God as he is, the Word as it is, sin as it is; for then we truly
know, when we know things in their own notions and colors.

much of its sight and life, it has learned to be idle, false, dumb, etc. It
has contracted so much guilt, foulness, brawninesse by trading in sin, that
there is do room for peace, till it has a new constitution, and be wholly
resined: now the way to have it cleansed, is to fly to blood: as in the Law
all things were purified with blood, so here the blood of Christ is that, that
cleanses from all sin, that washes the Conscience from dead works; this
blood is both healing, and will cloze all our scarefull gashes; and purging and
will take off all stains, an will make us as white as snow. O go to this
Refiner, this Fuller, this Physician, this high Priest, as the Word entitles
him; nothing will serve, but his bloody sacrifice, and that will do it; go to
him as to an All-sufficient Savior, rest in his blood without further
mixtures; plead his blood shed for sinners quite lost and undone; beg that of
God, asd Rahel did children of her husband, Give me blood or else I dye; apply
that to thy bleeding soul, and say, I bleed; but Christ bled too for me; my
sins are bloody, and his wounds are bloody too; my blood, if spilt, cannot
make God that satisfaction that his blood has, and therefore I Will rest in his
blood that speaks peace, not vengeance, as Abels did, and in him who quiets
Consciences as well as Seas and winds, Mar. 4.39. Else, as corrupt breath
stains and dimmes the glass: so a corrupt heart the Conscience. Next, when it
is clear from guilt and filth, then it must be pure and sanctified, the Spirit
therefore of Grace must rest in the Conscience, and give it a new constitution;
it is not sufficient to let out the bad blood, but now we must breed good
blood, and make new Spirits. From a natural Conscience, and a Conscience that
is enlightened by the Word, we must proceed to a sanctified Conscience, and
therefore we must labor to feel the power of Christ's Blood, and of Christ's
Life and Resurrection in our souls, (who is King of righteousness and peace
both, Heb 7.2.) quickening us in the Inner man, and stamping on us our first
impresse of wisdom, holiness, righteousness, that we may be throughout
sanctified, 1 These. 5. and have a beauty set upon the soul and conscience in
all points, as the Apostle says, and freed from dead works by repentance,
Heb. 9. and when the Conscience is filled in some due measure with light, and
freed from sin, and furnished with positive grace, then (out of all) results
that goodness of Conscience that now we speak of, whereby its fitted for its
ends and offices, and enabled to give us a good word and countenance.

2. How (...) ^ept.
Now for the keeping of Conscience good, because I will not ouercharge your
memories with rules, I Will express my self in one continued Similitude or
Allegory. The Conscience is a Clock or Watch in the bosom; look what you
would do to keep that in frame, that must be done here.

David did, Psalm. 51.



conscience of none, and will come to naught; and he that does not look upon
his conscience every day, and wind it up, and set it in frame, will have no
conscience in time: every day thou must talk with thy self, and know what the
Watchsaith, I mean, what report Conscience makes of thy days work, what it
has to say for or against thee. It Is with conscience, as with Bay liffs and
Stewards; if you call them to a daily reckoning, they will be careful and
useful; but if you let things run on, and reckon once at the hundreds end,
they will not watch, or they will not be able to remember: so it is with
conscience; therefore often look upon it, and every day consult with it.

The Watch must be used, else it rusts, furs, and first begins to slack its
pace, and after some time will not go at all: so conscience, it is preserved by
use, as the stomach is, and all things else; for every thing is perfected and
preserved by its proper operations; as water is kept sweet by running, the
Conscience by motion strengthens it sense, and sooner feels its weight: by
motion it is facilitated and that is as good as oil to the wheel of a Clock;
therefore exercise Conscience, and that in all good duties, whether personal
or local.

acts; and whosoever will preserve his conscience, must first keep himself pure
and upright. First, in Gods worships: Secondly, in works of righteousness
toward man: Thirdly, in his own place, he must make conscience of his
particulat calling and relation, and dwell upon that: and secondly, for others,
he must remember Paul's advice, Keep thy self pure, be not partaker of other
men's sins. In short, of all things he must fear God most; of all men, fear
himself most and his own Conscience; of all men out of himself, fear his
friends most, and his other men's sins. Many a man washes his heart at home,
and defiles his Conscience abroad; when he has gotten his own acquittance,
he intangles himself in other men's debts by conniuence, silence, consent,
etc. Take heed of this, for it is a hard matter to discharge conscience in
company and to come off well. Well, let conscience have its perfect work
toward God and man, alone, and in company, and like a good fountain, twill
work out its own corruption and mudde, and afford something toward the
washing of others too, as it runs along.

by the Heavens: the great God has only power over his great office, and he
in his Word is the just measure of it: we must not say that is lawful which he
prohibits, that is sinful which he commands, that is arbitrary which he holds
necessary, that is necessary (for its nature) which he holds arbitrary: in
short, we must neither widen nor straiten the rule, but bring home our selves
to that. Its hard to say where we shall land, if we sail not by the Compass,
and look not to the Heavens, and whether be worse to swallow all, or scruple
all, is more then I can tell! This is once, he that either ties up, or lets out
his Conscience, more then God would have him, makes work for himself, and way
for temptation. In practice, it is good to be of the restraining hand, where we
are left to ourselves: but for Opinion, Conscience, and Judgment, it is best to
hold ones self free where the Word frees him, and bound, where the Word binds
him, else Conscience will suffer wrack.

THE SECOND SERMON: Wherein is taught, how to use a good CONSCIENCE.
HEB. 13. 18. Pray for us, for we trust we have a good Conscience in all things
willing to live honestly.


THE second thing follows. Paul having gotten a good Conscience, emproues it,
and makes his benefit of it, partly for the removing of aspersions, partly for
the obtaining of prayers, and the engratiating of himself with the Hebrews.
The point.

They that have good Consciences, must make their use of them. Doct. 1.
This point calls more for practice then for proof; therefore we will be
larger there, briefer here. First, God calls us to this duty, Esa. 5. Judge,
ye inhabitants, etc. 3. -- as if he had faid, I appeal to your Consciences,
who will be of use in this case to you, if you will use them: Cap. 1. and 2.
so Haggai, Consider, faith God, with your selves, compare time with time,
thing with thing, how well you shall speed if you will be ruled by me, how ill
you have sped whilst negligent of me: and accordingly resolve, as if he had
said, If you would but reflect upon your selves, and consult your own
Consciences, reformation would follow. So also Psalm. 4. Psalm. 4.4
Talk with your own hearts; as if he should say, Do but ask your own
Consciences? Is not this Gods doing? Did not God prefer Danid? Does not he
maintain his Titles? Would we our selves reap that measure that we offer
him? And then ye will be quiet. Thus often in the new Testament: 1 Cor. 11. and.
Examine your selves, 2 Cor. 13. etc.
Judge your selves, Try your selves, Bethink your selves: Reu. 2. All comes
to this, Turn your thoughts upon your selves, and make use of your inward
light, that is, Conseience. Thus the precept is clear, the practice thereof
much urged; the neglect thereof, as much condemned, Ier. 8.6. and elsewhere
often.

Add secondly, to the Precept of God, the practice of Gods people, in their
passages with God and Man.

First, For God: Mark Abimelech, when he was hazarded; Genesis 20. leremiah, when
he was cursed; ler. 15. Hezekiah, when he was visited; Es. 38. David, when
he was slandered, Psalm. 7. The Apostles, Acts 4. when threatened; and see what
use they made of a good Conscience. How free, quiet, bold, courageous in all
those exigents they were.

Secondly, and for Men, look upon Joseph, first tempted, after persecuted:
upon Samuel rejected, upon Job traduced, upon Paul atraigned; and see what
benefit they made of Conscience, now to reign in lusts and passions, now to
provoke to just apologies, always to support in greatest pressures.

Thirdly, from Examples, pass we to Reasons.

First, Conscience is made for use, Reasons. 1.
and therefore use must be made of it: The excellency of things stands in their
use, the best things being ever most useful; now in this world there is
nothing more Divine and (as I may say) more God-like then Conscience. It is a
kind of secondary Law and Bible, yea, in a sort, a subordinate God, of
subdiuine authority. It has power to inform, to record, to witness, to
judge, to condemn, to absolve, to comfort, to execute, to hang and draw within
if self, as we speak in other cases; and we cannot without too too great
neglect of God, who makes nothing in vain, pass by such an Officer and Deputy
as Conscience is, without use and acknowledgement.

What am I doing? It were impossible that men should either digest such morsels
as they swallow, or swallow such puddle and poison as eftsoons they do, would
they but see and consider what they do, or have done.

Danids did: by use our inward light is exercifed and strengthened, and we
made able to discern, Heb. 5.14. Nay, use and exercise does both facilitate
and delight; for what is done ordinarily and habitually, is done with no, small
content, sure with no great contention and reluctance: custom and exercise
make the hardest of works at least sufferable. On the other side, difuse
Conscience, and though it continue in the root, yet the fruit will down.
First, the light of it will more and more decay, like the fire that is not
blown. Secondly, the life of it will also wear, (as the dull sluggard lives
not half so much as the diligent does) and this appears, if we consider those
acts and evidences of life (Sense and Motion.) For Sense, a Conscience
vnconsulted, unexercised, unexamined, becomes like a sleepy leg: when a man
has sat long, he feels not his limbs, the blood and spirits being
sometimes frozen and arrested with cold, sometimes intercepted in their passage
by too much suppression of that part: so it is with the Conscience; first load
it, and then let it lie still without motion, and in fine it will not feel it
self, but be as dead and senseless, as brawned, yea seared flesh: And this
experience iustifies in many, whose consciences lie bedridden: and look how
some (in that case of sickness) void much filth and feel it not: so these
spue forth abhorred blasphemies and outrages, and discern them not. As for
Motion, even as the limbs by long sitting grow stiff and stark, that we
cannot go: so the conscience unfrequented, twill rust like a Clock which
sleeps a winter or two, and so loses its tongue, not once telling you where
you be either in the day or night: just so a rusty Conscience, twill neither
counsel nor comfort, check nor excuse, twill speak neither to matters past
nor to come, but lie as dead within a man, as the dead child does within a
woman: Oh it is a most comfortless thing for a living woman to bear death in
her bowels! such a burden fills her with many fears for the present, at least
makes her too too heavy and unwieldy, and puts her to great extremity in the
cloze, there being more adce with one dead birth, then with two living children
it is no better with a dead conscience; the less that travels, the more we must
with fears and anguish; and therefore as we call upon women, to stir, that
their fruit may be stirring too: so must we ftirre up our selves, that
Conscience may be doing; for a dead conseience makes but a dead estate, a dead
heart, a dead man, a dull life; and dead it will be, unless we put it to use.

Now before we can proceed to exhortation, Use I.
we cannot but bewail and control two sorts of men first, such as utterly
disuse, secondly, such as searefully misuse their Consciences. How many be
there of the first fort, who live and dye strangers to themselves? They dare
not for their ears ask their own hearts: What is our case? In what terms
stand we with God? Children are we or enemies? In the ways of life or death?
Where are we? What are we? Which way go we? What will be the issue of our
courses? But look how bankrupts put off reckonings, so these allreasonings
with themselves. And as they keep their spiritual estate close from their
own consciences, so do they in particular actions: for, first, in shings to
be done, they rather consult others then themfelues, which is, but to sell ones
eyes, and buy spectacles, which see no more then the eye enables them.
Secondly, in things already done, they rather smother then consult conscience:
when Conscience takes the advantage of solitariness, and begins to question
them, they run from it into company, and hide themselves in the croude; when
Conscience begins a little to open its eyes and mouth after the reading of
some book, the hearing of some Sermon, the seeling of some inward or outward
pinches, they stop their ears, divert their thoughts, sing, whistle, drink,
game, and do any thing to out-talke and drown Conscience. This the practice
of hundreds, but how ill this practice is, first the Causes, secondly, the
Consequences will show.

The Causes hereof, The causes of this disuse.
First, Pride: Man would be somebody with himself, and therefore is loath to
look upon his own stains, and to see his own face in the face of his
conscience. Secondly, Hypocrisy: Man has such a desire to coozen, that he
would (if he could) coozen himself, and would feign make himself believe that
it is not so bad with him, as indeed it is. Thirdly, Unbelief: He looks for no
mercy, in case he peach himself, and therefore places all his safety in
secrecy; and so secret would he be, that by his will, his left hand shall not
know what his right has done. These are the causes: and what fruit can you in
reason expect from such a root?

Surely the issue cannot but be bitter: The consequences.
For, First, by disusing Conscience, men come to lose conscience, and
consequently their armor against sin: take away Conscience, and you can
hardly set down Atheism. Secondly, by this means sin is exceedingly
aggrauated; (for no man can neglect so near a Monitor as Conscience is,
without great presumption and wilfulness:) and secondly, a man's reckoning no
way furthered; for (do what we can) we must come to an account, and
Conscience will know us at last, whether we acknowledge it or not; nay, by how
much the less we regard it now, by so much the more it will shake us
hereafter, and rise upon us like a flame with so much the greater fury, by how
much the more it was (for the present) kept down and stifled.

The second sort reproved, Uses. 1.
are such as abuse conscience, and this is done (as sometimes otherwise) so
mostly thus:





for all unwarranted, both opinions and practices, that is, when men will put
the name of conscience upon the basest things: Opinion shall be Conscience;
Error, Conscience; the swallowing of widows houses, Conscience; as it was with
the Pharisees.



I now come to persuade every man to make good use of a good thing, Use 2.
a good Conscience; for the abuse of best things is ever worst: and a good
Conscience is in the rank of best things, It is a wonderful mercy in God, to
match us with so near a friend, so true a Counselor: let us thankefully
consider to what uses a good conscience may be put, and accordingly emproue it.
We will not run into the road of conscience in general, but confine our
selves to a good Conscience, which is so termed in a double sense.

First, Its good formally in its constitution. Conscience how termed good.


Secondly, effectiuely in its execution: as a Clock is good when it is made
well and goes well: first, the Conscience is good in its self, when it is
fitted for its proper acts and uses: the proper and immediate act and use of
Conscience, is to know that it knows, as Solomon speaks to Shimei, and as we
vulgarly say, I know what I know well enough. This the general. The
particulars of this knowledge are, first, conscience knows what we be:
secondly, what we do: what we be spiritually (not naturally) and in what
terms we stand with God; whether we bear his Image, be in his favor, yea,
or no? what we do either for substance or quality, good or bad, either in
times past, present, or to come: these things Conscience was made for, and
these the conscience, when it is good, does know, to wit, both tree and fruit
in the inward and outward acts thereof: and hence it is, that we are so often
invited to talk with our selves; and hereof grows that inward confidence and
enioyment, that the soul has of it self, wherein it resembles its Maker, who
takes full contentment in himself from his full understanding of himself. The
second act of a good Conscience is speaking or manifesting good to us, being
good in it self, it gives us due information touching our selves; as a clear
glass represents a true face: and here are two acts also: First and more
immediately it reports things as they be, which is called witnessing or giving
in evidence: thus the person being under mercy, it tells him so much, having
already done well, or having good things in agitation, it says so.

Contrarily, when things be not right, Conscience speaks as it finds them, and
herein it does well; for we speak of a Moral, not Natural good: and morally
that Conscience is good, that speaks the truth how-euer it be: as that's a good
glass that reports blemishes (if such) as well as beauties; a good Witness
that speaks the truth, though not what pleases. Secondly, Conscience strikes
upon the affections, and does some execution upon the offender; for from
information of estate, arises either certainty of hope or despair: as the
evidence comes in guilty or not guilty, and from information of works,
different affections and motions answerable to their different natures: from
things well done, comes comfort, joy, boldness, etc. ill done, shame, fear,
sorrow, remorce: from things well intended, courage, resolution, confidence,
etc. ill meant, (for the future) jealousy, repining, recoyling, as an horse
that would and would not leap a ditch. In the former respect, Conscience is
compared to a Witness, in this, to a Judge and executioner.

Now this being the use of Conscience, we must employ it to these uses;
namely, repair to Conscience, ask its advice, receive its report touching our
persons and actions, hear what it can say for or against us now; for once it
must pass a verdict upon us; and when we have its testimony, we must either
appeal to an higher Court (if we can show an error) or sit down by its
sentence, stop, where it says stop, work, where it says work, fear, where
it says fear, hope, where he gives hope, restore, where it says, restore.

When and in what cases conscience must most be consulted.
Howbeit, that our speech may be more fruitful, know we that in four cases
especially, we are to consult and use Conscience.

First, when we are in consultation about things to be done, or believed; in
this case it is not amiss to advise with others, but in no case must
Conscience be omitted.

I may easily deceive others by ill stating of the question, adding, or
altering, or suppressing, as affection leads me: again, a man may find so
many men, so many minds oftentimes, so different are their apprehensions and
affections. But a good conscience is one and the same, and that uprightly
consulted, can say more to my affections and intentions, more to the practical
part, then all the world.

Therefore use others if you please, but make use of your own hearts, else
your practice may be corrupt, when others counsel is good. Here forget not
these rules: First, pretend not Conscience, where Conscience is not the matter.
Secondly, be resolved of what thou do in thy self, or else forbear till
taught, if thou may. Thirdly, walk by thine own light, not other men's;
ground thy practice upon Conscience, Conscience upon Word, not upon Man. As for
cases here incident, we pass them now.

to themselves, sometimes upon weak principles, sometimes upon false
applications, never consulting Conscience, and then when Conscience is
awakened, they are miserably plunged. Beloved, it is not so easy a matter to
assure salvation as most men think; we are not all out of their minds, who
deny it possible, without extraordinary revelations, and who hold it sauciness
to avouch it; yet we must tell you, that the difficulties are more then a few,
and it concerns us much to deal much with Conscience about this point.

For faith whereby we believe salvation is one thing, and evidence whereby we
feel it another; there we must cleave to the promise, but here we must
confer with Conscience, as Saint Paul does, he was strongly persuaded (by the
lesuites leave) of his salvation and uprightness: but what are his grounds?
First, his Conscience was and had been good in all: secondly, his bent and
resolution for the future was right; hence he did, hence we must assure our
estates.

Secondly, as we must examine Conscience about our estate, so also about
actions past; was this well? did I well? said I well? otherwise there may be
deceit: For first, many matters lie hid from men, with their circumstance:
secondly, the motives that set the wheel a going usually do; here then happy
is he who condemns not himself in what he has done.

Thirdly, when slandred, censured, or accused, whether by men or devils. Thus
Job, when Satan accuses, when friends do, foes do, when good men do, and
bad men do, he repaires homeward, casts up his books, and finding all right,
he triumphs in his Conscience, and wears their libels as a Crown. Like use
must we make of our Consciences, when accused; first, see whether the charge be
just; if so, reform, amend: secondly, if not so, clear thy self to men, if
worth while, and if they will be satisfied; if not, enjoy thy self, and thine
own innocence. Here the rules be two: first, if thine own heart condemn
thee, rejoice not against the truth, though all the world applaud thee:
secondly, if (upon a true search) thy heart acquit thee, never for sake thine
own innocence: Let not men, nor devils, nor frowns, nor censures rob thee
of thy comfort, but set this wall of brass against all, as Paul. Say what you
will, my conscience is good, and I make this good by these and these proofs.

Paul does, and David, and all the Saints; now calling upon God, as Hezekiah, O
Lord, thou know I have walked, etc. Now upon Christians, as Paul, Pray for
me, for I have kept a, etc. Now upon our selves, with David, Why art thou cast
down, O my soul, etc. There is truth in thee, bear up. And this not only
for the present, but for future times, when we are threatened as the Apostles
were, with many storms, with much hardship: first, make good thy Conscience:
secondly, rest in the comfort thereof; for come what will come, if we bring a
good conscience to a good cause, these two bladders will hold our heads above
water. My brethren, till we have tried, we cannot conceive what the comfort,
courage, strength and resolution of a good conscience is; make use of it, enjoy
it, and enjoy your selves, your estate, all persons, all things, all times;
only be sure, first, that Conscience be regular, that is, that it speak Law,
and sentences all according to the Word written. Secondly, that it speak the
whole truth written, and nothing but the truth: Conscience has nothing to do
with secret counsels, that must speak to the action or present estate; but for
reprobation or final destruction; that conscience can say nothing to, as not
revealed; it has nothing to do either with absolute condemnation, or
absolution. Let it keep it self within its Sphere, and let me keep my self
to my time.

FJNJS.

