THE MESSIAH ALREADY COME. OR PROFES OF CHRISTIANITY, BOTH OVT of the
Scriptures, and ancient Rabbis, to convince the Jews, of their palpable, and
more then miserable blindness (if more may be) for their long, vain, and
endless expectation of their MESSIAH (as they dream) yet for to come.

Written in Barbary, in the year 1610, and for that cause directed to the
dispersed Jews of that Country, and in them to all others now groaning under
the heavy yoke of this their long and intolerable captivity. which yet one
day shall have an end; (as all other states and conditions in the World, they
have their periods) even when the fullness of the Gentiles is come in, and when
that veil shall be taken away from their hearts, as is prophesied.

Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel, is, that they might
be saved.

Romans 10.1. For I would not (Brethren) that ye should be ignorant of this
secret; that partly obstinacy is come to Israel, until the fullness of the
Gentiles be come in: and so all Israel shall be saved (as it is written etc.)

Romans 11.25. And Jerusalem shall be trodden under foot of the Gentiles, until
the time of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

Luke 21.24. Even to this day, when Moses is read, the veil is laid over their
hearts: nevertheless, when their heart shall be turned to the Lord, the veil
shall be taken away.

2 Cor. 3, 15. Verily, I say unto you, ye shall not see me, until the time
come that ye shall say, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.

Luke 13.35. How beautiful are the feet of them which bring glad tidings of
peace, and bring glad tidings of good things.

Romans 10.15. AMSTERDAM, Imprinted by Giles Thorp. Anno M. DC, XIX.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE FREDERICK KING OF BOHEMIA, etc. And TO HIS
ROYAL SON the most hopeful young Prince FREDERICK HENRY.
Most High and mighty Prince,
THis Treatise was published seven years ago, and Printed in the
Low Countries; not long after the death of that noble Prince Henry my master:
And for that, and some other reasons, Dedicated to those high and honorable
personages; as by the Epistle following may appear. The same reasons have
moved me to revise it, and publish it a new, under the Protection also of your
Majesty and Royal Issue; that most hopeful young Prince; cujus e^go etiam
nomine ipso recreor, in whom the name of Prince Henry is now revived again to
Gods Glory; So likewise the name of Queen Elizabeth, by your Majesty's most
happy inauguration King of Bohemia: which two names are yet precious, and ever
will be in the hearts of the English Nation, and other Nations likewise. The
other reason, for that the Jews also (whom this argument chiefly concerns)
many of them remain in your Majesty's Dominions: whereof in time your
Majesty, or Royal Issue (as may be hoped) raised up of God for that very
purpose, may be a happy instrument; as of the final desolation of that
Mystery of Iniquity Babylon: so consequently of the finishing of that
Mystery of Godliness; even the conversion of the Jewish Nation, the very
period of all Prophecies. And then (as John concludes his Revelation) come
Lord Jesus. He which testifies these things says, surely, I come quickly,
Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus. Amen, Amen.

Your Maties. most humble devoted servant JOHN HARRISON

TO THE HIGH AND Mighty Lords, the States General of the united Provinces of
the Low Countries. Also, TO THE HIGH AND Mighty Prince Maurice, Prince of
Orange, etc. And To his noble Brother Prince Henry: All happiness.
FOR two reasons I have made bold to present unto your high and honorable
considerations this Treatise following. The one more particular, in respect of
that intyre amity, and correspondence, which was betwixt my dear Master
deceased Prince Henry, of famous memory, and your Exce^lencie (and whole
State) whom he much honored, and thereof gave sundry testimonies, both
public and private, whereof my self (having the honor to be one of his
Servants near unto him, and by reason of my attendance much in his presence)
was oftentimes an eare-witnesse. And that your princely Brother ( alter idem,
an other Henry, cujus ego nomine ipso recreor, even for my Masters sake, that
gone is, and for that affection he showed toward his Highness, both in Life
and Death) who was much conversant with him before his sickn^sse, and in his
sickness came diu^rs times to visit his Highness, and to condole with us in
our heaviness, can also I make no doubt witness sufficiently: whose hearts,
or rather but one heart and soul (as it is in that place) seemed to be knit
together, 1 Samuel 18.1
like the soul of David and Jonathan by a mu^uall symp^thie, as in name, so in
nature and correspondence of disposition: which had not untimely death
prevented, some further covenant, like that of David and Jonathan, might
perhaps in time have been concluded, wor^^^e such heroical spirits. An other
reason is, for that the persons whom this Argument chiefly concerns, to wit,
the Jews, many of them remain in your Country, and have their habitation in
peace and safety: not in that slaverie as in other Nations, accounted of in
the basest manner that may be, in the number of dogs rather then of Men. Which
though it have fal^en upon them by the just judgment of God, yea, and by their
own judgment upon themselves, so much the more just: his blood be upon us,
and upon our children: yet are they, children of the Promise, and beloved for
the fathers sake, as Paul pleads for them in diverse places, alleging both
their prerogatives and privileges above the Gentiles: Romans 3.1.
What is then the preferment of the Jew (says he) much every manner of way. For
to them apperteineth the adoption, Romans 9.4.
and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service
of God, and the Promises: of whom are the Fathers, and of whom concerning the
flesh Christ came, etc. And in that respect we Gentiles ought not so proudly
and tyrannously to insult over them (as many do) especially Christians of all
others, should not add affliction to affliction: but rather pity and bewail
their induration (as Paul does in the place before cited) expecting with
patience their conversion in due time, as the Lord has promised: for if God
himself love them being his enemies (for they are beloved (as I said before)
for the Fathers sake, as he loved us before our conversion (when we were his
enemies he loved us: so the Apostle testifies) why should we Christians hate
and abhor them, who are so highly in Gods account (even the beloved of the
Lord) and hold them in such disgrace and contempt as we do: as in my sma^l
observation, and experience, I am able to testify, both by that I have seen
and heard: which rather exasperateth them against our profession then
otherwise. Which harshnesse and uncharitableness of ours; together with the
Idolatry, and superstition of the Church of Rome, in worshipping of Images,
and such like tromperie, I am persuaded, have been two maine obstacles to
their conversion hitherto: as some of them in Barbary objected to me, saying:
the Christian Religion could not be the true Religion, for that it allows the
worshipping of images, which is expressly against the Law: Thou shall not make
to thy self any graven Image. And if we say they crucified Christ, and
therefore we hate and abhor them, even to the third and fourth generation,
that is to say, their posterity for ever: so do we daily by our crying sins,
even crucify again the Lord Jesus, they but once and unwittingly (as Saint
Peter testifies) we often, and that both wittingly, Act. 3.17.
and willingly, to our greater condemnation, in respect of the fullness of
knowledge we have in the Messiah. This is that fullness of the Gentiles,
already come in (whereof the Apostle long since prophesied) as in knowledge
abounding, so in sin super-abounding, and that generally through out all
Nations. Of whom I doubt much whether I may say (as it was said in times past
of the Amorites as touching their fullness) it was not yet come: for I am sure
the fullness of the Gentiles (as touching sin) is already come: fullness of
Bread, and abundance of Idleness, as in Sodom: yea fullness and
loathsomeness, even of Manna it self: as the children of Israel in the end
waxed weary of that heavenly food, so is it with us in respect of the food
of our souls. Else what means so many Sects, and Schisms in our Church at
this day? Diseases arising from some bad humors and corruptions in the body
(as all diseases do) which therefore ought to be purged. Surely the variety
of the one argues a fullness and sacietie of the other. We are fallen from the
names of Christians, Act. 11.26.
given to the Primitive Church, to be baptized into new names; Anabaptists,
Arminians, and id genus farinae: Corn I may not call them, but chafe: yea,
Mat. 13.24
rather tares sprung up with the good Corn, over-spreading, and over-topping
it too in many places: but both must grow together till the harvest. Yea, our
fullness and niceness is such, as we can taste no manner of meat almost, but
what some curious cooks for the nonce provide for us: every one must have a
cook for his own palate. We are fallen into that time fore-prophecied by the
Apostle, 2. Tim 4. For the time will come when they will not suffer wholesome
Doctrine, but having their ears itching, shall after their own lusts get them
a heap of Teachers. We are even weary of Manna, as the children of Israel
were. And therefore now that they have fasted so long time, and that fullness
of the Gentiles come upon us; it stands both with the Lords justice and his
mercy, both to us and them, to do to them as he did to us at the first, Romans
11.22
and to us as he did to them. Behold therefore the bountifulness and the
severitie of God, toward them which have fallen severitie, but toward thee
bountifulness, if thou continue in his bountifulness, or else thou shall also
be cut off: and they also if they abide not still in unbelief shall be graffed
in, for God is able to graffe them in again. Of which g^orious work of the
conversion of the Jewish Nation, and finishing of that mystery of godliness;
if you (most h^gh and mighty Lords) shall be the first beginners in your own
Country, as you have already played your parts against the mystery of
Iniquity, both at home and abroad, both by Sea and by Land, as the chief
bulwarks of Christian Religion at this day against the power of Antichrist and
all his adhaer^nts, whereof you have borne the brunt (as Tully says of the
Scipioes; they were propugnacula belli punici) and therefore deserve the prize
above all other Nations) you shall not only highly advance your honor in this
World (as you have done already, both in those your martial aff^ires, and
otherwise, also by a general eye of policy (or rather so many Argus eyes)
watching over all estat^s, to keep them upright and in order: especially those
extraordi^ary, and magnificent (I may well call them so) works of Chari^ie
toward the poor, in those your state^y Ho^pitals, and Guest-houses, and such
l^ke places of provision: no crying for bread nor complaining in your Streets*
but also in the World to come, you shall a^vance your selves in honor and
glory above the Heave^s: where you shall shine like so many Stars in the
^irmament, and as the Sun in his strength: for so it is said: (...). 12.
They that turn many to Righteousness, shall shine as the Stars forever and
ever: And they that honor me (says the Lord) I will honor: then the which,
what greater encouragement.

And so humbly craving pardon for this my boldness being a Stranger, or
wherein otherwise I have erred: I commit you (according to your high and
eminent Places, Estates and orders, which in my heart more I honor, than
either my tongue or Pen can worthily express not so well known unto me) to
the Almighty: To whose service

I rest devoted JOHN HARRISON.

To the Reader.
I Must confess (Christian Reader) that a great part of the proofs following,
together with the method, I have borrowed out of a Book called the Christian
Directorie or Resolution, in English, which I had with me in Barbary: none
else of that argument, but the Book of Books, which is the Bible. And
therefore least any one should accuse me hereafter of secret theft; I do
ingeniously acknowledge before hand with the Poet: Fateor me transtulisse. But
yet with many additions, and alterations of my own, I have made it of right
(as it were my own, without any wrong to the Author. And so I refer it to
thy Christian censure.

THE MESSIAH ALREADY COME.
First for the promises and prophecies of old as touching the coming of a
Messiah, whom we call CHRIST, both they and we agree, both of us reading daily
in our Churches and Synagogues, teaching and holding for canonical the very
self same Scriptures, even the Law and the Prophets. In so much that the
Gentile is oftentimes enforced to marvile, when he sees a people so extrea^ly
bent one against another, as the Jews are against Christians, and yet do
stand so peremptorily in defense of those very principles, which are the
proper causes of their disagreement. But in the interpretation and application
thereof arises all the controversy, they understanding and applying all
things literally and carnally to their long looked for Messiah yet for to come,
we after a spiritual manner understanding all those promises and prophecies to
be most truly and really fulfilled in the person of our blessed Mesiah,
already come, they expecting a temporal King, to rule and conquer in this
world, we acknowledging a spiritual King, whose kingdom is not of this world,
as himself did many times protest, while he was in the world: My kingdom is
not of this World. To begin with Adam and so forward.

Gods Promise to Adam.
THe first promise as touching the Messiah is this made to Adam after his fall,
for the restoring of mankind, to wit that the seed of the woman should break
the serpents head, Genesis 3, 15.
that is to say one of her seed to be borne in time should conquer the devil
death and sin, as the ancient Jews understand this place, which being a
spiritual conquest and against a spiritual enemy the devil, he (I mean the
Messiah) must needs be a spiritual, and consequently not a temporal King, as
the Jews imagine.

Gods Promise to Abraham.
THe second to Abraham Isaac and Iaacob often repeated. To Abraham Genesis 12.3.
In thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed. To Isaac Genesis 26.4. In
thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. To Iaakob Genesis 28.14.
In thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed.
Therefore the Gentiles as well as the Jews, the blessing is general without
exception, all the families of the earth, all nations, no prerogative of the
Jew, no exception of the Gentile, as touching the Messiah, I mean the benefit
of this so general and great a blessing, though otherwise much every way, as
the Apostle reasons to the Romans. Romans 3, 2. Romans 9.4.
Whereupon I infer as before, that the Messiah must be a spiritual and not a
temporal King: otherwise it had been but a very small benediction to Abraham,
or others after him (who neaver saw their Messiah actually) if he must have
been only a temporal King, and much less blessing had it been to us
Gentiles, if this Messiah of the Jews must have been a worldly and a temporal
Monarch, to destroy and subdue all those Nations formerly blessed ( and blessed
shall they be) to the servitude of Jury, as the later Teachers do imagine.

The Prophecy of Iaakob.
THe third (which confirms the former) is the prophecy of Iaacob at his
death Genesis 49.10. The rod or scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a
Lawgiver from between his feet, till Shiloh come and the people or nations
shall be gathered unto him. Which the Chaldie Paraphrase, as also Onkelos, both
of singular authority among the Jews, do interpret thus. Until Christ or
the Messiah come (which is the hope and expectation of all nations, as well
Gentiles as Jews) the government shall not cease in the house or Tribe of
Judah. Whence I infer the same conclusion as before, that if the Messiah must
be the hope and expectation, as well of the Gentiles as of the Jews, then can
he not be a temporal King to destroy the Gentiles, as the later Jews would
have it, but a spiritual King, as before has been declared.

Secondly, if the temporal Kingdom of the house of Judah whereof the Messiah
must come, shall cease and be destroyed a^ his coming, and not before, that
being a certain sign of the time of his manifestation, how then can the Jews
expect yet a temporal King for their Messiah, the scepter already departed
and gonne, their kingdom and priesthood defaced, their city and temple
destroyed, themselves scattered amongst all nations, and so have continued
almost this sixteen hundredth years, yea such a fatal and final desolation
by Gods just judgment brought upon that woeful Nation, and that not many years
after the death and passion of our Savior Jesus Christ, Luke 19.42.
according to his prophecy in his life time, as may fully settle our faith in
this point.

The Prophecy of Moses.
THe fourth is that of Moses to the people of Israel, Deu. 18.1^
The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet like unto me, from among
you, even of thy brethren, unto him ye shall hearken, etc. and in the verses
following, ver. 18.
I will raise them up a prophet from among their brethren like unto thee
(says God to Moses) and will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak
unto them all that I shall command him, and whosoever will not hearken unto my
words, which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him. Which words
cannot be understood of any other Prophet that ever lived after Moses amongst
the Jews, but only of the Messiah, as appears most plainly in another place
in Deutro. where it is said, Deu. 34.10
There arose not a Prophet in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face
to face, in all the miracles and wonders which the Lord sent him to do, etc.
no such Prophet except the Messiah ever after to be expected: but the Messiah,
he it is that must match and overmatch Moses every way, he must be a man as
Moses was in respect of our infirmities, even according as the people of Israel
themselves desired the Lord in Horeb, saying, let me hear the voice of the
Lord God no more, nor see this great fire any more, Deu. 18.26,
that I dye not. And the Lord said unto Moses, they have well spoken, I will
raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee, etc. He
must be a Lawgiver, as Moses was, but of a far more perfect Law, as hereafter
shall appear, he must be such a one whom the Lord has known face to face, as
he did Moses, but of a far more divine nature. For as it is in Esaias, Esa. 53.8.
Who shall declare his age? Lastly, he must be approved to the World by
miracles, signs, and wonders, as Moses was, which the Lord shall send him to
do, as he did Moses. But no such Prophet has ever yet appeared in the world,
not ever shall, who has so fitly answered this type, so perfectly observed the
Law of Moses (which Moses himself could not do) giving us in stead thereof a
far more excelent Law, as was prophesied long before that he should. And
finally, so miraculously approved himself to the world, to be sent from God, by
signs and wonders done both by himself and his Apostles, as hereafter shall
appear) except this Christ which we profess, therefore he alone is the true
Messiah and no other to be expected

The Prophecy of David.
THe fifth, is the prophecy of David, a type also of the Messiah, who for that
he was a holy man, a man after Gods own heart, out of whose lineage the Messiah
was to come, had this mystery most manifestly reveiled unto him, for the
assurance whereof as of a great mystery, even that of Christ and his Church,
God byndeth himself by an oath saying, Psalm. 89.3.
I have made a covenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my servant,
thy seed will I stablish for ever, and set up thy throne from generation to
generation, Selah. Which words although the later Jews will apply to King
Solomon (and so in some sort they may, for that he was also a type of the
Messiah) yet properly these words, I will stablish the throne of his kingdom
for ever, 2 Samuel 7.13
so often repeated, cannot be verified of Solomon, whose earthly Kingdom was
rent and torn in pieces, straight after his death, 1 Kin. 12.
by Jeroboam, and not long after, as it were extinguished, but they must needs
be understood of an eternal King and kingdom, as must also those other words
of God in the psalm: Thou art my son this day have I begotten thee, Psalm.
2.7.
ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the
ends of the earth for thy possession, Thou shall crush them with a rod of iron,
and break them in pieces like a p^tters vess^l, which prophecy was never
fulfilled in Solomon, nor in any other temporal King in Iewrie after him. And
much less this that follows, They shall fear thee as long as the sun and
moon endures from generation to generation. Psalm. 72, 5.
In his days shall the righteous flourish, ver. 7.
and abondance of peace so long as the moon endures. His dominion also shall
be from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth, They that
dwell in the wilderness shall kneel before him, and his enemies shall lick
the dust. The Kings of Tharshish and of the yles shall bring presents, the
Kings of Sheba and Seba shall bring gifts, yea all Kings shall worship him,
ver. 17.
all nations shall serve him. His name shall be for ever, his name shall endure
as long as the sun, all Nations shall be blessed in him, and shall bless
him. And blessed be the Lord God, even the God of Israel which only does
wondrous things. And blessed be his glorious name for ever, and let all the
earth be filled with his glory, Amen, Amen. And so he ends as it were in a
trance, ravished beyond measure, with the sweet and heauvenly contemplation of
this spiritual and everlasting kingdom of the Messiah, for to him and to no
other can all these circumstances and hyperbolicall speeches of David (rapte
with the spirit of prophecy) properly and primarily apperteyne, though
literally the Jews understand them of Solomon, as they do many other places
in like case, applying them only to the type, never looking to the substance,
whereof those types and figures were but shadows and semblances, God of his
mercy in his good time take away the veil from their hearts, that at length
they may see the true Solomon in all his royalty, not any longer to grope at
noone days, wincking with their eyes against the clear sun like their
forefathers, as it is in Esaias: a most fearful judgment of God laid upon that
Nation of old, objected to them many times and often, both by Christ and his
Apostels, but in vain, go and say unto this people, ye shall hear indeed but
shall not understand, ye shall plainly see and not perceive, Esai. 6.^.
make the heart of this people fat, make their ears heavy, and shut their
eyes, least they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their hearts, and convert and be healed. Whereupon ensues
(even upon this wincking and wilful obstinacy) a most severe denunciation of
final desolation. Lord how long (says the Prophet) and he answered until the
cities be wasted without inhabitant, the houses without a man, and the land be
utterly desolate, etc. But yet a tenth reserved to return, a holy seed
remaining in due time to be converted. This judgment and desolation, has been
along time upon them, they feel it and groan under the burden of it, as their
forefathers did in Egypt under Pharaoh, and yet wincking shut their eyes and
will not see it, I mean, acknowledge the true cause of these so great
judgments revealed from heaven upon the^, even the contempt of Gods holy
Prophets sent unto them from time to time, but especially of the Messiah, whose
blood lies heavily upon them, even to this day, as their forefathers desired,
his blood be upon us and on our children, which all the world sees is come to
pass, yea they themselves feel it, yet wincking with their eyes they will not
see it. But there is a tenth to return etc. The rest which will not this their
Messiah to reign over them, let them look into that parable in the Gospel,
there shall they find a far more fearful destruction denounced then the
former. The first being but for a time, but a type of the other, but a
beginning of woes, the other eternal, for ever and ever. The first he
pronounces with tears over Jerusalem, the second he denounces as an angry
Judge, provoked at length to execute his fierce wrath upon them, without any
compassion at all. His words are these: Moreover, those mine enemies, which
would not that I should reign over them, bring them hither, Luc. 19, 27.
and slay them before me. Which words of our Savior although they will in no
wise believe, no more then they did the former, yet shall they find his words
one day, as truly fulfilled to them in the one, as they have done already in
the other. And howsoever hitherto they have esteemed of him as a false prophet,
a deceiver, yet has he been to them but too true a Prophet in all their
calamities both first and last. And so after this long digression I come to the
next.

The Prophecy of Jeremy.
THe sixth, which confirms the former, is that of Iere. 23, 5. Behold the
days come says the Lord, that I will raise up unto David a righteous branch,
and a King shall reign, etc. And this is the n^me whereby they shall call him,
the Lord our righteousness.

This was spoken of David's seed above 400 years after David was dead and
buried, which proves manifestly, that the former promises were not made unto
him for Solomon his son, or any other temporal King of his line, but only
for the Messiah, who was called so peculiarly the son and seed of David.

The Prophecy of Ezechiel.
THe seventh, which also confirms the other, is that of Ezec. 34.23. I will
set up ashepheard over them, he shall feed them, even my servant David, etc.
In which words the Jews themselves do confess, in their Talmud, that their
Messiah is called by the name of David, for that he shall descend of the seed
of David, and so it must needs be, for that King David being dead so long
before, could not now come again in his own person to feed them him self.

The Prophecy of Isaie.
THe eight, is the prophecy of Isaiah, 2.2. It shall be in the last days,
that the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be prepared in the top of the
mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all nations shall flow
unto it, etc. for the Law shall go forth of Syon, and the Word of the Lord
from Jerusalem. He shall judge among the Nations. Which very words Michah
repeateth, cap. 4.1. and are applied there as also here unto the Me^siah, they
can have no other meaning, by the judgment of the Jews themselves. In that
day shall the budde of the Lord be beautiful and glorious, Isai. 4, 2.
and the fruit of the earth shall be excellent. Unto us a child is borne, and
unto us a son is given, and the gouvernment is upon his shoulders, Isaie. 9,
6.
he shall call his name Wonderful, Councellor, the mighty God, the
everlasting Father, the Prince of peace, the increase of his gouvernment shall
have none end. And in the 11. chap. There shall come a rod forth of the stock
of Ishai, and a graffe shall grow out of his root, and the spirit of the Lord
shall rest upon him. Behold your God comes etc. Then shall the eyes of the
blind be lightened, and the ears of the deaf shall be opened, then shall the
lame man leap like a heart, and the dumme man's tongue shall sing, etc. chap.
35.4. And he said, it is a small thing that thou should be my servant, to
raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the desolations of Israel. I will
also give thee for a l^ght of the Gentiles, that thou may be my Salva^ion
unto the ends of the earth. chap. 49.6.

Out of all which places before aledged, I conclude, first the coming of a
Messiah, which the Jews will not deny: secondly, that he must be King as well
of the Gentiles as of the Jews, which they cannot deny: thirdly that he must
be a spiritual and not a temporal king, as they imagine. It follows next to
be proved, that he must be both God and man, even the son of God: the second
person in Trinity to be blessed for evermore, which also they shall not deny.

That the Messiah must be both God and Man.
The Jews at the first agreed with us in all or most points as touching the
Messiah for to come, denying only the fulfilling or application thereof in our
Savior, but since the later Jews finding themselves not able to stand in that
issue against us, they have devised a new plea, saying, that we attr^bu^e many
things unto Jesus, that were not foretold of the Messiah to come, namely, that
he should be God, and the son of God, the second person in Trinity, which we
will prove both by Scriptures, as also by the writings of their own
forefathers. For Scriptures, it is evident by all (or the most) alleged
before, that the Messiah must be God, even the son of God, endued with man's
nature, that is, both God and man. So in Genesis, where he is called the seed
of the woman, it is apparent he must be man, and in the same place, where it is
said, he shall break the serpents head, who can do this but only God? So in
Isay, Isai. 4.2.
where he is called, the budde of the Lord, his Godhead is signified, and when
he is called the fruit of the earth, his Manhood. Isa. 7, 14.
And so in an other place. Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a son,
and thou shall call his name Immanuel, that is to say. God with us, which name
can agree to none, but to him that is both God and man. And who can interpret
these speeches, that his kingdom shall be everlasting Isa. 9. That his name
shall be for ever, ^it shall endure as long as the sun and the moon, That
all Kings shall worship him, all nations serve him, Psalm. 72. worship him all
ye Gods, Psalm. 97. that no man can tell his age, Isai. 53. that he must sit
at the right hand of God. Psalm. 110. Who, I say, can understand or interpret
them but of God, seeing in man they cannot be verified, with which place of
Scripture the Evangelists do report, that Jesus did put to silence diverse of
the learned Pharisees: for, says he, if the Messiah be David's son, how did
David call him Lord? signifying, thereby, that albeit he was to be David's
son, as he was man, yet was he to be David's Lord as he was God, and so do
both Rab. Jonathan, and their own public commentaries interpret this place.
Michah is plain, Micah. 5.2.
His going forth is from the beginning, and from everlasting, And Isay is bold
to proclaim him by his own name, even God, and to give him his right style,
with all his additions, (as Herolds to great Kings and Princes use to do) he
shall call his name, Wonderful, Councellor, the mighty God, the everlasting
Father, Isai. 9.6.
the prince of peace, etc. In vain therefore is that objection of the Jews,
that El, or Elohim, signifying God, is sometimes applied to a creature, here it
cannot be so, nor in the next place following, Psalm. 45.6. Thy throne o God is
for ever and ever, etc. Wherefore God even thy God has anointed thee with the
oil of gladness ab^ue thy fellows, which cannot be applied to Solomon, but as
a type of the Messiah. Howsoever the name IEHOVA which is of such reverence
among the Jews, that they dare not pronounce it, but in place thereof read
Adonai, that I am sure they will never grant to belong to any creature. Then
what say they to that of Ier. 23.6. where the Messiah is called in plain
terms Jehovah, And this is the name whereby they shall call him, Jehovah our
righteousness. So likewise, chap. 33.16. over again is he called by the same
name Jehovah our righteousness. And so do the ancient Jews themselves expound
this place, namely, Rabbi Abba, who asks the question what the Messiah shall
be called, and answers out of this place, he shall be called the Eternal
Jehovah. The like does Misdrasch. upon the first verse of the 20 Psalm. And
Rabbi Moses Hadersan, upon Genesis 41: expounding that of Zephanie 3.9.
concludes thus: In this place Jehovah signifies nothing else but the Messiah,
and so did one of the Jews at unawares acknowledge to me, alleging that place
out of the Psalms, the Lord does build up Jerusalem etc. that their Messiah at
his coming should build a new city and Sanctuary, much more glorious then the
former. So did he also interpret that place of Hagg. 2.10. of a third temple.
Whereupon I inferred, seeing in those words he alleged, the Lord does build
up Jerusalem, the Hebrew word is Jehovah, therefore by his own interpretation
the Messiah must be Jehovah which he could not well shifte off, but said that
Adonai (for Jehovah they dare not name) must there be understood, which point
of the Godhead of the Messiah the most ancient Jews did ever acknowledge
proving by sundry places of Scripture, not only that he should be the son
of God, but also the word of God incarnate.

First that he should be the son of God, they prove out of Genesis 49.10. The
scepter shall not depart, etc. till Shiloh come. Which Rabbi Kinhi proves to
signify his son, that is the son of God. Out of Isai, Isai. 4.2.
where he is called the budde of the Lord. Out of the Psalms, Psalm. 2.7.
where it is said, thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee. And a
little after kiss the son least he be angry, and ye perish, blessed are all
they that trust in him, which last words cannot be understood of the son of
any man, for it is written, Cursed be the man that trusts in man, Ier. 17.5.

Secondly, that he shall be the Word of God, they prove out of Isay, as also out
of Hosea, Hose. 1, 7.
where it is said, I will save them by the Lord their God. Jonathan translateth
it thus, I will save the^ by the Word of their God. So where it is said, The
Lord said to my Lord, (...). 11^.1.
sit at my right hand, etc. The Lord said to his Word, sit at my right hand.
Also where it is said, Psa. 107, 20
He sent his Word and healed them. Rabbi Isaac Arama, upon Genesis 47. expounds
it to be meante of the Messiah, that shall be Gods Word: So likewise that of
Job, Job. 19, 26.
I shall see God in my flesh, etc. Rabbi Simeon upon Genesis 10. gathers
thereupon, that the Word of God, shall take flesh in a woman's womb. Another out
of these words; Jehovah our God is one Jehovah, proves the blessed Trinity,
Deuteronomy. 6, 4.
saying, by the first Jehovah, is signified God the Father, by the next, which
is Elohim, God the son, and by the other Iehova, God the Holy Ghost
proceeding of them both: to all which is added the word one, to signify, that
these three are indivisible, but this secret (says he) shall not be reve^led
until the coming of the Messiah. These are the words of Rabbi Ibda, reported
by Rabbi Simeon, in a Treatise called Zoar of great authority among the Jews,
where also the said Rabbi Simeon interprets those words of Isay, Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God of Hosts, in this manner. Esaias by repeating three times Holy
(says he) does signify as much as if he had said: Holy Father, holy Son,
and holy Spirit: which three Holies do make but one Lord God of Hosts, which
mystery of the blessed Trinity, Rabbi Hacadosch gathers out of the very
letters of JEHOVAH, upon those words of Jeremy before recited, Ier. 23, 6.
the two natures of the Messiah both divine and humane, his two filiations, the
one whereby he must be the son of God, the other whereby he must be the son
of man: concluding thereupon, that in him there shall be two distinct natures,
and yet shall they make but one Christ, which is the same that we Christians
hold. Philo that learned Jew shall end this first consideration, touching the
nature and person of the Messiah, as himself writes in his Book De Exulibus,
By tradition we have it, says he, that we must expect the death of an high
Priest, which Priest shall be the very Word of God, void of all sin, whose
Father shall be God, and this Word shall be the Fath^rs wisdom, by which all
things in this World were created, etc. Therefore the Messiah must be both God
and man, both by the Scriptures, as also by their own writers, they cannot
deny it.

That the Messiah must change the Law of Moses.
AS the Messiah must be both God and man, even the natural and only begotten
Son of God, and the very Word of God incarnate, void of all sin, able to
satisfy the wrath of his Father, and to fulfill the Law of Moses for us, which
Moses himself could not do, nor any other after him. It was a burdensome Law
to the children of Israel, A yoke which neither they nor their forefathers
were able to bear: Act. 25.10*
so having once in his own person most exactly accomplished the same here on
earth, together with all rites, ceremonies, prophecies, types, figures, and
circumstances, of his coming, clearly fulfilled in him and by him. It was
necessary (I say) the substance being once come, those shadows and ceremonies
should cease and be abolished, I mean the ceremonial Law totally, for as
touching the moral Law, or the Commandments he says, I came not to destroy
the Law or the Prophets, but to fulfill them, only thus far has he
abolished that too, he has taken away the curse of it, hanging it on his
cross, even the handwriting that was against us, together with himself
crucified.

This ceremonial Law of Moses (I say) consisting of such a multitude of
ceremonies, figures, types, sacrifices, etc. all of them for the most part
pointing at the Messiah to come; for by those outward signs and services
appointed by God to his people, they were still put in mind of his covenant,
and assured of his promise, that the Messiah should come. Moreover it being
proper and peculier to one only nation in all the world namely Jury, the
exercise thereof permitted, but in one only place of that country, namely
Jerusalem, whither every man wa^ bound to repair three times every year, to
wit, at the Pasqua, Pentecost, and the feast of Tabernacles, there and no where
else to offer sacrifice. I say this Law of Moses, being altogether
ceremonial, and peculier to that nation, it was necessary at the coming of
the Messiah, the same should be abolished, and a more general and perfect Law
given and established, a Law that should be common to all men, serve for all
countries, times, places, and persons, otherwise how could the Gentiles be made
pertakers of the covenant, as well as the Jews, how could all these nations, so
far distant from Jerusalem, repair thrice every year thither, how should
every woman dwelling in the East or West Indies repair thither for her
purification, after every childbirth, as by the Law of Moses she was commanded
Levit. 12. Therefore it is manifest, that this Law of Moses was given to
continue but for a time, even till the coming of the Messiah, and then another
to come in place to continue, till the worlds end. This signified Moses to the
people, after he had delivered the former Law to them, Deu. 18.15
saying, The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet like unto me, from
among you, even of thy brethren, unto him thou shall hearken. As if he had
said, ye shall hear me till he come, who must be a Lawgiver as my self, but
of a far more absolute and perfect Law, and therefore more to be reverenced
and obeyed. And then he adds in the person of God himself, this thundering
sentence against all misbelievers: Whosoever will not hearken unto my Word,
which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him. Which words cannot
be verefied in any other Prophet, after Moses until Christ, for that of those
Prophets there arose none in Israel like unto Moses, Deuteronomy. 34.10. They had no
authority to be Law givers, as Moses had, but were all bound to the
observation of his Law, till Christ should come, whom Moses here calls a
Prophet like unto himself, that is, a Lawmaker, exhorting all men to hear and
obey him. Hereunto the Prophets subscribe, none of them all presuming to take
upon them that privilege to be like unto him. A prophet like unto Moses, they
must let that alone to the Messiah, whose office it is to change the Law of
Moses, given upon mount Sinay, and in stead thereof, to promulgate a new Law,
to begin at Sion, as says the Prophet Isay: Isai. 2.3.
The Law shall go forth of Sion, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem.
Which cannot be understood of Moses Law, published eight hundredth years before
this prophecy, and that from Sinai, not from Sion, but of the preaching of the
Gospel, which began at Jerusalem, and from thence was spread over all the
world. Which the same Isay foresawe, when talking of the Messiah, he says, In
that day shall five cities in the Land of Egypt speak the language of Canaan,
etc. In that day shall the alter of the Lord be in the midst of the Land of
Egypt, Esa. 29.18.
and a pillar by the border thereof, unto the Lord. And the Egyptians shall
know the Lord in that day, and do sacrifice and oblation, and shall vow^
vows, etc. which could not be verified of the Law of Moses, for by that Law,
the Egyptians could have nether alter nor sacrifice, but it was fulfilled upon
the coming of Christ, when the Egyptians were made Christians. Also in another
place, and the yles shall wait for his Law. The same was likewise foretold by
God in Malachie, Isai. 42.4.
where he says to the Jews, and of the Jewish sacrifices, I have no pleasure
in you, neither will I receive an offering at your hands, for from the rising of
the sun, ^sa^. 8.10.
unt^ll the going down of the same my name i^ great among the Gentiles, and in
every place incense shall be offer^d (...) my name, and a pure offering, for my
name is great among the Gentiles, s^^th the Lord of Hosts. Wherein we see,
first a reprobation of the Jewish Sacrifices, and consequently of the Law of
Moses, which depends principally thereupon. Secondly, that among the Gentiles
there should be a pure manner of Sacrifice, more grateful unto God then the
other, not limited either in respect of time or place, as the Mosaicall Law and
sacrifice was. For so says God in Ezechiel, Ezec. 20.2^
I gave them statutes which were not good, and judgments, wherein they shall
not live, that is not good to continue perpetually, nor shall they live in the^
any longer, but til the time by me appointed. Of which time he determines more
particularly by Jeremy in these words Behold the days come, says the Lord,
Ier. 31.32.
that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and Judah, not
according to that covenant which I made with their Fathers etc. where you see a
new covenant or Testament promised different from the old, whereupon I
conclude, the old Law of Moses by the Messiah must be changed into a new.

The time of his manyfestation with all other circumstances.
NOw for the time of his manyfestation, with all other circumstances, of his
birth, life, death, resurrection, ascension and those things also that fell out
afterward, if we shall consider how particulraly, and precisely they were all
foretold by the Prophets, and how long before (some hundreths some thousands of
years) before they fell out; as also how exactly they were all fulfilled in
the person of our blessed Savior: all directed like so many lines to one
center: we shall (as it were in a mirror) see and behold both the truth of
Christian religion settled upon a most firm and unmovable center; as also the
vanity of all other religions whatsoever, especially this most vain
expectation of the Jews to this day, of their Messiah yet for to come, as
vain and fond altogether, as was that opinion of one of the Philosophers which
the word center has put me in mind of, that the earth forsooth did move and
the heavens stand still: and how far they are degenerate, not only from all
true light and understanding in heavenly matters, but also even from common
sense and reason it self in things of that nature tending thereunto.

And first for the time. Daniell who lived in the first Monarchy foretold that
there should be three monarchies more, the last the greatest of all, to wit
the Roman Empire, and then the eternal King or Messiah should come, his (...)
are these. In the days of these Kings, shall the God of heaven set up a
kingdom which shall never be destroyed, Dan. 2.44. And just according to this
time was the Messiah born, namely in the days of Augustus Caesar, Luke 2. (as
both we Christians account and the Jews acknowledge) even in those halcyon
days of peace when the temple gates of Ianus were commannded to be shut, and
upon that very day when Augustus commanded that no man should call him Lord
was this Prince of peace borne. Therefore to him agrees this circumstance of
time very fitly, most vainly therefore do the Jews after this time expect for
another.

^o^. 49.10
Secondly Jacob who lived many years before, prophesied of this time very
precisely, as already has been aleadged, that the Mes^iah whom he there
calls Shilo should come at that time when the scepter or government regal was
departed from the house of Judah, which was in the days of Herod, and never
till then, who first usurped that government, his father in law King Hircanus
with all his of^pring of the blood royal of Judah, together with the Sanhedrim
put to death. The genealogies of the Kings and Princes burned. A new pedegrie
for himself divised, In a word all authority regal whatsoever belonging to
that tribe, at that time, quite extinguished. And just according to this time
was our Savior borne, namely in the days of Herod, Math. 2.1. Therefore, to
him agrees this circumstance of time very fitly: most vainly therefore do
the Jews after this time expect any longer.

Thirdly God himself says by his Prophet Hagga^; that the Messiah whom he
there calls the de^ired of all nations: shall come in the time of the second
temple, which was then but new built, far inferior in statelynes and glory to
the former built by Solomon, (which the old men in the book of Ezra testify by
their weeping when they saw this second temple, Ler. 3, 12.
and remembered the glory of the first. The words of the Lord by his Prophet
Haggai are these. Hag. 2.
Speak unto Zerubbabel: who is left among you that sa^e this house in her
first glory and how do you see it now? is it not in your eyes in comparison of
it as nothing? yet now be of good cheer o Zerubbubel for thus says the Lord
of hosts yet a little while and I will shake the heavens and the earth and the
sea and the dry land. And I will move all nations, and the desire of all
nations shall come, and I will fill this house with glory says the Lord of
hosts. The glory of this last house shall be greater their the first etc. which
must needs be understood of the coming of the Messiah to wit his personal
presence in this second temple, in whom is the fulness of glory, and therefore
could he and none other, fill it with glory, being himself indeed the King of
glory. Lift up your heads o ye gates and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors
and the King of glory shall come in. Psalm. 24.^.
So does Mallachie prophesy in these words. Mal* 3.1.
The Lord whom ye seek shall speedily come to his temple, even the m^ssenger
of the covenant whom ye desire, behold he shall come says the Lord of hosts
etc. And so indeed he did, for Christ Jesus came into the world during this
second temple, and did himself likewise foretell the destruction thereof,
which came to pass even in that age. Therefore to him agrees, this
circumstance of time very fitly, most vainly therefore do the Jews after this
time, to wit the destruction of the second temple expect any further.

Fourthly the Messiah by the true computation of Daniels prophecy, accounting
his Hebdomades or weeks for so many years to be multiplied by seven: that is
to say weeks of years, (as they must needs be understood) was to come just
according to the time before mentioned, his words are these: Seventie weeks are
determined upon thy people and upon thine holy city: know therefore and
understand, that from the going forth of the Command^ment to bring again the
people, and to build Jerusalem unto Messiah the Prince, shall be seven weeks,
and threescore and two week^. And after threescore and two weeks shall the
Messiah be slain, and not for himself. And the people of the prince that shall
come shall destroy the city and sanctuary, and he shall confirm the covenant
with many for one week, and in the midst of the week he shall c^use the
sacrifice and oblation to cease. Which Hebdomades, or weeks of years, whether
we account from the first year of Cyrus who first determined the Jews
reduction, or from the second of Darius, who confirmed, and put the same in
execution, or from the twentieth year of Darius, for that he then made a new
Edict in the favor of Nehemias, and sent him into Jury: every way they will
end in the reign of Herod and Augustus, under whom Christ was borne, or in
the reign of Tyberius, under whom he suffered. And by no interpretation can it
be avoided, but that this time is now out, above one thousand and five hundredth
years. Beside^, this being a clear prophecy of the Messiah (howsoever
somewhat more intricate and obscure, in respect of the years, wherein the
Prophet alludeth to the captivity of Babylon, as some think) must needs be
interpreted according to the former prophecies also of the Messiah. And so does
the Prophet expound himself in the former words, namely that theMessiah should
be slain, before the destruction of the city and Sanctuary. Yet is there one
week more to make up the number of seauentie, in the midst of which week the
Messiah should be slain, which came to pass accordingly, for in the midst
of that week, that is about three years and an half after his baptism,
Christ Jesus the true Messiah was slain, Luke 23.14.22.
and not for himself, for Pilat could find no fault in him: I find no fault in
the man, I find no cause of death in him, I am innocent of the blood of this
Just man, Mat. 27.
look ye to it. Not for himself but for us was he wounded (as says the Prophet
Isai) He was wounded for our transgressions. Isai. 53.5.
Therefore to him does this circumstance of time bear witness, and consequently
the Jews after these times by God himself appointed for the Messiah, expecting
yet for an other beside^ the vanity of this their expectation, they make God
himself a liar, yea and all their Forefathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and
all the holy Prophets (whose children they hold themselves to be) who all of
them saw these days, and prophesied of them, Abraham rejoiced to see my day
(says our Savior) and he saw it, Ioh. 8, 56. Act. 3, 21. Chap. 8, 44.
and was glad.) All these make they Liars with themselves, whereby they show
themselves, rather to be the children of the Divil, who is the father of lies,
then of Abraham, who is the father of the faithful only. For so did that vile
serpent at the first, even dare to give God himself the lie (as it is in
Genesis) God ^ayth there to Adam* In the day that thou eatest of such a tree
thou shall dye the death: No (says the Divil) it is not so, Genesis 2, 17. Genesis
3.4.
ye shall not dye as all. So do these Imps of Satan, generation of vipers, as
John the Baptist in his time called them, Mat. 3.7.
even just after the same manner. For says God by his prophets, at such a time
will I send the Messiah into the world, and by such and such marks, ye shall
know him: no says this froward generation, it is not so, he has not yet sent
him, he is not yet come, we acknowledge no such marks, as that he shall be poor
and of no reputation in this world, put to death. We look for a magnificent
prince, we will none of such a base fellow, as this Jesus to reign over us, a
false Prophet, a deceiver, and so forth, with whatsoever else their malicious
hearts can imagine, their blasphemous tongues, being set on fire of hell, are
ready to utter to his disgrace. But let them look into that parable of our
Savior and there they shall find him another manner of person the^ they
imagine, I will repeat it unto them. Moreover those mine enemies who would not
that I should reign over them, Luke 19, 27.
bring them hither and stay them before me. God of his mercy give them
repentance in time of their heinous and high blasphemies, that they may mourn
for him whom they have pierced, every family and tribe apart. Repent for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand, And think not to say with your selves, we have
Abraham to our Father, for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones, to
raise up children unto Abraham. Now is the axe put to the root of the tree.
The last trumpet will blow and then it will be to late, when ye shall hear
that shrill voice ringing in your ears arise ye dead and come to judgment,
that voice will awake you out of all your dreams, and make you arise whether
ye will or no, when ye shall see the son of man come in his glory, even your
long looked for Messiah, like a magnificent prince indeed, but little to the
comfort of those that remain obstinate. Awake therefore to your salvation that
ye be not awakened hereafter to your condemnation: Awake thou that sleep,
stand up from the dead, Ephesians. 5.14.
and Christ shall give thee light, shake of all your idle dreams and foolish
fantasies of your imaginary Messiah, fitter for children then men of
discretion, consider with your selves at length, how long ye have overslept
your selves, how many ages are now past and gone, since both by computation of
Scriptures (as aforesaid) as also by the observation of your own Doctors, and
Teachers, your Messiah was to come, and yet you see him not, no nor any
likelihood at all of his coming, more then at the first, yea rather all
evidenc^s and probabilities to the contrary that may be, look into your
Talmud, and there ye shall see plainly, if you be not blind there also as you
are in the Scriptures, the vanity of vanities of this your expectation, for so
it is indeed.

It is often repeated in your Talmud that one Elias left this tradition, that
the world should endure six thousand years, that is two thousand before the
law, two thousand under the law, and two thousand, after that under the
Messiah. Which last two thousand years, by all computation could not begin
much from the birth of Jesus. And your Rabbis long since complained in that
their Talmud, that there seemed to them in those days seven hundredth and odd
years past since the Messiah by the Scripture should have appeared; and
therefore they do marveyle why (...) (...) so long, deferreth the same much
more then may ye marvel upon whom the ends of the world are come.

An other observation cabalisticall they have upon those words of Isa. 9:7: The
increase of his government and peace shall have no end, where the Hebrew word is
lemarbeh signifying to increase or multiply ad multiplicandum: In which word,
because they find mem to be shut which is not usual in the middle of a word
they gather many secrets, and among other, that seeing mem signifies 600
years, so long it should be from that time of Isai, until the time, of the
Messiah, which account of theirs falls out so just, that if you recko^ the
years from Achas King of Judah, in whose time Isay spoke these words, until the
time of Herod under whom Christ was born, ye shall find the number to fail in
little or nothing.

A much like observation has Rabby Moses ben Maimon in his Epistle to his
countrymen the Jews in Africa concerning the time of the Messiah, which he
thinks to be past according to the Scriptures above a thousand years, (he
lived about the year of Christ one thousand, one hundredth and forty) but that
God deferreth his manifestation for their sins, since which time, has
passed almost 500. years more, and yet ye hear nothing of his coming.
Consider this ye Jews of Barbary for to you partly seems this Epistle to be
written. Will you then stay still, and say still after so many hundredth years
past and gone, that for your sins God deferreth yet his coming, putting it
of from one five hundredth years to another, and so in infinitum? it is all one
as if you say, that for your sins God has broken his promise now, a
thousand and six hundredth years, and consequently it may be for your sins
the Messiah will never come, this must be your last refuge, you may as well say
the one as the other. But howsoever you make your selves sinful, yea out of
measure sinful, yet let God be just and righteous in his promise (as it is
written) make not him a liar as you have done hitherto. Psalm 51.4. Romans 3.4.


To this purpose also apperteyneth the narration of one Elias (as Rabby Joshua
reports it in the Thalmud) that the Messiah was to be borne indeed according
to the scriptures before the destruction of the second temple, for that I say
says of the synagogue: before she traveled, she brought forth and, before her
pain came she was delivered of a man child, (...). 66.7.
that is says he, before the Synagogue was afflicted and made desolate, by the
Romans she brought forth the Messiah. But yet says he this Messiah for our
sins does hide himself in the seas and other defarts, till we be worthy of
his coming. Which is as much in effect as if he had said, (the one as probable
as the other) that perhaps for our sins and unworthiness the Messiah may not
come at all, but return to heaven back again from whence he came. And why I
pray you not have stayed as well in heaven all this while rather then in the
seas and deserts for so many years, to no purpose. I am parswaded if Balaams
Ass were alive again, and did hear these, and such like your idle fantasies
and dreams touching your Messiah, the very ass would reprove you to your
faces, and make you ashamed of them, whereof though I have read somewhat in
diverse authors yet could I hardly believe any such absurdities to be
delivered, much less defended, by any reasonable creatures, till I had heard
some thing my self. I urged that place of Genesis, to one of them, to wit,
that the Scepter should not depart from Judah till Shilo came, that is the
Messiah, which being so long since departed and gone, I asked what reason they
had, as yet to expect for a Messiah, he answered, the Scepter was not departed,
they had their sheckes, that is to say, chief men of their tribes, in all
parts, where they inhabit. Moreover that some of the Moors forsooth had
brought them word of a people or nation of the Jews, inhabiting in a far
country, he could not tell me the place where, but first there is a river to
be passed, two trees, growing on either side directly one against another,
which two trees, every saturday and no day else, do of their own accord bow
one toward another, making as it were a bridge for men to go ^ver. Now the
Jews, by reason that day is their Sabath may not attempt to pass over it. But
the Messiah at his coming shall bring them al^ogether, into the land of
promise, they know not how, rebuyld the city and sanctuary in a trice, much
more glorious then ever it was before. To which purpose he alleged that place
out of the Psalms, Psalm. 147.2
( The Lord does buyld up Jerusalem and gather together the dispers^d of
Israel. So likewise interpreting that of Hag. ( the glory of this last house
shall be greater then the first) of this third imaginary temple. Hag. 2.10.
So literally applying that of Isai, that in those days the wolf should dwell
with the Lamb, the leoparde lie with the kidde, the calf and the lion and the
fa^te beasts together, Isa. 11.6.
and a little child to lead them, etc. That these things should thus come to
pass literally, according to the very Hebrewe characters. This is all the
knowledge they have in the Scriptures, the bare Hebrew letters, and no more.
Yet can they not speak one word of the true spiritual language of Canaan, but
in steed of Shiboleth (like those Ephraimites, Judge. 12.6.
they pronounce Siboleth, no interpretation spiritual of the celestial Canaan,
the heavenly Jerusalem, of the spiritual temple, of the mystical body of the
Messiah, that is to say, his Church, no relish at all of the Spirit of God, or
any spiritual worship amongst them. And yet forsooth they will be the people
of God alone, and who but they, the children of Abraham, and of the promise,
and none but they, yea they are so vaynly puffed up with the foolish pride of
this their high pedigree, that they think verily and will speak it
confidently (I have heard it from them, that none of them, unless for very
heinous offenses as perjurie, or such like, shall be judged after this life, or
be in danger of hell fire, they only to have their punishment in this world,
and not else. As though hell fire were only prepared for us gentiles, and
heaven only for the Jews, which unless they repent they shall find quite
contrary, if the words of our Savior be found true, which hitherto they have
found but to true, to their woe, as I noted before. I say unto you that many
shall come from the east and from the west, Mat. 8.11.
and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Iaakob in the kingdom of
heaven, and the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into utter darkness,
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Where are now the Jews with
their lofty pedigree* Even as Esau sold to Iaakob his birthrigh for a mess
of pottage, so have the Jews to us Gentiles their birthright to the kingdom
of heaven, for a mess of idle dreams add fantasies they imagine to
themselves, towers and castles in the air, crowns and kingdoms in
expectance, even in this world, another paradise here on earth. But in the end
they shall find themselves to have been all this while in a fools paradise,
and as it were in a dream, which when one awaketh vanishes, and so I leave
them to their dreams and profound sleep, till it shall please God of his
mercy to awake them.

Thus then it is manifest both by Scripture, tradition, and observation of the
Jews themselves, that about the time before mentioned, to wit in the days
of Augustus Caesar, the new Roman Emperor and of Herod the usurper King of
Jury, who was the first that took away the scepter from Judah, even in the time
of the second Temple, the true Messiah was to be borne. And hence it ^as that
the whole nation of the Jews remained so attente at this time more then ever
before or since in expecting the M^ssiah. Whereupon so soon as ever they
heard, of John Baptist in the desert, the Jews sent Priests and Levites from
Jerusalem to ask if he were the Messiah and in another place it is said, Ioh.
19.
as the people waited and all men mused in their hearts of John if he were the
Messiah John answered and said unto them etc. Luc. 3.1^.
So that you see in those days the whole people of the Jews waited for his
coming all men mused upon their Messiah. So did also John himself being in
prison send two of his Disciples to Jesus demanding, art thou he, Mat. 11.3*
that shall come or shall we look for an other, and again at the feast of the
dedication they came flocking to him from all parts they came round about him
as it is in that place saying how long do thou hold us in suspense, Ioh.
10.24.
if thou be that Christ tell us plainly. All which imports the great
expectation wherein the people remained in those days, of which fame,
expectation, and greedy desire of the people, diverse deceivers took occasion
to call themselves the Messiah, Judas Galilaeus, Judas the son of Hezechias,
Atonges a Shepharde, Theudas and Egiptus, all notable deceivers. But above all
one Barcozbam, who (as the Talmud affirms, for thirty years together was
received for the Messiah by the Rabbis themselves, til at last they flew him,
because he was not able to deliver them from the Romans. Which facility in the
people when Herod saw, he caused one Nicolaus Damascenus to devise a pedigree
for him from the Ancient Kings of Judah, and so he as well as the rest took
upon him the title of the Messiah, whom diverse carnal Jews that expected the
Messiah to be a magnificient King, as Herod was, would s^em to believe and
publish abroad, whereupon they are thought to be called Herodians in the
Gospel, who came to tempte Christ, Math. 22.16.
But all these deceivers are vanished and gone, their memorial is perished
with them; whereunto our Savior, seems to allude, where he says; All that
ever came before me are thieves and robbers, Ioh. 10.^.
but the sheep did not hear them. I say all these false Messiahs with their
followers, they are vanished and gone; only Jesus Christ and his religion,
contrary to all other religions in the world, without either sword, spear
or shield against all worldly strength and policy has increased and
multiplied and shall do to the end of the world, as Gamaliel long ago
prophesied to the Jews, wilfully bent but all in vain, even in the very
first infancy thereof to have destroyed it. His words are these. And now I say
unto you r^fraine your selves from these men, (...). 5, 38.
and let them alone: for if this council or this work be of men it will come
to naught, but if it be of God ye cannot distroy it, least ye^ be found even
fighters against God.

Wherefore to conclude at length this maine point of the tim^ of Christ's
appearing which cut^eth the very ^hroat of the Jews vain expectation, seeing
at or about that time there concurred so many signs and arguments together, as
1. the establishment of the Roman Empire newly erected (for then by Daniels
prophecy was the G^d of Heaven to set up his Kingdom). 2. The departure of
the rod or scepter from the house of Judah. Dan. 2.44.
3. The destruction of the second Temple, foretold by our Savior, and
coming to pass accordingly even in that age. 4. The just calculation of
Daniels hebdomades, or weeks of years. 5. The observation of Rabbines. 6. The
public fame and expectation of all the Jews, together with the palpable
experience of more then sixteen hundredth years past since Jesus appeared;
wherein we see the Jewish people in vain do e^p^ct an other Messiah, they
being dispersed over all the world without Temple, Sacrifice, Prophet, or any
other pledge at all of Gods favor which never happened to them, till after
the death of our Savior: for that in all other their banishmentes,
captivities, and afflictions, they had some prophecy, consolation or promise
left unto them for their comfort, but now they wander up and down (God
having set a mark upon them as he did upon Cain) as a people forlorn, and
abandoned both of God, and men.

His lineage or pedigree.
Secondly the Messiah by the scripture was to be borne of the tribe of Judah and
to descend lineally from the house of David. There shall come a rod forth ^f
the flock of Ishai etc. So did our Savior, as appears by his genealogy set
down by his evangelists Math. 1. Luke 3. as also by the Thalmud it self which
says that Jesus of Nazareth crucified was of the blood royal from Zerubbabell
of the h^use of David, Isay. 11.12.
confi^med by the going up of Joseph and Marie his mother, to Bethelem to be
taxed, which was the city of David, who was borne ther^, Luke 2.^.
as also it is manifest for that the Scribes and the Phar^sies ^^o objected
many matters of much less importance against him: as that he was a carpenters
son etc. yet never obj^cted they against him that he was, not of the house of
David which could they have proved would quickly have ended the whole
controversy.

His birth with the circumstances thereof.
THirdly, the Messiah by the Scripture was to be borne of a virgin, so says
Isay. Isai. 7.14.
Behold a virgin shall conceive and bring forth a son, the Hebrewe is He
emphatioum the virgin. And Isai appoints this to Achaz, for a wonderful and
strange sign from God, therefore, says he, the Lord himself will give you a
sign, behold, which he could not have done in reason, if the Hebrewe word in
that place had signified a young woman only, as some later Rabbis will
affirm, for that is no such sign nor strange thing, but very common and
ordinary for young women to conceive and bring forth children, and so did the
Elder Jews understand it, as Rabbi Simeon notes. And Rabbi Moses Haddersan
upon those words, Truth shall bud forth of the earth, says thus. Here Rabbi
Ioden notes, that it is not said, truth shall be engendered, but truth shall
budde forth, to signify, that the Messiah, who is meant by the word truth
shall not be begotten as other men are, in carnal copulation. To the same
effect, and after the same manner to be interpreted is that of Jeremy. Ier.
32.22.
The Lord has created a new thing in the earth a woman shall compass a man.
And Rabbi Haccadosch proves by cabal^ out of many places of Scripture, not
only, that the Mother of the Messiah must be a virgin, but also that her name
shall be Marie. Now ^he birth of Jesus Christ was thus, Mat. 1, ^8.
etc. that is to say, after this strange and extraordinary manner, therefore
must he needs be the true and undoubted Messiah.

The Messiah by the Scripture was to be borne at Bethlehem in Iud^a, for so it
is written by the Prophet. And thou Bethlehem Ephrathah are little to be among
the thousands of Judah, Mich. 5.2. Mat. 2.5.
yet out of ^hee shall he come forth unto me, that shall be the ruler in
Israel, etc, which place the chief Priests themselves quoted to that purpose,
to Herod demanding of them where Christ should be borne, and they answered him,
at Bethlehem in Judea, for so it is written by the prophet, as before. So also
D^vid after much restles study, and industrious search, to find out this
myst^rie, etc. I will not enter into the tabernacle of my house, nor (...) upon
my pallet or be^de, Psalm. 132, 3.
nor suffer mine eyes to sleep, nor mine eye ledds to s^^^ber, until I find
out a place for the Lord etc. At length, the mystery being reveiled unto him,
he does (...) it were point to the very place in the words following: Lo^, we
heard of it at Ephrata, which is Bethlehem, Genesis 35.19. and found it i^ the
fi^lds of the forest. Then adds, We will enter unto his Tabernacle, and
wor^hip before his footstool: foreshewing that divine worship there afterward
done to Jesus by those Mags or wisemen, who came from the east to worship him
in that place, even in the cratch, and before his footstool, Mat. 2.1.
presenting unto him gifts, gold, frankincense and myrh, as was also prophesied
in another place, that presents and gifts should be brought unto him from far
countries and by great personages. The kings of Tarshish and of the yles shall
bring presents, the kings of Sheba and Seba shall bring gifts. Psa. 72, 10.
Cyprian says, it is an old tradition of the Church, that those Magi or
wisemen were Kings, or rather little Lords of particular places, which is to be
understood, such little Kings, as Iosuah slew thirty in one battle,
howsoever it is manifest they were men of place and reputation in their
countries (neither are prophecies always so strictly and literally to be
understood) They brought with them a great treasure, Joshua. 12.
gold frankincense and myrrh, yea both Herod and all Jerusalem took notice of
their coming. They had private conference with the king as touching the star
that appeared unto them, leading the^ to that most bright morning star,
whereof Balaam long before prophesied saying. Number. 24.17
I shall see him but not now, I shall behold him but not near, there shall
come a star of Iaak^b, etc. Jesus then being borne at Bethlehem in Judea (as
was prophesied long before the Messiah should be) and indeed it stands with
great reason, that he that was to be the son of David, should also be borne
in the city of David: the circumstances also of his birth duly considered
both before and after, first the Angels salutation to his Mother Marie,
foretelling that his name should be Jesus, Luke ^, 28. Chap. 2, 31.
before ever he was conceived. So Esdras prophesied in the person of God
himself, 2 Esd. 7.26.
saying, Behold, the time shall come, that these tokens which I have told thee
shall come to pass, etc. for my son Jesus shall appear, etc. and after
these same years shall my son Christ dye: Here is both his birth and
passion, both his names; Jesus, Christ plainly expressed. Which book though it
be not canonical, yet was it extant in the world before ever Christ was borne.
Also Rabbi Haccadosch proves by art Cabalist out of many places of Scripture,
that the name of the Messiah at his coming shall be Jesus, and among other he
adds this reason, that as the name of him who first brought the Jews out of
bondage into the Land of promise, was Jesus or Joshua, (which is all one) so
must his name be Jesus, that shall the second time deliver them. Secondly the
Angels appearing to the shepherds in the night of the nativitie with this
joyful message from heaven, Behold I bring you tidings of great joye, Luke 2,
^.
that shall be to all people, that unto you is borne this day in the city of
David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord: And this shall be a sign unto you,
ye shall find the child swadled and laid in a cratch.

Thirdly the star that appeared, notifying his coming into the world,
whereof not only the wisemen, before mentioned, but also generally, all the
Astronomers and soothsayers of that age took special notice, adjudging it to
portend universal good to the earth, some gathering thereupon; that some God
descended from heaven to the benefit of mankind, and for that cause had that
star an image erected to it in Rome, and as Plinies words are, Is Cometa unus
toto orb colitur, That only Comet in all the world is adored. Fourthly his
presentation in the temple, according to the Law of Moses, where openly came
old Symeon, by the motion of the spirit ( for he had a revelation from God,
that he should not see death, till he had seen the Lords Christ) took the child
in his arms, Luke 10.
acknowledged him for the Messiah, prophesied that he should be a light to be
revealed unto the Gentiles, appointed for the fall and rising again of many in
Israel, with other events, which afterward came to pass. So did likewise Anna
the Prophetess, as it is in the same chapt^r. Fifthly, that most pitiful
murder of all the Infants in and about Bethlehem, upon this occasion, Mat. 2,
^^.
as was prophec^ed by Jeremy, Ier. 31, 15.
saying, A voice was-heard on high, mourning and bitter weeping, Rahel weeping
for her children, and refused to be comforted, because they were not, Rahel was
buried in the way to Ephrath which is Bethlem, and for that cause those infants
were called her children, Genesis 35.19
albeit she were dead above two thousand years before they were slain, and
above one thousand and five hundredth before Jeremy wrote this prophecy. Among
which Infants Herod also for more assurance, slew an infant of his own, for
that he was descended by the mothers side of the line of Judah. Which cruelty
coming to Augustus his ears, he said, he had rather be H^rods swine, then his
son, for that he being a Jew was prohibited by his religion to kill his
swine, though not ashamed to kill his son.

Sixthly his flying into Egypt hereupon, as also to fulfill that prophecy,
Mat. 2.13. Hos. 11.1. Isay. 19, 1.
out of Egypt have I called my son; which I say inlargeth further saying.
Behold the Lord rides upon a light cloud (which is his flesh, or humanity)
and shall come into Aegipt, and all the Idols of Aegipt shall tremble) at his
presence, which later point Eusebius shows was fulfilled most evidently in
the sight of all the world, Eusebius. iib. 6.
for that no nation came to christian religion with so great celerity and
fervor as did the Egyptians, who threw down their Idols before any other
nation. And as they had been the first in Idolatry to other countries, so
were they, the first by Christ his coming unto them that afterward gave
example of true return unto their creator. It follows in Isay, I will
deliver the Egiptians into the hands of cruel Lords (these were the Roman Lords
and Princes, Pompei, Caesar, Antonie etc. and a mighty King shall reign over
the^ etc. this must needs be Augustus the Emperor, who after the death of
Cleopatra the last of the blood of the Ptolimies, took possession of all Egypt
and subjected it as a province to the Roman empire. But after these temporal
afflictions threatened against Egypt, behold a most Euangelical promise of
deliverance: In that day shall five cities of the land of Egypt speak the
language of Canaan, etc. In that day shall the altar of the Lord, be in the
midst of the Land of Egypt etc. They shall cry unto the Lord because of
their oppressors, and he shall send them a Savior, and a great man, and shall
deliver them, etc. The Lord of Hosts shall bless them saying, Blessed be my
people of Egypt, etc. This blessing (I say) the Egyptians obtained by our
Saviors being in Egypt, whom here the Prophet calls by his own name Jesus,
a Savior a greatman. Finally, the coming of John Baptist, his forerunner or
Messenger, as was propheci^d, Behold, I will send my Messenger and be shall
prepare the way before me, Mal. 3, 1.
and the Lord whom ye seek shall speed^ly come to his temple. And again, I
will send you Eliah the Prophet, that is to say, chap. 4, 5.
John the Baptist, in the spirit and power of Eliah, as an angel from heaven
expounds it, appearing to Zacharias his father in the temple, sent to
foretell him both of his birth, as also by what name he should call him, Luke
1.13.
even John, saying, thou shall call his name John, he shall be great in the sight
of the Lord, etc. he shall go before him in the power and spirit of Eliah. And
therefore our Savior in plain terms he calls him Eliah, Mat. 11, 14. And
if you wilt receive it, this is that Eliah which was to come, he that has ears
to hear let him hear. And as our Savior gave him his due, before a multitude
then assembled, calling him Eliah: So did this Eliah also give our Savior his
due, in acknowledging him for the Messiah, not assuming unto himself that
honor offered unto him by the Jews, but refusing it absolutely, and laying it
upon Jesus our Savior the true owner. Then, this is the record of John, Ioh.
1, 19.
when the Jews sent Priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, who art
thou, and he confessed and denied not, and said plainly, I am not the Christ, I
am not the Messiah. I baptize you with water, but there is one among you, whom
ye know not, he it is that comes after me, which is preferred before me,
whose shoe l^tchet I am not worthy to unlose. These things were done in
Bethabara, beyond Jordan, where John did baptize. The next day John sees Jesus
c^mming to him, and says behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin
of the world. This is he of whom I said, after me comes a man that is
preferred before me, for he was before me, and I knew him not but bec^us^ he
should be declared to Israel, therefore am I come baptizing with water. So John
bare record saying, I saw the spirit come down from heaven, l^k^ a dove, and
abiding upon him And I knew him not, but he that sent me to baptize with
water, he said unto me, upon whom thou shall see the spirit come down, and
stay still upon him, that is he which baptiseth with the Holy Ghost. And I saw
and bare record, that this is the son of God. According as it is, Mat. 3.16.
Mar. 1.10. Luke 3, 21.
in the other three Evangelists more at large expressed, how that Jesus when he
was baptized came strait out of the water, and lo the heavens were opened unto
him. And John saw the spirit of God discending l^ke a dove and lighting upon
him. And lo a voice came from heaven saying, This is my beloved son in whom
I am well pleased. The next d^y John stood again, John. 1.3^.
and two of his disciples, and he beheld Jesus w^lking by and said: Behold the
Lamb of God, and the two disciples heard him speak and followed Jesus. All
this was done at Bethabara, beyond Jordan in the sight and hearing of a number
of people there present, as three of our Evangelists do report, which they
would never have presumed to have done, had not the matter been most evident,
and without all compass of denial or contradiction. And truly no one thing
in all this story of Jesus life, does more establish the certainty of his
being the true Messiah, then that John the Baptist, whose wisdom, learning,
virtue and rare sanctity is confess^d, and recorded by the writings of all our
adversaries, should refuse the honor of the Messiah offered unto himself, and
lay it upon Jesus, and also should direct those disciples, that depended upon
him, to the only following and embracing of Jesus doctrine, which is most
evidently proved, that he did for that somany followers and Disciples as
himself had, not one appeared ever after, that was not a Christian.

These circumstances I say of the birth and coming of the Messiah into this
world so long before foretold by the Prophets and fulfilled so exactly in the
person of our blessed Lord and Savior well considered; I may at length
conclude, Heaven and earth concurring, men and Angels with all other creatures
applauding thereunto, yea and God himself from heaven pronouncing it, this is
my beloved son in whom I am well pleased. That therefore as sure as God is
God and cannot lie nor give testimony to any untruth, so sure is Jesus Christ
the son of God, the true Messiah and Savior of the world, no other to be
expected.

His preaching or doctrine.
THus having evicted by the birth of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ together
with the circumstances both before and after, that he was by birthright the
only legitimate (as I may say) and true borne Messiah, all others that were
before him, or since have sprunge up or shall do hereafter to the worlds end,
but bastards, and usurpers, yea thieves, and robbers, and that in the highest
degree of theeverie that may be, even robbing God of his honor, which he will
not impart to any other: it remains yet furthere to demonstrate the same by
his life, death, resurrection, ascension, with all other accidents, and
circumstances accordingly to be observed, which may make this mystery more and
more manifest, or rather palpable, as the Apostle witnesses saying, that which
was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen, with these
our eyes, which we have look^d upon, and these hands of ours have handled etc.
that I say which we have seen and heard declare we unto you: what can be more
palpable?

After his baptism he began to preach (having before gotten his living (as
most conjecture) with his own hands, and eaten his bread with the sweat of his
brows, to show himself true man, and that he was made a curse for us, (as it
is written, in the sweat of thy brows sh^lt thou eat thy bread) and what was
his doctrine* of this world, or worldly delights, of pleasure, or profit, no,
no, quite contrary to the humors of this wicked world, and to the corruptions
of flesh and blood, which procured him the more hatred (as in all the four
Evangelists, Mathewe, Mark, Luke, and John, who recorded both his sayings and
doings may appear:) wholly tending to the sinceare service of God in spirit
and truth, to the exaltation of Gods glory, the beating down of man's pride,
by discovering his misery, to the contempt of this wicked world and vain
pomp thereof, to the mortifiation of all sins in us, patience, peace of
conscience etc. in a word all directed to the manifestation of his fathers will
and amendment of man's life: Deuteronomy. 6.5. Mat. 22.37.
tending wholly to this one ground or principle thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thy soul which is the first and great commandment and thy
neighbor as thy self, on which two hangs the whole law and the Prophet. The
manner of his doctrine was simple plain and easy, altogether according to the
evidence of the spirit, not in the enticing words of man's wisdom like the
heathen orators and Philosophers, nor like the Scribes and Pharisees, but with
power and authority, without either fear or flattery of any man's person,
rebuking all men's sins even to their faces, which (I say) procured him such a
general hatred. It took away no one spiritual point of Moses law (but the
ceremonial only and provincial, which by the coming of the Messiah was to
be taken away) yea rather revived, interpreted and made perfect the same,
corrupted much by the Jews false interpretations and glosses. That (as they
taught) commanding external observance only, this adding internal obedience
also. For whereas that enjoined (according to the letter, and as they
interpreted) to love our neighbors and friends, and no further: this adjoyneth
love also your enemi^s, bless them that curse you Math. 5.43. Where that
prohibited actually to commit adultery, and no more (as they imagined) this
forbids the adultery of the eye and of the very heart. And so of all the
rest of the decalogue our Saviors doctrine is nothing else but a most exact
and sincere exposition, according to the true intent of the Lawgiver God the
father. Therefore I conclude this doctrine so quite contrary to the gross
humors of this wicked world, and so repugnant to flesh and blood, so wholly
devoted to Gods glory and the sincere observation of his law is the doctrine
proper to the Messiah, which the Prophets of God foretold should be delivered
by him (at his coming) into ^he world.

His life and conversation.
FOr his life and conversation, (the express image of his do^trine) it was
staineles, and without reproof, even by the testitestimonie of his very
enimi^s: acknowledged also by the divills themselves. A man of such gravitie as
never in his life he was noted to laugh, but often to weep: of such humility
as being the son of God, yet scarce took upon him the dignity of a servant,
of so mild and sweet a nature as all the injuries of his enemies never wr^st^d
from him an an^rie word, but on the contrary prayers and tears in their
behalfs. In prayer often: the day he spent in the temple, and elsewhere,
preaching to the broken hearted, doing good to al me^, healing all manner of
diseases as the Prophets foretold the Messiah should do: the night on mount
Olivet and other places in prayer. In fastings often forty days and forty
nights together: that the Jews might know he was more then a man. Finally he
was such a one as was described by God in Isay so many ages before he was
borne. Isa. 42.1. Zach. 9.9. Porph. lib. Delaud. Philo
Behold my servant etc. he shall not cry. A bruised reed he shall not break.
As also in Zachary Behold thy King comes unto thee, he is just and having
salvation, lowly, etc. Such a one Isay was our Savior as touching his
integrity, sanctity, piety, humility and all other virtues even by the
testimony of his greatest enemies, Porphyry and others; yea of the Divils
themselves. Ergo.

His miracles.
FOr his miracles which he wrought for the confirmation of his doctrine, and
approbation of his person, as sent from good the Jews themselves do grant,
and record the same in diverse places of their Thalmud: yea they make mention of
many wonderful things that Jesus did, which are not written by our
Evangelists. So does Mahomet in his Alcoran: affirming him to have been a
great Prophet, and to have wrought his miracles by the only power and spirit
of God. And they weresuch as first were foretold by the Prophets, Isa. 35.5.
that the Messiah should work, as namely; to give sight to the blind to open
the ears of the deaf to make the lame to leap, the dumme to sp^^ke, etc
Secondly such as were altogether unpossible for any mortal man to effect, but
by the mere power and finger of God, as the raising of the dead to life again,
as he did Lazarus, after he had lain four days stinking in the grave. Iairus
his daughter; a chief ruler of the synagogue. John. 1^.17. Mark. 5.22.
The widows son before the gates of the city Nain in the presence of a
multitude of people there assembled to the funeral. With many other strange
miracles recorded by such faithful witnesses (the Evangelists I mean) four in
number Deuteronomy. 19.15.
though two or three had been sufficient in law, Luke 7.11.
who afterward sealed the truth thereof even with their dearest blood, as did
infinite others after them. Neither could the Jews of those times, compassed
about with such a clowd of witnesses ever deny the truth thereof: the parties
themselves then living, and conversing amongst them, upon whom they were
wrought. They had no other evasion but this, to say (and that most
blasphemoussie, contrary to their own knowledge and conscience: and therefore
our Savior lays it to their charge as that fearful sin against the holy
Ghost not to be prayed for) that he wrought these his miracles by the help of
Beelzebub the Prince of Divils. Whereas it is most apparent, the Divill himself
had never that power given him to raise one from the dead: and though he had,
yet would he sooner by his good will, take away both life and breath from all
men at once (if it were possible) wishing all men in the world had but one head
or neck, like that cruel tyrant in Rome rather than give life to any one, for
he is a murderer from the beginning. And yet the Jews themselves in their
Thalmud do acknowledge that the Messiah at his coming, shall be most wonderful
in working miracles. And in their public commentary upon ecclesiastes they
have these words: all the former miracles of the Prophets or Saints, shall be
nothing to the miracles of the Messiah when he comes. But such were the
miracles of our Savior, the whole multitude applauding hereunto: Mat. 9.33*
the like was never seen in Israel, he has done all things well; never man
spoke like this man. Seeing also it is impossible, yea blasphemy to think that
God should give testimony, to any untruth, it must needs follow that all was
true which Jesus affirmed, and therefore seeing he affirmed himself to be the
sone of God, and the Messiah, it must needs follow (I say) by these his
miracles, that he was so in deed, according to that speech of his to the Jews:
Ioh. 10.2^.37.
" the wo^kes that I do in my fathers name they bear witness of me. And
again, Luke 7.20.
If I do not the works of my father believe me not, but if I do them though
ye believe not me yet believe my works. As also that answer of his to John's
Disciples sent to inquire of him as touching that mystery of the Messiah, Luke
7.20.
art thou he that shall come etc. Jesus answered, go and tell John what things
ye have seen and heard, the blind see, the halt go, the leapers are cleansed,
the deaf hear, and the dead rise again etc.

The calling of his Apostles.
Hereunto (as an appendix to his miracles) I may well annexe the calling of his
Apostles, Disciples and followers, whereof Josephus makes mention as of a
great miracle, who being of diverse callings states and conditions in the world,
yet all on, the sudden upon his call left both Father, Mother, Wife,
Children, and other temporal respects and followed him, who had nothing to
give or promise them in this world but crosses and afflictions: he that will be
my Disciple let him take up his cross and follow me. A man that never spoke
them fair but ever cossed them in their humors savouring of flesh and blood:
(...). 16.^^.
get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me. Chapter 16.23.
His doctrine ever harshe hard and repugnant to flesh and blood: this is a hard
saying, who can hear it. A man in disgrace with the higher powers, Ioh. 6.60.
the Rulers, high Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, Chapter 7.48.
do any of the rulers or of the Pharisees believe in him? A man that had
neither friends in the world to bear him out, nor a house to put his head in,
the foxes have holes, and the souls of the heaven, Mat. 8.20.
they have nests, but the son of man has not whereon to rest his head. And
yet notwithstanding, all this that worldly men and women and some also
notorious sinners, and loose livers before, should leave all their worldly
hopes, ease, profit, pleasure (and their sweet sins too) to follow such a
man, with so great inconveniences, losses dangers and disgraces (as they did)
and should continue with him in all his afflictions, temptations, and
persecutions, and be content to dye, and loose their lives, rather then forsake
him or abandon his service, this (Isay) is such a miracle, as never in the
world fell out the like, and must needs be granted by the enemy, to be
supernatural. We read of an Emperor, that taking in hand to conquer the
world made this proclamation for winning men unto his party: Plut apophth
prise. regum.
Whosoever will come and be my servant, if he be a foot man. I will make him a
horseman, if he be a horseman, I will make him ride with coaches, if he be a
farmer I will make him a gentleman, if he possess a cottage I will give him a
village, if he have a village, I will give him a city, if he be Lord of a
city I will make him prince of a Region or country: And as for gold, I will
pour it forth unto them by heaps, and weight, and not by number. This was the
proclamation of Cyrus the great King of Persia to his followers, very glorious
(as we see) in pomp of words, and to the eye of flesh and blood.

Let us now compare herewith the proclamation of our Cyrus, Jesus Christ, to
his disciples and followers: the entrance and preface whereof was this, Repent,
etc. Mar. 1.35.
And then it follows (in stedd of whosoever will come and be my servant, If
he be a footman, I will make him a horseman: Mat. 16.24.
) If any man will follow me (says Christ) let him forsake himself, and take
up his cross and follow me, not on horseback (as the Pope does, with all his
proud Cardinals, and Bishops in his pontificalibus: I have seen servants on
horses, Eccl. 10.7.
and princes walking as servants on the ground: so did an Emperor bare footed
to his holiness, but what would Solomon have said, if he had seen a Prince hold
his stirrope? and yet (forsooth) will this proud Prelate be Servus servorum, a
follower of Christ, and Peter's Successor.) In steed of possessing lands and
lordships, gold and treasures, he says, possess not gold nor silver, nor
money in your purses, Mat. 10.9.
nor a scrip for the journey, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor so much as
a staff in your hands. In steed of these preferments and pleasures of the
world (says Christ) contrary to Cyrus: Ioh. 16.33.
In this world ye shall have affliction, yea which is more, ye shall be delivered
up to the Counsels, and to the Synagoues, ye shall be beaten, and brought before
rulers and Kings, for my sake, Mar. 13, 9.
ye shall be hated of all men, for my names sake, chap. 13, 13 Luk, 21.16
ye shall be betrayed also of your parents, brethren, kinsmen and friends. And
(which is most of all) ye shall be put to death, for who^oever will save his life
shall loose it. Finally, Mat. 16, 25.
if any man come to me, and hate not his father and mother, and wife and
children, and brethren and sisters, yea and his own life also, Luke 14, 26.
he cannot be my disciple. And whosoever bears not his cross and comes
after me, he cannot be my disciple. For which of you mynding to buyld a tower
sits not down before, and counts the cost, etc. So likewise, whosoever he
be of you that forsakes not all that he has he cannot be my disciple. This
was the proclamation and Edict of Christ to his followers. This was the
entertaynement proposed by Jesus, to such as would come and serve under his
colors, with express protestation, that himself was sent into the world, not
to bring peace, rest, and ease to flesh and blood, but rather to be the cause
of sword, fire and tribulation. Think not that I am come to send peace into
the earth, I came not to send peace, Mat. 10, 34.
but the sword. And yet with these cold offers presented to the world, first by
himself to his Apostles and disciples won thereby to follow him, even upon
the first call, they left all and followed him, and by them to all others
afterward: Isay, by this doctrine so cross and opposite to man's nature,
inclination, and sensual appetite, he gained more hearts unto him, within the
space of forty years, then ever did monarch in the world possess loving
subjects, by whatsoever temporal alurements, they did or might propose: which
argues the omnipotent, puisance of him, that contrary to man's reason in so
short a time could bring to pass so miraculous a conquest, were there no
other argument in the world, of the truth of Christian Religion, this were
sufficient.

His death and passion.
FOr his death and passion, with all the disgrace dispite and indignities were
done unto him by the Jews, it was also foretold by the Prophets, and so
expounded by their own Rabbis, as also by our Savior himself: Luke 18, 31.
behold we go up to Jerusalem, and all things shall be fulfilled to the Son
of man, that are written by the Prophets, Mat. ^1, 2.
etc. He made his entrance into the city upon an a^^e, in all humility, as
was prophesied the Messiah should do. Rejoice greatly, o daughter Zion, shoute
for joye, etc. Fulfilled even at the same time, Zach. 9.9.
when the people spread their garments in the way, cut down branches from
the trees, and strowed them in the way, Mat. 21, 8.
crying Hosanna to the Son of David, etc.

He was betrayed by his own disciple, as David in diverse places had foretold,
Psalm. 55.13. and 109.4.
under a type of those his secret enemies, in the days of Saul, as also
himself prophesied before hand, saying, He that dippeth his hand with me in the
dish, he shall betraye me.

Mat. 26, 23.
Being apprehended, he was most barbarously entreated by the Jews, Mat. 26, 67.
Isay. 50, 6.
according to that of Isay, I gave my back to the smyters, and my checkes to
the nippers, I hid not my face from shame and spi^ting.

After all this inhumane dealing, he was nailed to the cross, hand and foot,
Luke 23.33. Psalm. 22.16.
according to that of David: they pierced my hands and my feet, I may tell all
my bones, they beheld, and looked upon me, they parted my garments among them,
Zach. 12.10
and cast his upon my vesture. And in another place, they gave me gal in my
meat, Psalm. 69, 2^.
and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.

He was crucified between two malefactors or evildoers, Luke 23.32.
one on the right hand the other on the left, according to that of Isay, He was
counted with the transgressors, yea Barabas a murderer in the esteem of the
Ie^es preferred before Jesus, Isay. 53, 12.
and quitte by a common cons^nt, and cry aw^y with him, and deliver unto us
Barabas; crucify him crucify him. Luke 23, 18.


He prayed for his enemies and persecutors, Father forgive them for they know
not what they do: according to that of Isay, Isay. 53, 12.
He bare the sin of many, and prayed for the trespassers.

Not a bone of him was broken, according to that Law of the Passover, a lively
type thereof. Ioh. 19, 36. Exo. 12. 46.


To conclude, that Christ should dye for the sins of the world, it was a
received opinion of the Jews, in all ages, both prefigured and fore^old
throughout all the Scripture, Genesis 22, 1. Number. 21.8.
prefigured by the sacrifice of Isaac, the lifting up of the brazen serpent,
and by all other sacrifices in the Law. Foretold not only by the Scriptures
before mentioned, but also by Daniel, in most plain terms, after threescore
and two weeks shall the Messiah be slain, etc. Dan. ^, 26.
acknowledged also by Cayphas himself, Highpriest even the self same year
that Christ ^uffered, his words are these to the Pharisees, taxing their great
blindness in this point, and in them the whole nation of the Jews to this day,
Ye perceive nothing at all, noryet do you consider, that it is expedient for
us, that one man dye for the people, Ioh. 11.4^.
and that the whole nation perish not, etc. But he that will read the whole
story of Christ crucified, with the particulars described many hundredth years
before the same fell out, let him turn to Isay, and acknowledge him foran
Evangelist, who to signify the straungnes of the case, begins first with a
preface, who will believe our report, etc. All which narration Rabbi Jonathan,
Isay. 53,
the author of the Chaldie Paraphrase applies to the murder of the Messiah by
the Jews, whereunto agree Rabbi Simeon, Rabbi Hadersan, and others: proving
further out of Dan. 9. ver. 27. That after the Messiah shall have proached half
seven years, he shall be slain: which disagreeth little or nothing from the
account of us Christians. Also in their Talmud it is set^e down for a
principle, and the sentence pronounced before hand peremptorily and in plain
terms, that the Messiah at his coming shall be put to death. So then I may
conclude upon all these particulars of Christ his Death and Passion, foretold
by the Prophets, prefigured in the ^awe, and so oxpounded and acknowledged by
the Jews themselves (the ancient Rabbis before mentioned) and finally, so
exactly fulfilled in our Lord and Savior (as by the quotations in the margent
may appear) together with the mild manner of his death, praying for his
enemies, Mat. 27.
Father forgive them. and meekely recommending his soul into the Hands of God,
Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit: Luke 23.
with other strange accidents and circumstances: that miraculous eclipse of
the sun, at that very instant, from the sixth to the ninth hour there was
darkness over all the Land, the veil of the temple rent in twain, from the
top to the bottom, and the earth did quake, and the stones were cloven, and
the graves did open themselves, and many bodies of the Saints which slept,
arose, etc. Isay, upon all these particularities and circumstances, I hope, I
may conclude (as it is in that place) with the Centurion, and those that were
with him watching Jesus, who when they saw the earthquake, and the things that
were done, they feared greatly, saaying, truly it is was the son of God. And
all the people that came together to that sight, beholding the things which
were done, smote their breasts and returned. So may I conclude, Truly this was
the son of God, truly this is the Messiah, and let all the people of the
Jews come together again to this sight and behold him, whom they have
pierced, Act. 1.37.
and smite their breasts, prick^d in their hearts like those Jews in the Acts,
and cry out Men and brethren, what shall we do? and return to the Lord, and
be baptized every one in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of
sins, which God grant. And the Lord power upon them the spirit of grace,
Zach. 12.10
and of compassion, that in soul and spirit they may look upon him, whom they
have pierced, and lament for him (as it is in the prophet) every tribe and
family apart.

His Resurrection.
FOr his Resurrection it was also foretold by the prophets, and prefigured in
Jonas. David says in the person of the Messiah of whom he prophesied in diverse
places, and was a type, I have set the Lord always before me, Psa. 16.8.
etc. Wherefore mine heart is glad and my tongue rejoices, my flesh also
does rest in hope, for thou will not leave my soul in the grave, nor suffer
thine Holy one to see corruption. Also Hosea says, Hos. 6, 2.
After two days will he rev^ke us, and in the third day he will raise us up.
Us in the plural number, poynting (as it should seem) both at the
Resurrection of our Savior the third day, as also the raising of a number of
the Saints together with him, at the same time, prefigured in Jonas, Iona. 1,
17.
together with the time of his abode in the sepulcher, and foreshevved many
times by our Savior himself to his disciples, such and such things shall be
done to the son of man, He shall be apprehended, evil entreated, mocked,
scourged, put to death, but the third day he shall rise again. Luke 18.31.
Also to the Jews demanding a sign, he ansvvered, Destroy this temple, and
in three days I will raise it up again. And at another time, Ioh. 2.18.
An evil and adulterous generation se^keth a sign, but no sign shall be
given them, save the sign of the prophet Jonas, for as Jonas was three days
and three nights in the whales b^ll^e, Mat. 12.38.
so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the
earth. Which prophecy of his they full well remembering, and fearing the
event, immediately upon his burial they went to Pila^, saying, Sir we remember
that deceiver said, while he was living, within three days I will rise again,
command therefore the sepulcher to be made sure, cha. 27, 62.
till the third day, least his disciples steal him away by night, and say unto
the people, he is risen from the dead, and so the last error be worse then the
first. All which was done, according to their desire, a strong watch appointed,
the Sepulcher sealed up, all things made so sure by the Jews as might be: for
they had gotten from Pilate a special commission for that purpose, to whom he
was as forward to grant it, as they to ask it, and that in as large and ample
manner as themselves knew or could devise. All which, notwithstanding after a
most miraculous manner, The angel of the Lord discending from heaven, Mat. 28, 2.
with an earthquake, and rolling back the stone from the door of the
sepulcher, the keepers astonished and become as dead men: Jesus our Savior
according to the former prophecies is risen again, and has appeared to his
Apostles and disciples his faithful witnesses, a number of them, at diverse
several times, to whom he presented himself alive (as S. Luke writes) by
many infallible tokens, Act. 1, 3.
being seen of them by the space of forty days, and speaking of those
things, which apperteyne to the kingdom of God: how soever the Jews suborned
the soldiers, giving them largely to say, his disciples came by night and
stole him away, while they slept, which saying is noysed among the Jews to
this day. How probably (the former circumstances considered) let the world
judge. Therefore I will conclude this point also, with that of Paul, touching
the Resurrection of our Lord and Savior, Romans 1, 4
He has declared himself mightily to be the son of God, by the Resurrection
from the dead, and consequently, Romans 1, 2.
that Messiah promised before by the Prophets in the holy Scriptures, as the
same Apostle urges.

His Ascension.
FOr his Ascension, it was also foretold by the Prophets, and necessarily
follows upon his Resurrection to be believed: to wit, that having finished
the work of our Redemption here on earth, he ascended up into heaven, and
there sits at the right hand of God. David says, Thou art gone up on high
thou have led captivity captive, Psalm. 68, 18
and received gifts for men, etc. And in another place, Psa. 110, 1.
The Lord said to my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, etc. which is the place
alleged by our Savior, wherewith he put the Jews to silence, both as
touching the Dietie and the humanity of the Messiah, for says he, if David
call him Lord, how is he then his son, where we may see David acknowledges
him his Lord, and consequently his God, even the son of God, sitting at the
right hand of God (for the present, as touching his divinity) afterward to be
accomplished also in his humanity, which David believed as verily should come
to pass, and forsawe by the eye of faith, as did Thomas, when it was come to
pass, putting his hand into his side and crying, My Lord and my God: so says
David here, my Lord: The Lord said unto my Lord, etc. I say, this article of
our faith as touching his Ascension, it follows necessarily to be concluded
upon his Resurrection, it needs no other proof. For that whosoever sees and
acknowledges, that Jesus being dead could raise himself to life again, will
easily believe also, that he was able to ascend up to heaven at his pleasure.
And hereof we have also all his Apostles and Disciples for witnesses,
eyewitnesses, in whose presence and sight he ascended, as it is in that place,
they looked steadfastly toward heaven as he went. Act. 1, 10.
And in witness thereof gave up their lives, and sealed the same with their
blood.

Therefore I conclude upon all these premises so necessarily following and
depending one upon an other: to wit his birth, life, doctrine, actions, death,
resurrection, and ascension: seeing nothing has happened in the same which was
not foretold by the Prophets of God, nor any thing foretold by the same
Prophets concerning the Messiah, which was not fulfilled most exactly in the
person of our Savior: We may most certainly assure our selves that as God is
truth, and therefore can neither foretell an untruth, nor yield testimony to
the same: so it can not be but that these things which have been showed to be
so manifestly foreprophecied, and so evidently accomplished in the person of
this our blessed Lord and Savior: must needs (I say) assure us Christians that
he was indeed the true Messiah: and quite confound the Jews in their vain
imagination, and expectation of another.

The sending of the Holy Ghost: with the first plantation and wonderful
increase of the Church.
NOw for those things that followed after his ascension as arguments and
effects of his divine power: they were also foretold by the Prophets, to wit,
the sending of the Holy Ghost that comforter from on high with the sudden,
strange and myraculous increase of his Church, throughout the world even
against all worldly power and policy, by the only power and ministry of his
word confirmed with signs and wonders that followed, wrought by his Apostles,
Disciples, and other his faithful servants, and witnesses in the primitive
Church: then the which there can be no greater argument in the world of the
truth of Christian Religion, if we consider how all other religions in the
world have grown and been maynteined by force of arms, fire and sword, this
only by the preaching of Christ crucified, in all na^ions has increased and
multiplied and shall do more and more to the end of the world, this must
increase all others decrease, how so ever the Turks have possessed the greatest
part of the world at this day, yet our Saviors prophecy in the end shall be
found true: this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached throughout the whole
world for a witnesunto al nations Now for the first increase of it how small a
number were there gathered together after the ascension at Jerusalem from
whence they were to march (even the twelve Apostles no great army Godwat) to
co^quer the world as it is in that place, Mat. 24.14.
Luke 24.47.
Isa. 2.3.
The law shall go forth from Zio^ and the word of God from Jerusalem. There
was the Rendevous, there they staid there they rested there they continued in
prayer and fasting till such time as Christ after his ascension according to
his promise sent them the comforter even the holy Ghost, John. 14.26 cha.
15.26. and 16.7.
induing them with power from on high and arming the^ at all points for so
great a work. When and where being gathered together Act. 2.1.
all with one accord in one place suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of
a mighty wind and filled all the house where they sat. And there appeared unto
them cloven tongues like fire, and it sat upon each of them and they were all
filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues as there is
mentioned. And with these fiery cloven tongues these 12. silly souls without
any other means, men, money or munitio^ in a very short time conquered a great
part of the world. In so much that at one sermon of S. Peter at the same time
there were added to the Church three thousand souls. And so multiplied
successively from time to time, and from place to place, spreading it self
from one country to another, and from one nation to an other and so at length
into all nations; there is neither speech nor language where their voice is not
heard, their line is gone forth through all the earth and their words into the
ends of the world, as we see it is come to pass this day. Of which coming of
the Holy Ghost in the time of the Messiah Joel prophesied saying. Joel. 2.28.
And it shall be in the last days that I will power out my spirit upon all flesh
etc. and on my servants and on my, handmaids. I will power out my spirit etc.
It filled all the house where they sat, and it sat upon each of them and they
were all filled with the holy Ghost. Here is a deluge of Gods grace powered upon
the world immediately upon the ascension of our Lord and Savior. First upon
his Apostles and disciples of those times in greater measure as the first
fruits of his spirit by the which they wrought miracles, spoke all manner of
languages, healed all manner of diseases, cast out Divils, raised the dead, and
lastly sealed the same with their blood. Poor fishermen and such like, of no
reputation in the world, without learning, without credit, without means (as
before) yet by this means conquered the world to the subjection of their
master Christ; Pal. 118.22. Act. 4.11.
that stone cast aside of the builders but now become the head stone of the
corner: this is the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes.

The sincerity of the Evangelistes.
NOw for the Evangelists, or writers of the Gospel, that is to say the
registers of his birth, life, doctrine, and death: it is to be noted, that our
Savior being God, took a different way from the custom of man, in delivering
unto us his laws, and precepts. For that men who have been lawmakers unto the
world, knew no surer way of publishing their laws, and procuring authority to
the same, than to write them with their owns hands, and in their life time to
establish their promulgation. So Lycurgus, Solon, and others among the
Grecians, Numa to the Romans, Mahomet to the Sarasins. But Jesus, to show this
divine power in directing the pen, and style of his Evangelists; would not
leave any thing written by himself, but passed from this world in simplicity
and silence: without any further show, or ostentation of his own doings.
Meaning notwithstanding afterward, to his glory, and the aedification of his
Church here on earth, by four irrefragable witnesses or remembrancers, (the
four Eva^gelists) every word should be established and recorded. As may appear
by that place where he says: Ioh. 14.25.
These things have I spoken unto you being present with you, but the Comforter
which is the holy Ghost* whom the Father will send in my name he shall bring all
things to your remembrance which I have told you. Whereupon I infer, that the
Evangelists, and Apostolical writers, were all of them guided and directed, by
one and the same spirit, even the spirit of God for the registring of all
things either said or done by our Savior: so far forth as seemed best to
his divine will and pleasure* to be registered, and recorded, for the benefit
and edification of his Church. Ioh. 20.30.21.25.
For there were many other things which Jesus did (as Io. the Eva^gelist
testifies) which are not written: that is to say, which the holy spirit of God
thought needless to faith and salvation, but (says he) these things are
written that ye might believe, (...)
that Jesus is the Christ the son of God and that in believing ye might have
life through his name. Now for these Eva^gelists, Ezekiel. 1.
four in number (which some have rese^bled to the four beasts in Ezekiel:) the
first and last are Apostles, that wrote as they had seen, the two middle at
disciples who registered things as they had u^derstood by co^fere^ce with the
Apostles. Luke 1.2.
The first gospel was written by an Apostle to give light, to the rest: and the
last also by an Apostle, to give authority and confirmation to the former. The
first was written in the Hebrew tongue: for that all those miracles which Jesus
wrought were done in that country (he was not sent but to the lost sheep of
the house of Israel) to the end that either the whole nation might believe them
or the obstinate impugn them: Mat. 15, 24.
which yet never any of their Rabbines took in hand to do. The other three
were written in the most famous and popular language of all nations at that
time, to wit, the Greek tongue. They wrote their stories in diverse countries,
far distant one from another, and yet agreed they all most exactly in one and
the same narration (as is to be seen) though diversely related, yet in truth
and substance all one: one sometimes supplying what another has not,
according to the discretion of one and the same spirit, vvherevvith they were
all guyded and directed, like those four beasts in Ezech. 1.12: Every one went
straight forward* whither their spirit led them, they returned not. They
vvrote in diverse times, one after another: and yet the later did neither
correct nor reprehend any thing in the former, as heathen vvriters use to do.
They published their vvritings when infinite were alive that knevve the
facts, and of them no small number, who desired by all means to impugn them.
They set down in most of their narrations, the time, the day, the hour, the
place, the village, the house, the persons with all other circumstances,
which the more they are in number, the more easy to be refuted, if they were
not true. Neither did they write of things done in far Countries or places
remote, but in the same Country where they were borne, in towns and cities
that were publicly known, in Jerusalem it self, in Bethania, and Bethsaida,
villages hard by Jerusalem, in the Suburbs and hills about the city, in such a
street, at such a gate, in such a porch of the temple, at such a fishpoole,
public places, familiarly known to every one, for these things were not
done in a corner (as says the Apostle.) All which circumstances duly
considered, Act. 26, 26.
(never yet impugned) me thinks should persuade any man of reason, to become a
Christian: as Agrippa in that very place acknowledges to Paul, saying, almost
thou perswadest me to become a Christian. They published their writings in
their life time. They altered not their writings af^erwards as other Authors
are wont in their latter Editions, nor ever corrected they one jote of that
which they had first s^t down. And (that which never happened in any other
writings in the world besides, nor ever monarch was able to bring to pass for
credit of his Edicts) they gave their lives for defense and justifying of that
which they had written. Their manner of writing is sincere and simple, as
becomes so divine a History: without all art or Rhethoricall amplifications,
as Historians use. They flatter none, no not Jesus himself, Mat. 21, 18. Luke
19, 41. Mar. 14.33.
whom they most adore, nor in confessing him to be their God, do they conceal
his infirmities of flesh, in that he was man: as his hunger and thirst, his
being werie, how he wept, his passions of fear, and the like. Nay, these
Evangelists were so sincere and religious in their narrations, as they noted
especially the imperfections of themselves, and of such others, as they
principally respected. Matthew names himself, Matthew the Publican. Mark, Mat.
10, 3. Mar. 14, 67.
Peter's Disciple, records how S. Peter thrice denied his Lord and Master, and
so of the rest. These men's writings were published for canonical, and received
for undoubted truth by all that lived in the very same age, and were privy to
every particular circumstance therein contained. They were copied abroad into
infinite men's hands, and so conserved with all care and reverence, as holy and
divine Scripture. They were read in Churches throughout all Countries and
nations, expounded preached and taught by all Pastors, and Commentaries made
upon them by holy Fathers from time to time. So that no doubt can be made at
all, either of the Authority of them, as originally and immediately proceeding
from the Holy Ghost, or of the certainty: but that we have the very same
incorrupt, as the Authors left them, for that it was impossible for any enemy
to corrupt so many copies over the world, without discovery and resistance.
And thus much for the credit and authority of our Evangelists.

The confession of Martyrs.
NOw for the Martyrs (or witnesses) appointed by God, for the sealing and
deliverie of this doctrine of the Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
to all the world, they were first and principally his own Apostes and
Disciples, Now ye are witnesses of these things: Who both heard his doctrine,
and saw his miracles: Luk, 24, 4^.
as S. John testifies: 1 Ioh. 1.1.
that which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes etc. That I say,
which we have seen and heard declare we unto you. And S. Peter, 2 Pet. 1, 16.
For we followed no deceivable fables when we opened unto you the power and
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but with our eyes we saw his majesty. This
doctrine (I say) of the glorious Gospel of our Lord and Savior, whereof they
were so fully persuaded, Luke 1.1.
they did not only profess it with their mouths, yea even before Kings, and
were not ashamed, as God says to Paul, Act. 23, 11. cha. 27, 24.
as thou have testified of me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness also at
Rome: thou must be brought before Caesar: but in witness thereof they gave up
their lives, and by their deaths sealed and delivered to the world the truth of
that which in their lives they professed, they have sealed that God is true:
These are witnesses worthy to be believed, these are Martyrs. Next to these
are all those holy Disciples of theirs, all those holy confessors of the
Primitive Church put to death with most exquisite torments, under those cruel
Roman tyrants, during those ten famous persecutions upon record, called the
ten persecutions, Catexochen, in respect of the rage, fury and cruelty
thereof: and all against poor, harmeles, and innocent Christians, daily to^ne
in pieces, and butchered by those wolves, as sheep appointed for the slaughter:
(whereof our Savior long before had forewarned his Disciples: Behold I s^nd
you as lambs among wolves, Mat. 10.16. Rev. 6, 9.
etc. persecuted, even to the death, for the Word of God, and for the
testimony which they m^inteined. In which extreme and most incredible
sufferings of Christians three points are vvorthie of great consideration. The
first, what infinite multitudes of all estates, conditions, sexes, qualities
and age did suffer daily for testimony of this truth. The second, what
intolerable and unaccustumed torments, not heard of in the world before, were
devised by tyrants for afflicting this kind of people. Thirdly, and lastly,
what invincible courage and unspeakable alacrity these Christians showed in
bearing out these afflictions and torments, which the enemies themselves could
not attribute, but to some divine power and supernatural assistance.

The subjection of Spirits.
ANother consideration follows of his divine power and omnipotency, declared
and exercised upon the spirits infernal, which in those days spoke in the
oracles, and till that time had possessed and deluded all nations. Hear the
complaint of one of them: Hei mihi, congemiscite, hei mihi, hei mihi,
oraculorum defecit me claritas. Woe unto me, lament ye with me, woe, woe to me,
for that the honor of oracles has now forsaken me. Which woeful complaint is
nothing else but a plain confession, that Jesus was he of whom a prophet said
diverse ages before, Zeph. 2, 11.
He shall consume all the Gods of the earth, and every man shall worship him
from his place, even all the yles of the Heathen. This confessed also the
wicked spirits themselves, when at Christ's appearing in Iewrie they came and
did their homage to him, and besought him not to afflict or torment them before
the time, nor command them presently to return to hell: but rather to permit
them some little time of entertainment in the sea, or mountains, or among
herds of swine, or the like, which conf^ssion they made openly before all men,
and declared the same afterward by their deeds. For presently upon Christ his
death, and upon the preaching of his name and Gospel throughout the world, the
oracle in all places ceased, whereof the Poets themselves bear witness: Cessant
Oracula Delphis. Iuven. Saty 6.
Whereupon Plutarch, that lived within one hundredth years after Christ made a
special Treatise to sifte out the causes, why the oracles of the Gods (as they
deemed them) were ceased in his time. Plutar, de defectu oraculor.
And after much turning and winding many ways, at length resolved upon two
principal points, or causes thereof. The first, for that in his time there was
more store of wisemen then before, whose answers might stand in steed of
Oracles: and the other, for that perhaps the Spirits accustumed to yield
Oracles, were by length of time grown old and dead. Both which reasons, in the
commonsence of all men must needs be false: and by Plutarch himself cannot
stand with probability. For first in his books, which he wrote of the lives of
ancient famous men, he confesses, that in such kind of wisdom as he most
esteemed, they had not their equals among their posterity. Secondly, in his
Treatise of Phylosophie he passes it for a ground, that Spirits can not dye or
wax old. And therefore of necessity there must be some other cause yielded of
the ceasing of these Oracles: which can not be but the presence, and
commandment of some higher power: according to that saying of S. John: 1 Ioh.
3, ^^
for to this end and purpose appeared the son of God, to wit, that he might
destroy the works of the devil. Neither did Jesus this alone in his own
person, but gave also power and authority to his disciples, and followers, to
do the like: according to that their commission in the Gospel: Then called he
the twelve Disciples together, and gave them power and authority over all
divils, etc. Luke 9, 7.
And not only to these twelve did he give this absolute power and authority
over unclean Spirits, but to the rest likewise: as may appear in the next
chapter following, upon the return of their commission: And the seauentie
returned with joy saying: cha. 10, 17.
Lord even the Divils are subdued to us through thy name. And he said unto
them, I saw Satan like lightning fall down from heaven: and so renueth their
commission, saying Behold I give unto you power to tread on Serpents and
scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy: (that is to say, the Divil)
nevertheless (says he) in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subdued unto
you, but rather rejoice because your names are are written in heaven. And this
authority over the spirits infernal given by Jesus to his Disciples in the
primitive Church, extended it self so far, that not only their words and
commandments, but even their ver^e presence, did shut the mouths and drive
into fear, the miserable spirits: as both Lactantius, Lact. lib. 2. div. inst.
cap. 16.
and others do witness, whence it proceeded, that in all sacrifices,
conjurations, and other mysteries of the gentiles, there was brought in that
phraise, recorded by scoffing Lucian, exeant Christia^i, let Christians depart,
for that while they were present nothing could be well accomplished. And that
professed enemy of Christianity Porphyrie who of all other most earnestly
endeavored to empugne us Christians, ^orph. lib. 7. cont; Christ. apud Eusebius.
lib. 5. cap. 1. de prep. Evan.
and to hold up the honor of his enfeebled Idols, yet discoursing of the great
plague that reigned most furiously in the city of Messina in Cicilie, where he
dwelt, yields this reason, why Aesculapius the God of physic (much adored in
that place was not able to help them in that extremity. It is no merveile
(says he) if this city so many years be vexed with the plague, seeing that
both Aesculapius, and all other Gods, be now departed from it, by the coming
of Christians: for since that men have begun to worship this Jesus, we could
never obtain any prophet by our Gods. Thus much confessed this patron of
paganism, concerning the mayme that his Gods had received, by the power and
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, which albeit he spoke with a malicious mind
to bring Christians in hatred, yet is the confession notable, and confirms
that story, which Plutarch in his forenamed book does report: that in the
latter years of the reign of the Emperor Tiberius, a strange voice, and
exceeding horrible clamor, with hideous, cries, skryches, and howlings, were
heard by many, in the Grecian sea: complaining; that the great God Pan was now
departed. And this af^irmeth Plutarch (that was a gentile) to have been
alleged and approved, before the Emperor Tyberius, who merveyled greatly
thereat, and could not by all his diviners, and southsayers, whom he called to
that consultation, gather out any reasonable meaning of this wonderful
accident. But we Christians, comparing the time wherein it happened, unto the
time of Christ his death and passion, and finding the same fully to agree: we
may more then pabablie persuade our selves, that by the death of their great
God Pan (which signifies all, was imported, the utter overthrow of all wicked
spirits, John. ^2.31. 2. Cor. 4.4. Ephesians. 1.2.
and Idols upon earth: according to that vision of our Lord and savior before
mentioned, I saw Satan like lightning fall down from heaven etc. and again in
an other place, now is the judgment of this wo^ld, now shall the Prince of this
world be cast out (even this great God Pan) who in an other place is called the
God of this world: the Prince that rules in the air, and therefore may well
be said by our Savior to fall down from heaven, being before time worshipped in
those Idols oracles and heathenish prophanations, as a God in all the world,
and exalted (as it were) into the highest heavens. But behold as Dagon, that
idol of the Philistims, 1. Sam. 5, 2.
^^ll flat on his face (and that twice) his head, and hands dismembered before
the ark of God in Ashdod: so did Satan this great God Pan the God of this
world, the Prince of the air etc, (let me give the Divil his due, yea rather
more then his due) (as does the ho^y scripture) so did Satan (I say)
immediately upon the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ into this
world, and preaching of his Gospel (the ark of his everlasting covenant) fall
flat one his face to the ground, his head and hands dismembered: according to
that first promise, and covenant to our first parents, which was this: that he
(to wit, Genesis 3.11.
the Messiah) should break the serpents head etc. which he has done, not
only in his own person, by subduing Satan with all his whole legions of
Divills, and power infernal tra^pling them under his feet; but also in his
members; to whom also he gave like authority: as before: he gave them power
and authority over all Divills: yea over all the power of the enemy, which
argues again the power, and omnipotency of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, who not only in his own person here on earth, but also in his
servants, disciples and followers, was able to conquer, and subdue even the
Devils themselves: Acts. 19* 15.
as they themselves acknowledge: Jesus I acknowledge and Paul I know etc. And
thus much of the subjection of spirits.

The punishment of enemies.
NOw rests this his divine power and omnipotency, yet further to be
manifested by an other consideration of his justice, and severitie showed from
heaven upon diverse his greatest enemies here on earth, after his departure out
of this world. As we may read in Josephus: Joseph. antiq lib 17. ca. 10.
of Herod the first, who persecuted Christ, even in his cradle, and slew all
those infants in and about Bethlehem. And that other Herod, Tetrarch of
Gililie, who put John Baptist to death, and scorned Ies^^ before his passion:
Luke 23.^^.
himself scorned afterward by the Emperor, and disgracefully sent into exile:
first to Lions in France, and after that, to the most desert, and inh^bitable
places in Spain: lib. 18. ca. 9.
where he with Herodias wandered up and down, in extrea^e calamity all their
life time; and finally ended their days, as forlorn and abandoned of all men.
In which misery also it is recorded, that the d^uncing daughter of Herodias,
Niceph. Lib... ca. ^0.
who demanded John Baptists h^ad, being on a time to pass over a frosen
river, suddenly the ice brake, and she in her fall, had her head cut off by the
same ice, without hurting the rest of her body. So likewise it is recorded in
the Acts, Act. 12.1
of Herod Agrippa, who stret^hed forth his hand to vex certain of the Church,
killed James the brother of John with the sword, and imprisoned Peter, how
immediately thereupon (as it is in that chapter) going down to Cefarea, he was
there in a solemn assembly, stricken from heaven, with a most horrible
disease, whereby his body putrified, and was eaten of worms: as also Josephus
makes mention. Joseph. anticq. lib. 29. ca. 7.
Pilate, that gave sentence of death against our Lord and Savior; we read,
that after great disgrace received in Jury, Eutrophist. lib. 7.
he was sent home into Italy, and there slew himself with his own hands. And
of the very Emperors themselves, who lived from Tiberius (under whom Jesus
suffered) unto Constantine the great, under w^om Christian Religion took
dominion over the world (which contained the space of some three hundred
years, or there abouts) very few, or none, escaped the manifest scourges of
Gods dreadful justice, showed upon them at the knitting up of their days.
Whereas since the time of Constantine, (whiles Emperors have been Christians
(as one has observed) few or no such examples can be showed: except upon
Julian the Apostata, Evag. scholast. lib. 3. hi^t. c. 41.
Valens the Arian haeretique, or some other of l^ke detestable, and notorious
wickedness. And thus much of particular men chastised by Jesus. But if we desire
to have a fu^l examp^e of his justice upon a whole nation together let us
consid^r what befell Jerusalem and the people of that place for their barbarous
cruelty, practiced upon him in his death and passion. And if we believe
I^sephus, and Phylo, the Jewish historiographers; w^o lived in those times: it
ca^ hardly be expr^ssed by the tongue ^r pen of man, what insufferable
calamities, and miseries, were infl^cted upon that people presently after his
assension. First of all by Pilate their governor, under Tibe^ius, and then
again by Petronius, under Caligula, after that by Cumanus under Claudius, and
lastly by Festus and Albinus under Nero. Through whose cruelties that nation
was enforced a^ last to rebel, and take arms against the Roman Empire: which
was the cause of their utter ruin and exterpation by Titus and Vespasian. At
what time, besides the overthrowe of their city, burning of their temple, and
other infinite distresses: (which Josephus an eye witness, protests, that no
speech or discourse humane, can declare) the same author likewise records,
xj C. M. persons to have been slain, and fourscore and seventene thousand
taken alive: who were either put to death afterward in public triumphs, or
sold openly for bondslaves, into all parts of the world? And in this
universal calamity of the Jewish nation, being the most notorious and
greevous that ever happened to any people or nation either before or aft^r them
(for the Romans never practiced the like upon others) it is singularly to be
observed, that in the same time, and place, in which they put Jesus to death
before; that is, in the feast of the Pascha, when their whole nation was
assembled at Jerusalem, from all parts, Provinces, and contries, they received
this their most pitiful subversion and overthrowe, and that by the hands of
the Roman Caesar, to whom by public cry they had appealed from Jesus not
long before. We have no king but Caesar. etc. John. 1^* 15.
Yea further it is observed, that as they apprehended Jesus, and made the
entrance to his passion upon Mount Olivet, where ^e used much to pray, and
meditate: so Titus (as Josephus writes) upon the same Mount, planted his first
siege, for their final destruction. And as they led Jesus from Caiphas to
Pilate, afflicting him in their presence: so now were they themselves led up
and down, from John to Simon: (two seditious Captains within the city) and
were scourged, and tormented before the tribunal seats. Again as they had
caused Jesus to be scoffed, beaten, and villanously entreated by the soldiers,
in Pilates Palace: so were now their own principal rulers: (as Josephus
writes) most scrornefully abused, beaten and crucified, and that by the
soldiers. Which latter point of crucifying, or villainous putting to death upon
the cross, was begun to be practiced by the Romans, upon the Jewish gentry,
i^mediately after Christ his death, and not before. And now at this time of the
war, Josephus affirms, that in some one day f^ve hundredth of his nation
were taken, and put to this opprobrious kind of punishment: in so much,) that
for the great mulltitude he says: Lib. 5. c. 28
nec locus su^ficeret crucibus nec cruces corporibus. This dreadful and
unspeakeable misery, fell upon the Jews, about 40. years after Christ's
assention, when they had showed themselves most obstinate, and obdurate,
against his doctrine delivered unto them, not only by himself, but also by his
disciples: of which they had now slain S. Steven, and S. James: and driven
into baniment both Peter, and Paul, and others that had preached unto the^.
This the^ was the providence of God, for the punishment of the Jews at that
time. And ever after their estate declined from worse to worse, and their
miseries daily multiplied throughout the world. Whereof he that will see a very
lamentable narration, let him read but the last book of Josephus de bello
Iudaico. Wherein is reported, besides other things, that after the war was
ended, and all the public slaughter ceased: Titus sent threescore thousand,
Jews as a present to his father to Rome, there to be put to death in diverse
and sundry manners. Others he applied to be spectacl^s for pastime to the
Romans that were present with him. Where of Josephus says, Joseph. de bell.
l. 7. c. 20.21.
that he saw with his own eyes two thousand and five hundred murdered and
consumed in one day, by fight, and co^bate among themselves, and with wild
beasts, at the Emperors appointment. Others were assigned in Antioch, and other
great cities, to serve for faggots in their famous bonefires, at times of
triumph. Others were sold to be bondslaves. Others condemned to dig, and hew
stones for ever. And this was the end of that war, and desolation.

Quis talia fando,
Myrmidonum, Dolopumve, aut duri miles Vlyssi,
Temperet a lachrymis?
After th^s again under Trajane the Emperor, there was so infinite numbers of
Jews slain, and made away by Marcus Turbo in Africa, and Lucius Quintus in
the East, as was vvonderfull. And in the eighteenth year of Adrian the
Emperor, one Julius Severus being sent to extinguish all the remnant of the
Jewish generation, destroyed in a very short time ninety and eight towns and
villages within that country, and slew five hundred and fourscore thousand of
them in one day. At which time also he beat down the city of Jerusalem, in
such sort, as he left not one stone standing upon another of their ancient
buildings: but caused some part thereof to be re^dified, and inhabited only by
Gentiles. He changed the name of the city and called it Aelia, Aelius Adrianus.
after the Emperors name. He drove out all the progeny and offspring of the
Jews forth of all those countries, with a perpetual law confirmed by the
Emperor, that they should never return, no nor so much as look back from any
high or eminent place, to that country again. And this was done to the
Jewish Nation, by the Roman Emperors, for accomplishing that demand, which
their principal Elders had made not long before to Pilate the Roman
Magistrate, (after he had washed his hands, before the multitude to clear
himself, at leastwise in outward show, from the blood of Jesus, saying: I am
innocent of the blood of this just man, look you to it:) Then answered all the
people, and said, Mat. 27, 2^
* His blood be upon us and upon our children: and so it came to pass
accordingly, even in that very age. Then the which what greater argument of a
true Prophet? and consequently, of the Deity and Omnipotency of our Lord and
Savior, who from heaven was able in so short a time, and that in so full
measure to revenge himself upon his enemies here on earth. Yea, a whole Nation
together brought to final desolation. And so much for the punishment of
enemies.

The fulfilling of Prophecies.
THe last consideration follows, and so an end: which is the fulfilling of
prophecies, all those prophecies uttered by our Lord and Savior, while h^ was
here upon earth: Especially this one of the destruction and desolation of the
Jewish nation already declared, might suffice for all, which over and over,
while he was conversant amongst them, he denounced against them, and foretold
should shortly be accomplished upon them, in most fearful manner. As namely at
one time, after a long and vehement commination made, to the Scribes and
Pharisees (in which he repeateth eight several times that dreadful threat,
woe) he concludes that all the righteous blood injuriously shed from the
first martyr Abel, and so successively should be revenged very shortly upon
that generation: Mat. 23.3^
Verily I say unto you all these things shall come upon this generation: and
in the next words threatens that populous city Jerusalem, that it should be
made utterly desolate. Jerusalem, Jerusalem which killest the Prophets, and
stonest them that are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy
children together, as the hen gathers her chickens under her wings, andye
would not. ^ehold your habitation shall be left unto you desolate. And at
another time, even that solemn time of his entry and tiding into Jerusalem
before his passion, it is said in the Gospel, that, when he was come near, he
beheld the city and wept over it, Luke 19.41.
saying: O if thou had even known, at the least in this thy day those
things which belong unto thy peace, but now are they hid from thine eyes.
then denounces that fearful desolation following: that not one stone should
be left upon another, but all thrown down even to the ground. Executed upon
them and made good by Tytus the son of Vespatian, and finally, accomplished
by Julius Severus, who in the days of Adrian (as before is rehearsed) utterly
defaced the very ruins of that city, in such sort, as he left not one stone
standing upon another, of all their ancient buildings, but laid them even with
the ground. Again, at another time, Luke 21, 5.
as some spoke of the temple how it was garnished with goodly stones, and
consecrate things, he said: are these the things you look upon? the days will
come wherein a stone shall not be left upon a stone, that shall not be thrown
down. And yet more particularly in the same chapter he foretells the signs,
whereby his disciples should perceive when the time indeed was come: when ye
shall see Jerusalem besieged with ^oldj^ars, Luke 21.20
then know ye, that her desolation is at hand. This foretold Jesus of the
misery, that was to fall upon Jerusalem, and upon that people (by the Romans)
when the I^wes seemed to be in most security, and greatest amity with the
Romans: when they could away with no other government but that: We have no
king but Caesar, John. 19.15 ver. 12.
he that makes himself a King speaks against Caesar, and consequently at
that time, they might seem in all humane reason, to have less cause then ever
to misdoubt such calamities. And yet how certain and assured foreknowledge,
and as it were most sensible feeling, Jesus had of these miseries, he declared
by those pitiful tears he shed upon sight and consideration of Jerusalem
(as before is mentioned) when he wept over it: as also by that tender speech he
used to the women of that city, who wept for him as he was led to be
crucified, Luke 23, 28.
persuading them to weep rather for themselves and for their children, (in
respect of the miseries to follow) then for him. All which prophecies, and
predictions of Jesus, with sundry other his speeches, foreshewing so
particularly the imminent calamities of that Nation, and that at such time,
when in humane reason there could be no probability thereof, when a certain
Heathen Chronicler, named Phlegon, (about a hundredth years after Christ's
departure) had diligently considered, having seen the same also in his days
most exactly fulfilled (for he was servant to Adrian the Emperor, by whose
command the final subversion of that Jewish nation was brought to pass) this
Phlegon (I say) though a Pagan, yet upon consideration of these events, and
others that he saw (as the extreme persecution of Christians foretold by
Christ, and the like, he pronounced, that never any man foretold things so
certainly to come, or that so precisely were accomplished, as were the
predictions and prophecies of Jesus. And now albeit these praedictions and
prophecies concerning the punishment and reprobation of the Jews, fulfilled so
evide^tly in the sight of all the world might be a sufficient demonstration of
his divine prescience and foreknowledge in things to come: yet were there also
many other things besides, foreshewed by him, which fell out as exactly as
these did, which by no humane reason or learning, could possibly be foreseen.
As for example, the foretelling of his own death, resurrection, and ascension,
with all their several circumstances; the manner, time, place, and all other
particulari^ies; as precisely, as if they had been al^eadie accomplished: and
that not only to his own Disciples, but even to the Scribes and Pharisees,
who came of purpose to tempt him: as he that shall but examine the quotations
following (which for brevirie sake I have but only zyphered, and (as it were)
pointed at in figures) may easily perceive. First to his Disciples: Matthew. 16,
21. chap. 17, 9, 22. chap. 20, 17. chap. 26, 1, 11, 31.45. Ioh. 13, 33. chap.
^6, 16. and 13, 3. and 18, 4. and 14, 2, 28. Then to the Scribes and Pharisees:
Mat. 12, 38. chap. 21, 38. Luke 13, 31. Ioh. 2, 18. chap. 3. 12. chap. 7, 33.
chap. 8. 21, 28. chap. 12, 31. Also how his Disciples should be scattered and
forsake him: Ioh. 16, 32. Of Peter's denial: Mat. 26, 34. And by what manner of
death he should glorify God: Ioh. 21, 18. How Judas one of his own Disciples
should betray him: Ioh. 6, 64, 70. chap. 13, 10, 26. chap. 17, 12. Mat. 26, 21,
46. Of the sending of the holy Ghost: Ioh. 7, 38. chap. 14, 16, 26. chap. 15,
26. chap. 16, 7. Luke 24, 49. Of his Disciples miracles, which they should work
in his name: Mark. 16, 17. Luke 10, 18. John. 14, 12. The cruel persecution
that should arise to the professors of his name in all places: Mat. 10, 16.
chap. 24, 9. Ioh. 16.1. The buylding of his Church notwithstanding (in despite
of the Devil, and all oppositions) upon a rock, with this sure word of promise
never to fail, that the gates of hell shall not overcome it, Mat. 16, 18. And
again, I am with you always, even to the end of the world Mat. 28, 20 The
signs and tokens that should go before the end of the world: as first, the
false Christ's, and false Prophets that should arise here and there with the
Church, yea and in the church: that abomination of desolation spoken of by
Daniel the Prophet, to be set in the holy place: Matthew. 24, 5, 11.15, 23.
Meaning (and so I think would the Holy Ghost have all men to understand it,
when he adds this parenthesis; Let him that reads consider it) even that
Arch-Antichrist, now sitting in that holy place, or church (for so it was in
times past) whose faith was once so famous in all the world, Romans 1, 8. Wars
and rumors of Wars; pestilence, famine, and earthquakes: Mat. 24, 6.
Persecution, as before: Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and
shall k^ll you, and ye shall be hated of all nations, for my names sake, Mat.
24, 9. So were Christians in the Primitive Church, under the Roman Emperors,
those cruel Caesar's: and so have been of latter times also, under the tyranny
of this Arch-antichristian Caesar, that abomination of desolation, now sitting
in the self same place: R^v. 17.6.
drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of
Jesus, whose destruction sleeps not. Come I will show thee the damnation of
the great whore, etc. Finally, the preaching of the Gospel to all nations, Mat.
24, 14. and the uniting, and gathering together both of Jew and Gentile into
one fold, under one shepherd (even that great shepherd of our souls) that
there may be one sheepfold, and one shepherd, Ioh. 10, 16. This is one of the
last signs foretold by our Savior: and but in part remains to be
accomplished: and what hinders? Even that abomination of Desolation before
spoken of, which has been a stumbling block to all nations hitherto, both
Turks and Jews, for coming to Christianity: which the Lord in due time will
remove. For Babylon shall fall (as it is in the Revelation) it is fallen, Rev.
18, 2.
it is fallen, Babylon that great city. In part it is fallen already: and
what hinders, but that daily and hourly we may expect the final desolation
thereof? Daily and hourly (I say, for with such celeritie, and violence ( when
it shall please God to put in their hearts whom it may concern to fulfill his
will: Rev. 17.17.) shall this sentence be executed. chap. 18.8.
In one day shall her plagues come upon her, death and ^orrowe, and famine; and
she shall be burnt with fire; etc. In one hour she shall be made desolate.
Rejoice over her thou heaven, Rev. 18.1^
and ye Holy Apostles and Prophets; for God has given your judgment on her.
And a mighty Angel took up a stone, like a great millstone, and cast it into
the sea, saying: with such violence shall that great city Babylon be thrown
down.

And here I might cast up together in like manner, (making but one total sum
of all) the prophecies of all those Holy Apostles* and Disciples of our Lord
and Savior: both as touching diverse particulars whereof they prophesied in
those times, fulfilled most exactly: as also touching the general state of the
Church successively in all ages, even, to the end of the world: and of the end
of the world it self. First for the particulars, I will but point at them, as
before. One of those Holy Prophets prophesied of a general dearth to fal^ out
in those times: which happened accordingly under Cla^dius Caesar, Act. 11.27.
also of Paul's imprisonment, Act. 21, 10. Paul in his sailing toward Rome,
foretells the Centurion and the rest of the tempestuous weather to ensue,
Act. 27.10. Of their shipwreck; but yet with safety of their lives ve^. 22.
and precisely the place where they should be cast a shore to wit, upon a
certain Island: verse. 26. In one of his Epistles he prophecieth of his own
death, 2 Timothy 4.6. So does also Peter, 2 Pet. 1.14. Secondly, for the future
state of the Church in these last days, with the coming of Antichrist into
the world, and all his damned crew, those hellish furies: see how precisely
these Holy Apostles and Prophets foretell of these times; th^s^ pers^ous times,
and how lively, they set him out in his colors, with all his additions (as
well becomes such an infernal King) the angel of the bottomless p^tte,
whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon, Rev. 9.^^.
in Greek Apollyon: that Antichrist, that man of sin: the son of
perdition, that wicked one, etc. with all other adjuncts, and circumstances, so
lively described, as if he had been then already come; for even in these dai^s
(as the Apostle speaks) did this mystery of iniquity begin to work. See
then I say: 2 These. 2. 1 Timothy 3. 2 Timothy 4. 2 Pet. 2. 1 John. 2, 18. chap. 4, 1.
2 Ioh. ver. 7. yea the whole Revelation is nothing else, but a continued
prophecy, of all such things, as should happen to the church militant, even
from the Apostles times, to the end of the world. All which prophecies we see
accomplished: except before excepted the final destruction of Babylon, and the
calling of the Jews, whereof both our Savior himself, as also Paul has
prophesied, Romans 11. both which we daily expect: and then, (as it is in the
Revelation) Come Lord Jesus. Rev. 22, 10.
Of which second coming, or general doom, with the manner of it, and all
other circumstances; we have also sundry prophecies both of Christ and his
Apostles, which here I will join in one, as proceeding all from one and the
same spirit: for here all prophecies must come to a full period, nil ultra. I
will only quote them, as formerly: Mat. 16, 27. chap. 19, 28. chap. 20, 1.
chap. 24. chap. 25. chap. 26.64. John. 5, 25. etc. 1 Cor. 15. 1 These. 4, 14.
chap. 5, 1. Iam. 5, 8. 1 Pet. 4, 7. 2 Pet. 3. Jude ver. 6. and 14. Rev. 21.
where you shall see a new heaven and a new earth etc. New Jerusalem descending
from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride trimmed for her husband.

Thus have I brought you at length (as after a long and tedious passage by sea)
to see land, and as it were the sea-mark whereunto, after so many variable
winds, and so often tacking to and again, we have directed our course, even
from the first prophecy made to Adam in Paradise: Genesis 3, 15. to the very
last period of all prophecies in the Revelation, shut up in the second Adam,
Jesus Christ: who is the first and the last, Alpha and Omega, the beginning and
the ending: in who^ all prophecies kiss each other, and have their
consummation. Luke 24.44.
These are the words (says he) which I spoke unto you while I was yet with
you: that all must be fulfill^d, which are written of me in the Law of Moses,
and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms, etc. Thus it is written, and thus it
behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise again from the dead the third day, and
that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among
all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem. I say from this Jerusalem, which now lies
desolate, I have brought you to the New Ierus^lem coming down from heaven, as
a bride adorned for her husband: from an earthly, to a heavenly paradise, and
there I leave you.

FINIS.
A COLLECTION DEMONSTRATIVE, OR Sum of the former proofs.
The Messiah must be a spiritual King, to conquer the Divill, death, and
sin: both by scripture, as also by the interpretation of the ancient Jews
themselves, upon that place of Genesis he shall break thine head: Therefore not
a temporal King as the later Jews imagine. Genesis 3.1^^


The Messiah must be King over the Gentiles as well as the Jews, both by
scripture, as also by their own writers: Therefore not a te^porall King to
reign over the^ only; much less to subdue the Gentiles to the servitude of
Jury; as some of them imagine.

The Messi^h must be both God and man: the son of God, the Word of God
incarnate, The second person in Trinity; both by the scriptures, as also by
their own writers: Therefore no such earthly Monarch as they exspect.

The Messiah at his coming (being to be King both of Jew and Gentile) must
change the law of Moses: (to wit the ceremonial and provincial proper to the
Jews only) and instead thereof, give a general law to both, absolute, and
perfect, to serve for all persons, times, and places to endure even to the end
of the world* therefore no such temporal monarchy to be expected, as they
look after. For one and the same conclusion follows upon all the premises,
beating upon their main ground (to wit a temporal or earthly kingdom) which
being once shaken, the rest falls to the ground.

All prophesi^s whatsoever, with every particular circumstance foretold by the
Prophets of the Messiah, were both substancially, and circumstancially
fulfille^ in the person of our blessed Savior: both as touching his bir^h,
life, doctrine, miracles, death, resurrection, asc^ntion: and other effects
afterward of his divine power: in sending of the Holy Ghost, and the
myraculous increase of his Church etc. Therefore was he in deed the Messiah, no
other to be expected.

The Messiah, by Daniels prophecy, was to appear immediately upon the
establishment of the Roman Empire: for (says he) in the ^ayes of these Kings,
shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall not be destroyed: Dan.
2.44. which must needs be understood* of the kingdom of Christ, or the
Messiah. And in these days was our Savior borne; even in the days of
Augustus Caesar: Therefore in him is the circumstance of time verified.

The Messiah by Jacobs prophecy, was to appear, imediately when the rod, or
scepter, was departed from the house of Judah* Then appearred that state of
Jacob our Lord and Savior: ergo.

The Messiah by the prophecy of Haggai, (as also by their^ own Thalmud) was
to come during the second temple: then came our Lord and Savior: ergo. And
consequently the Jews after this time; (to wit the destruction of the second
temple) in vain expect for another,

The Messiah by the true account, and calculation, of Daniels Hebdomades or
weeks of years; was to come just according to the times before mentioned: So
did our Savior (as is aforesaid) therefore to him does this circumstance of
time bear witness: And cons^quently the Jews, after these times by God
himself appointed for the Messiah: (or rather one and the same time, for there
is no other difference, but only in adjuncts, and circumstances) expecting yet
for an other; besides their vain expectation, make God himself a liar.

The Messiah by the scriptures, was to be borne of the tribe of Judah of the
house of David: so was our Savior: Therefore, he alone the legitimate, and
true borne Messiah: by birthright (as I may say,) as also by praescriptio^,
after so long time of peaceabl^ possession: no other to be expected.

The Messiah by the scripture, as also by their own Rabbis, was to be borne
of a Virgin: so was our Savior, ergo.

All other particulars, foretold of the Messiah; see them fulfilled, as
follows. To wit.
Mich. 5, 2.
That the place of his birth should be Bethlehem. Luke 2, 4.


Ier. 31, 25.
That at his birth all the infants thereabouts should be slain. Mat. 2.1^.


Psa. 72, 10.
That Kings or great personages should come and adore him, and offer gold and
other gifts unto him. Mat. 2, 1.


Mal. 3.1.
That he should be presented in the Temple of Jerusalem for the greater glory
of that second temple. Luke 2.22.


Hos. 11, 1.
That he should flee into Egypt and be called thence again. Mat. 2, 13.


Number. 24.17
That a star should appear at his birth, to notify his coming into the
world. Mat. 2, 9.


Mal. 3.1. and 4, 5. Isa. 40.3.
That John Baptist (who came in the spirit and power of Eliah, and therefore was
called Eliah, Luke 1, 17. Mat. 11, 10, 14. should be the messenger to go
before him, and to prepare the way, and to cry in the desert. Mat. 3, 1.


Isa. 42, 2.
That he should begin his own preaching with all humility quietness and
clemency of spirit. Mat. 5, ^.


Isa. 53.
That he should be poor abject and of no reputation in this world. Luke 2, 7.


Isa. 35.5.
That he should do strange miracles and heal all diseases. Mat. 4, 23.


Isa. 53, 12. Dan. 9, 26.
That he should dye and be slain for the sins of his people. Mat. 27.


Psalm. 55, 13.
That he should be betrayed by one of his own familiars. Mat. 26, 47.


Zach. 11.12
That he should be sold for thirty pieces of silver. Mat. 26, 15.


Z^c. 11.13.
That with those thirty pieces there should be bought afterward a field of
^o^sheards. Mat. 27, 7.


Zach. 9, 9.
That he should ride into Jerusalem upon an ass. Mat. 21, 7.


Isa. 50, 6.
That the Jews should beat and buffet his face and defile the same with
spitting. Mat. 26, 67.


Isa. 53, 5.
That they should whippe, rent and tear his body before they put him to death.
Mat. 27.26.


Isa. 53, 12.
That he should be put to death among thieves and mal^factors. Luke 23, 33.


Isa. 53, 7.
That he should be silent before his enemies, as a sheep before his shearer.
Mat. 27, 14.


Isa. 53, 12.
That he should pray for his enemies and persecutors. Luke 23, 34.


Psalm. 22, 18. and 69, 21.
That they should give him vinegar to drink, divide his apparel, and cast lots
for his upper garment. Mat. 27.3^.


Psalm. 22.16, Zac. 12.10.
That the manner of his death should be crucifying, that is, nayling of his hands
and his feet to the cross. Ioh. 19, 1^.


Zac. 12, 10.
That his side should be pierced, and that they should look upon him, whom they
had so pierced. Ioh. 19, 3^.37.


Exo. 12, 46.
That not a bone of him should be broken, figured in the Passover by that
spotles lamb, without blemish, a type thereof, and therefore is he called in
the new Testament, the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world,
the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world. Ioh. 19.36.


Psalm. 16.9. Hose. 6.2.
That he should rise again from death the third day. Mat. 28, 1.


Psalm. 68, 18. and 110.1.
That he should ascend into heaven, and there sit at the right hand of his
Father triumphantly for ever. Luke 24.^1. Act. 7.55 56


All these particulars foretold of the Messiah, see (I say) and examine how
exactly they were all fulfilled in our Savior. And there withal consider
those things which fell out afterward; as effects of his divine power. To wit,
the sending of the Holy Ghost immediately after his ascension: with the
miraculous increasse of his Church, even in the midst of persecution. The
severe punishment of all his enemies: especially that of the Jewish nation. The
subjection of the Devil, with all his infernal power, under his Apostles, and
Disciples feet: togea^her with the ceasing of oracles. And finally, the
fulfilling of all his Prophecies; (with those likewise of his Apostles, and
Disciples) most exactly. I say all these, with the former, put together, and
well considered; may s^ttle the heart of any Christian man, against all
Induisme, Paganism, yea and Atheism too, in the most undoubted truth of his
profession; to wit the Christian religion: with this full, and final
persuasion: wherewith I will knit up all:) that there is no other name under
heaven given so the sons of men, whereby to be saved, but the name of Jesus
Christ. And therefore to him be the honor of our Salvation ascrib^d, and to no
other. To him (I s^^) with the Father and the Spirit: even that bessed
Trinity; (...) glory; now and evermore. Amen. Amen.

To the forlorn, and distressed Jews in Barbary; And in them to all others
now groaning under the heavy yoke of captivity in what nation soever;
scattered, and dispersed throughout the world: Grace, mercy, and peace, be
multiplied; in Christ Jesus the true Messiah.
BEing employed not long since into Barbary, the land of your capt^vitie,
where at this present you live, in great bondage, and slav^ri^; and so have
done this long time: (as do also the rest of your brethren, and nation
elsewhere, dispersed throughout the world, groaning under the yoke of their
cruel taskmaisters: (as did your forefathers in the Land of Egypt four
hundred and thirty years: this captivity of yours, Accou^ting from their
first entrance to the day of their departure thence. Exodus 12.40.
having continued now almost four times 400 years: the last and greatest of
all: than the which was never heard, nor read of greater of any people, from
the creation of the world to this day, nor shall be:) the King, at that time of
my arr^vall, upon his expedition toward Fez, I appointed to stay at Saphia,
till his return back from those wars: where I remained in the lower castle,
almost six months, solitary, and in suspense, expecting the doubtful event
thereof. Whither resorted to me often to accompany me, and for my better
instruction in the Hebrew (whereof I had a little taste before) one of the chief
Rabbis of that your synagogue; Rabbi Shimeon: a man of grave, and sober
carriage, and pleasant otherwise, of whose company I was very glad. Now and
then, among other matters, arguing, and reasoning, of the Messiah, (as ye say
yet to come: but as we say, etc are able to prove, by invincible arguments, and
demonstrations, both out of your own Law, and Rabbines, al^eadie come:) which
gave me occasion, (having little else to do; and not knowing how to pass that
tedious time better) ^o gather together, all those arguments, and reasons, I
had read, or for the present could conceive of my self, drawn both out of the
sacred scripture, and other books, as touching that controversy. Where by I
might be the more able, over and besides the matter of employment, and busynes
I came about, to maintain that Religion prof^ss^d in my country, and the
undoubted faith, whereof his Majesty, the King of Great Britayne, (as others
his predecessors have done) professes himself a chief defender: according
to that his most just title: defender of the faith. And afterward, when the
King sent for me to Morocus, being lodged amongst you by his appointment in the
Iudaria, in one of your principal Houses; where I staid, before I could get my
despatch from the King, three Months, and a half; where also I grew
familiarly acquainted with diverse of your nation, and was presented at sundry
times (especially at your marriages, and solemn feasts) with diverse of your
dainties, which I took very kindly, and ever since have studied, what
Christian dainties I might send you back again in recompense; or rather
duties, in steed of those dainties. Seeing also in the mean time (which I
could not choose but see, with much pity, and compassion) the great, and
grievous oppression, under which you groan: taxations, vexations, exactions;
grammings (as you call them) even with torments rather than fail; drubbings
(so many hundredth blows at once, as my self have both seen and heard:) with
that base servile and most contemptible state, and condition otherwise, (above
any other nation, or people) under which you live: not only in Barbary, but in all other parts of the world besides: as a fatal effect, of that heavy curse
laid on you by your own forefathers long ago, upon the death of Christ; (when
Pilate the judge washed his hands, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this
just man, look ye to it:) they cried with one consent his blood be upon us
and on our children. As also of that prophecy of our Savior in his life time,
when he wept over Jerusalem saying o if thou had even known, at the least
in this thy day, those things which belong to thy peace, but now are they hid
from thine eyes etc. And more particularly to his Disciples, he renueth it over
and again: when ye shall see Jerusalem besieged with soldiers then know ye
that her desolation is at hand. For these be the days of venga^ce to fulfill
all things that are written. For there shall be great distress in this land,
and wrath over this people. And they shall fall one the cadge of the sword and
shall be lead captive into all nations etc. Which heavy curse of your own
forefathers, and prophisie of his, how truly they have been fulfilled both the
one and the other, all the world sees, and ye your selves feel the effect:
as before. The Lord in mercy, take away the veil from your hearts, that at
length ye may know those things which belong to your peace which now are hid
from your eyes: for why will ye dye o ye house of Israel? These considerations
(I say) and reasons, with some others, have moved me; and partly in recompense
of those your definaes, and dainties, whereof I tasted so often while I was
amongst you) to send you here a small banquet, of such dainties as Christendom
can afford: wishing you would but taste some part of mine (as I did of yours)
being indeed Sabbath days dainties: taste (I say) and see how sweet the Lord
is. And the rather do I invite you to this banquet, Psalm 34.1.
yea rather provoke you thereunto (even to your own salvation, which through
your fall is come to us Gentiles to provoke you (as it is that place) for that
now the time of your redemtion draws near (with ours: Romans 11.11.
much nearer now the^ when we believed) foretold also, both by Christ, and his
Apostles, as was your desolation: and shall one day, as surely and certainly
come to pass, the one as the other. For God that has promised is of power to
perform it; he will do it; he is able to graffe you in again, into your own
olive tree. Verily I tell you, (says our Savior to the Pharisees) ye shall
not see me, until the time come, that ye shall say blessed is he that comes
in the name of the Lord. Luke 13.35.
Therefore such a time shall come with out all doubt, whearein ye shall so say,
that is to say, most willingly obey the Heavenly calling, without any more
resisting the Holy Ghost, as did your forefathers. Also in an other place: Act.
7.51.
and Jerusalem shall be trodden under foot of the Gentiles, until the time of
the Gentiles be fulfilled: So long and no longer: there is the period. Luke
21.24.
And Paul the Apostle in a most fervent manner, both prays and prophesies to
this effect: brethren my hearts desire, and prayer to God for Israel is, that
they might be saved. Romans 10.1.
Then prophecieth at large in the chapter following, and that most divinely, as
of their fall so of their general call in due time: with many arguments, and
reasons to that purpose. Which prayer, and prophecy of his, proceeding from a
divine instinct, and revelation; no doubt shall one day take effect. For it can
not be, but that the word of God should take effect. For it is the power of God
unto salvation to every one that believes, to the Jew first and also to the
Grecian To the Jew first: thereis the promise there is the privilege. Lift up
your heads now therefore o ye Jews, sons of Abraham, children of the
promise: Romans 9.4.
to whom pertayneth the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the
giving of the law, and the service of God, and the promises: of whom are the
f^thers, and of whom concerning the flesh Christ came. I say lift up your
heads, and listen to the heavenly call, of Christ and his Apostle Paul, for
your redemtion draws nere. This is the generation of them that seek him of
them that s^eke thy face: Iaacob, Silah. Lift up your heads ye gates, and be ye
li^t up, Psalm. 24, 6.
ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in. And let us
Christians also ( upon whom the ends of the World are come) lift up our heads
and know (remembering that parable of the figtree) when w^ s^e these things
begin to come to pass, Luke 21, 28. Mat. 2^, 32.
that the kingdom of God is near, eue^ at the doors. Verily, I say unto you,
this generation shall not pass, till all these things be done: Act. 20, 32.
Heaven and earth shall p^sse away, but my Words shall not pass away. They are
the words of our Savior.

And now brethren (to return to Paul) I commend you to God, and to the word
of his grace, which is able to buyld you up, and to give you an inheritance
among all them which are sanctified. Be favorable unto Sion for thy good
pleasure, Psa. 51.12,
build the walls of Jerusalem. Then shall thou accept the sacrifice of
righteousness, even the burn^offring and oblation, then shall they offer calves
upon thine altar. Oh give salvation unto Israel out of Sion, when God turns
the captivity of his people, Psalm. 53, 6.
then shall Iaakob rejoice, and Israel shall be glad. When the Lord brought
again the captivity of Sion, we were like them that dream: Psalm. 126, 1.
then was our mouth filled with laughter; and our tongue with joye: then said
they among the Heathen, The Lord has d^ne great things for them. The Lord has
done great things for us whereof we rej^ice. Psa. 106* 47
O Lord bring again our captivity, at the rivers in the south. Psa. ^0, 15.
Save us (O Lord our God and gather us from among the Heathen, that we may
praise thine holy name, and glory in thy praise. Comfort us according to the
days, Psa. 102, 13.
that thou have afflicted us, and according to the years that we have seen
e^el. Thou will arise, and have mercy upon Sion, for the time to have mercy
thereon, for the appointed time is come. For thy servants delight in the stones
thereof, and have pity on the dust thereof. Then the He^then shall ^eare the
name of the Lord, and all the kings of the earth thy glory: when the Lord
shall buyld up Si^n, and shall appear in his glory: and shall turn unto the
prayer of the desolate, and not dispis^ then p^ayer. This shall be written for
the generation to come, and the people which shall be created shall praise the
Lord, for he has looked down from the height of his sanctuary, out of the
heaven did the Lord behold the earth: that he might hear the mourning of the
prisoner, and deliver the children appointed unto death: that they may decl^re
the name of the Lord in Sion, and his praise in Ierusal^m. For God will save
Sion, and bui^d the cities of Judah, that men may dwell there, Psa. 69, ^5.
and have it in possession: the seed as of his servants shall i^^erit it, and
they tha^ ^^ue his name shall ^w^l^ ther^in. Surely the Lord will not sail his
people, and 94, 14.
neither will he fo^sake his inheritance. He has always remembered his covenant
and promise, Psalm. 105, 8
that he made to a thou^and generations. Thou will think upon thy congregation
which thou have possessed of old, and on the rod of thine inheritance, which
thou have redeemed, and 74, 2.
and on mount Sion, wherein thou have dwelt. Yea when the Lord turns again
the captivity of hi^ people, which will be, when they turn unto him by hearty
repentance, not before: and 107.6.
when they cried to the Lord in their trouble, he delivered them out of their
distress, then will he make even their very enemies to become their friends,
and give them grace and favor in the sight of all those kings and princes,
under whom now they live and groan in most miserable slaverie and bondage (as
in their former captivities may be observed) He saw when they were in
affliction and heard their cry. and 106, 44.
He remembered his covenant toward them, and repented according to the
multitude of his mercies, and gave them favor in the sight of all them that
led them captives, for the hearts of Kings are in the hands of the Lord, as the
rivers of waters: he turns them which way soever it pleas^th him. Prove. 21, 1.
So the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus King of Persia, Ezr. 1, 1.
(after that their seauentie years captivity in Babylon) as also Darius and
others to write in their behalf, sundry most favorable edicts, chap. 6, 1.
for their return into their own country again: with large liberality, for
the rea^difying, of the temple of God in Jerusalem: for the Lord had made them
glad, and turned the heart of the King of Asshur unto them, chap. 6, 22.
to encourage them in the work of the house of God, even the God of Israel.
Therefore Ezra blesses the Lord, ^or all these extraordinary favors, saying,
Blessed be the Lord God of our Fathers, chap. 7, 28.
which so has put in the Kings heart to beautify the house of the Lord, that
is in Jerusalem, etc. Yea rather then fail of his promised deliverance to his
people, when they cry unto him in their distress, Psa 105, 14.
he will rebuke even kings for their sakes. As he did Pharaoh king of Egypt,
in the days of old: Exo. 7, 16. and 8.1.20. and 9.1.13. and 10.3.
with this peremptory command by the hand of Moses over and over: Let my
people go that they may serve me, or if thou will not etc. inflicting upon
them one plague after another, till at length they were forced to drive them
away (as it is in that place) Rise up, get you out from among my people, and
go serve the Lord, as ye have said. And the Egyptia^s did force the people,
Exodus 12 31
because they would send them out of the Land in have (for they said we dye
all) giving them favor in the mean time, in the sight of the Egyptians: Cha.
11.3.
also Moses was very great in the Land of Egypt in the si^^t ^f Pharoahs
servants, Chapter 7, 1.
and in the sight of the people. Behold I have made thee Ph^raohs God (says
the Lord) so he brought out Israel from among them, Psalm. 136, 11 Acounting the
time as before.
for his mercy endures for evrr, with a mighty hand and out stretched arm,
etc. after four hundredth and thirty years captivity in Egypt. And when the
four hundredth and thirty years, were expyred, even the self same day departed
all the hosts of the Lord out of the Land of Egypt. Exo. 12, 41.
And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud to lead them the
way, chap. 13, 21
and by night in a pillar of fire to give them light. He divided the sea in two
parts, and made Israel to pass through the mids of it, Psalm. 136, 13
and overthrewe Pharaoh and his host in the red sea, for his mercy indureth
for ever. So leading them through the wilderness and feeding them forty years
with Manna from heaven: till at length he brought them safe and sound, (as it
were upon egles wings) maugre all difficulties and oppositions of enemies what
soever, even to the promised Land of Canaan the lot of their inheritance. Where
they continued in peace and prosperity, so long as they served him, and kept
his commandments: but when once they sinned against him: (or rather as often
as they sinned, for it was not once but often) and forgot the Lord their God,
which brought them out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage: then
he suffered their enemies to prevayle against them and tyrannize over them,
sometimes one and sometimes another, till at length they were carried captives
to Babylon. Yet ever (as the burden of that psalm is) when they cried to the
Lord in their trouble, he delivered them out of their distress, raising up
from time to time Judges (as he did Moses and Joshua at the first) which
delivered them out of the hands of their oppressors. Iud. 2, 16,


Othoni^l, who delivered the^ out of the hands of the King of Ara^, as it is in
that place, Judge. 3, 7.
where it is said, that the children of Israel did wickedly in the sight of the
Lord, and forgot the Lord their God, and served Baalim; therefore the wrath of
the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he sold the^ into the hand o^
Chushan-rishathaim, king of Aram, who^ they served eight years. But when they
cried unto the Lord, the Lord stirred them up a Savior, even Othoniel, etc. So
the land had rest forty years. Ehud, who delivered the^ out of the hand of
Eglon, ^hap. 3, 12.
king of Moab. Then the children of Israel ^gain committed wickedness in the
sight of the Lord, and the Lord strengthened Eglon king of Moab, etc. So they
served Eglon king of Moab 18 years. But when they cried unto the Lord, the
Lord stirred the^ up a Savior, Ehud the son of Gera, chap. 3, 30.
etc. So the land had rest 80 years. And after him was Shamgar the son of
Anath, which slew of the Philistims 600 men with an ox goad, and he also
delivered Israel. Deborah and Barack who delivered the^ out of the hand of
Iabin, chap. 4, 1.
king of Canaan. And the children of Israel began again to do wickedly in the
sight of the Lord, and the Lord sold the^ into the hand of Iabin king of
Canaan, whose chief Captain was Sisera. Then the children of Israel cried to
the Lord, etc. And at that time Deborah a Prophetess judged Israel, then she
sent and called Barak etc. Judge. 4, 4.
And the Lord destroyed Sisera and all his charets etc. And the land had rest
40 years. chap. 5, 31
Gedeon, who delivered them out of the hands of the Midianites. chap. 6, 1.
Afterward the children of Israel committed wickedness in the sight of the Lord,
and the Lord gave them into the hands of Midian 7 years etc. chap. 6, 6.
So was Israel exceedingly impoverished by the Midianites: therefore the
children of Israel cried unto the Lord etc. and he raised them another Savior
even Gedeon, that valiant man, chap 6, 12. chap. 7, 5.
who with three hundredth men (and no more) such as lapped water with their
tongues (the rest sent away by the Lords command) overthrew the whole host of
Midian, chap. 7, 20.
with this cry the sword of the Lord and of Gedeon. Thus was Midian brought low
before the children of Israel: chap. 8, 28
so that they lift up their heads no more: and the country was in quietness 40
years in the days of Gedeon. chap. 8, 33
But when Gedeon was dead the children of Israel turned away etc. and remembered
not the Lord their God which had delivered them out of the hands of all their
enemies on every side etc. After him succeeded Abimilech his son. After
Abimilech Tola. After Tola, Iair the Gileadite. After these arose Iepthe who
delivered them out of the hand of the Ammonites. And the children of Israel
wrought wickedness again in the sight of the Lord, and served Baalim etc, chap.
10.6
and forsook the Lord and served not him. Therefore the wrath of the Lord was
kindled against Israel and the Lord sold them into the hands of the Philistims,
and into the hands of the children of Ammon etc. chap. 10, 1
Then the children of Israel cried unto the Lord etc. So the Lord raised them
up another valiant man even Iepthe. Then the spirit of the Lord came upon
Iepthe etc. chap. 11, 1 chap. 11, 2^
So Iepthe went unto the children of Ammon to fight against them, and the Lord
delivered them into his hands. Thus the children of Ammon were humbled before
the children of Israel. And lepthe judged Israel 6 years. chap 12, ^
After him Ibzan of Bethlehem judged Israel. After him Elon. After Elon, Abdon.
But the children of Israel continued to commit wickedness in the sight of the
Lord, chap 13, 1
and the Lord delivered them into the hands of the Philistims 40 years. Then
God raised up Sampson, who with the j^w-bone of an Ass slew a thousand of the
Philistims at once. chap. 15, 1 ver. 20.
And he judged Israel in the days of the Philistims 20 years.

Thus may we see by all these examples (and make use thereof ^f we be wise)
what the state and condition of Gods people has been ever of old, the effect
in brief, or burden of the song, nothing else but this: when they sinned
against the Lord, he delivered them into the hands of their enemies: but when
they cried to the Lord in their trouble (that is to say repented) he
straightway delivered them out of their distress, raising up from time to
time, one Savior or deliverer after another, and so immediately governing them
by Judges till the days of Samuel. When this people still growing worse and
worse, and not contented with this sacred kind of government, immediately from
God himself, but desiring a King like all other Nations: Make us now a King to
judge us like all other Nations: he gave them a King in his anger, saying to
Samuel: S^m. 8.5
hear the voice of the people in all that they shall say unto thee, for they
have not cast thee away, but they have cast me away, that I should not reign
over the^, etc. And as before under the Judges, so now under the Kings still as
they sinned, and multiplied their transgressions, so did the Lord inflict and
multiply upon them his judgments, one plague after another: till at length
they were carried captives into Babylon. After which long captivity, yet
restored again upon their repentance, the time was not long, but they fell
again to their old byas, and forgate the Lord their God, which had done so
great things for them: yea, rather now worse then ever, persecuting the
Prophets from time to time, whom God raised up amongst them, and killing them
one after another: even till the coming of the Messiah, and him likewise they
crucified. Whereupon ensued this last and final desolation, as the full
measure of their sins deserved, and as themselves desired, saying: his blood
be upon us and upon our children: which has continued now almost this 1600
years: the longest captivity and greatest misery that ever happened to any
people, and so shall continve, till they (as did their forefathers) turn to
the Lord by trve and hearty repentance, and cry unto the Lord in their trouble,
and then will the Lord deliver them out of their distress, according to the
former examples* and not before. And this is the state and condition of the
Jews at this day: the miserable state (I say) with the cause* and the remedy,
which God grant they may make use of. Amen.

Escapes.
Page 22 line. 26. add these words ( Seeing, I say, so many signs and
arguments at once concurring together, I may well conclude as before.) page 51.
l. 14 put out these words ( of a trve Prophet? and consequently.) page 58. l 9.
for, ( in the, read, is the.) line 10. for, ( was appear, read, was to
appear.) line 12. for, ( State, read, Star.) With what other fault else, I
desire the judicious Reader to Correct with his Pen.


