A TOVCH-STONE OF GRACE.

Discovering the differences between true and counterfeit Grace: Laying down
infallible Evidences and marks of true Grace: Serving for the trial of a man's
spiritual estate.

By A. H. Bachelor in Divinity, and Minister of Gods Word at Cranham in Essex.

2 Pet. 1. 10. Wherefore, the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your
calling and election sure: for if ye do these things ye shall never fall.
LONDON, Printed by R. B. for Philemon Stephens and Christopher Meredith. 1630.

TO THE PEOple of my Cure and Charge, Grace and Peace be multiplied.
Dearly beloved: my hearts desire, and prayer to God for you, is, that ye may
be saved: And that ye may be the better persuaded of my hearty affection to
you-wards, I have here presented to your eyes, that which heretofore has been
offered unto your ears; nothing doubting but that, as then it found attentive
audience, so now it shall receive kind acceptance. Ye have run well, endure
unto the end, that ye may be saved. To help you and others forward in the
Christian race, I have undertaken this task, hoping that ye will have
remembrance of these things after my departing from you, that so ye may follow
the truth in love, and in all things grow up unto him which is the head, that
is, Christ. In the mean time, I shall think my travail and pains happily
bestowed; my ministry and service highly blessed, and my poor labors richly
honored and rewarded, if I may bring any one to a more serious examination and
trial of himself, to a godly sorrow for the want of grace, and to a holy
hungring and thirsting after more grace. And thus, my brethren, I commend you
to God, and to the Word of his Grace, which is able to build further, and to
give you an inheritance among all that are sanctified. Pray for me

The Watchman of your souls, A. HARSNET.

To the godly and well-affected Reader.
GEntle Reader, I have here presented unto thy view, the sum and substance of
diverse Sermons, which I preached unto mine own Charge, and some adjoining
neighbors: who receiving (as they professed) much good by my Labors, were
earnest with me either to bestow upon them some of my notes, or else to publish
in Print, that which I had delivered in word. Whose requests I could not well
with-stand, being urged by some, that my calling makes me a common servant for
any good I may in public, as well as in private. And I was rather induced unto
this task in a double respect. First, because amongst the heap of books that
are printed, too few strike downright at sin, or lend a hand to help forward
the work of Grace. Secondly, because the iniquity of the time is such, that
with too many (who follow the fashions of the world) grace is out of fashion,
and of all other things the least regarded, or looked after; although (as I
shall make it plain) it be the only thing to be desired, as that which
sanctifies and well-seasons every condition here, and makes way for happiness
hereafter: for the want of Grace cuts off all hope of future glory, and
precipitates people into endless woe and misery. Nature by its strength may in
time work out, or wear out many bodily maladies, without the advice of the
Physician, or any help of physic: but the soul, so deadly sin-sick as it is,
can never be helped and healed, without the Balsam of grace; which alone is
able in time to work out those malignant humors, which the soul has
contracted unto it self. A rare thing it is to find that man or woman which
will not easily be persuaded, for the preventing or curing some deadly disease,
to take (though otherwise loathing physic) such things as shall be prescribed
them for their good: for Nature seeks to preserve it self. Hence it is that
the Toad (upon distemper) runs to the Plantin, the Heart to the Dittany, and the
Dog to the Grass. Therefore, unless we will show our selves to have less
understanding than the unreasonable creatures, we must look out for Grace,
the only cure of our distempered and diseased souls.

Read then, I beseech thee, this small Treatise with the same affection, and
heart, in which it was compiled for thee; and that is (God knows) an earnest
desire of bettering thy spiritual estate, and helping forward thy salvation:
that the worldly wiseman may grow more wise for his soul; that the ungodly
may labor for grace; that the hypocrite may be more sincere and upright; and
that the gracious heart may grow in grace, and with more comfort hold it out
unto the end. If upon the first taste thou find but little, or no sweetness
herein, let me entreat thee to assay the second time; one bit may draw down
another. It is a rare feast where every guest likes, and loves all the
provision that is made; yet he is an unworthy guest which will feed of no dish,
or be offended with his friend which invited him, because some one or two
dishes be prepared which he likes not. Read, taste, and consider. If thou
receive any good by these my Labors, give God the praise, and pray for me

Thy servant in the Lords work, A. H.

A brief Table directing to the principal things contained in the Treatise
following.
GRACE how it is taken in the Scripture. Page 3 A threefold difference betwixt
true and counterfeit Grace. 10 First, in the ground, secondly, in the growth,
thirdly, in the falling and rising. 13 Grace is Gods free gift. 14 Grace comes
through Christ. 30 Grace forgiues sins. 35 The gift of the Spirit is from
Grace. 44 Eternal life from Grace. 48 Civility is not Grace. 50 True Grace
grows many ways. 59 True Grace perseueres. 74 Saving knowledge an evidence
of Grace. 93 Saving knowledge is operative, and practical. 98 Saving knowledge
changes us. 102 Saving knowledge seeks Gods glory. 104 Saving knowledge
grows. 106
Directions to make our knowledge powerful.
FIrst, consider that our knowledge should make us lights unto others. 118
Secondly, we must side with our knowledge against our corruptions. 121
Thirdly, we must pray that the Lord would put life into our knowledge. 124
Faith an Evidence of Grace. 126 Difference betwixt the faith of Gods children,
and the presumption of the wicked. 133 The first difference is in the ground
out of which they spring. ibid. The second difference lies in their fruits and
effects. 143 Thirdly, true faith makes the heart to stoop to Christ his
Scepter. 144 Subduing of lusts, is a sound Evidence of Grace. 147 Differences
betwixt the leaving of sin through the strength of Grace, and some other
by-respects. 157 Obedience to the will of God, is an Evidence of Grace. 164 An
Hypocrite may go far in outward obedience. 170 Differences betwixt that
obedience which proceeds from Grace, and that which is done by hypocrites upon
by-respects. 172 First true Grace aims at the whole will of God. ibid.
Secondly, a gracious heart labors to obey at all times. 174 God often
with-drawes himself from his children for diverse ends. 177 First, to show us
our weakness. 178 Secondly, to humble us. ibid. Thirdly, to make us more
watchful. 179 Fourthly, to bring us closer to God. 180 Fifthly, that we might
pity others fallen. ibid. Sixthly, that we may love the Lord the better for
restoring of us. 181 Thirdly, a gracious heart obeyes willingly and
cheerfully. 183 Fourthly, he obeyes sincerely. 185 Motives to obedience. 190
Reasons of the Doctrine.
GRace gives content to the heart. 199 Grace inables us to hold up our heads in
the time of affliction. 203 Grace helps us to live godly. 205 Grace brings in
outward and temporal benefits. 208 Grace makes up decays in nature. 217 Grace
gives us a sanctified use of all those things we partake of. 221 Grace paues a
way to glory. 222 No falling from Grace. 226 First, in regard of Gods promise.
228 Secondly, in regard of Gods attributes. 229 Thirdly, in regard of the
all-sufficiencie of Christ. 233 Fourthly, in regard of the nature and ^^fice of
Gods Spirit, being Gods Seal and earnest. 234 Grace may be cooled. 241
Symptoms of declining in Grace.
FIrst, an inordinate appetite to things that are hurtful. 243 Secondly, an
abating of our spiritual taste. ibid. Thirdly, if we digest not the Word, as
of old. 244 Fourthly, if there be a cold and drowsy performance of holy
duties. 245 The want of Grace a woeful thing. 247 Labor for Grace. 255 Strive
to grow in Grace. 260 That we may grow in Grace, we must first pluck up such
weeds as ouer-grow and choke it. 262 Pride. 263 Selfe-confidence, or
security. 265 In-sinceritie, want of uprightness of heart. 269 The cares of
the world, and deceitfulness of riches hinder the growth of Grace. 271 All
noisome lusts do hinder the growth of Grace. 274 The society of the wicked
hinders the growth of Grace. 276
Helps to grow in Grace.
FIrst, keep the heart soluble. 280 Secondly, use the society of the godly.
281 Thridly, be often in hearing and reading. 282 Fourthly, Exercise Grace, let
it not be idle. 285 Fifthly, be often and earnest in prayer. 286
Signs of our growth in Grace.
FIrst, if we more and more dislike sin. 290 Secondly, if we more and more
delight in Gods ordinances. 291 A difference betwixt the godly and the wicked
in their taste of Gods Word. 295 Grace will carry us through inward tentations.
297 Grace will comfort us against crosses. 302 Grace will help us against
corruption. 306
The end of the Contents.
Errata.
PAge 22. line 17. for being, read bring. p. 73. l. 12. for rescued, r.
rescue. p. 79. l. 10. for have, r. save, p. 82. l. 1. leave out in. p. 116. l.
3. for Therefore. r. Secondly. p. 216. l. 3. r. in a wrong tenure. p. 233. l.
6. for preserve r. present. p. 242. l. 9. r. it lives. p. 270. in the margin,
for Phil. r. Psalm. p. 285. l. 17. for approuement, r. improuement. p. 295. l.
8. for wickeds r. wicked.

A TOVCHSTONE of Grace.
HEBR. 13. 25. Grace be with you all.
IT is not my purpose to spend many words about the Author, or authority of
this Epistle, which are questioned by some, and controuerted by others. Lest I
should seem to trifle out the time with matter of no great importance.

Although the Author cannot speak for himself to claim his right, or to
vindicate that wrong which he has sustained; yet the matter of the Epistle
speaks sufficiently for its Author, and authority. Why should any question the
Author, when it bears Saint Paul's Ensign, and mark, though not his name?
Great wisdom there was in concealing of his name; the want whereof is no sound
argument to prove it was not Paul's, for then (by the same reason) we may say,
that it had no Author, because it has no Owner, no name put unto it. And as
for its authority, me thinks it should be out of question, the matter thereof
being so heavenly, so lively setting out the offices of Christ, so soundly
proving him to be the promised Messiah, the only Prophet, and Archbishop of his
Church.

The words which I have read unto you, are the ordinary salutation, and
farewell which Saint Paul uses in all other his General Epistles, the sense
and meaning whereof I will give you in a few words.

Grace in Scripture has well-nigh twenty several acceptations: Grace how
taken in Scripture.
I will acquaint you with some of the principal.

Sometimes it is taken for the free, and undeserved love, and favor of God
electing, and calling of us, 2 Timothy 1. 9. He has saved us, and called us with
an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his purpose and
grace.

Sometimes it is taken for the imputation of Christ his righteousness, Romans 5.
17. Much more shall they which receive the abundance of grace, and of the gift
of righteousness, etc. Here grace stands in opposition unto the guilt of
Adams sin, and so is taken for Justification.

Sometimes grace is taken for the guidance, direction, and operation of Gods
Spirit in us; as Romans 6. 14. Sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye
are not under the Law, but under Grace, where it may be taken for
Sanctification.

Sometimes Grace is taken for the blessed estate of Gods children after they be
justified, and sanctified, Romans 5. 2. By whom we have access through Faith
unto this grace wherein we stand.

Sometimes grace is taken for the practice of piety, 2 Pet. 3. 18. Grow in
Grace.

And sometimes it is taken for glory, the perfection of grace, 1 Pet. 1. 13.
Hope to the end, for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation
of Jesus Christ.

Here grace cannot well be understood of any thing else but glory. And glory
may very well be termed grace in two respects.

Ephesians. 2. 8.

And secondly, because by grace we come to have some assurance of glory, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 16. Who has given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through
grace.

But grace in this place is taken for the free love and favor of God to
manwards, together with all those benefits spiritual and eternal, which do
flow from thence; as Adoption, Regeneration, Remission of sins, Justification
and Sanctification; all which do properly come under this term Grace.

From whence we may lay this foundation, upon which we intend (God assisting)
to build our ensuing discourse, to wit, that (seeing Paul wished grace unto the
Hebrews, and all others unto whom he wrote, above, and before all other
things) The chiefest good which we can wish one to another, or can receive, and
be made partakers of, is Grace. No doubt, if any thing could have been more
beneficial, or necessary unto the Hebrews, he would have wished it unto them:
but seeing he begins and ends this, and other his Epistles with this prayer,
Grace be with you: we may safely conclude, that Paul esteemed Grace to be the
best good which he could wish them, or they par take of.

Long and large disputes have been amongst Naturalists concerning the chief
good; several verdicts, and judgments have been given of it; some calling
pleasures, some esteeming profits, and some accounting honors the chief good;
some this thing, and othersome that, as their several humors and affections
have swayed them: but we have not so learned Christ, and therefore (from a
better principle) beyond the reach or pitch of all Naturalists, we conclude,
that the prime good, the best thing we can partake of, is Grace: for I may
truly say of it, as David speaks of Goliahs sword, 1 Samuel 21. 9. None to that.
All earthly comforts, yea the greatest preferme^ts, the largest possessions,
the most excellent endowments either of body or mind, in respect of Grace,
are but as dung and dross. The excellency of Grace will appear the better,
if we acquaint our selves with the truth and worth thereof: which that we may
the better do, observe we these particulars.









Differences betwixt true and counterfeit Grace.
FIrst, of the differences betwixt true and false, sound and cou^terfeit Grace.
A necessary search, and a point wherein we, have all need to be skillful,
because of the deep imposture, and deceitfulness of our own wicked, wretched
hearts, which (like unto lying spirits) will flatter, and deceive us, telling
us that we are in a good way, and that all is well with us, when as it is worse
than naught; and therefore we should be the more willing to hear of it. For a
man may have a graceless and wicked heart, and yet not know it, nor believe it;
and we are beguiled in nothing so much, in nothing so soon, as about our
spiritual estate, the estate of grace; pleasing our selves with shows and
shadows, in stead of matter and substance. Besides, the Devil is subtle, and
he will not be wanting to teach us the art of hypocrisy: and hence it is that
virtues are often taken up by vicious persons; and fiends of darkness will for
their own ends sometimes appear like Angels of light. How much then does it
stand us upon, how nearly does it concern us, to search and try whether our
coin be current, or counterfeit? lest that, as for the present we beguile
others, in the end we deceive our own souls.

The differences twixt true and counterfeit grace, lie especially in four
things:

First, the ground or beginning

Secondly, the growth,

Thirdly, the declension

Fourthly, and lastly,

First, of the ground and beginning of grace. Know we that all grace comes
from God the fountain of grace: Iam. 1. 17.
Every good giving, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down
from the Father of lights. Grace comes from grace: for there is grace
infusing, and grace infused. Now that you may the better distinguish the one
from the other: before I fall upon the differences, give me leave to acquaint
you with the nature of that grace, from whence all grace is derived unto us.
Peter Martyr does thus define the grace of God. Grace defined.
Grace is the free good will of God to man, whereby he accepts of us in
Christ, forgiues us our sins, gives us his Spirit here, and eternal life
hereafter.

First, The definition explained.
it is called the free good will of God, utterly to exclude all merit on our
part. Hence it is that the Scripture in diverse places does diametrally oppose
grace and merit: As Romans 11. 6. If it be of grace, it is no more of works, or
else were grace no more grace. For grace is all grace, or no grace. So Ephesians.
2. 8, 9. By grace ye are saved, it is the gift of God, not of works, etc.
Light is not more contrary unto darkness, good stands not in more opposition
unto evil, than grace and merit do oppose each other. Merit in the best sense,
in the least sense, does mar the sense of grace. Yea grace excludes that
preuision of our works, which some imagine to be the ground of Gods loving us;
or if not the ground, a maine motive, and great means of Gods bestowing his
grace upon us. But the nature of grace will not admit of any such preuision,
and foreseeing of our works. The ground of all grace is in God himself; and
therefore grace must needs be free, it being his mere good will, and own
goodness to respect us. As he told the people of Israel, Deuteronomy. 7. 8. Nothing
without God moves him, or can any ways allure him to bestow his grace upon
us. He found us in our blood, Ezekiel. 16. 6*
unlovely, loathsome, unworthy to be beloved: wherefore we conclude, that grace
is Gods free good will.

The Church of Rome has been much puzzled about this doctrine of Gods free
grace, and therefore in general terms they will seem to join issue with us,
as if they said not, as if they held not any other thing than that the Apostle
alleges, Romans 3. 24
Romans 3. 24. That we are justified freely by his grace; but like the Devil
their father, they speak the truth in a false manner; their words have a
wicked meaning, which overthrows the nature of Grace, and the very foundation
of Christian religion: For by Justification they do not understand the free
grace of God in himself, and that right0eousnesse of Christ, freely imputed
unto us, but such a righteousness, as God freely works in us: So by grace,
they do not understand the free and undeserved love and favor of God to man,
but certain gifts of grace, (...).
certain, habitual graces, as faith, love, mercy, etc. which God freely
works in us, and for which (say they) he does accept of us. Now what is this,
but to ouerturne grace, to overthrow Justification, and to make us our own
saviors? When for certain graces of our own, and our own inherent
righteousness, God does accept of us. From whence we may boldly conclude: that
the doctrine of the Church of Rome does overthrow the foundation, it peruerts
the nature of grace, and takes away the truth of Justification For
Justification rightly considered, implies two things: First, an utter
emptiness and want in us: Secondly, an absolute fullness and sufficiency in
Christ. I would know how this can be, if any merit or worth be in us; if we
merit, there is something in us; if something in us, then not an utter
emptines; neither is there an all-sufficiencie in Christ: thus they take away
Justification, they make Christ no absolute Savior, and so no perfect Christ,
and so no Christ at all. Let us therefore abominate the doctrine of the Church
of Rome, that satanicall Synagogue; let us hold it to be Antichristian,
against Christ, and their doctrine to be against the truth of grace, and (to
say truth) a graceless doctrine. To put it out of all question that grace is
the free gift of God, Saint Faul tells us, 2 Timothy 1. 9. that it was given
unto us before the world was. True, say the Papists: But how? through Gods
foreseeing our works. But this the Apostle confutes in the same verse, telling
us, that it is not according to our works, but according to his own purpose
and grace. Again, in Ephesians. 1. 5, 6. He tells us, that He predestined us to
be adopted, Ephesians. 1. 5, 6.
through JESUS CHRIST unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his
will, to the praise of the glory of his grace. Therefore, to conclude this
point: know, that whatsoever good thing has befallen us, or is coming
toward us, (all favors and mercies exhibited, or promised) all are of Gods
free grace, all according to the good pleasure of his will; the ground of all
is within himself, as Beza well renders the words, Ephesians. 1. 5. (...),
Teaching us that no cause present, or future without God, moved God to bestow
his grace upon us. For if God had not loved us before we loved him, we had
never been beloved, 1 Ioh. 4* 19*
1. Ioh. 4. 19. If God had not loved us before we had been amiable, fit to be
beloved, we had never tasted of his love: for he found us filthy in our blood,
Eze. 16. 6. Ez. 16. 6.
If God had not loved us before we had been able to procure, or deserve his
love, we had never been beloved, To. 5. 7, 8.
Romans 5. 7, 8. If we be at any time able to do God any service, it is not we,
but the grace of God in us, 1 Cor. 15. 10.
1. Cor. 15. 10. Or, if at any time, we being any thing unto God, we must say
as David said, 1 Chronicles. 29. 14. All things; O Lord, come of thee, and of thine
own hands have we given the. If God respect, or reward any service of ours,
what does he but crown his own gifts?

The consideration whereof cries shame in our faces, for making the Lord so
vvretched a requital for so free, and undeserved grace. Our case was
desperate, our condition damnable; nothing of our own to bring us into grace,
and favor with God: only his own goodness moved him to take pity upon us,
and freely of his grace to instifie us, Romans 3 24*
Romans 3. 24. How should this knit our hearts unto the Lord? A benefit, the more
freely it comes, the stronger it ties the receiver unto the giver. The Sun
shines not more freely upon us (nay not so freely, for that can do no other,
it shines by virtue of an higher and commanding power, and that order which God
has set, Psa. 104 19
Psalm. 104. 19.) then Gods grace is bestowed upon us. How should this fill our
hearts and tongues with the praises of the Lord? Had we the tongues of men and
Angels, we could not sufficiently express his praises, for the freeness of
his grace. How should this tie us unto the Lord, and knit our hearts unto him,
who has so abounded in love unto us, and that so freely, so undeservedly?

Again, here is matter of comfort unto all dejected and drooping spirits, cast
down in the sight and sense of their own vileness and unworthiness; these
should consider that Gods grace is free; he looks not at any thing in us in
the bestowing of his grace. What, do thou think thou are incapable of
grace, because thou art unworthy of it? This is a mere fallacy. Do not cast
away thy confidence, because thou see not in thee that goodness thou
desire. It is goodness enough for thee, to be bad enough in thine own
esteem. Be but vile enough, base enough, bad enough, and then thou art good
enough to partake of grace. Thine emptiness will make some way to fullness,
Luke 1. 53. Luke 1. 53*
He fills the hungry with good things. Esaias 55. 1.
Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and ye that have no
silver, come buy wine and milk without money; yea, or monyes worth; all
conditions of our own worth and merit are here utterly excluded. Therefore
comfort thy self, and cheer up thy heart, thou poor unworthy sinner, in
this, that God is most free of his love; though thou have nothing whereby to
deserve any grace from God, yet he has enough in himself to move him to give
to all poor dejected and humble sinners.

The devil (it may be) will teach thee to put a price upon Gods wares; he will
make thee believe that thou must have thus much holiness, or thus much
obedience, or thus much faith to purchase or procure the love of God, as if we
had grace from God by way of exchange, we being thus and thus qualified: but I
tell thee, that thou must come to God with a bare naked hand, with a poor
empty soul, else thou art incapable of his grace. Me thinks this should
uphold poor souls that faint, and are ready to sink under the weight and
burden of their sins, mourning like Rahel, and will not be comforted, casting
away their hope and confidence, yea, and forsaking their own mercy by waiting
upon lying vanities, Ion. 2. 8.
Ion. 2. 8. Whereby they do not only rob God of the glory of his grace, but
even defraud their own souls of comfort, through slavish fear and unbelief.
Has not the Lord made a general inuitation, calling to the throne of grace
all hungring, thirsting, and mourning souls, that so they might partake of his
wine and milk? Yea, that they may receive mercy, and find grace to help in
time of need, Heb. 4. 16.
Heb. 4. 16. If God has given thee but a heart to desire grace, thou have a
warrant to believe that God will freely bestow it upon thee. Psalm. 145. 19.
For he will fulfill the desire of them that fear him; He also will hear
their cry, and will save them, Psalm. 145. 19. I tarry the longer upon this
point, for the comfort of those poor ignorant, fearful and unbelieving
souls, whose consciences speaking bitter things against them, pass the
sentence of death upon themselves, as incapable of any grace, because they are
guilty of these and these sins. If they were thus and thus qualified (they
say) they should have some hope that God would be good unto them; but know
thou, poor deluded soul, that no man's goodness is the ground of Gods love
unto him: no, no, it is Gods love is the cause of our goodness: Ephesians. 1. 4.
Ephesians. 1. 4. He has chosen us that we should be holy. Holiness is not the
cause, but the effect of Gods loving us. Thou must be in Christ, before ever
thou can be good, or have any inclination unto goodness: for as the branch
cannot bear fruit of it self, unless it abide in the Vine, Ioh. 15. 4.
John 15. 4. no more can we, unless we be in Christ.

It follows: He accepts of us in Christ.
Whereby he accepts of us in Christ. This truth is euidenced by diverse places
of Scripture, Ioh. 1. 17. The Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came
by Jesus Christ. So Ephesians. 1. 5, 6. He has predestined us to be adopted
through him; and in the next verse, He made us accepted in his beloved: Which
places, and diverse other do plainly teach us, that all grace bestowed upon us,
is by the means of Jesus Christ. He is the conduit-pipe in and through whom all
grace runs from the Father unto us; he is the head which conueyes all
spiritual life, sense, and motion into all his members, which was typified by
that Ointment which ran down from Aarons head to his beard, and so to the
skirts of his garment. In him it pleased the Father that al fullness should
dwell, Col. 1. 19.
Coloss. 1. 19. And of his fullness we receive grace for grace, Ioh. 1. 16.
Ioh. 1. 16.

So that from hence we may learn, unto whom we are to return the praises of
any good thing we partake of, whether already exhibited, or promised: God in
Christ is to be glorified for all. Therefore such as sacrifice to their own
nets, do sacrilegiously rob God and Christ of their due. We are not able to
think a good thought, much less to speak a gracious word, most of all unable
unto any pious and holy work without Christ: for without him we can do Ioh.
15. 5.
nothing, Ioh. 15. 5. It is God which works in us both the will and the deed,
Phil. 1. 13. Not I, says Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 10. 1 Cor. 15. 10.
But the grace of God in me. If God bestows upon thee any good which he has
denied unto others; it is not because he saw thee better, or more worthy than
another, but because he is pleased to be more gracious and merciful unto
thee, in Christ, than to another.

Again, here we learn whither to go for such grace as is wanting in us: seek
it from God through Christ. What, do thou hope to find it through thy
service, thy prayers, thy good meaning, or good works? Away with these
menstruous rags, go to God through Christ: No man comes to the Father but by
him, Ioh. 14. 6.
Ioh. 14. 6. All other hopes and helps without Christ, are but as Egyptian
staves, unto which if a man lean, they will strike into his hand and pierce
him. Make sure of Christ by believing, and then sure of grace: Want of true
union and communion with Christ, makes seeming grace in many temporizers to
welter and come to nothing, as standing pits and shallow brooks dry up in
Summer for want of some fountain and spring to fill or feed them.

It follows: Forgive us our sins.
Forgive us our sins. This also is evident, Ephesians. 1. 7.
Ephesians. 1. 7. By whom we have redemption through his blood, even the
forgiveness of sins according to his rich grace. Hence it is that the Lord
proclaims himself, Exodus 34. 6*
Exodus 34. 6. Gracious, merciful, forgiving sins: as if the fruit, yea, the
excellency of his grace lay in the forgiveness of our sins, grace being
illustrated in this act of forgiveness, as much as in any other. Benefits
bestowed upon us, though they proceed merely from love, do not so much
magnify the clemency of the forgiuer, as the setting down by great wrongs
and intolerable injuries, or requiting of evil with good. Many a man will
easily give, that cannot so easily forgive. Herein appears the excellency of
Gods grace, in passing by our infinite and loathsome iniquities and
transgressions. To say truly, it is only grace which can forgive, forgiveness
being a free and gracious pardoning of some fault committed, and of some
punishment deserved.

Besides, the grace of God is the more to be magnified in that it extends unto
all sins, great as well as small, and small as well as great. For if God
should forgive some and not other some, it would be thought that he is either
not so willing, or not so able to remit all sin as some; yes, his grace
reaches to the forgiveness of all sin, Coloss. 2. 13. And ye which were dead
in sins, Col. 2. 13.
has he quickened together with him, forgiving you all your trespasses. So 1
Ioh. 1. 7. 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin: the guilt of one
transgression makes us liable to eternal torments; and our sins have been
multiplied, they are like to the sand by the seashore, innumerable, yet grace
is able to remit all. Then are the Romanists foully mistaken. First in saying
that some sins need no forgiveness; and secondly, that some sins may be
forgiven without the free grace of GOD. Some sins (they say) need no
forgiveness, as Concupiscence which they make to be no sin, whereas in truth
it is the spawne and seed of all sin, as Iam. 1. 14. Iam. 1. 14.
Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence, and is
enticed. Again, they say that many venial sins which are not done against,
but besides Gods commandment, and which are not acted with a perverse mind,
with a rebellious heart against God, these sins, though they displease God, yet
they make not God displeased with the doer of them, and therefore may be done
away by our selves, through the saying over a few Aue Mariaes, or the doing of
some work of charity, or if that will not serve the turn, a little Holy Water
will wash away al filth, or if that fail, the breath of a Bishops blessing
will blow away their sin; or if all these fail here, a little Purgatory-fire
hereafter with his Holiness pardon, will make them as clean as need be. Most
horrible and blasphemous untruths against the grace of God, which alone is the
prime cause and chief means of the forgiveness of all sin, Esaias 43. 25. Esa.
43. 25.
I am be that puts away thine iniquity for mine own sake. If thou have
committed any sin, it must be forgiven, else thou shall perish, Ezekiel. 18. 4*
for the soul that sins, it shall die, Ezekiel. 18. 4. If sins be forgiven, God
must do it: for this is a prerogative royal proper to the Lord, Who can
forgive sins but God only? Mark. 2 7.
Mar. 2. 7. If God forgiues any sins, it must be of his mere grace, Ephesians. 1. 7.
For his own sake.

In the second place let the consideration hereof provoke us to unfeigned and
hearty thanks, for that when our estate was so desperate, our condition so
damnable, as there was no possibility of deserving grace, we were so far
indebted to the law of God, as no way able to make satisfaction, that then the
LORD of his rich grace should forgive all. Suppose thou were ready to be cast
into prison by thy Creditor for a thousand pounds, all thou have to be seized
upon and sold, and yet thy Creditour unsatisfied; at length in mere pity, he
should set thee free, bestow great things upon thee: oh how would thy heart be
knit to such a man! thou would think, that thou should never be able to
require his love: God has done ten thousand times more then so for thee; how
then art thou bound to love him, to praise him, to tell unto others, what great
things the Lord has done for thee? What, all debts forgiven? all reckonings
cleared, and made even betwixt the Lord, and thee, without any satisfaction
made on thy part? What, no accusation in that black and terrible day liable
against thee? All sins done away through his free grace? O the deepenesse of
the riches of his mercy! How vn-vtterable is his goodness? What will thou
render unto the Lord for his unspeakable grace? How should this inflame thy
heart with the love of God, as Luke 7. 47? Such as do not heartily love the
Lord, may fear they have no part, no share in his rich grace. Unthankfulness
is a grievous sin, and that which moves the Lord (I am persuaded) many times
to hide away the joy and comfort of the pardon of their sins from many of his
children. How ready are many, if they be but a little crossed in some petty
matter, to swell and hang the lip; yea, with a little help, could be persuaded
to quarrel, and be angry with the Lord, as Jonas was? If we fall short of our
hopes in some good thing we have promised to our selves; or if God cut us short
of some outward comforts lent unto us, what grumbling and repining is there
against the wisdom and righteousness of our good God? All sense of his
infinite love in forgiving an infinite debt unto us is swallowed up, we have
little joy in it, and God has as little thanks from us for it; whereas,
better lose all the world, than miss this grace: for, as Mat. 16. 20. What
will it profit a man to gain the whole world, Mat. 16. 20*
and lose his soul? which does perish without it partake of the grace of God.

It follows: Gives us his Spirit:
Gives us his Spirit here. This necessarily follows, as Sanctification
succeeds Justification, Ezekiel. 36. 25. Ez. 36. 25.
I will power clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your
filthiness. Here is our Justification. Then follows in the next verse: A new
heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you. And again, the
27. verse, I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them. Which words imply our
Sanctification; Gods Spirit is made manifest in us, by our walking in Gods
Commandments: which we can never do to any purpose, until by the Spirit
corruption be deaded, and grace inviued in us. Grace in the child of God works
in him more and more sanctification through the Spirit: that is, a cleansing of
our selves daily from all filthiness; and never can we have any evidence of
the truth of grace (as shall be made more plain hereafter) or of our
justification, but by our sanctification; until we see sin purged, we may
not think that it is pardoned; for whomsoever Christ frees from the damnation
of sin, Romans ^. 1.
he does also deliver from the dominion of sin. From hence then we may be
assured of the presence and abode of Gods Spirit in us; which whosoever has not,
partakes not of grace, is none of Christ's, Romans 8. 9. is none of Gods, Gal. 4.
6. Because ye are sons, God has sent the Spirit of his Son into your hearts.
If the Spirit of God has taken up its abode in thee, all the house shall fare
the better for it; it will work a holy change in thee, it will make thee a new
creature, changing thy thoughts, words and works, from evil unto good. For as
every creature in nature has a faculty to produce its kind: (Do men gather
grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Matthew. 6. 16. No, Thorns produce
thorns) so a sanctified and a gracious heart brings forth fruits of holiness
and righteousness, fruits agreeable to the nature of the Spirit. If the holy
Spirit of God once takes footing in the heart of a man, as the Idol Dagon fell
down as soon as the Ark of God was brought near unto it: so down goes
Satan's throne; a man is no longer a slave to his base lusts, no longer under
the bondage of any one sin: 2 Cor. 3. 17*
For where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is freedom and liberty; freedom
from the slavery of any corruption, freedom from the bondage of any ruling
sin.

And last of all, And eternal life hereafter.
eternal life hereafter, Rome. 6. 23. The gift of God is eternal life. So 2 Thessalonians. 2. 16. Who has given us everlasting salvation, and good hope through
grace. Thus have I presumed through your patience to tarry a while upon the
explanation of the definition of that grace which is the fountain and
wellhead from whence all grace is derived unto us.

Now to proceed in the unfolding of the Differences betwixt true and
counterfeit grace. The first difference (as has been said) lies in the
ground or root from whence true grace springs. If thou would not be
deceived, or mistaken about the truth of thy grace, do but seriously consider
with thy self, out of what soil, or from what root, that grace which
appears, and peradventure thou beleeuest to be in thee, did spring and come
forth, whether from the seed of God, from the presence and working of the
Spirit, or out of Natures garden, or from education, or else out of some
worldly, carnal, and byrespects; if it came not from God, it will quickly
appear in its proper colors, it will ere long discover its rottenness, it
will vanish, perish, and come to nothing.

Some there be in whom the corruption of Nature is so restrained, that they are
of a very ingenious temper and disposition, affable, courteous, gentle,
peaceable, not given up, nor inclined unto any exorbitant courses, not
affecting any notorious vices, but rather hating and abhorring them: who
comparing themselves with gross sinners, and finding in themselves a freedom
from those foul sins which others are defiled withal, do by and by bless
themselves in their own hearts, yea, and it may be, they are taken of others
(like or worse than themselves) to be marvelous good people, very religious
and gracious persons: whose grace is no other, no better than mere civility,
which is as far from sanctity and true grace, as chalk is from cheese, as
the old saying is. Others also there be, who having been well bred, piously
and virtuously educated, sucking (it may be) the Scriptures with their mothers
milk, as it is spoken of Timothy; 2 Timothy 3. 15.
brought up in a family, where happily they had no evil example (though this be
very rare) to corrupt them, do hold on still that course into which they were
entered young, and have been trained up from their childhood, approving of good
duties, frequenting Gods house upon all good occasions, using, and (which is
more) delighting in the society of the people of God; and all this, not by
virtue or strength of saving grace, but through an habituated practice of godly
exercises, so that they can say as the young man in the Gospel, Mat. 19. 20.
I have observed all these from my youth. Are all these (think you) arguments
strong enough to prove the truth of grace wrought in the heart of such a
person? Then Paul his condition was good enough before his conversion, for he
was well educated, brought up, and lived after the strictest manner, yet he
accounts all this but as dross and dung, as Phil. 2. 8. Gods worship and the
performance of good duties through long use may be grown into a very form,
wanting zeal and all spiritual vigor, or life in the performance of them;
and will you say that the bare, naked, and customary performing of good duties,
is a sure evidence of goodness in the heart of the doer of them? No, no, thou
may be a Pharisaicall Angel, hear, read, fast and pray by the strength of
thine education, custom prevailing so far with thee, as to necessitate the
performance of pious exercises, doing good duties, because thou have always
done them, and not through the power and strength of true grace, either
inuiting thee, or inabling thee unto the performance of them. True and saving
grace comes not from nature and good breeding, but from spiritual
regeneration; from union and communion with Christ, who is the Head which gives
spiritual life and motion unto all his members. Every gracious person is knit
unto Christ by joints and bands, as Col. 2. 19. Col. 2. 19.
These ligatures are the graces of the Spirit, by which every good heart being
conglutinate and graffed into Christ, draws daily from him such spiritual
strength, as inables him to the practice of good duties. So that if grace be
truly wrought in thee, thou live in Christ, as a siene in the stock, and
Christ lives in thee, as the root lives in the branches: Then the mind and
affection of Christ will be in thee, thou will do good duties not of form,
but in faith, in love, yea with a kind of holy necessity, as if it were thy
nourishment, thy meat and thy drink, as Christ said, To do the will of thy
Father which is in heaven.

Others also there be which will outwardly appear very forward in the
performance of good duties, they will not miss a good Sermon, etc. as if grace
were truly wrought in them; when as little, or nothing at all is done by them
in love to the duty, but love of themselves, and to by, if not base ends.

Some, because they are brought into a family, where the ordinances of God are
daily on foot, and where grace is in some request, think and know, that
unless they conform to good duties, and make some show of godliness, there
will be no abiding for them, they shall be nothing set by: whereupon they resolve
to draw in the same yoke with others, (though good duties be in truth a very
yoke unto them) and hold quarters with the rest of the family, putting on a
vizard of grace, either to hedge in some favor of their master, mistress, or
some other of the family, or to be well esteemed of amongst the rest.

And there be others that will be forward in the best things, that so their
masked godliness may be a Lure to draw others to trade and commerce with
them, that so they may with the less suspicion prey upon the simplicity and
innocence of honest hearted people, with whom they hope (making a show of
godliness) to have negotiation. Many such like there are, who in truth are no
other than painted and garnished sepulchers, having within nothing but
rottenness and corruption. Whereas true grace makes the child of God to
appear and seem to be godly, because he is so* and to practice goodness,
for the love of goodness, and not of goods, as many hypocrites do.

A second and a maine 2 Timothy 3. 13.
For evil men and deceivers wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived,
2 Timothy 3. 13. whereas true grace is still of the mending hand, and grows many
ways.

A gracious person grows Abraham, the more familiar he grew with God, the more
he humbled and abased himself: This is one singular property of a good heart,
the more grace it receives from God, the more disgrace it does cast upon
himself, in the sense of his own unworthiness. After that Job having heard
of God by the ear, came to enjoy a more clear evidence of him by the eyes,
presently he abhorres himself, and repents in dust and ashes, Job 42. 5, Job
42. 5, 6.
6. Paul (after he had tasted of grace, 1 Timothy 1. 13.
) confesses himself a blasphemer, a persecutor, etc.

Secondly, a gracious Ez. 36. 32.
He is ashamed and confounded for his former ways, Ezekiel. 36. 32. he will no
more of his old ways, but says of them, as Ephraim of his Idols, Hos. 14, 9.
Hosea 14. 9. What have I to do any more with Idols? He sees before him a way
of joy and comfort unto his soul, beset with many sweet and precious promises,
adorned with many benefits and blessings: his heart in now so fixed upon this
way, that he grows more and more in love with it; all other ways, in
comparison of it, he hates and abhors, he will not exchange the new for the
old, for all the world to boot.

Psalm. 42. 1.
As the Heart brayeth for the rivers of water, so pants his soul after
Christ, his soul thirsts after him. That fellowship and communion which he
has with Christ in his holy ordinances, is most sweet and comfortable unto his
soul; and yet this he knows is but a glimpse of that comfort he shall
partake of, at the appearing of the Lord Jesus: Therefore he longs for that
day, knowing that when Christ his life shall appear, then shall he also
appear with him in glory, Col. 3. 4.
Coloss. 3. 4. Now take an hypocrite, and temporary professor at the best, and
it will soon appear that he grows none of these ways. First, he grows not
into acquaiutance with his own heart, for that does every day more and more
deceive him. Secondly, he grows not into a hatred of his old ways, for he is
still the same he was, as rotten at the core as ever he was, and as well
pleased now with his lusts as before; though happily for some by-respect he may
seem to forbear them, and hinder or suppress the Paroxysme and return of
them. Thirdly, as for loving the appearing of the LORD CHRIST, he does it not,
he cannot do it heartily, whatsoever outwardly he may make show of; for he
cannot be ignorant of that which Christ has said of hypocrites, which say, but
do not, or do all their works to be seen of men, and take Gods Covenant
into their mouths, but hate to be reformed, that none of these shall escape the
damnation that is to come. Matthew. 22. 33.
The consideration of which things, works in them a dread of the dreadful and
terrible day of the Lords coming, wishing it might never be, or ever be
deferred.

A third difference, is in God and men: yet there is a great deal of
difference betwixt his relapses, and the falls of those whose hearts are not
sound.

First of all, a gracious heart allows not of the committing of any sin,
Romans 7. 15. I allow not that which I do. Romans 7. 15.
If he be prevented and overtaken with any evil, he approues not of it, his
heart is not delighted or affected with the doing of it. When David had numbered
the people, the Text says that his heart smote him, 2 Samuel 24. 10. Which
shows, that though he were overtaken, yet he did not allow of the evil he
had done. Whereas an hypocrite, howsoever he may seem outwardly to quarrel
with himself, or to be angry with his sin, yet al is well betwixt his heart
and his sin, as the Ferry-man in the Boat, he looks one way, though moves
another. He wants that principle, Grace, which alone opposes sin, and makes
not only the judgment to mislike it, but checkes the conscience, and grieves
the heart for it; whereas a wicked heart wanting this principle, may happily
resolve against sin, and promise better things: as Pharaoh told Moses, that
he would let the people of Israel go, but presently returns to his old
hardness and stubbornness.

Secondly, a gracious heart is bettred by his false. He grows more and more (as
was said even now) into acquaintance with his own heart: he sees his own
frailty, he is more fearful of falling, as the old saying is, The burnt
child dreads the fire. He is more careful of his ways, and watchful over
himself, as one that is climbing up into a tree, if one foot has slipped, or
the bough broke on which he stood, how does he tremble? how careful is he of
sure footing, lest he fall? So the child of God being by occasion fallen into
any fault, takes heed unto his steps, etc. gathers his wits together, to keep
himself upright from falling again; whereas the hypocrite is no whit at all
bettered by any sin, something he may be terrified, there may be some pause,
some forbearance, but no bettering: some say, a leg once broken, and well set
again, is stronger than before; it is true in grace, for this grows more
strong after a fall than before. As appears by Peter, who though at first he
was shaken by the breath of a maiden, yet like a Cedar in Lebanon grew so
strong after, that death it self could not shake, or ouerturne him.

Thirdly, the falls of the righteous drive them closer unto God by prayer and
godly sorrow. How was David's heart broken after his fall? What heart-broken
petitions did he put up unto the Lord, to vvash him thoroughly from his
iniquity, and to cleanse him from his sin, to create in him a clean heart, to
restore unto him the joy of his salvation, and to stablish him with his free
Spirit? Whereas a graceless heart is either senseless of his danger, and GODS
displeasure, and therefore seeks not to God by prayer, that so he may make his
peace again with God; or else if he be griped or stung a little, he seeks to
allay his grief by Music, as Saul did, or with merry company or pastimes, to
put it from him.

Fourthly, the falls of the godly make them to complain of themselves, and
cry-out upon their sin, as Paul, Romans 7. 24.
Romans 7. 24. O wretched, etc. So David, Psalm. 51. 3, 5. whereas a graceless
heart is ready to extenuate his sin; would none did worse than this; I hope
this is not such an heinous matter: or else excuses himself, and ready to lay
it upon others. But the child of God, with a kind of indignation aggrauates
his sin, abhorres it with a detestation, entreats the Lord for mercy in the
pardon of that is past, and for aid to help him in time to come.

Last of all, a gracious heart by his falls has his heart knit more strongly
unto the Lord. O how much does he think himself bound unto God, for sparing
and not confounding him? What shall he render unto the Lord, for bringing his
soul out of the snares of the Devil, and delivering him from the danger into
which sin had plunged him? He confesses that it was Gods mercy that he was
not consumed. And because God has spared him, his soul is knit more strongly
unto the Lord, than ever before. I have read (how true it is I know not) of a
great kindness that a Lion did show unto a man, who had formerly pulled a
thorn out of his foot; and will not grace teach a man (think you) to love the
Lord for doing greater things for him? Nature teaches a man, to love those
that preserve our bodily lives, or rescued us in extreme danger; and shall not
grace do this much more? So that you see a wonderful great difference betwixt
the falls of those that partake of grace, and such as want it. Howsoever
sometimes a strong corruption and a violent tentation may shoulder out or keep
down the work of grace in Gods children, yet he is not pleased with this
condition of his; for these relapses and preuarications of his, do cost him
hot water and the setting on, he has many a gripe and sting, many a
heartbreaking groan by them: whereas those that yield any voluntary
subjection to their lusts, and give their evil affections the reins; though
sometime they may feel and express some gripes and horrors of conscience, yet
by that which has been spoken, it is evident, that they are far from any
evidence of true grace.

perseverance. Counterfeit grace is but temporary, it looks fresh, and seems
to flourish for a season, but every little frost of adversity, or blast of
trouble, nippes it in the head, and makes it give in. If he perceiues that he
is like to miss of his hopes, and proiects, or some rubs will be in his way,
or that his profession bring trouble or persecution; then he gives in, he
thinks it is good sleeping in a whole skin, and therefore falls off,
whatsoever profession he has formerly made: And that because he wants a
sound bottom, he is not built upon the Rock Christ: his principles were from
Nature, education, or the world; and not from union and communion with Christ;
his holy profession was taken up upon carnal and fleshly terms; not out of
love to piety, but out of self-love and by-respects, which whensoever they
fail, his piety quails; if they fail or fall, they bear down his
godliness with them: whereas sound grace in an honest and good heart, being
built upon a sure rock, the foundation whereof is laid in Christ, holds it out
in all storms, he is no reed shaken with the wind, no wavering vveather-cock,
no time-seruer; he knows in whom he has believed, and therefore abides the
heat of Summer, the rage and violence of persecution; he endures the frost in
Winter, all those crosses and losses which befall him, still runs with
patience that race which is set before him, Heb. 12. 1.
Heb. 12. 1. So that it is with hypocrites and counterfeit professors, as with
many rotten and worme-eaten pears and plummes in a garden: look upon them,
walk by them, and none so beautiful to the eye, none so lovely to behold as
they, but lay hands upon them, or shake the tree on which they grow, and down
they tumble presently; whereas that fruit which is sound, though it make not
so fair a show, hangs still for all your shaking. Gods people in this are like
the Cedars of Lebanon, the stronger the wind blows them, the deeper root they
take, the surer they stand.

Now in a few words to apply that which has been formerly delivered
concerning this point of difference, let that which has been spoken, be a
means of sending us every one into the Closet of his own heart; let us
seriously search and try our selves, that we be not mistaken about the truth
of grace. It is a thing of the greatest consequence that can be, I mean, the
trial of the truth and soundness of grace in us; for if we be deceived in
this one particular, we are undone for ever. A man may be mistaken in outward
things, be deceived in vvorldly bargains, and yet nevertheless a happy man:
he may have his soul, though he lose his substance: but if he be gulled in
the matter of grace, he is irrecouerably miserable. Does it not then stand us
upon, (as I said before) to consider whether we be deceived or not?

If there were plenty of washed gold stirring, or great store of bad and
counterfeit silver abroad, every one would look what he takes, for fear he
should be deceived. O my beloved brethren, these are the days wherein many
make fair shows, godliness is grown (in appearance) into some credit
amongst us; almost every body would be accounted religious, but as for the
power of Religion, and the truth of godliness (God knows) it is found in very
few: All is not gold that glisters, all have not grace that are taken, and do
also take themselves to be gracious: A man may go far in outvvard
appearance, and yet go to hell in the end, for want of saving grace. As for
example.

First, a man may be free from gross sins, from scandalous crimes, and
enormous vices, yea, even loath and detest many evils, as did the Scribes and
Pharisees, Luke 18. 11.
Luke 18. 11.

Secondly, a man may be strict in the duties of the second Table, just of his
word, true in his dealings, as many civil persons, and Gentiles do by nature,
Romans 2. 14.
the things contained in the Law, Romans 2. 14. Cato and many other Heathens were
admirable in respect of Morality.

Thirdly, a man may set up Gods service in his family, and give himself to
fasting and prayer, as the Jews did, Esaias 58. 2, 3. Seek God daily, Esaias 58.
2, 3.
know his ways, enquire of God in the ordinances of justice, as a people that
would do righteously.

Fourthly, a man may set upon the work of reformation, joy in a good Sermon,
reverence Gods faithful Ministers, as knowing and believing that they are such
as fear the Lord, and show unto him the way of salvation, as Herod did, Mar.
6. 20.
Mark. 6. 20.

Lastly, a man may leave his old courses and companions, as Simon Magus did,
Act. 8. he may be escaped from the filthiness of the world through the
knowledge of the Lord, and yet return with the dog to his vomit, 2 Pet. 2.
20.
and for want of sound and saving grace be damned in the end. Now seeing it
may be thus, tell me in good sadness, if thou do not think it to be a
matter of great importance to search and try thine own heart?

How many thousands be there which come short of these things before-named? and
yet take up their rest, flatter themselves, and speak peace to their own
souls, resolving to be no other, desirous to be no better, and therefore
neglect this duty of trial and examination of themselves. But assuredly a time
will come, when the consciences of these people (which are now cast into a
deep, if not a deadly sleep) will be awakened; when death, judgment, and
hell will present themselves unto their view; when their sins like toads will
croake vengeance against them, when Ezekiels book will be laid open before
them, where is written within and without, Ez. 2. 10.
lamentations, and mourning, and woe, then what howling? what roaring? what
wringing of hands, and breaking of hearts? to consider that old and new sins
do bleed afresh before them; and that many thousand thousand reckonings are to
be cleared betwixt the Lord and them, and they not able to answer one of many
thousands. Then (when it will be too late) they will cry out upon themselves,
condemning their folly and madness, that they so trifled away their time, let
slip the golden season of grace and mercy, passed over their souls to Satan
for momentany bables and vanities.

Tell me then (my beloved) in cool blood, if it be not a point of high
wisdom, to look to this betimes, not to trust our hearts too far in this
weighty matter, seeing our hearts are above measure deceitful, and as those
lying spirits in the mouths of Ahabs false prophets, will flatter us, bid us go
on, and prosper, when we run to our own destruction. I beseech you therefore
(my beloved brethren) by the tender mercies of God, and in the bowels of the
Lord Jesus, I entreat you to look to your selves in this one particular
search, and try your own hearts, how things stand betwixt the Lord and you;
do not desperately run on, as many careless bankrupts do, never minding to
make even with their Creditor, until the Bayliffe has gotten them under
arrest, if not carried them into prison. Slight not over these things, lest
hereafter, when it will be too late, you find and feel that to be true,
which now you cannot be brought to fear. Consider (I say) with your selves,
what sin is alive in you, what lust is crucified in you: whether your life be
the life of grace, and whether grace be truly begun and settled in you. Do not
think these things are skar-crowes to mock children withal, and so slight
them over, for I tell thee, if thou can not find leisure to search and try
thy ways, that thou may turn unto the Lord in seeking for grace, and suing
for mercy, thou will not find (I fear) leisure to escape the wrath of God,
hell, and condemnation.

Of the Evidence of true and sound Grace.
NOw I come to the third thing, Evidences of true Grace.
which in the beginning I propounded, and that is, to consider of the evidences
of true and sound grace: the which before I come unto, it will not be amiss,
to let you know, that the work and truth of grace wrought in the heart of Gods
child, has in Scripture sundry appellations, though all signifying one and
the same thing. Sometime it is called Spirit, as Gal. 5. 17. The flesh lusts
against the Spirit, Gal. 5, 17.
and the Spirit against the flesh. Sometimes it is called A new creature, 2
Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 17
let him be a new creature. Sometimes, Calling, as in diverse places of
Scripture, Romans 9. 24.
Romans 9. 24. Even us whom he has called. 2 Pet. 1. 10. Wherefore brethren,
give rather diligence to make your calling and election sure. Sometimes,
Sanctification, 1 Pet. 1 2
as 1 Pet. 1. 2. Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, unto
sanctification of the Spirit. All which places tend to this purpose, to let us
know, that we are then spiritual, renewed, or borne again, effectually called
and sanctified, when the work of grace is truly wrought in us: Which work
sooner or later, more or less is wrought in every one of GODS elect; whereby
he becomes purged from the former filthiness of his flesh and spirit, and
sanctified throughout: for as sin, like an Epidemicall evil, diffused it
self into al parts of a man; as Wine or Beer put into a mustie cask, is all
equally tainted; so grace, if it enter into any, it sanctifies him throughout;
it puts a spiritual life, not into one or two parts, but into the whole man,
renewing every part and faculty of body and soul: For grace comes into the
soul, as the soul comes into the body, not infused by degrees, though it be a
maxim in Philosophy, that the heart first lives: which is not so to be
understood, as if life were some while there, when it is wanting to all other
parts of the body, but because the heart is the seat (as it were) of life, and
first of all moves, manifesting life above any other parts of the body. So
grace is wrought at once, though it grows by degrees, being first weak, as is
a babe, before we be strong men in Christ. Know also, that though grace once
wrought, be infused into the whole man, yet it shows it self not alike in
all faculties at all times, because of the contrary habit of corruption, which
is stronger in some part and faculty of the body and soul, than in other some;
yet if the life of grace be inspired, it shows it self more or less in the
whole man. This much I thought fit to premise, to let you understand, that if
the truth of grace appear in any one thing, though not in another, or but
weakly, you may assure your selves that you are truly regenerate, and so
members of the Lord Jesus by spiritual union, never after to be rent off from
him, as more largely hereafter shall be proved. Now to the Evidences.

The first Evidence of grace.
THe first evidence of sound grace, Saving Knowledge, an Evidence of Grace.
is a sanctified and saving knowledge of Gods will revealed in his Word. I call
it sanctified, because it helps froward our Sanctification, John 17. 17.
Sanctify them with thy truth, thy Word is truth; and I call it Saving, because
it tends to our salvation, as appears Coloss. 1. 9, 20.

This Knowledge, some Divines (upon good ground) do make the prime and first
work of grace in Gods child, and the foundation of all other. Hence Coloss.
3. 10. The new man is renewed in knowledge: Col. 3. 10.
By new man, you are to understand (as was said before) the work of grace.
Hence it is that the Gospel is called the Word of life, Phil. 2. 16.
Phil. 2. 16. because it is a means of working, and perfecting this life of
grace, as 1 Pet. 1. 23. No life of grace therefore can be, where this Word
has not been (I understand of those that be of years and capacity) to work
the knowledge of God and Christ. Ioh. 17. 3.
Not that every knowledge of God is life eternal, for there is a Knowledge of
God which profits not, as may easily be proved.

First, all they which believe God to be such an Essence, as may be expressed
by any bodily likeness, or the similitude of any creature, know not God aright:
for if we conceive God to be like any thing that may be imagined, we fancy to
our selves an Idol: we are to conceive of God by way of negation, and to
abstract him from all similitudes, Esaias 46. 5.
Esaias 46. 5, 9.

Therefore Papists, and all other, which conceive of God in a carnal and
gross manner, know not God aright, and so gain little benefit by their
knowledge of him.

Secondly, they, that believe not God to be the chief Good, and the only
thing to be desired, loved and feared, know him not aright. Such as cannot say
as did David of the Lord, Psalm. 73. 25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? Psa.
73. 25.
I have none in the earth to be desired in comparison with thee: receive little
benefit by their knowledge of God. Therefore all Mammonists and covetous
persons, which prefer their riches before God; all Epicures and Bacchanalls,
which make their belly their God; all voluptuous and sensual persons, which
make their pleasures and honors their god, know not God aright to their benefit
and comfort.

Lastly, all that know not God in Christ, receive no benefit by their knowledge
of God. To know God out of Christ, is to know him to be a terrible and angry
God, taking vengeance upon us, for our iniquities and transgressions. Therefore
if thou would have comfort by thy knowledge of God, behold him in Christ,
see his justice satisfied, and his wrath appeased by that satisfaction and
atonement which Christ has made for thee (so trusting to him for salvation)
which knowledge, because almost every one that lives within the pale of the
Church, seems to have, we are to understand, that this knowledge, if it be
merely theoricall, will not save us; for it may be in the temporary believer
and hypocrite: therefore unless this knowledge be sanctified, it is no
evidence of grace, it profits not. How then may we be assured, that our
knowledge is sanctified and saving? By these effects:

Saving Knowledge. Signs of it.
is operative, it is a working knowledge, it is no idle knowledge, but reduced
into practice, Psalm. 86. 11. Psa. 86. 11.
Teach me thy ways, O Lord, that I may walk in thy truth. Grace teaches a
man to put his knowledge in practice. A gracious heart had rather do, and not
know, (if it could be) than to know, and not to do: he desires to be taught,
that he might walk, not that he might talk, as too many do. Hence David,
Psalm. 119. 34. Give me understanding, and I will keep thy Law, yea, I will
keep it with my whole heart. In saying he would keep Gods Law, it shows he
was no Temporizer in religion, which turns with the wind, and runs with the
times; and adding with his whole heart, he shows himself to be no hypocrite,
who is hollow, not sincere in his profession. Knowledge, if sanctified, helps
forward our obedience, rests not in speculation, but proceeds unto practice.

Temporizers and hypocrites seek after knowledge, rather to inform their
judgment, than reform their lives; rather to teach others, than to teach
themselves. This knowledge will not save, but deceive us, Iam. 1. 22, 23, 24.
Iam. 1. 22, 23, 24. That is the good and honest heart, who having received the
Word, keeps it, and brings forth fruit, Luke 8. 15.
Luke 8. 15. The Word is a sanctifying, a fruitful Word where grace is. The
knowledge of graceless persons is a barren knowledge, they know, but do not;
and this kind of knowledge is no better than ignorance in Gods account, 1 Ioh.
2. 4, 5. 1 Ioh. 2 4. 5.
He that says I know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar, and
the truth is not in him: by keeping his Word, we know we are in him. Hence it
is, that in the first of Sam. 2. 12. 1 Samuel 2. 12
The sons of Eli were said to be wicked men, and knew not the Lord. How could
this be? Eli the Priest and Judge, his children, those that attended upon the
Altar, and received the offerings, and yet knew not the Lord? No, their lives
being vicious, and themselves profane, they did not express in their carriage
any fear of God, they were as those that knew not the Lord. Such as profess
they know, if they be disobedient, and to good works reprobate, are (for all
their knowledge) abominable; where knowledge abides in the brain or lip, and
never comes so low as the heart and hand, this knowledge makes way to
conviction and deeper condemnation.

2 Cor. 3. 18. 1 Cor. 3. 18.
We behold as in a mirror, the glory of the Lord with open face, and are
changed into the same Image, from glory to glory. Whereas knowledge
unsanctified leaves a person as it found him, unless peradventure he be grown
worse by his knowledge. The knowledge of graceless persons wants both metal
and making: If it transformes them not, they have but a form of knowledge, as
Rom 2. 20. Now what difference there is betwixt the thing it self, and a form
of it, a living man and his picture, it will be needless for me to relate unto
you: the same, in a sort, is betwixt a formal and a sanctified knowledge: the
former never moves the heart to God, nor yet remoues it from evil: the latter
both purifieth the heart, and rectifieth the life.

Thirdly, Saving Knowledge honor and glory of God, and the good of others. A
gracious heart so opens his lips, as his mouth may show forth the praises of
God, Psa. 51. 15.
Psalm. 51. 15. So also he desires that his lips may feed many, Pro. 10. 21.
Prou. 10. 21. He talks to edify; for grace is communicatiue as well as
operative, like to that ointment of Spikenard wherewith Mary anointed JESUS,
which filled the whole house with the savor thereof, Ioh. 12. 3. where grace
is in the heart, the lips are often dropping of some heavenly counsel, comfort
and instructions, such as may tend to the enlargement of Christ's kingdom:
whereas graceless persons seek to set up themselves by their knowledge; it
may be they know much of God and Christ, but know little for God and Christ.
How few poor souls have been brought home to Christ, by the great knowledge
of many who have a great name and fame of learning and profoundnesse? How many
be there who strive for honors and preferment, and had rather be accounted
great Artists, than faithful Laborers in the Lords Vineyard, improuing their
Talents to Gods glory, and the good and salvation of those poor souls that
are committed to their care and charge? The Locusts of Rome will rise up in
judgment against all such unprofitable servants: for they compass sea and
land to make a proselyte; they study and labor night and day to advance and
increase the kingdom of Antichrist: but these are so wedded to their ease, and
to their lusts, that they have no heart to take any pains for the Lord Christ.

1 Pet. 2. 2.
As a newborn babe thou desire the sincere milk of the Word, that thou
may grow in it, 1 Pet. 2. 2. This growth I believe is not meant of the
letter only and understanding, but especially of the feeling and power of the
Word, every day finding more comfort, and tasting more sweetness in the same.
So that the Word, as Ier. 15. 16. is the joy and rejoicing of thine heart: Ier.
15. 16.
It is sweeter to thy taste, than the honey or the honeycomb, Psalm. 19. 10.
And more esteemed then thine appointed food, Ioh. 23. 12. Thus if thy knowledge
be sanctified, it grows in thee, and thou growest into it. And this growth
arises from two properties in a gracious heart. First, he receives the Word
in thesi, in the general, and then he applies it to himself in hypothesi, in
the particular.

First, a gracious heart puts his hand and seal unto every divine truth,
believing and embracing all those truths he meets withal, whether they be
threatenings, promises, or precepts, as Cornelius and his company said, We are
here present before God, Act. 10. 33.
to hear all things that are commanded of God, Act. 10. 33. Receiving the
Word, as did those Noble Bereans with all readiness, Act. 17. 11. This shows
the soundness of his spiritual constitution, and the goodness of his heart;
for as it is in nature, a sound constitution feeds heartily upon any good
creature provided for him, refuses nothing that is man's meat, wholesome and
good; whereas a bad stomach will pingle, and pick here a bit and there a bit,
taking little or or no content in any meats, but those that are daintily
cooked, or curiously dressed; even so it fares with a naughty heart; unless
the Word be neatly handled, spiced with humane oratory, and set out with the
enticing speech of ma^s wisdom, 1 Cor. 2. 4.
it savors not to his carnal pallat, he finds no more relish in it, than in
the white of an egg.

Again, a gracious heart makes a particular application of the Word, as spoken
and belonging unto him; that part of the Word which does most nearly concern
him, he lays surest hold of, and will not part withal. Grace will teach a man
to welcome and make much of that Word which makes most against his sin; and
likes that preaching best, which does best discover the secrets of his heart,
and most lively set out the filthiness of his corruptions: whereas a naughty
heart swells against that Word; which closes with his bosom sins, he
brooks not the Word, because (as the Pharisees said) it puts him to rebuke.

Now then to make use of this point. Is it so, that sanctified knowledge is a
sure evidence of true grace? this then may speak heavily, first to the heart
of all ignorant persons; they must know that their condition is dangerous,
deadly, damnable, because graceless, and it is graceless, because they are
ignorant, wanting saving knowledge. An ignorant heart must needs be a naughty
heart, because without knowledge the mind cannot be good, Pro. 19. 2.
Prou. 19. 2. What goodness can possibly be where Gods Spirit is not?
Ignorance does manifest the want of the Spirit: For, the Spirit is given unto
us, 1 Cor. 2. 12
that we might know the things that are given to us of God, as 1 Cor. 2. 12.
Therefore, when any know not the things of God, needful to be known, it is
evident that they want the Spirit of God. And yet how hardly can this be beaten
into an ignorant head? They will not believe they want grace, or that the
Devil has them in his snare, or that they are taken captive by him at his
will; yet thus they are, until they be brought to repentance, That they may
know the truth, 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26.
2 Timothy 2. 25, 26. O the lamentable condition of ignorant persons, especially
such as are folded up in the mantle of their own conceitednesse! for many of
these, though they be ignorant of the truth, yet the Father of lies, their
lord and master, has taught them to cavil against the Word, and to lay down
execuses for themselves, that they are not booke-learned, that they have no
leisure, or that they have a good heart, though they cannot talk as many do,
that so he may withold from them the truth in unrighteousness. O the heavy
doom that belongs to those that have eyes and see not, ears but hear not,
hearts and understand not, that they might convert and be healed! Esaias 6. 10.
Esaias 6. 10.
This is the condemnation, that light is come amongst them, and they love
darkness rather than light, Ioh. 3. 19. Ioh. 3. 19.
The Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven with his mighty Angels, in
flaming fire, rendering vengeance to ignorant persons, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8. For as
Hell is appointed to be the habitation of the wicked, so this is the place of
him that knows not God, Job 18. 21.

Me thinks then this should set up the price and worth of knowledge, set an
edge upon our appetite, and make us call after knowledge, and cry for
understanding: To seek her as silver, and search for her as for treasures, as
Prou. 2. 3, 4. O the pains that men take, the dangers they undergo in the
mines to dig out, and fetch forth silver and treasure out of the earth;
which when they have gotten, they have got just nothing, if we will credit
Solomon, nothing in comparison of knowledge. For riches avail not in the day
of wrath, Prou. 11. 4. Neither silver nor gold shall be able to deliver in the
evil day, Zeph* 1. 18. Pro 2 10, 11, 12.
Whereas, if wisdom enters into thy heart, and knowledge delights thy
soul, then shall counsel preserve thee, and understanding shall keep thee,
and deliver thee from the evil way, Prou. 2. 10, 11, 12. Therefore, above all
gettings, get knowledge, above all increasings, grow in knowledge, 2 Pet. 3 18.
2 Pet. 3. 18.

Therefore make we trial of our knowledge whether it be rightly qualified;
what use thou make of thy knowledge, and whether thou do improve it to
Gods glory, others benefit, and thine own salvation. If thy knowledge a be
barren and graceless knowledge; woe worth the time that ever thou knew, for
in some sort it may be applied to thee, which the Preacher speaks Eccle. 1. 18.
Eccl. 1. 18.
He that increases knowledge, increases sorrow. For thou shall be beaten with
many stripes, Luke 12. 47.
Luke 12. 47. Consider therefore what life and power is in thy knowledge. Many
abound in knowledge, but their knowledge is so weak and feeble, that it is
unable to withstand any corruption, or to keep under any one sin, in them.
It is said of the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5.
That the Gospel was unto them not in word only, but in power, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5.
Would you know what is meant by power? Even that force wherewith God does open
the hearts of his Elect to believe, and that strength of the Word whereby they
are regenerate, and made new creatures. Has thy knowledge manifested any such
virtue, and power in thee? Then it is a saving and sanctified knowledge; else
but a weak and unprofitable knowledge. Therefore that for time to come thou
may have thy knowledge more powerful to subdue thy corruptions, observe
these few directions following.

Phil. 2. 15, 16. Phil. 2. 15, 16.
That ye may be blameless and pure, and the sons of God without rebuke in
the midst of a naughty and crooked nation, amongst whom ye shine as lights
in the world, holding forth the Word of life. Thy knowledge should make thee a
light. Thrue light retains its light in whatsoever darkness it shines; so thy
knowledge, if it be sanctified, will teach thee to govern thy self, to look
to thine own feet, and to direct thine own ways; and if it fall out that
thou be cast amongst the children of darkness, yet their darkness shall
not be able to extinguish and put out thy light, that is, make thee go or do
against thy knowledge, but thy light will be able to discover their darkness,
and to guide and direct thee. Again, true light, as it has light in it self,
and retains that light, not extinguished by others darkness, so does it
communicate light to others; whersoeuer it shines, others do or may partake of
it, receiving benefit by it, and comfort from it. So thy knowledge, if it be
sanctified, will tend and bend it self to the edifying of others. 1 Cor. 12. 7
For the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal, 1
Cor. 12. 7. Every good disposer of the grace of God, as he has received the
gift, 1 Pet. 4 10
will minister the same to others, 1 Pet. 4. 10. Look to it therefore, thou
have much to answer for, who have received much knowledge, and certainly, if
thou do not good with thy knowledge, thou will do harm with it: thy sin
will be exemplary, thou will draw on others unto evil, they taking heart and
being emboldned by thine example, as appears, 1 Cor. 8. 10, 11. Now how will
thy knowledge do good to others, if it does thy self none? as it does not if
sin be as powerful in thee, as if thou had no knowledge.

Secondly, thou must with thy knowledge against thy lusts which fight against
thy soul, 1 Pet. 2. 11
1. Pet. 2. 11. Thy lusts are too strong of themselves, add not thou more
strength unto them, by yielding unto them. When thy knowledge tells thee that
these and these things must not be, join issue with thy knowledge, and say as
Joseph did, Genesis 39. 9.
How can I do this evil, and sin against God, Genesis 39. 9. I tell thee, it
is a grievous evil to sin against knowledge, when a man's knowledge within
cries out to the contrary: this will make bloody wounds, and strike deep
gashes one day into thy conscience. In the mean time thou art in a fearful
condition, if thou allowest thy self in the practice of any one sin,
condemned by thy knowledge; for thou lie open unto any kind of impiety, yea
to any error, even unto Popery; for that person which denies the power of
godliness, will easily be brought to forsake the profession thereof: if one
sin loved and delighted in, be enough to pull a man from God to the Devil,
yea, into hell, may it not then pull a man into Popery? A wicked graceless
person is a fit piece of stuff to make a Papist of. He that will not be
persuaded, nor brought to leave his sin for the truth sake, will easily be
persuaded to leave the truth for his sins sake. How much better had it been
for such a one never to have known the way of righteousness, than to turn
away from that holy commandment given unto him? 2 Pet. 2. 21*
2 Pet. 2. 21.

David makes many petitions to the Lord, Psalm. 119. 88. Quicken me according to
thy loving kindness, so shall I keep the testimony of thy mouth. The Scribes
and Pharisees knew the letter of the Law, and were perfect in the Scriptures,
but the Lord by his Spirit had not taught them, and therefore there was no
spiritual life nor power in their knowledge. Howsoever they boasted of their
knowledge, and thought scorn to be taught of others, yet their knowledge being
but a dead knowledge, did increase their judgment; as appears by those words
of Christ, Ioh. 9. 41. If ye were blind, ye should not have sin, but now ye
say, We see, therefore your sin remains.

A second Evidence of Grace.
THe next Evidence of Grace is Faith, Faith.
which follows Knowledge, as the frame does the foundation; for until such
time as the mind be enlightened with the truth, no man can believe. There must
be knowledge, or else there can be no faith: 1 Ioh. 4. 16
We have known and believed, says John.

No man can believe in Christ without the knowledge of him; For how shall they
believe in him, of whom they have not heard? Romans 10. 14.

Faith must needs be an evidence of grace, because it is a special and a
principal part and member thereof: not the fountain of all other graces (as
some do hold) nor the root, out of which all fruits of sanctity do spring.
For the soul must first be endued with the life of grace before it can
believe, unless we will say, that faith may be in a graceless heart: which
cannot be, because being regenerate and sanctified by the Spirit, we come to
believe, and to rest upon the promise for the remission of sins, and
salvation by Jesus Christ. Saint Paul calls Faith a fruit of the Spirit, Gal.
5. 22.
by whom we are sanctified, therefore it cannot be the efficient cause of our
sanctification. It is true that Paul has a passage tending that way, Act. 26.
18. That they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them
that are sanctified by faith; but by the Word sanctified we are to understand
the fruit, not the grace of sanctification: we are dead in sins, until such
time as we come to be quickened by the Spirit, Ioh. 6. 3. It is the Spirit
which infuseth all divine qualities into the soul. The Apostle calls them
the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22, 23. Amongst which fruits, Faith is one of
the principal, as that which puts a kind of liuelihood into all other graces;
and therefore after a certain manner may be said to sanctify us: For
according to the strength of faith, will be the power of other graces, hope,
love, etc. If faith be weak, hope and love cannot be strong; little faith,
little hope, little love; no faith, no hope, no love at all. So that faith must
needs be a sound evidence of grace; for until such time as the heart be
purified, and washed in the lauer of regeneration, it is either Atheistical to
deprave the Word of God, by doubting of divine truths, if not denying the^; or
else it is Sophistical to pervert and wrest the Word, so as oft-times blood
comes out of it to choke and strangle Gods people, in stead of milk to feed
and nourish them. But if the heart be once sanctified by the Spirit, then is
faith wrought in us, which does further, and more effectually cleanse and
purify us through the Word, Ioh. 15. 3. Now because as in the former evidence
of grace, so in this also many a man and woman is mistaken, the heart being so
infinitely deceitful; it will be no lost labor to examine the truth of our
faith. For you must know that it is possible for a wicked and graceless person
to believe that Christ died for him; yea to die in a strong persuasion of Gods
love and favor, and so of his own salvation. Has not experience taught us
thus much? Who so confident, who so full of faith (if you will believe them) as
many vile wretches and graceless persons? They wonder what people mean to
doubt of Gods love, for their part they never, as yet, called it into question.
They thank God they have ever had as strong a faith as the best, and so they
hope to continue. This is evident by examples in the Scripture. The Lord by the
Prophet Jeremy speaks to the wicked Jews, which had polluted the Land with
their whoredoms and malice, which had a whores forehead, and would not be
ashamed, saying, Mica 3. 11.
Did thou not still cry unto me, Thou art my Father, and the guide of my
youth? So in Mica 3. 11. The Lord speaking of corrupt Judges, of mercenary
Priests and merchandising Prophets, which set the Word to sale, and prophecy
for money, says, that yet will they lean upon the Lord and say, Is not the
Lord among us? no evil can come upon us. By which it appears, that wicked and
graceless people may be confident of Gods favor.

How then may we distinguish the faith of Gods children, from the presumption
of unbelievers?

There lies a great difference betwixt them.

The first difference is in Difference 'twixt Faith and presumption.
out of which true faith springs, or the means by which it is wrought in
believers. True faith is wrought in all Gods children by the ministry of the
Word, as Romans 10. 17. Romans 10. 17.
First, the Law conuincing us, discovering unto us our sins, Romans 7. 7. showing
us both the nature and the danger of them, and our misery into which sin has
plunged us; and not only so, but an utter impossibility of our selves, either
to satisfy the justice of God for the least transgression, or to be freed
from that wrath and vengeance which hangs over our head, by reason of our sins.
The consideration whereof terrifying and afflicting a poor sinner, makes him
to cry out as the Jews did, Act. 2. 37. Act. 2. 37.
What shall I do? Then comes in the Gospel, the Word of comfort, and the
message of reconciliation, which discouers and prescribes a remedy, whereby a
poor sinner may be brought into favor with God, and accepted with him; come
out of the snares of the Devil, and be freed from the curse and malediction of
the Law; and that is, by receiving of the Lord Christ, in whom all the promises
of God are yea and Amen. 2 Cor. 1. 20
And by whom we have redemption through his blood, Ephesians. 1. 7.
even the forgiveness of sins, Ephesians. 1. 7. Whereupon he begins to hunger and
thirst after Christ, seeing, and knowing no other way, no other means whereby
he may be saved, or have his spiritual wants supplied. As the prodigal saw no
means of comfort, but starve he must, unless he get home again, and be
received into his fathers family; so the poor sinner knows his soul will
famish, if he get not into Christ; and therefore he labors to be made one
with Christ; his soul hungers and thirsts after nothing so much as Christ: all
the world is dung unto him in comparison of Christ. Oh that he may be found in
Christ: to live or die, Christ is all in all unto him; he lays hold upon his
righteousness, and shrowds himself for comfort under his wings: and as Ioab
laid hold upon the horns of the Altar, saying, I will die here, 1 King. 2. 30.
So the poor believer lays hold upon the Lord Christ, rests only upon
Christ, and if he perish, he will perish at the feet of Christ; whereas the
faith of unbelievers and hypocrites arises either out of their education,
common illumination, or from some vain persuasion of some good in themselves,
for which they are persuaded God loves them, or else he would never have
bestowed so much upon them, have done these or these things for them. So that
their faith is no other than a faithless confidence, a vain presumption, or
some Satanicall illusion, never wrought in them by the Lord Christ, Heb. 12. 2
the Author and finisher of our faith, Heb. 12. 2. by the ministry of his Word.
For they were never thoroughly humbled, or if they were, it was but for a while,
a little Sermon-sicke, their consciences wambling, while the Word was delivered
unto them, and no longer; If this man's faith had bin begun, or he begotten
again of the Word of God; as a newborn babe he would more and more desire
it, that he might grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2. 2. for we are nourished with that,
by which we are begotten: but he finds no sweetness, takes no true content in
the Word, any further than he is sensible of some art or some novelty in the
same, which does affect and delight him. Tell me then (thou that boastest or
presumest so much of thy faith) how thou did attain unto it, when it was
first wrought in thee; which if thou can not, thou have just cause to fear,
thy faith is but thy fancy.

Here a question will fall in very fit to be answered, and that is, whether
every one that believes can tell when or how faith was wrought in him?

This scruple and scrutiny has troubled many a dear child of God, who has
been ready to question the truth of their faith, because they cannot precisely
lay down the time when, or the means how faith was wrought in the^. For their
education and bringing up was always godly and religious; from their
childhood they have entertained the Word of God; they have always borne a
good will to godliness, and loved the professors of the truth; always
approved of the best things, and therefore question the truth of faith and
grace in them. For the comfort of such, let me first of all tell them, that if
all were not well, twenty to one the Devil would not be so busy with them, to
perplex and trouble them with these pious fears and holy doubtings. We seldom
hear or read of any but the Lords people, that have these troubles, or that
put these doubts and questions. But for the satisfying of thy scruple; consider
first what Christ said to Nicodemus, Ioh. 3. 8.
Ioh. 3. 8. The wind blows where it lists, etc. The meaning of which words,
is to teach us that the operations of grace are sometimes, as it were, hid from
the regenerate themselves, neither knowing the time when they first began to
work, nor whence they sprung, nor to what measure they will grow. Therefore
though thou can not tell by what means, or at what time the Spirit of God
comes into thine heart, or how at first, its quickening and sanctifying
presence gave spiritual life unto thy soul: yet blessed and happy is thy
condition, if thou now find faith to be wrought in thee, which thou may
be assured of, if thou find thy soul enlightened with the saving knowledge
and understanding of the truth, if thou have been abased and humbled under the
hand of God, in the sight and sense of thy unworthiness, and if thou prizest
Christ above all the world, laboring to win him, and desiring to be found in
him, not having thine own righteousness, Phil. 3 9* 10.
but that which is through the faith of Christ, even the righteousness which
is of God through faith, Phil. 3. 9, 10. But if thou find not these to be
in thee, then thou may well question the truth of thy faith.

A second difference lies Gal. 5. 6.
Where grace is, faith works by love, Gal. 5. 6. A heart knowing and believing
what the Lord has done for it, cannot but love much, Luke 7. 47. being so
dearly beloved. And this love of God works the heart to a hatred of all
things displeasing unto God, Psa. 97. 10.
Psalm. 97. 10. and to a practice of that which he requires, Psalm. 26. 3.
Psalm. 26. 3. Thy loving kindness is before mine eyes, therefore have I walked
in thy truth. Whereas the faith of the unregenerate works no change in him,
makes him no better than he was, unless it be in show and appearance.
Confidence of Gods love emboldens him to wickedness, and makes him to sin more
and more, as Ier. 3. 4, 5. rather then abate sin in him. Certainly, if ever the
Lord speak peace to thy soul through Christ, he will so inflame thine heart
with the love of his truth, his Image, his ordinances, that these will so take
up thy heart, that thou shall not turn again unto evil, Psalm 85. 8.
Psalm. 85. 8.

Thirdly and lastly, faith in the regenerate makes the heart to stoop to
Christ's Scepter, to hear his voice and follow him. Ioh. 10. 27.
It is faith which apprehe^ds the authority and sovereignty which Christ has
over us; and approues of the holiness and goodness of his Commandments, and so
inclines the heart unto a willing and cheerful obedience. Whereas the
hypocrites faith does embolden him unto liberty, it makes him loose and
licentious, laying all upon Christ back, saying, Christ dyed for us, his blood
shall cleanse us, etc. Let the Ministers of Christ say what they can, threaten
what they will, they are resolved to hold on, they will not shift one foot, nor
stir any further than they list. Let judgments be threatened against them,
threatened folk (they say) live long; they can laugh in their sleeves at the
zeal of Gods servants; no more moved, or removed with a Sermon, than with the
wagging of a straw. Oh take heed therefore, that thou be not deceived in the
truth of thy faith: Thou may have a great deal of carnal confidence, and
bold presumption, and yet not one dram of true saving faith. Heb. 3. 12.
Take heed, brethren, lest at any time there be in any of you an evil heart,
and unfaithful, to depart away from the living God. Do not think that thy
coming to Church, thy hearing of Christ preached, and receiving of the
Sacraments, are infallible evidences of true faith; for many thousands who take
up their religion upon trust, and take themselves to be sound believers, have
their hearts fraught with unbelief, their faith being no better, nay, scarce
so good as the faith of devils, for they tremble at the power and displeasure
of the Lord, whereas these are not once touched, nor any thing affected
therewith. And this shall suffice to have spoken of faith, the second Evidence
of true Grace.

A third Evidence of Grace.
NOw I come to the third Evidence of true Subduing of our Lusts.
Grace, and that is the subduing of our Lusts, and the conquering of our
corruptions. This is meant by those words of Paul, 1 Cor. 9. 27
I beat down my body, and bring it into subjection. By body the Apostle does
mean the old man, Gal. 5. 17.
sin and corruption, which does lust against the spirit. All such as are truly
regenerate, by the quickening power of the Spirit, are sanctified (as was said
before) in all the faculties of their souls, and members of their bodies: not
only enlightened in their judgments to dislike that which is evil, but their
hearts also are set against it. They know that all fleshly lusts do fight
against their souls, and therefore they maintain open war with them, and
will not yield any voluntary obedience or subjection unto them. Grace cannot
stand with the regiment of sin. For as Paul says, Romans 6. 14.
Sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under the Law, but
under Grace. Howsoever the Lord (to check the security, presumption, pride,
selfe-conceitednesse, and unthankfulness of his children) may for a while
leave them unto themselves, and withdraw (as it were) the powerful presence
of his grace, whereby corruption may bustle, swell, yea and break forth also;
yet by the power of grace, they shall be brought again to mislike, and
condemn themselves for those evils wherewith they have been ouer-taken, and
cry out with Paul, Romans 7. 24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death!
Therefore the Anabaptists and others are foully mistaken, who hold that after
the work of grace is once truly wrought in a man, sin has no being in him
that is regenerate: for you must know that in every one that is regenerate,
there is flesh as well as the Spirit: in every faculty there is grace inclining
the heart to goodness; and there is corruption like a backbyas, drawing it the
contrary way. For grace and corruption in every regenerate person (as Jacob and
Esau did strive in Rebeccaes womb) are evermore struggling and striving one with
the other: yea, there is a continual war betwixt them, as was between the
House of David and the House of Saul; 2 Samuel 3. 1.
but as the House of David waxed stronger, and the House of Saul weaker: So
fares it between Grace and corruption; the flesh may strive, but the Spirit
ouercomes: for by virtue of habitual grace infused, the will is so sanctified,
the affections are so rectified, the heart is so purified, as the whole man
resignes up himself to be at Gods service, imbraceth a holy and a heavenly
life, as the only true comfort and sound happiness, and desires and resolves
so to hold on, even unto the end. Therefore they are grossly deceived, who
hold that after the work of grace is wrought in the heart of Gods children, the
will hangs like a beam upon the balance, equally inclining to one hand as
well as to the other: A foggie and a mistie error contrary to the current of
the Scriptures, which teach us that a regenerate person labors to keep a good
Conscience in all things; Heb. 13. 18
desiring to live honestly, as Heb. 13. 18. That person in whom the work of
grace is wrought, desires and endeavors to be evermore furnished with the
Panoply, the complete armor of God, that so he may stand fast, resist the
Devil, and be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked: The strength
and bent of his will and affections are for God and goodness; he chooses
holiness with a full purpose and resolution to walk in it; he turns from his
former evils with a detestation of them, he leaves them with a resolution never
to take them up again. As Ephraim said, Hos. 14. 8. What have I to do any
more with Idols? Hos. 14. 8.
So says he of his old courses and companions, Away from me, and as Christ to
Peter, Matthew. 16. 23.
Get thee behind me, thou art an offense unto me, Matthew. 16. 23. He daily
prays, and cries earnestly to God for strength against corruption, Psa. 119. 5.
and wishes, O that my ways were so directed to keep thy Statues continually!
Psa. 119. 5. He is not for God to day, and the Devil to morrow, he is no
morning Saint, and evening Devil: but desires and endeavors to walk before
the Lord in all pleasing, and to serve him in holiness and righteousness all
the days of his life. Well then, if the case so stands, consider with thy
self, what combat thou do daily maintain against thy corruptions. Romans 7.
22.
Do thou delight in the Law of God, concerning the inner man? as Romans 7. 22.
though thou see another law in thy members rebelling against the law of thy
mind. Are thy failings matter of daily humiliation unto thy soul? Do thou
find and feel that nothing under the Sun does more sting and pierce thy
heart, than to be at any time overtaken with passions, or carried away with the
swinge of any corruptions, against thy godly purpose and holy resolutions? Why
then, cheer up thy drooping spirits; the Lord by the power of his grace has
taken possession of thee: for nothing but grace is able to keep the love of
sin out of the heart, though peradventure (as was touched in the beginning)
some other thing may for a while keep it out of thy hand: Ciuility and
hypocrisy may a little snib sin, or bid it for a while to stand aside and give
way to better things, but it is only grace that strikes this Goliath dead, and
takes off his head. It is only grace which cures a soule-sick sinner of those
diseases, which by sin he has contracted unto himself; as only Jordan,
above al other waters, could heal Naaman of his leprosy. Now lest any one
should bring himself into a fools paradise, and please himself with an
opinion of his own goodness, because of the abating of some sin, or the
laying down of some base carriage, which formerly he had taken up: let him
know that there is a maine difference between the forsaking of sin, in and
through the strength of grace, and any other by-respect whatsoever.

Corruption is kept under in a gracious heart, merely in love to God, and
hatred of sin, as Hosea speaks of those that shall be converted unto God,
Hosea 3. 5.
They shall fear the Lord and his goodness, Hos. 3. 5. Though naturally thou
may love this or that sin more than ordinary, yet grace will help thee to
abhor and loath it: a better evidence of grace cannot be, then when the heart
is set against its old love; for it must needs be a supernatural power, and
the work of grace, which moves any to dislike and loath that evil which
naturally he loves. Whereas in the hypocrite sin is sometime forsaken, because
sin has left him, he has no means of committing it; or else he forbeares
sin, as many a fearful dog does meat in the platter, because of the whippe or
cudgel that is held over him: So the hypocrite loves his credit, loves his
purse, loves his skin, it may may be; and therefore, lest the committing of
some sin, which he lingers after, should make a flaw, or a hole or rent in
him, he forbeares the committing of it. Examine thy heart therefore in this
particular, what mooues thee to forbear thy sin? what is the ground of that
divorce which seems to be betwixt thee and thine old lover? If any thing in
the world but grace, thou art in a bad condition, whatsoever is become of thy
sin.

Art thou one whose heart likes well of sin, though thou can not, or dare
not commit it? Art thou one, who when thou art convinced of, or reproved for
any failings, thy heart rises against the rebuke, though for thy credit or
profit sake thou seem to welcome, and thankfully to entertain that
reproof? I tell thee, thou art in a dangerous condition: thou have but weak
and slender evidence of grace, if any at all. For where true grace is, there
(howsoever, (as was said before) for a time in a passion or tentation,
corruption may prevail) will be a welcomming of the means, and helps that
may keep us from falling into sin, as appears in David, who blessed the Lord
and Abigail, for the good counsel which she gave him; there also the heart will
bleed, and the tongue will freely against it self acknowledge the foulness
of those sins he has committed.

Know moreover, that the nature of grace is to strike at all sin, great and
small, whether more or less profitable and pleasing, as Psalm. 119. 104. Psa.
119. 104.
Therefore I hate all the ways of falsehood. A gracious heart is set for the
glory of God in all things, in all places, at all times: he labors to shun all
things displeasing to God, or grievous to his Spirit, makes conscience not only
of open, but secret sins, not only of gross and foul, but of the least
evils, not only murder, but heart-burning or envy, not only of blasphemy and
perjury, foulemouthed sins, but of those that seem more fair, as faith and
troth, etc. So that as some Physicians have their Catholicon for the purging
out of every peccant humor: so grace is a Catholic expeller and purger of all
known sins, whereas hypocrites and double-minded men repress sin but in
part, and that very partially too; not out of any hatred they bear to sin,
but because of some evil consequent which waits upon sin. He keeps one sin
or other close, one hole in his heart for some base lust or other, one Dalila
or darling sin he has, from which he will not be divorced, as if God and men
must give him leave in some thing to take his liberty; he has one sin which
all the world shall not bring him out of love withal, much less to leave, and
to forsake it. But let al such know, that God will none of their patcht
holiness and piece-meale reformation; as good never a whit, as never the
better. All such will one day be confounded, which have not a respect unto
all Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119. 6.

A fourth Evidence of Grace.
A Fourth Evidence of Grace, Obedience to Gods will.
is obedience unto the will of God. The Lord by his Prophet tells us, that those
which are taken into covenant with him, shall have his Spirit put into them,
and he will cause them to walk in his Statutes, Ezekiel. 36. 27.
to keep his judgments, and do them. Hence it is that the Apostle says, We
are elect through sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, 1 Pet. 1. 2.
Unfeigned obedience unto the will of God, is the character of a gracious heart,
for until such time as grace has seasoned and sanctified the heart, little or
no obedience will appear in the life and conversation. Hearty obedience does
distinguish a sound heart from an hypocrite. To abound in knowledge, to have a
form of godliness, to be forward in the outward profession of the truth, and
to partake of the Sacraments, make no essential difference betwixt a gracious
and a graceless heart: Romans 6. 17.
To obey from the heart that form of doctrine which is delivered, is a sure
mark to distinguish the one from the other: Not the hearers of the Law are
just before God, but the doers of the Law shall be justified, Romans 2. 13. It
is not Lord, Lord, the naked performance of holy duties, which will bring us
unto heaven; it is obedience, The doing of the will of my Father (says Christ)
which is in heaven, Matthew. 7. 21. Be ye doers therefore of the Word, not
hearers only, deceiving your selves, Iam. 1. 22. All knowledge (as has been
said before) without obedience, is in Gods esteem no better than ignorance: He
that says, I know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar, and the
truth is not in him, 1 John 2. 4. Grace teaches a man to reduce his knowledge
into practice: for by the power and strength of grace the will of man is made
willing to obey God in all things, so that it will be our meat and drink to do
the will of our heavenly Father. Here some will be ready to cry out, and say,
that by this doctrine we destroy the liberty of ma^s will, and turn it into a
mere necessity. But they speak they know not what. For when we affirm that by
the power of grace man's will becomes willing to obey, this is not to take away
or destroy, but rather to rectify the liberty of our will, which consists not
in an unstable changeableness to bend every way, but in a settled and firm
resolution in all things to do that which God requires. When the will by the
power of grace does pitch upon Gods will, adheres unto it with a resolution not
to swerve from it, is the will then compelled, or the liberty thereof
violated? No wise man dares so say, I suppose. When David said, I will keep
thy Statutes, Psalm. 119. 8. And again, I will delight in thy Word, verse. 16.
And again, I have chosen the way of thy truth, ver. 30. And again, I will run
the way of thy Commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart, verse. 32. was
here any violence, or compulsion offered unto David's will? Or was David's will
moved unwillingly, when he entreated the Lord to knit his heart unto him, Psalm
86. 11
that he might fear his Name? No, no: this desire and holy resolution of David
proceeded from the truth of grace infused into his heart; after which infusion,
the will inclines it self most willingly and cheerfully, to obey the will of
God. Do we not pray daily, Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven?
Those heavenly spirits obey willingly, cheerfully, constantly, having neither
will nor power to disobey. How so? are their wills manacled and fettered? or is
it a wrong unto them, that they can do no other? Surely no, for the power and
strength of grace in them, will give them no leave to do otherwise. This
obeying and serving God, is perfect liberty and freedom; and it is the LORD,
by the work of grace in our hearts, Ioh. 8. 36.
which must make us thus free. Now because an hypocrite wanting grace, may go
far in outward obedience, it will be very requisite to lay down some
differences betwixt that obedience which is performed by the powerful work of
grace, and that which is done upon outward and by-respects: For you must know
that an hypocrite may go far in outward obedience. Did not Cain offer
sacrifice as well as Abel? Did not Ahab humble himself at the hearing of
threatenings, as well as Hezekiah? 1 King 21. 27.
in some particulars Ahab out-stripped Hezekiah, for he rent his clothes, he
fasted, and lay in sackcloth, which acts of humiliation are not reported of
Hezekiah. Did not Iehu bestir himself in fulfilling the commandments of God?
Did not Judas preach? Was not Simon Magus baptized? Did not Ananias and Saphira
sell their possessions, and lay them down at the Apostles feet, Act. 5. 1, 2.
And many other instances there may be brought, to prove how far hypocrites may
wade in outward obedience: therefore outward obedience and conformity is no
infallible evidence of true grace. Wherein then lies the difference? In these
particulars.

First, true grace aims at the whole will of God, it teaches a man to walk
in all Gods Commandments. As it is said of Zachary and Elizabeth, Luke 1. 6.
They walked in all the Comma^dements of God without reproof. Psa. 119. 5, 6. O
that my ways were directed to keep thy Statutes, then should I not be
confounded, when I have respect unto all thy Commandments! For he that is
bound to one, is bound unto all; Iam. 2. 10.
and he that offends in one, is guilty of all, Iam. 2. 10. Whereas
counterfeit grace picks and culls out here and there, such precepts as stand
with ease or profit. It will boast with Saul, and say, I have fulfilled all the
Commandments of God; yet Agag must live, and the fattest of the cattle must
be spared: Whereupon Samuel told him, that he had not obeyed the voice of the
Lord, 1 Samuel 15. 19. For to say truth, he that wilfully and of purpose breaks
any one of Gods Laws, cannot be said to keep any of them, because he keeps
them not of conscience; for if he made conscience of one, he would make
conscience of all. If Iehu his obedience and zeal had been sound, it would
have been manifested in the pulling down of Ieroboams calves, as well as
Ahabs Baal; but his suffering of the one discovered his obedience and zeal to
be unsound, and counterfeit in the other.

Psalm. 106. 3.
Psalm. 106. 3. Gods Commandments are not grievous, but delightful unto him:
and therefore as it is said of Hezekiah, 2 King. 18. 6. He cleaues to the
Commandments of God, and departs not from them. Whereas the obedience of the
hypocrite is like unto Ephraims, Hosea 7. 8. As a cake on the hearth not
turned, half baked. His goodness is as the morning dew, quickly dried up; for
he sets not his delight on the Almighty, Job. 27. 10. neither seeks he to God
at all times.

But do not the best of Gods children sometimes halt in their obedience?
Object.


Yes, Answ.
for in many things we sin al, Iam. 3. 2. Grace is but imperfect in the best of
Gods children, and corruption in the unregenerate part, keeps down too often,
and hinders the work of grace: not that corruption is of it self stronger than
grace, if God will put to his strength: for this were to make God weaker than
man, and the flesh stronger than the spirit; but because if God at any time
leave us to our selves, or never so little withdrawes the power of his Spirit,
we are more inclined to follow the sinful motions of our corrupt flesh, than
the holy and gracious inclinations of the Spirit of God: For if Adam in his
innocence, when he knew no evil, being left but a while unto himself, and
wanting the efficacious presence and assistance of Gods grace, was so quickly,
so easily drawn to sin; much more the corrupted children of sinful parents,
who are but in part sanctified, and have too much affinity with sin, are easily
brought to disobey God, if he help us not with his Spirit against the motions
of sin, and back us against all tentations and prouocations to disobedience.
For you must know, that God is not always alike present with his children, but
in great wisdom withdraws from them sometimes that effectual presence of his
grace, which at other times he affords them, and that for these and some other
causes.

First of all, to show us our own instability and weakness, how unable we are
of our selves to stand any longer than we are vpheld of him. If he takes from
us his Spirit, as sometimes he took the wheels from Pharaohs charrets, down
we fall presently. How quickly did Peter fall, being left unto himself?

Peter did, who tells Christ that he would stick fast unto him, though the rest
of the Apostles should flinch, and fall off from him; but they stand, when he
falls to his greater shame and deeper humiliation.

Thirdly, the Lord does Peter did, who would needs adventure into the High
Priests Hall, in confidence of his own strength, where (being left unto
himself) he fell most shamefully and foully, above the rest of the Apostles,
who durst not be so foole-hardy, as to plunge themselves into danger, when they
might keep out.



that we do not bear our heads too highly over him, look too bigly upon him,
if his foot has slipped, and he by occasion has fallen into a sin; but that
we labor to restore him, or set him in again (as the word imports, (...).
Gal. 6. 1.) with the Spirit of meekness, considering our selves, being of the
same metal and making; who either have or may in the like manner be tempted as
our brother has been.

Sixthly and lastly, that causes left unto himself, and wanting the assistance
of grace, to bring him well off from the tentation into which he was fallen;
listens to Satan's charm, stoops to his lure, until such time as the Lord who
has formerly laid earnest for him, returns again with the gracious and
powerful presence of his Spirit, vindicates his own right, curbs and subdues
the mutinous and rebellious lusts of the flesh, sets grace in its seat again
to direct and govern the whole man: and so the will and affections set in tune,
the child of God falls again to his former course of obedience.

Thirdly, a gracious heart Romans 6. 17. Ye have obeyed from the heart. Romans 6.
17.
He loves the Lord with all his heart, with all his soul, with all his
strength, as Luke 10. 27. There may be an universal obedience (I mean in
outward show and appearance) and yet not a hearty and cheerful obedience. A
servant may go thorow-stitch with his work, and do all his task, and yet
shucke and grumble, and wish his work were less, or of some other kind, or
at some other time appointed him. So hypocrites may obey, but it is no hearty
and cheerful obedience, but a halting and unwilling willingness; if they
could tell which way to save their credit, compass their ends, and come
fairly off, they would leave off to obey. Whereas a gracious heart performs
duties not by constraint, 1 Pet. 5. 2.
but willingly, and of a ready mind, 1 Pet. 5. 2. He yields himself as a
servant to obey, Romans 6. 16. Whatsoever good servants do, they do (or at
least should do) it cheerfully, Coloss. 3. 13. without any mumbling or
wording, or reasoning the case with their master; which cheerfulness and
willingness makes the work accepted, though there be many failings, 2 Cor. 8.
12. If a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, etc.
Therefore seeing the Lord calls for the heart, Prou. 23. 26. and measures all
obedience by the heart, For with God the mind is the man; Pro. 23. 26.
and it is not the outward action, but the inward intention of the heart which
the Lord looks upon, let us learn to deny our selves, and whatsoever we do,
to do it heartily; though troubles and crosses do attend our obedience, to
the utmost of our power let us endeavor to bring forth fruit with patience.

A fourth difference lies of heart. A good man obeyes for conscience sake,
without any respect of any carnal and earthly ends, as David exhorted his son,
1 Chronicles. 28. 9. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.
Solomon, know thou the ^^d of thy Fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart
and willing mind. It is said of David, 1 King. 3. 6. 1 King. 3. 6
He walked before the Lord in truth and uprightness. Every one that obeyes
willingly and cheerfully, obeyes not sincerely. Iehu was forward enough in
fulfilling the command of God, and rooting out Ahabs posterity, but he aimed
more at the settling the crown upon his own head, and making sure work for
his posterity after him, than the obeying of Gods Word. Whereas a gracious heart
has his conversation in simplicity, not subtilty; in godly pureness, not
dissembled and counterfeit sanctity, or fleshly wisdom. He walks not in
craftiness, but approues himself to every man's conscience in the sight of
God, 2 Cor. 4. 2.
2 Cor. 4. 2. Therefore to conclude this point, as we desire any sound evidence
to our own hearts of true grace, let our life be a life of obedience; and that
we may not be losers in the end by all our obedience, but gainers: look (I
beseech you) that your obedience be rightly qualified; let it be an entire and
perfect obedience, make conscience of all good duties, and that at all times,
and in all places, beware of displeasing God, to please man. Beware of culling
out here and there some good duties to serve thy turn withal: there must be
no parting of stakes betwixt God and the Devil, betwixt Christ and the world.
A piece-meale obedience, is in Gods esteem no better, no other than
disobedience, as appears in Saul's killing the Amalekites, and sparing Agag,
and some of the cattle. To reform some things, nay, to conform in many
things, and not in all, is no conformity at all, but deformity. What auailes it
a man to be a Saint abroad, and a devil at home? To frequent the assembly of
Saints, and to fashion himself to the world? To be strict in the duties of
Religion, and loose in the works of morality, and outward righteousness? Or
to walk in a tracke of ciuility, and to neglect, if not abandon the way of
piety? As if holiness and righteousness were two enemies, and could not
accord and agree together! Again, that which thou do, do with all thy might,
and (to make al good) last of al cast in the salt of sincerity to season al thy
doings: do nothing to be seen of men; for then thou losest thy reward with
God, who loves truth in the inward affections, Psalm. 51. 6. and passes by all
outward failings, where the heart is upright before him; sincerity being a
grace which makes al obedience savor well to the Lords pallat.

Therefore that thou may be drawn to such a kind of obedience, Motives
unto sound obedience.
consider of these motives.

Ioh. 15. 14.
Ye are my friends (says Christ) if ye do whatsoever I command you. Many can
be content to receive good by Christ, and to account him their Jesus; but few
return love and duty unto Christ, by acknowledging him their Lord, in keeping
his Word, obeying his will, and doing whatsoever he commands them.

Secondly, thou want

Thirdly, the richer thou five talents, had the rule over five Cities: For
every one shall receive according to his work, Romans 2. 6.

Esaias 1. 19. If ye be willing, and obey, ye shall eat the good things of the
Land.

Now then, to draw to a conclusion of this point; seeing you have heard of
these evidences of true grace: let me in the bowels of the Lord Jesus beseech
you, my brethren, to go home to your own hearts, make there a diligent
scrutiny and narrow search, whether you find these evidences in your
possession, or not. Are the eyes of your understanding enlightened with saving
knowledge? Is thy knowledge rightly qualified? Is it practical, or is it
merely theorical? Is it a transforming knowledge moulding thee to the Word? Is
it such a knowledge as vents it self continually for the glory of God, and the
good of others? Do thou find thy heart, by believing, knit unto God through
Christ, loving him, and fearing him for his own sake, as well as for his
Christ's sake? Do thou find the throat of thy corruption cut in thee, and thy
sins bleeding to death, and gasping in thee? Is thy heart set against every
evil way, and thy soul delighted in the practice of that which is good? Does
thy heart stoop to GODS Word, and thou yield up thy self to be at his
command, and that willingly, cheerfully, and in singlenes of heart fearing
God? Then blessed be the time that ever thou were made acquainted with these
high prerogatives; God has done more for thee, than if (wanting these) he had
put upon thee all the honor, pomp, and glory of the world. But woe and alas,
how few are there in who^ these evidences are to be found! Oh that such as
want them, had but eyes to see their misery, and hearts to consider how full of
inconceivable horror their consciences will one day be, when they come to be
awakend, and perceive how they have trifled away the day of grace, turned the
grace of God into wantonness, received the grace of God in vain, so as they
have no part in the inheritance either of grace, or of glory! Know and believe
(dear brethren) that things will not always stand at this stay with you. A
day is coming, wherein ye must lay down these earthly tabernacles of yours,
and with them all your pleasures, profits and honors, when none of all these
will stand you in any stead, or afford you any comfort, but will rather
(wanting grace to use them aright) increase your grief and sorrow. A day will
come, wherein (if these evidences be not in thee) thy conscience will not spare
to tell thee to thy face, that (wanting grace) thou art a vessel of wrath,
ordained and prepared for destruction. Oh the troubles, sorrows and fears,
into which (in that day) thy poor soul will be plunged for want of grace! Oh
what would thou not then give for one dram of grace? How happy would thou
take thy self to be, if thou had but a little time to redeem, wherein thou
might come to partake of the means of grace, which formerly thou have
slighted over, making no more account of them than of thine old shoes? Thou will then cease to wonder at Gods faithful Ministers so inueighing against the
neglect of grace, and so vehemently pressing and urging the necessity thereof.
Thou will then say, that a little grace were more worth than all the world
beside, and that they are only happy that do partake of it. Whereas the child
of God having tasted of Gods goodness, and made partaker of his grace, is
filled with inconceivable joy and comfort, finding himself delivered from the
power of darkness, and translated into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. His
conscience being purged from dead works by the blood of Christ, and his heart
purified by faith, he can look death in the face, take him by the hand, and
bid him welcome; he can lie down and rest in peace, and in full assurance (or
if any doubtings through Satan's malice do arise, in hope) of eternal life
through Jesus Christ. And this shall suffice to have spoken of the evidences of
true Grace. I now come (according to the method and order which in the
beginning I propounded) to lay down some grounds and reason, Why Grace is the
best thing we can partake of.

First, The first Reason.
because it is the only thing which gives content to the heart and mind of a
Christian, in every estate and condition whatsoever God has placed him.
Contentment is the thing which every one aims at, and desires in all his
courses. Why do men toil and moile in the world early and late, through thick
and thin, but to satisfy their minds in these outward riches? Why do people
follow, and with unwearied and unlimited desires and affections, hunt after the
honors and pleasures of this world, but to satisfy their desires, and (as they
suppose) to give themselves content? But this is a mere imposture of our
wicked heart, falsely thinking that our desires are satisfied with desiring,
when as (the truth is) they are increased. Why do men and women deck and
adorn (as they think, whereas indeed they deforme) their bodies with strange
attire, with costly ornaments, but to give themselves content, and to please
their minds? For if you ask them a reason of their practice, they will tell
you it is their pleasure so to do. But they deceive themselves, in looking for
content in worldly things, or to be satisfied with the^, as appears, Esaias 55.
2. Wherefore do you spend money for that which is not bread? Esaias 55. 2.
and labor for that which satisfies not? Is it possible that vanity, and
vexation of spirit, should give content to the heart of man? All things under
the Sun are no better, no other than vanity, if we will believe the
Preacher, Eccles. 1. 14. Only grace is that living water, or water of life,
Ioh. 4. 14.
of which whosoever drinks, shall never thirst, John 4. 14.

Grace teaches us in every estate and condition to be content, Phil. 4. 11.
Phil. 4. 11. We can be abased, and we can abound, we can be full, and we can
be hungry; Gods grace is enough and sufficient for us, able to supply all
defects, and to fulfill all our necessities. But if grace be absent, the mind
is full of blindness, the heart is fraught with wickedness, and the
conscience perplexed with guiltiness; the flesh, the world, and the Devil do
there Lord it; and what content or rest can there be, where such lords of
mis-rule do rule and bear sway.

Again, The second Reason.
it is through the strength and power of grace that we are able to hold up our
heads in any storm of trouble and affliction, that we are not swallowed up of
tentations; that we are not in distress, when we are afflicted; that in
poverty, we are not overcome of poverty, and that we perish not when we
are cast down: Phil. 4. 13.
we are able to do all things through the help of Christ which strengthens
us, Phil. 4. 13. Many a dear child of God, in the agony of his soul, through
the heat and pressure of some hot and heavy affliction, is ready to cry out,
Never man troubled and crossed as I am! co^plaining as the Church, Lam. 1. 12.
Lam. 1. 12.
Behold and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow which is done unto
me: thus is he ready to sink under his burden, were he not supported by the
grace of God, who being faithful, 1 Cor. 10. 13.
will no suffer his to be tempted above that which they are able to bear, but
will give the issue with the tentation, that they may be able to bear it, 1
Cor. 10. 13. Though weak and weary of themselves, yet the Lord will renew
their strength, Esa. 40. 31.
they shall lift up their wings as the Eagles: they shall run and not be weary,
and they shall walk, and not be faint, Esaias 40. 31. Grace vpholds them in, and
carries them through every trial and affliction whatsoever. In wrongs and
injuries it makes a man to sit down without revenge: in afflictions, to lay his
hand upon his mouth, and not repine, or murmr, but to be as a man dumb: in
every pain to apply some plaster for ease and comfort. Through the strength of
grace, the soundness of the heart supports the weakness of the body; so that
when the outward man faints and fails, the inward is renewed more and more.

Thirdly, The third Reason.
it is grace which (as has been sufficiently proved before) teaches and
helps a man to live godly, and to walk in the ways of godliness, which in
regard of the manifold lets and discouragements within us, and without us
(without grace) can never be effected. The way of virtue is very hard, in
regard of our manifold weaknesses, wanting strength to wade throw the
difficulties, and pass over the rubs which lie in a Christian race: weakness
of judgment and understanding in the duties of piety, rightly to discern
which coast the right way bends: weakness of will and affection to take the
right way, when it is prescribed unto us: weakness of ability to move one foot
forward in the way, much lesseable to encounter with those difficulties, which
(through the allurements of the world, and the subtlety of that old Serpent,
and rage and malice of the Dragon) will be laid before us: and last of all,
weakness in regard of perseverance, and continual progress in our journey.
Whence it falls out, that many prove idle loyterers, which not only make many
baits and pauses in their way, but at last fall short, and take up their rest
before they come to their iourneyes end: Against all which weaknesses, it is
only grace that affords a Christian strength, and enables him to continue to
the end; as appears, Ier. 32. 40.
Ierem. 32. 40. and Ezekiel. 36. 27. and to run with patience the race that is
set before us, Hebr. 12. 1.

Fourthly, The fourth Reason.
Grace brings in outward and temporal benefits: the surest and the speedyest
way to get goods, is, to get goodness. For, 1 Timothy 4. 8.
Godliness has the promise of this, and of another life, 1 Timothy 4. 8. When
the children of Israel had professed their obedience to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
the Lord replies to Moses, Deuteronomy. 5. 29
O that there were in them such hearts to keep my Commandments always, that
it might go well with them: not only in respect of their souls, but their
bodies also; as Moses told them afterward, Deuteronomy. 28. 1. If you diligently obey
the voice of the Lord, and observe and do all his Commandments: Then as it
follows, Thou shall be blessed in the City, blessed in the field, etc. So
Esaias 1. 19. If ye consent and obey, ye shall eat the good things of the Land.
Grace paues a way to outward prosperity. Hence Prou. 3. 16, 17. it is said of
Wisdom, Pro. 3. 16, 17.
That length of days are in her right hand, and in her left riches and glory,
her ways are the ways of pleasure, and all her paths prosperity: What else
was employed by that speech of our Savior, Matthew. 6. 33. First seek the
kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall be ministered
unto you. Outward blessings attend upon grace as its appurtenances; get grace,
and be sure of these. This may seem a paradox to many, and ordinary experience
(some will say) teaches us the contrary.

For, Object.
first of all, do we not often see, that piety and poverty go hand in hand,
that many gracious people abounding in goodness, have but a poor pittance of
outward goods? And on the other side, is there not many a devil incarnate,
that is clad in purple and scarlet, fares deliciously every day, and has more
than enough? Psalm. 73. 12.
Lo (says David, Psalm. 73. 12.
Psalm. 73. 12.) these are the wicked, they prosper and increase in riches.

For answer to both these Objections, Answ.
know first, that the promise of temporal good things is but conditional;
when they are expedient for us, when they may be furtherances, and not coolers
of grace in his children. The Lord does all things by weight and measure; all
his works are done in wisdom and righteousness. It may be the Lord sees that
riches begin to steal away the hearts of his children, and therefore he will
withdraw riches from them; for the Lord is a jealous God: if once he begin
to see us dote upon, or to delight in the things of this world more than in
him, he will cut us short of them, as he dealt with Jonas, who took too much
content in his Gourd, and therefore the Lord smites it, that it withered, Jonas
4. 17. Or it may be, the Lord withdrawes outward benefits, that so we may see
their vanity, how changeable and flitting they are, and therefore will have us
to mind riches more durable, and labor for the food that perishes not, Luke
12. 33.
and for the bag that will never wax old, Luke 12. 33. Or else the Lord takes
from us temporal riches, to bestow upon us spiritual good things, which he
sees will not thrive nor prosper, where the other are. Or it may be he sees we
are not able to manage outward riches, but would do some harm with the^, grow
proud, contentious, and quarrelsome, or fall to some excess and intemperance
by them; and therefore as we deal with a child, who has a staff or a sword
in his hand, take it from him, lest he hurt himself, or some other with it: so
deals the Lord with his children. Or if none of all these, it may be the Lord
takes away these outward benefits, sets fire upon the hedge which is about his
children, to make known the truth of grace in them, that the Devil and all the
world may see and know, their service to God is not mercenary, but that they
can love, and fear and obey him as well in the want, as in the plenty of
these outward things; yea, and bless God, taking from them as well as giving
unto them, Job 1. 21.
Job 1. 21. For (as you heard) grace fits their minds to their estate, so as
they can be empty as well as abound; therefore that little which they have,
being sanctified and seasoned with grace, is better than great riches to the
wicked, Psalm. 37. 16.

Again, whereas you object that many wicked and graceless people have a
greater portion of these outward things tha^ Gods dear children; It is not
that God regards the rich more than the poor, Job 34. 19.
Job 34. 19. but deals with them, as it is said King Eutraples did with his
enemies who^ he most hated; heaps most riches upon them, thereby to plunge them
into tentations and snares; to fill them with many foolish and noisome lusts, 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10.
that so they may pierce themselves through with many sorrows, 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10.
God oft-times gives honors and riches to the wicked in his wrath, as he gave
Quails to the Israelites, Psalm. 69. 22
so that their table is a snare before them, and their prosperity their ruin,
Psalm. 69. 22. Grieve not therefore at the seeming happiness and prosperity of
graceless persons; for whatsoever they have, they hold a wrong tenure, they
have it with a curse, and they must be called to after-reckonings for it. Only
grace sanctifies things present, and paues a way for future benefits. If there
were no more arguments to prove the worth of grace, me thinks this should
enhaunce the esteem thereof, even amongst worldlings. Would they be rich?
Would they leave possessions behind them to their posterity? I know no better
way than grace. Psalm. 37. 25
I have been young, and am old: yet saw I never the righteous forsaken, nor
his seed begging bread, Psalm. 37. 25. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord,
and delights greatly in his Commandments. His seed shall be mighty upon
earth: the generation of the righteous shall be blessed, Psa. 112. 1, 2. Psalm.
112. 1, 2, 3.
and what follows after in the third verse? Riches and treasures shall be in
his house.

Fifthly, The fifth Reason.
it is only grace which makes up Decays and defects in Nature, which all the
things in the world cannot do. Art may help Nature, and in some particulars
perfect Nature, but it is only grace which makes up the breaches and decays
thereof. When a man has lived to that age and fullness of days, that his head
and arms do dodder through weakness, his knees and thighs do buckle under
him, as unable to support his unwieldy body: when age and time have worn out
the edge and back of his senses, so that his eyes wax dim, as did Isaacs,
he has no more taste in his meat and drink than had Barzillai, and he can
no more distinguish the voice of singing or any melody, if grace be in the
heart, notwithstanding all these decays in Nature, he flourishes in his age,
Psalm. 92. 12. Psalm. 92. 12.
The righteous shall flourish like a Palm Tree, and shall grow like a Cedar in
Lebanon, verse. 14. They shall still bring forth fruit in their age, they shall
be fat and flourishing. Job 17. 9.
The righteous will hold his way, and he whose hands are pure, shall increase
his strength, Job 17. 9. not of nature, but of grace, which supplies the
defects of nature.

He has the eyes of faith, to see the excellency of a holy life, to see the
happiness of his estate. He has the hands of faith, to claspe about the
promises, to take CHRIST into his heart, as Simeon took him into his arms. He
has ears open, or if Nature has played her part in them, and they can receive
no more; he has an heart open, to hear what the Lord shall speak to his soul
by his Holy Spirit. His taste is fresh and lively, he finds sweetness in the
holy ordinances of God, more than in the riches, pleasures, and delicates of
the whole world. Nay, which is more, though his grinders cease, and the doors
be shut without by the base sound of the grinding, as Eccles. 12. 3, 4. he can
heartily feed upon the body and blood of the Lord Jesus Christ; and when they
wax dark that look out by the windows, verse. 3. he can (without going up to
Pisgah, as Moses did) behold the Land of Canaan; nay, more than so, he can
look Death in the face, long for him, as for a treasure, and desire to lay
down his earthly tabernacle, and be with the Lord Christ. Tell me then if all
the art, riches or pomp of the world is able to do thus much; no, no, it is
the only prerogative and privilege of grace, to supply these natural wants.

Sixthly, The sixth Reason.
it is only grace that gives us a sanctified use of all those things we do
partake of; for whatsoever it be that any one does enjoy and possess, 1 Timothy
4. 5.
if he be a graceless person; all these things (good in themselves) will prove
curses and snares unto him, and such as will further his condemnation in the day
of Judgment. It is Grace which must sanctify all parts of Nature, al
endowments and gifts of body and mind: The strength of Goliath, the valor of
Ioab, the beauty of Absalom, the wisdom of Achitophel, the eloquence of
Herod, the honor and promotion of Haman, and the riches of Dives; all these
were but snares, thorns, and curses to the possessours of them, for want of
grace to qualify, to sanctify them.

Seventhly and lastly, The seventh Reason.
herein appears the excellency of grace, in that it paues the way, and
brings us unto glory. Grace is the first fruits of glory, and as it were the
earnest of our eternal inheritance: for all the gifts of grace bestowed upon
us here, do tend and make for the fitting, and preparing of us for glory
hereafter. Grace never finally or totally forsakes a man, but brings him at
last to that eternal inheritance, lands him in the end in heaven, his desired
haven. There be many things of good use and worth, which are no lasting things;
there be many things both delightful and precious, but yet fading; only grace
herein has its precedencie and excellency above al earthly things, it never
wholly leaves us, but prepares us and brings us unto glory. Grace is heaven
upon earth: (...), so taken, Titus 3. 5.
and therefore they which follow Christ in the regeneration, shall sit in the
throne of glory, Mat. 19. 28.

Grace prepares us for glory two manner of ways.

First, by removing those evils which may hinder us.

And secondly, by enabling of us to practice those good things which may
further us. The grace of God which brings salvation unto al men, has
appeared, and teaches us that we should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts,
and that we should live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present
world, looking for the blessed hope, etc. Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13. Whether you
understand here by grace, the Word of grace, as some do, or the free grace of
God, as others take it, I am sure it is true also of the grace of
sanctification, for this helps us to eschew evil, and to choose, and cleave
to that which is good. As it is in the lightning of any dark place, darkness
gives way, when light approaches; so when grace comes into the soul, away
(in part) goes darkness and blindness of mind, ignorance, impiety,
profaneness, etc. Paul tells us that he was sent to preach unto the
Gentiles, Act. 26. 18.
To turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan, unto God.
Such as live in darkness under the power of any one sin, those know not what
the powerful presence of grace means. Grace pulls down sin, and sets up
righteousness, Romans 5. 21. Grace reigns by righteousness. It holds up the
Scepter of Christ within us, helps us to be holy in all manner of
conversation; and so having our fruit in holiness, we come in the end to
everlasting life, Romans 6. 22. O the excellency of grace, that it thus brings
us to glory!

Let this comfort us against that co^fortlesse doctrine of falling away from
grace. Consider we from whom grace proceeds; eue^ from God the Father. And will
not God perfect the work of his own hands? I am persuaded that he that has
begun this good work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ,
Phil. 1. 6. The gifts of God are without repentance, Romans 11. 29. The righteous
shall never be moved, but had in everlasting remembrance, Psalm. 112. 6.

But we are weak and feeble, Object.
we have strong corruptions within us, and mighty and subtle tentations
without us, and therefore like to fall away.

True, Answ.
if there were not an higher power, and a stronger arm than our own to
support us. Our help stands in the name of the Lord. We are strong in the
power of his might, For it is God which stablisheth us in Christ, and has
anointed us, 2 Cor. 1. 21. Our stabilitie is derived from God the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost:

The grounds of our stability which we fetch from God, are these:

Ier. 24. 7. I will give them an heart to know me, that I am the Lord, and
they shall be my people, and I will be their God. So Ier. 32. 40. I will put my
fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Now to say that
these are general promises made unto the whole Church, and therefore not to be
appropriated to particular persons, will be but a silly evasion. For does not
the whole consist of particular members? And do not we find in Scripture,
promises made to particular persons generally applied, and likewise general
promises particularly applied? The Lord made a particular promise unto Joshua 1.
9. I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee. Which promise S. Paul, Hebr. 13. 5.
applies generally. Other instances there be.

Secondly, we prove it those whom the Lord has effectually, called should
utterly fall from grace and perish, it must needs follow, that God wants either
power to save those whom he would, or else wants faithfulness to save, as he
has promised, either of which wants, the devils themselves dare not avouch to
be in God.

Concerning his power, the Lord himself tells us, Esa. 43. 13.
Esaias 43. 13. I will do it, and who shall let? Again, Esa. 46. 10. Esa. 46. 10.
My counsel shall stand, and I will do whatsoever I will. Christ also tells
us, Ioh. 10. Ioh. 10. 29.
My Father which gave them me, is greater than all, and none is able to take
the^ out of my Fathers hand. For, says Peter, we are kept by the power of God
through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5.

And, for his faithfulness, that Wizard Balaam could say, Numb. 23. 19.
Numb. 23. 19. God is not as man, that he should die, neither as the son of
man, that he should repent: has he said it, and shall he not do it? and has
he spoken, and shall he not accomplish it? Yes surely, for the Lord is
faithful which will stablish you, and keep you from evil, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 3.

The Lord purposing to frame unto himself a Church, against which the gates of
hell should never be able to prevail, thought it fit to lay the foundation of
it deep and strong, even in himself, his own purpose. Things many times
decay and perish for want of a firm and good foundation. 2 Timothy 2. 19.
But the foundation of God (says Paul) remains sure, 2 Timothy 2. 19. So that
until such time as God does alter his purpose, which shall never be, for as
Malac. 3. 6. Mal. 3. 6.
I am the Lord, I change not: Gods children are sure to persevere in his grace:
For whom he once loves, to the end he loves them, Ioh. 13. 1.

Secondly, assurance of perseverance in the grace of God, may be gathered from
many things in the Son:

First, from his al-sufficiencie, Hebr. 7. 25. Heb. 7. 25.
He is able perfectly to save all those that come to God by him, Jude 24. Jude
24.
To him that is able to keep you, that you fall not, and to preserve you
faultlesse, etc. As he is able, so is he willing, Ioh. 6. 37. and 40.

Secondly, from the virtue of his passion and sufferings, Heb. 10. 14
Hebr. 10. 14. For with one offering has he consecrated for ever them that are
sanctified.

Thirdly, from the efficacy of his prayer, which God always hears. Christ
prayed for all believers, Ioh. 17. first, Ioh. 17. 15
that the Lord would keep them from evil, verse. 15. and secondly, That they
may be one with him, verse. 21. and thirdly, That they may be with him, and
behold his glory, verse. 24. And this prayer the Lord Christ our Advocate still
continues, though not in a vocal manner, Heb. 7. 25.
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for us, Heb. 7 25. These things
considered, it is as possible to pluck Christ out of his kingdom, as to rent
the poorest believer from him, once made a true and lively member of his
mystical body.

Thirdly, we prove it from the nature and office of the Spirit, which is to
seal up, and make sure the inheritance of Gods chosen. All that partake of the
covenant of grace, Ephesians. 1. 13.
are sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1. 13. which sealing is not
for a day, a month, or a year, but for ever, Ephesians. 4. 30.
unto the day of redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. The nature of a Seal (all know) is
to make things sure. The decree of the Medes and Persians, that it might be
irreuocable, was sealed with the Kings seal, Dan. 6. 8.
Dan. 6. 8. Lest the Disciples should come by night and steal Christ out of
the sepulcher wherein he was laid, Matthew. 27. 66.
They went and made the sepulcher sure, and sealed the stone, Matthew. 27. 66.
When we have put our seal to a writing, by the law of Nations it is firm.
Shall the Seal of a mortal man be of that force, that no law can alter it;
and shall the obsignation of the holy Spirit be of less virtue and power? This
were to make God less than man.

Again, it is the earnest of our inheritance, Ephesians. 1. 14.
until the redemption of the possession purchased unto the praise of his
glory. Now the nature of an earnest (we know) is to bind any contract or
bargain, and to give a kind of state, and possession of the thing bargained
for. Gods Spirit is his earnest which he has laid for his, to assure the
hearts of his children, of their full possession of that inheritance which
Christ has purchased, and God has prepared for them.

Now if any shall object, that we may either lose or forfeit our earnest, and so
miss of the bargain: you must know that the Spirit of God does never finally
and wholly depart from those unto whom it is once given, as appears Ioh. 14.
16, 17.

But had not David lost the Spirit of God, Object.
when he prayed so earnestly unto the Lord, that he would restore unto him the
joy of his salvation, Psalm. 51. 12.
and stablish him with his free Spirit?

This objection may be said to answer it self. Answ.
Could David, without the presence and assistance of the Spirit, have been
thus earnest with the Lord in prayer?

Again, a difference must be put betwixt the presence of the Spirit, and the
feeling or comfort of the Spirit. A hand benumbed with cold, or stunted with
some blow, may hold a thing, and yet have no feeling of it. It does not follow,
that (therefore) Gods Spirit has utterly forsaken a man, because in his
apprehension and feeling he takes it to be so. Therefore in stead of perplexing
and troubling thy self about needless fears of reiection and final falling
from grace, labor to be furnished with sound evidences of true grace; and
then (my life for thine) God, who has begun a good work in thee, Phil. 1. 6.
will confirm it until the day of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1. 6.

Here some weak believer may reply, Object.
and say; If I had as good a heart as many have; or if I were endowed with as
much grace as some be, I should then have less fear, and more hope of holding
out unto the end; but (alas) I am a poor sinful creature, full of frailties,
and compassed about with manifold infirmities, and therefore fear my self.

For thy comfort, Answ.
thou must know, that Gods grace is sufficient for thee, and his power is made
perfect through weakness. It is not the greatness, but the truth of grace
which the Lord respects, Matthew. 12. 20.
A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench,
until he bring forth judgment unto victory. If grace in thee be sound and
true, though it be no more than a grain of mustard seed, it shall be able to
bring thee unto glory.

It may be so, Object.
if I could believe this, but I cannot be fully persuaded of this thing.

If thou believe not, Answ.
yet abides God faithful, he cannot deny himself, as the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 2. 13.

Let no man, from this which has been spoken, grow secure and careless, as
if he were out of all fear and danger of losing his comfort, or lessening that
grace which he has received. For though it be true, that true grace cannot be
utterly lost, yet through pride, security, earthly-mindednesse, and the like,
the child of God may fall into such languishing fits, that the life of grace
may appear to be utterly extinct in him.

Suppose our bodies were of that temper and constitution, that no poison or
infection could make a rent betwixt the soul and them; were it not folly, nay
were it not madness for any one to cut and wound himself, or through
mis-dieting of himself, and surfets, so to impair his strength and health,
that his life should be a continual faintness and sickness. Even so it is
with us, in respect of grace, the life of our souls, for that soul which is
destitute of grace, is dead whiles lives, 1 Timothy 5. 6.
as appears 1 Timothy 5. 6. What though grace once seazing upon the soul, cannot
be wholly separated from it? yet may it through our spiritual distempers take
such a surfeit, as little strength, or power thereof may ever appear in us.
Therefore that no man may be settled upon the lees of security, or sing a
requiem unto his own soul, consider daily what strength and life is in that
grace which God has bestowed upon thee; lest before thou be aware of it,
grace be cooled and declining in thee; which if it be, will appear by these
symptoms.

The first is an inordinate Symptoms of declining in grace.
For as our bodily health is impaired and weakened, by feeding upon such things
as are in antipathie unto our nature and constitution; so it fares with our
souls, if we be bold with sin the souls bane, the strength of grace
grows quickly feeble in us.

The second is the abating when we find not the sweetness and comfort in the
Word, which formerly we have done; when we feed not upon the Word with that
desire and appetite which once we did, this argues some distemper in the
soul. For as in bodily meats, when they grow unsavory to our pallats, it is
most evident that our stomachs have in them some distemper; so it is with our
souls: if the same Word have not the same relish with us now, which sometime
it had, we may say there is some spiritual distemper.

we have done. Evil concoction of onr meat argues a cold stomach, or at least
an abatement of the native heat: so when people digest not Gods Word, the food
of their souls, but vomit it up again, either by storming against it,
censuring of it, or wilfully neglecting the power and practice of it, it is a
sign of declining in grace.

Fourthly and lastly, if labor, when a man begins to give in, when there is
not that strength and power in his arms, legs and back, which sometimes has
been, we see, and say, nature is debillitated and weakened in such a man;
even so, when we perform not holy duties with that zeal and spiritual vigor
(though it may be with less strength of body, the organes being decayed
through age or sickness) which formerly we have done, we may fear grace is
in some decle^sion.

Consider therefore, my brethren, I beseech you, seriously of these things,
that so you may (by the grace of God) be the better able to prevent declining,
or being fallen, may remember from whence ye are fallen, Apoc. 2. 5.
and repent, and do your first work.

Thus having acquainted you with the differences betwixt true and counterfeit
grace: having laid down the evidences of true grace; and thirdly, having
showed the reasons why grace is of that excellency and worth above all the
world: I now come to the fourth and last thing which I propounded, and that is,
to make some use and application of the point.

Is it so, Use 1.
as has been proved, that grace is the best thing we can partake of? Then
lamentable is the blindness, and pitiful is the ignorance of the greatest
part of the world, who neither see their want, nor yet the worth of grace. How
many be there who place all happiness in these outward things, riches,
honors, pleasures, etc? Taking those to be the only happy men, whose bellies
the Lord fills with earthly treasures. O, he is a happy man (say they) he
cannot do amiss, he has the world at will. These are such as live by sense,
Whose hearts go after their eyes, as Job 31. 7. These are such as mind
earthly things, and therefore say, as Psalm. 4. 6. Who will show us any good?
They encumber themselves with the things of this life, neglecting grace, the
only thing needful, yea, that which is of absolute necessity unto salvation.
Is it not a thing much to be lamented, that in this glorious noone-tide of the
Gospel, people should so dote upon the world, as if there were no other
goodness under the Sun, but to be great, to be honorable, to eat and drink,
to take their sports, and follow their pleasures and profits? If Paul in his
days could not speak, nor write it without grief and weeping, to consider
how many went a madding after the world, minding earthly things; surely if he
lived in these our times, his heart would not ache, but break, to see how eager
people are upon the world, how little grace is respected and look after, no
more than the reffuse and parings of our nails. Whereas, if a man had all the
world, and want grace, he has in account nothing, but if he want all outward
things, and be endowed with grace, he has enough, for grace is sufficient for
him: yet, alas, as the Israelites were scattered up and down Egypt to gather
stubble, Exodus 5. 12.
and to pick up strawes; so the greatest part of the world hunt up and down,
beat their brains, use their wits, and stretch their consciences for those
things which (compared with grace) are no better than straw or stubble. The
condition of many people would be a great deal more tolerable, (if any
toleration may be of evil) if their want of grace proceeded from mere
ignorance of the price and worth, or the necessity of grace: but too many
there be who are destitute of grace, merely through their neglect of the means
of grace; nay (which is worse) from a graceless and wicked contempt of it,
scoffing and scorning the practice of it, wheresoever they behold it. Where
shall a man live, or whither shall he go, where he shall not meet with some
scoffing and fleering Ismael, or some scorning Michol, to flout the practice of
piety, and tooth and nail to bring it into disgrace? If any amongst them be
(like Saul amongst the people) higher in matters of religion, or more forward
in the practice of holiness than themselves, how is he maligned and
contemned? He is hunched at (as Joseph was amongst his brethren, Genesis 37. 4.
who could not speak peaceably unto him) he is hated of them, as Jacob was
hated of Esau, because his own works were evil, and his brothers good. 1 Ioh.
3. 12. Had not our sweet Savior foretold us of the iniquity of these last
times, we might wonder, that these days of the Gospel should bring forth such
prodigious monsters as these are. Oh let us pity them, and bewail their
graceless condition. I have read of one Marcellus, a Roman Captain, who
having taken Siracusa, and entered the City, tears fell from his cheeks to
see so great a multitude of people, and so goodly a City to be captiuated.
Has the outward and bodily misery of others, occasioned sorrow in those that
were heathens, yea, enemies, and shall not we that are Christians weep and
mourn to see so many souls, so many of our friends and acquaintance to be
captiuated of sin and Satan, to perish body and soul through the want of
grace? Show we our true compassion, not only in being affected with the misery
and danger of graceless persons, but also in laboring to pull them out of the
snares of the Devil, of whom they are captiuated at his will. 2 Timothy 2. 26.
Of old, Gods people were enjoined to bring home their neighbors, yea, their
enemies Ox or Ass, if they met them going astray, Exodus 23. 4. Will God have
us to take care of Oxen and Asses, and not (much more) to regard the souls of
our brethren? Let him know, that he which conuerts a sinner from going astray
out of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of
sins, Iam. 5. 20.

Again, Use. 2.
is grace the most excellent thing we can attain unto? Then let this set an
edge upon our affections, let it be as a spur in our sides to make us mend our
pace, and make more haste after grace. If you were persuaded of your happiness
in the possession thereof, if you were sensible of your misery in the want of
it, as Rachel cried unto her husband for children, Genesis 30. 1. Give me
children, or else I die; so thou would cry out, Lord, give me of thy
grace, or else I die. I see how wretched and miserable I am wanting grace: Oh
what shall I do, that I may obtain grace? Be entreated therefore to throw
down thy self before the throne of grace; confess thy sins unto the God of
Grace; entreat his Majesty to pity the poor confounded work of his own
hands, by the malice of Satan and the poison of sin most woefully defiled.
Beseech him for his Christ's sake, to breathe into thy empty soul some blast
of grace, to fill thy empty, barren, and graceless heart with the fruits of
his Spirit. This earnest desire of thine will be a good evidence to thy soul
of some good coming toward thee, of some seed of grace already sown in thee,
it being an effect of grace to bewail the want of grace, and to be earnest
with the Lord for a supply thereof. If thou were in any bodily want or
necessity, Town and Country (peradventure) should hear, if not ring of it.
Thou can heartily pray for, and earnestly seek out for outward necessaries,
food, clothing, fire, etc. But to whom do thou make thy complaint of the want
of grace? Whereas grace being the most excellent thing, should in the first
place be desired for thy self, thy wife, thy husband, thy children, etc. If
thou have grace, thou have gotten a rich portion, a great possession, thy line
is fallen in a fair ground. If thou see grace wrought in the hearts of thy
children, thou may be freed from carfulness, or seeking great things for
them, they have a great, a rich portion. The Heathen could say that Virtue was
a sufficient Dowry. And the Scripture says, The Lord will not famish the soul
of the righteous.

But how hard a thing is it for a Minister of Christ to beat this into the
heads of people, especially the poorer sort, who most neglect grace; and
therefore they can rise early, lie down late, and eat the bread of
carfulness; they can call and cry for these outward things for themselves
and theirs, but how few will stir one foot, or wet a finger for the obtaining
of grace? How many poor souls never had any one thought tending that way? not
so much as once dream of the necessity of grace, and therefore trouble not
themselves about it? Let all such beware, lest as a Captain (who finding one
of his watchmen which kept sentinel asleep) cut off his head, saying, Dead I
found thee, and dead I leave thee: so the Lord cut off these with the sword of
his wrath and vengeance, leaving them for ever dead in sin, as he found them.

Thirdly, Use. 3.
if Grace be the most excellent thing, why should we not labor and strive to
grow in grace, as we are exhorted, 2 Pet. 3. 18.
2 Pet. 3. 18? An honest and good heart is never weary of increasing its stock
of grace, as worldlings are unwearied in heaping up transitory riches, and
lading themselves with clay, though sometimes it falls out that outward things
have their satiety, and we may be cloyed with them; whereas in grace there is
no nimiety, a man's heart cannot be cloyed, nor clogged with it. Our life is a
wayfare, a walk, no time of standing, we must still forwards, on and on, as
those that have a great journey to go. As the Lord said to Elias when he
found him sitting and sleeping under a Juniper tree, Up and eat, thou have a
great journey to go, 1 King. 19. 7. So we have a long way, and a short day to
finish it in; and therefore had need bestirre our selves to purpose: Therefore
as Paul said to the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1.
1 Thessalonians. 4. 1. so I to you: Now I beseech you brethren, and exhort you in the
Lord Jesus, that ye increase more and more. Grace in the heart of Gods child,
should be like the waters flowing from the Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 47. 3, 4.
Ezekiel. 47. 3, 4. which were at the first to the ancles, and after to the knees,
and so to the loins, and at last to a great deep that could not be passed
over. Though grace below and shallow at the first in us, we should so nourish
and cherish it, that it may grow to ripeness, and full holiness in the fear
of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Which that we may the better do, observe these
directions. First, we must be careful to remove away all evil hindering grace;
and secondly, set upon the practice of that good which will further it.

First of all, Take away evil things.
we must be careful to pluck up root and rind of al such weeds as may
ouer-grow, choke, and hinder the prospering of grace. One maine and rank weed
is spiritual pride and selfe-conceitednesse; which grows too fast in the best
soil, being watered and cherished by the Devil; who when he cannot procure
the child of God to stoop to his lure, and bite at his bait of impiety and
profaneness, then labors he to poison him with his own venom, to puff him
up and make him swel with pride of his gifts. He will make him proud of his
knowledge, proud of his preaching, praying, etc. yea, (rather than fail) he
will make him proud of his humility, proud that he is not proud. Pluck up this
weed therefore, for it much hinders grace. 1 Pet. 5. 5.
God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. He fills the hungry
with good things, and sends away the full empty, Luke 1. 53. Humble your
selves therefore, and the Lord will exalt you. The more humble and lowly thou
art, the freer thou art from shaking and ouer-turning: for we see low houses
stand fast, when many lofty and high buildings are blown down and fall. The
higher any hill or mountain is, the more barren it is; for the dew and rain
which waters the earth, to make it fruitful, tarries not upon high hills, but
falls down into the valleys, and makes them fruitful; even so the means of
grace lighting upon an high and lofty spirit, do fall from him, without soaking
or entering into him; whereas lighting upon the humble and lowly, they make him
fertile, for the humble he will teach his way, Psalm. 15. 9.
Psalm. 25. 9.

Another weed which must be plucked up, is selfe-confidence, or security.
When Christians begin to bear themselves upon their own strength, and to grow
presumptuous, the Lord often withdrawes from them the strength of his grace, and
then down they fall. David was too selfe-confident, Psalm. 30. 6.
when he said, I shall never be moved: therefore God soon hides away his face,
and David was as quickly troubled. But of all other examples there is none for
our purpose more remarkable than that of Peter, who took it in foul scorn to
be thought to be such a dastard, and whiteliuerd soldier, yea, such a
false-hearted servant, as to forsake his Lord and Master in greatest
extremity; and therefore (if you will take his word) he will never flinch, he
will die for Christ, before he will deny him. But (when Christ foretold his
Apostles of their flinching from him) if Peter had thus replied; Lord, it may
be thou see more into me, and know my heart better than I know my self;
we are of our selves weak and frail, ready to pull in our heads upon every
storm; but Lord, the spirit is willing, though the flesh be frail; of our
selves we can do nothing any further than thou will assist us; strengthen us
therefore with thy grace, and then we will never fly from thee. If thus Peter
had answered Christ, all had been well; but being foole-hardy, and
selfe-confident, the Lord sets him upon his own legs, leaves him unto
himself; and what became of this boaster? at the word of a Maiden he denies
and forsweares Christ, curses, and damnes himself if ever he knew him. Thus
when Gods children grow careless, too confident, or are ouer-take^ with a dead
sleep of carnal security, the Lord often stands by, lets Satan loose, and lays
the reins upon their own necks, whereby they come oft-times to be ouer-taken
with gross and shameful sins: the Lord in wisdom using (as bodily Physicians
often do) desperate medicines and remedies, for the curing of some desperate
disease prevailing in them, or growing upon them. Again, there is another weed
to be plucked up, and that is Insinceritie, if I may so call it; the want of
truth and uprightness of heart: call it Hypocrisy, if you will, that stinking
weed, which like the wild Gourd, 2 King 4. 40.
sowred all the Pottage, 2 King. 4. 40. The Lord loves truth in the inward
parts, and loathes the contrary. Uprightness and sincerity helps forward the
work of grace, as appears, Psalm. 84. 11. The Lord will give grace and glory,
and no good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly. The want of
uprightness will make grace to wither. It is not possible for that tree to
stand long, which is rotten at the root, it may for a while seem fresh and
green, but as it takes no root downward, so it will not (long) bear fruit
upward, for when the wind begins to blow hard, down it falls. Whereas a gracious
heart (which truly delights in the Law of God, and meditates therein alone in
the night, as well as openly in the day) is like a tree planted by the rivers
of waters, Phil. 1. 1, 2.
that will bring forth her fruit in due season, whose leaf shall not fade, but
be green, and never cease yielding fruit.

As these weeds must be plucked out of the heart, or else grace cannot possibly
thrive or prosper; so there be certain briers and thorns which must be
stubbed up, or else grace will quickly be choked in us. Mat. 13. 22
These thorns are the cares of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches,
which while some have lusted after, they erred from the faith, 1 Timothy 6. 10.
and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.

These things, says Paul, 1 Timothy 6. 11. we must fly, and follow after
righteousness, godliness, faith, etc. implying that grace will not thrive, if
love of money be not rooted out of us. What choked grace (if any was) in
Demas, but the love of the world? Oh the multitude of souls that have
miscarried, and for ought we know to the contrary, might have done well, if
riches had not been; not that riches are the cause, but an occasion of their
miscarrying! What parted Christ, and that hopeful young man in the Gospel?
Mat. 19. was it not the love of riches? Many have begun well in their youth,
and given good hope, but in their age have grown cold, through the love of the
world. Job 31. 7.
If once men's hearts begin to go after their eyes, and to be set upon the
world, twenty to one but grace goes to decay in them; for the world will afford
a man little time to exercise those things which hold up the life of grace; as
prayer, reading, hearing, etc. If the world has seized upon the heart, it
fumes up into the head, and fills the brain, sleeping and waking with
restless thoughts, which way to compass business, contriue things and bring
ends together, so as scarce once in the day a good thought comes to mind, but
one occasion or other of the world stifles it, or shuffles it out, so as it
comes to nothing. Therefore if riches increase, Psalm. 62. 10.
set not your heart upon the^, Psalm. 62. 10. Use the^ as thorns for thy weal,
to stop a gap withal, to fence thee from outward harms, or to warm thee, but
lie not upon them, hold them not too hard, lest they strike into thee, and
would thee; remember always that they are thorns, good in their lawful use,
and when they are rightly husbanded, but otherwise noxious and hurtful. They
are thorns, they will ouer-grow and choke all good things that grow near
them, if they be let alone.

Again, there be many bad humors, foolish and noisome lusts which must be
purged out of the heart, or else grace will never thrive nor prosper in it; to
wit, envy, hatred, malice, guile, dissimulation, filthiness, evil speakings,
and the like, which corrupt goodness. Therefore S. Peter exhorting his
brethren, to whom he wrote, to embrace the sincere milk of the Word, that
they might grow thereby, prepares the^ to this, by aduising the^ to lay aside
those base distempers, for they do much hinder the growth of Grace: where they
are, they take away the glory and beauty of a Christian, and make him unseemly
in the eyes of his brethren; they darken his luster, and do blot and blemish
his holy profession. Therefore away with these, lay these aside, not as a man
does his apparel, with a resolution to take it up again; but as the captive
maid, when she was to be married, laid aside the garment of her captivity,
Deuteronomy. 21. 13. Deuteronomy. 21. 13.
with a resolution never more to put it on. 1 Pet. 2. 11.
Abstain from all fleshly lusts, for they fight against thy soul, 1 Pet. 2.
11. As Eastern winds do nippe herbs and flowers, and cold storms do hinder
trees from growing: so fleshly lusts nip grace in the bud, as it were, and
blast it in the bloome, that (if it dies not, yet) it comes not forward so
fast as otherwise it would.

Last of all, take heed and beware of the needless and familiar society of
graceless and godless persons; for they are the quenchcoale, nay, the very
bane and poison of grace unto many. Prou. 13. 20.
He that is a companion of fools, shall be destroyed; or as Iunius has it, He
shall be made worse, Prou. 13. 20. God has branded wicked persons for fools,
they are fools in grain; therefore come out from amongst the^, lest thou
partake of their folly. They are pitch, if thou touch them, they will defile
thee. There is a kind of poison and venom in the words and society of the
wicked, which will fret, as the Apostle says, like a Gangrene; and men's souls
are more ready to take the co^tagion of sin, than their bodies are to take the
infection of the plague. It would take up a long time, and prove a large
discourse, to show how many ways, and by what degrees mischief does grow by
haunting wicked company. By often hearing filthy and obscene speeches, zeal in
many is quenched, and such language grows in-offensiue. By often seeing lewd
prankes and wicked practices, men can look on without dislike. Thus the
society of the wicked quells a man's hatred of their wicked courses, and so
inchants him, that (if he cast not in his lot amongst the^ yet) he has no
power to gainsay or reprove the^. Therefore as you love your souls, loath the
company of the wicked. Can a man take fire into his bosom, and not burn? live
amongst, or delight to be with the wicked, and not be ungodly? Do thou not
know that a little leaven will sour the whole lump? And as the old saying is,
One scabbed sheep infects the whole flock. Therefore say as David, Psalm. 119.
115.
Away from me ye wicked, I will keep the Commandments of my God, Psalm. 119.
115. If thou would have grace thrive in thee, Be a companion of those that
fear God and keep his Precepts, Psalm. 119. 63. For evil men and deceivers
grow worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3. 13.
deceiving, and being deceived. Now as these evils must be avoided, so (if you
would grow in grace) good things must be practiced; as the means to procure
health of body is first to purge out malignant humors, and then to take
cordialls, and to observe a good diet.

Therefore, Good things to be followed.
first of all labor to keep thy heart soluble, be every day abased at the
sight of thy sins, and the sense of thy vileness and unworthiness. The way
for a man to get any good at Gods hand, is to acknowledge and bewail his
emptiness, to grieve and mourn for his unworthiness. God has made a promise
to fill the hungry with good things, Apoc. 21. 6. I will give to him that is
athirst, Apoc. 21. 6
of the Well of the water of life freely, etc. 1 Pet. 5. 5. He gives grace to
the humble. Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he
may exalt you.

Secondly, use the society of Gods people, by whose example you may be
encouraged to godliness, and by whose means you may be furthered in the way
of happiness. Firebrands being laid together and blown, will increase their
heat and light; so does co^munity and society with those where the Word of God
is kept on foot, by holy and Christian conference, increase the light of
knowledge and the love of goodness in us.

Thirdly, Be frequent in hearing and reading of the Word; the Word of God is
the Word of grace, Act. 20. 32.
which is able to build us up further, Act. 20. 32. Therefore, 1 Pet. 2. 2. As
newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the Word, that you may grow
thereby. If this Word be thy delight, it will make thee fruitful, Psalm. 1. 2,
3. Hence it is, that in Esaias 55. 10, 11. the Word is compared unto rain, which
waters the earth, and makes it to bring forth, and bud, that it may give
seed, etc. The barrenness of many souls proceeds from the want of the Word to
make them fruitful. Paul tells the Colossians, Chap. 1. 6. That they were
fruitful through the Gospel, Col. 1. 6.
from the day that they heard it, and truly knew the grace of God. The ministry
of the Word is Gods holy ordinance, to beget and increase grace in his
children, beating them off from the world, raising them up to a higher pitch of
heauenly-mindednesse, teaching them which way to prevent occasions of sin, and
to beat back the tentations of the Devil, etc.

Oh, pity then, pity those poor souls, which want these living waters, and
this bread of Life. How many thousands in this our English Israel perish for
want of vision, the means of grace? What will become of all cruel
soule-murtherers in the day of the Lord? Oh let us continually bow the knees of
our hearts to the Father of spirits, that he would put bowels of compassion
into those that have authority, that the Church may be purged of all unsavory
salt, and a supply made of a faithful Ministry, which might feelingly and
tenderly respect the flock of Christ, which he has purchased with his blood:
And let all such (as to whom Wisdom has sent her maidens, Prou. 9. 3, 4, 5.
calling them that are destitute of wisdom, to come and eat of her meat, and
drink of her wine) know that God looks for fruits of increase answerable to
the means of grace bestowed upon them, lest they be in the number of those
which receive the grace of God in vain, 2 Cor. 6. 1.

Fourthly, if thou desire to increase thy stock of grace, set thy grace on
work, Prou. 10. 4.
let it not be idle. The diligent hand makes rich, says Solomon, Prou. 10. 4.
And, Pro. 14. 13
in all labor there is abundance, Prou. 14. 13. I dare boldly say, it is in
nothing more true, nay in nothing so true, as in the approuement of grace; use
grace and have, yea, increase grace. That servant which used and improued his
Masters Talents, gained by the^, and increased them. Whereupon Christ inferred,
Matthew. 25. 29.
Mat. 25. 29. Unto every one that has, it shall be given, and he shall have
abundance. Instruments and vessels, for want of use, do (oft-times) grow
worse, and unserviceable. Gifts and graces of the Spirit, are bettered by
improuing them; according to the common saying, Use makes perfect. Hence it is,
that 1 Timothy 4. 15. Paul advises him, These things exercise, and give thy self
unto them, that it may be seen how thou profitest

Fifthly and last of all, be earnest with the Lord in prayer, that he would
put a spirit of life and power into all those means used by thee, or bestowed
upon thee, for the increase of grace. 1 Cor. 3. 6.
For Paul may plant, and Apollos may water, but God must give the increase, 1
Cor. 3. 6. without his blessing all means are but naked and empty. He is the
Author and perfecter of every good thing begun in any. Hence it is that the
Apostle prays for the Philippians 1. 9. that their love may abound more and
more. And that the Colossians 1. 9. may be fulfilled with knowledge, and verse.
10. fruitful in all good works. Teaching us, that prayer is the only help to
obtain increase of any good from God.

Now because of the deceit^fulnesse of our hearts, and the abundance of
self-love, which abides in the best of Gods children, we are too ready to
flatter, and to think too well of our selves, taking oft-times mole-hils for
mountains; it will not be amiss to make some privy search, whether we
find any growth of grace in us, or whether it stand at a stay, or be in
declension. A shame it will be for all such as live under the means, upon whom
God does daily bestow cost, watering them with heavenly dewes, if they thrive
not. If grace be true and not counterfeit, more or less, some way or other it
will grow. For to say truth, it is only the good heart that grows and brings
forth fruit: and evil heart may give some appeara^ce, make some show of
growth, but grows not like to an Atrophe, one whose meat does him no good, he
eats and drinks, and it may be, with a greedy appetite deuoures more than is
fitting, yet battles not, but rather falls away; every day more meager and
lean than other: This (as was touched before) shows there is no sound union
betwixt Christ and such: that they are no true and lively members of Christ's
body: for the^ there would appear some fruitfulness, Ioh. 15. 5. He that
abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit. Well then,
seeing the Lord has planted us amongst the rivers of waters, let us take a
view of our growth and fruitfulnes.

First, thou may know thou growest in grace, if thou growest more and more
into a dislike of sin, (as was said in the beginning) if thy wants and
weaknesses do work in thee daily, deeper humiliation. For as grace discouers
corruption, so the more it grows (as a light that comes into a dark room) the
more it shows us the filthiness and odiousness thereof, and makes us more and
more ashamed of it.

Secondly, thou may know thou growest in grace, by thine appetite to Gods
ordinances. Do thou taste more and more sweetness in the Word? Is prayer
more and more delightful to thy soul? Do thou receive more and more comfort
by the Sacrament? Does thy soul more and more delight to be in the place where
Gods honor dwells? And are the feet of those that bring glad tidings of
salvation more and more beautiful in thine eyes? Whence arise these fruits,
but from that seed of grace sown in thy soul? I tell thee for a truth, that
if these fruits be in thee, and thy affections to the means of grace, be more
and more entire and hearty, thou need no more doubt of the growth of grace
in thy soul, then thou would, or do question the growth of thy body, when
thou find thy stomach unto thy daily food fresh and quick, and the parts
and members of thy body, every day more active and lively than other, and more
strong and able unto their several offices. For certainly it is only grace
which makes the ordinances of God always sweet unto us. For to a graceless
pallet they are for the most part unsavory. What made David so much to long
after Gods Sa^ctuary? It was the grace of his heart, which set an edge upon his
affections, and made his soul (even as the Heart brayeth for the reuers of
waters) to thirst after God, Psalm. 42. 1.
Psalm. 42. 1. When grace grows, our love unto the means increases, 2 Cor.
10. 15. 2 Cor. 10. 15.
We hope (says Paul) when your faith shall increase, to be magnified by you.

Therefore consider, whether thine appetite to Gods ordinances increases. Thou
may know it by these notes.

First of all, if thou find thy soul maruellously refreshed with them,
Psalm. 36. 8. Psalm. 36. 8.
They shall be satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and thou shall give
the^ drink out of the rivers of thy pleasure.

Secondly, if Gods ordinances do raise thee up to an higher pitch of
heauenly-mindednesse, and do more and more beat off thine affections from the
world, and mar thy taste of earthly things, through the abundance of
sweetness which thou find in holy duties.

But may not a graceless and wicked heart find sweetness in Gods ordinances?
Object.
Ezekiel had a pleasant voice in the ears of the wicked, Chap. 33. 32. So
Herod heard John Baptist gladly. And the temporary believer, who resembles the
stony ground, Matthew. 13. 20.
hears the Word, and receives it with joy, Mat. 13. 20. And Heb. 6. 4. Some
that fall away, may taste of the heavenly gift. And verse. 5. taste of the good
Word of God, and the powers of the world to come. How then is the taste of the
godly distinguished from the taste of the wicked?

The taste of the wicked proceeds only from tasting of the ordinances of God,
Answ.
not feeding upon them; whereas the taste of the godly comes from feeding upon
the^. Now you know there is a great difference betwixt a Cooks tasting of
meats, who dips but his finger in them, or touches them but with the tip of
his tongue; and his taste that eats of the meat, and takes it down into his
stomack^. A wicked man may taste of Gods ordinances, but he eats them not,
he feeds not upon them, he does not digest them, they make no good blood, no
spiritual health or strength in him, he quickly vomits them up again, so as
his soul thriues not by them; whereas the good heart receives the Word and
thriues by it, Luke 8. 15
For he brings forth fruit with patience.

Fourthly, Use 4.
if there be that excellency in Grace, this makes wonderfully for the comfort
of all Gods children, in regard of many high favors, and singular privileges
which they have a right unto. First of al, this may comfort them in and against
all those tentations, whatsoever do or may befall them, either in respect of
their kind and nature, or in respect of their strength and measure. Every one
feels most where and how his shoo does pinch him; and therefore in the agony
of his soul cries out (I know it to be true) Never poor soul tempted as I am
tempted, and speaks in the language of the Church, Lam. 1. 12. Behold and see;
if any sorrow be like to my sorrow* for thy comfort consider what Paul speaks
to the Corinthians, as weak and as foulely defiled as thou have been, 1 Cor.
10. 13. 1 Cor. 10. 13.
There has no tentation taken you, but such as appertains to men; and God is
faithful, which will not suffer you to be tempted above that you be able, but
will even give the issue with the tentation, that you may be able to bear it.
Christ praying, that if it were possible the cup might pass from him, offered
up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears unto him that was
able to save him from death, Heb. 5. 7.
and was also heard in that which he feared. He was, and he was not heard; not
heard, because not exempted from tasting of that bitter cup of his Passion: for
therefore came he into the world, that he might drink thereof, as himself
acknowledged: and yet heard, in that, strength and comfort was so abundantly
ministered unto him, that by suffering he overcame. And therefore, as one that
had experience of our infirmities, he has taught us to pray, lead us not into
tentation, but deliver us from evil: as if we should say, howsoever (holy
Father) thou have determined to expose us for our trial, unto tentations, yet
suffer us not to be vanquished or overcome by any evil. Now we know, or at
the least should know, that (if we pray in faith) God always hears us: if not
to be preserved from the tentation, yet to be vpheld and assisted with
sufficiency of grace to endure the tentation: so as either the power of it
shall be weakened and abated, or else our strength to bear it, so increased,
that we shall by the help of his grace, be able to wade through and overcome it.
For God knows our strength, and what our backs are able to bear, and therefore
does balance and proportion the tentation to the strength of his children;
weaklings or younglings he will not ouer-load with such burdens as may break
their backs, or crush them to pieces; they shall have light tentations.
Whereas his strong ones have strong trialls; yet no other than such as they
shall manfully undergo, without fainting under them, though not without the
feeling of the smart of them. So that as they have just cause to cry out with
S. Paul, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? So also in experience of Gods gracious assistance, no less cause to
break forth into thankfulness, and to triumph with Paul, saying, I thank my
God through Jesus Christ, etc. For is God the God of Paul only? Is his grace
sufficient only for Paul, or some few other specially beloved, endowed with
supereminent graces? Is he not also our help, our strength, he that yields
sufficiency of grace to every poor sinner, that trusts in his goodness,
and believes in his promise? Surely yes; for the Lord is nigh unto all that
call upon him, he also will hear their cry and will help them, Psalm. 145.
18, 19.

Secondly, this may wonderfully comfort us against the outward cross, as well
as the inward tentation. The way to heaven (we know) is not strowed with rushes
and violets, but beset with thorns; a rough, narrow, and troublesome way,
whereupon many of Gods children are disheartened, and are ready to faint under
the cross, when it lies any thing heavy upon them. If these had eyes to see,
and hearts to consider of the excellency and sufficiency of grace, which makes
us willing to undergo whatsoever the Lord will lay upon us, well content with
the Lords ordering and disposing of us; they would rejoice in heaviness, and
be comforted against the cross. It may be thou think thy troubles are such,
as thou shall never be able to overcome, and therefore art ready even to faint
under the^, and give over in the plain field. Oh but consider the excellency
of grace, wherewith the Lord has hitherto supported thee in thy afflictions!
Has not God said, I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee, Heb. 13. 5. Has he
not said, My grace shall be sufficient for thee?

What though thou be plunged into a gulf of sorrow through manifold
afflictions which have befallen thee? 1 Pet. 1. 6.
so that for a season thou art in heaviness through them; yet through the
power of grace thou shall be able to hold up thy head from sinking, yea to
rejoice in the end with joy unspeakable and glorious, 1 Pet. 1. 8. What though
the Devil swell and rage against thee? What though his wicked instruments do
combine and bandie themselves against thee, seeking to spoil thee of all
outward and inward comfort? What though thy nearest and dearest friends do now
turn away their faces from thee, yea, hate and abhor thee as an outcast and
alien? Let David's comfort be thine, who being in great sorrow because of the
rage of the people which intended to stone him, comforted himself in the Lord
his God, 1 Samuel 30. 6. So do thou comfort thy self in the grace of God. Has
he bestowed his love upon thee? Has he given thee of his grace? Though thy
outward calamities be never so many, never so great, though thine enemies be
never so mighty, never so powerful, yet stronger is he that is in thee, than
he that is in the world, 1 Ioh. 4. 4. If God grace thee, what though all the
world should cast the dung of reproach in thy face to disgrace thee? If he love
thee, his love is better than life, and he will keep thee from taking
infection or hurt, from the rage and malice of all the world that hate thee.

Last of all, the consideration of that which has been spoken concerning the
excellency of Grace, may comfort thee against the dregs and relics of
corruption, and the remnants of the old man yet abiding in thee, which, it may
be, do so perplex thy soul, and wound thy conscience, that thou gronest under
this pressure, and cryest out with Paul, Romans 7. 24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
Know, thy condition is no other, no worse than the best of Gods children, who
so long as they live in this earthly tabernacle, do carry about them the
remainder of sin, which will defile their best actions, often blemish their
profession, yea, grieve Gods holy Spirit, and make their heavenly Father
offended with the^; yet comfort thy self, and be assured, that though
corruption may vex and molest thee, it shall never subdue, nor vanquish thee,
because of the grace of God abiding in thee: For sin shall not have dominion
over you: for ye are not under the Law, but under Grace, Romans 6. 14. It is a
good sign there is life, where wounds do bleed and smart; the grief of thy
soul for sin, argues the life of grace abiding in thee; for those that are
dead in sins, feel no smart, are not grieved with corruption. Sin is not
ponderous in the heart and conscience of graceless persons; because it is in
its proper eleme^t and place, where it is welcomed and entertained, where it
lives and reigns. Therefore, if at any time thou feel (as which of Gods
children feel not?) a rebellious law in thy members, Romans 7. 23.
rebelling against the law of thy mind, and carrying thee into the practice of
such evils as thou hate, and have vowed against, let not this perplex thy
soul, as if grace had forsaken thee, because it is no better with thee; but
collect thy spirits, call upon grace, and say, Where art thou, my friend, my
guide, my hope, my help? stand by me, and strengthen me against corruption,
which is too strong for me; if thou help me not, I am undone. I tell thee for
truth, (for I know (what I say) to be true) that by the virtue and strength of
grace, a poor distressed soul cleaving to the ground, abhorring its self, and
lying at the very brinke of despair, ready to be swallowed up of Death and
Hell, consulting and resolving to try whether hell torments, or the hellish
pangs of an afflicted conscience were more tolerable; I say, a poor soul in
such a desperate condition, has by the strength of grace been brought back
from death to life, and as it were from hell to heaven, received new, or
revived again its old comfort, been at defiance with sin and Satan,
challenged Hell and Death, and bid them do their worst, saying, Who shall
separate me from the love of God? Romans 8. 38.
etc. Therefore yield not either to thine own corruptions, or Satan's
tentations, though they have got thee on the hip, and given thee the foil. Set
speedily upon the repairing of grace, and making up those breaches which sin
has made in thy soul and conscience. A good husband, as he has a care to
keep his house wind-tite and water-tite, so if through the violence of any
storm or tempest, any thing be blown down or rent, he speedily sets upon the
repairing of it, lest through negligence and delays, things grow worse and
worse: even so deals every good man with his own soul: if any thing be
amiss, or out of order, he lets not all run to ruin, but speedily sets upon
the repairing and amending of that which is any way weakened in him.

Now unto him that is able to keep you, Jude 24. 25
that ye fall not, and to present you faultlesse before the presence of his
glory; that is, To God only wise, our Savior, be Glory, and Majesty, and
Dominion, and Power, both now, and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

