THE BVRNING BVSH, NOT CONSVMED

Wherein (either under all deep sense of Wrath; or hardness of Heart, one may
judge, whether he be the Child of God, or not, etc. Chiefly receiving
satisfaction concerning the Sin against the Holy Ghost.

Perused by I. D. and diverse other Divines.

Judge nothing before the time. Secret things belong unto God.

1 Thessalonians. 5.9. For God has not appointed us to Wrath, but to obtain
salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, who died for us, that whether we wake or
sleep, we should live together with him.

LONDON, Printed by T. C. and B. A. for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at
his shop in Fleet-streete, over against the great Conduite. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, M. WILLIAM TOTHIL, and M. FRANCIS DRAKE, Esquiers,
Justices of the Peace, etc. and to the no less religious and virtuous
Gentlewomen, Mrs. KATHERINE TOTHIL, and Mrs. JOAN DRAKE, their wives, the
increase and perpetuity of all Happiness, etc.
Right Worshipful,
AS my wandering thoughts were musing which way I might best acknowledge with
perpetual thanks, that duty which my best love owes unto your many
vndeser-ued bypast kindenesses: this little Book (then ready for the
Press,) did step forth, proffering so to accomplish my desire, as that
nothing (save timelesse Time in the general dissolution) should be able quite
to blotte out, and deface the memory of this my wish: which since it has now
so faithfully performed, I beseech you to accept thereof: that like unto
PHILIPS little Boy) it may put you in mind, not only that there is a terrible
endless wrath prepared for wilful, final, impenitent sinners: but also that
(if need be) it may help you how to shun the same.

Gladly it would have singled forth some one of you, but that the strict bonds
both of Nature and grace, which in love has so united you (as though you had
but one soul) did strictly forbid the same: wishing me rather, that (since
such a fast Gordian knotte had already tied your affections) I should likewise
do my best to unite you in a piece of Paper: Not that thereby I should any
thing add unto your happiness: (whose Cup already runs over with a
plentiful measure, pressing down of all blessings) but that thereby I might
show, how far my fainte and weak wishes extend: that as already upon
Earth, GOD has buylt you a sure House upon a Rock, so also that you would
endeavor to build your selves upon the Rock CHRIST JESUS: that at last when
(at the all-shaking voice of the Arch-Angell, and Trumpet of GOD, sounding)
downe-rayning Fire with floods of horrors, blown with the tempestuous
whyrlewinde of indignation, shall ouerwhelme the wicked, and seem to dossolue
the whole frame of Nature: You (like his Doves) may find a sure shelter in the
holes of this Rock, until (Judgment finished,) with all Saints, you may
mount with Him, to possess for ever those infinite unspeakable Joys, the
greatness whereof can not be known, until possessed.

Yours in duty, much and ever bound, I. HEART.

TO ALL THOSE WHO EIther (for the present) Thunder-beaten with the terror of
the wrath of GOD, mourn in secret, under any sense of the same, or feel
hardness of heart, much Peace, Comfort, Softness, and speedy deliverance.
Dear Souls.
THough I know assuredly that the plodding thoughts of both sorts of you, to
whom I now write, uses for the most part to be rapt up; the one, with the
imagination of Wraths all-ouerturning deluge which you fear, presently to
precipitate you, (as I think) in the eternal never dying furnace of
all-deuouring flames: the other, with seeming substantial thoughts (grounded
upon former and present stony impenitent effects) imagining your selves to be
as sure of reprobation, as though already (assured by some Angel of the Decree)
Caines mark had sealed you on the forehead, as sheep to the slaughter: which
now so transporteth your hopeless souls beyond all limits of moderation, that
you can lend your ears to hear no voice, which sounds not of Desperation,
because either you think it is too late, or in vain, to use the means: or
that Wraths ouerpressing load so keeps you down in the floods of sorrows,
that you are not able to look up.

Yet could I not choose but send unto your view this little Treatise, which by
(Gods providence coming into my hands) only for your sakes, did now see the
light: wishing, that though (of all others) I was least able to comfort you;
yet, that therein you might find a word in due time: which I know you shall, if
you bannish Carnal reason, Sense, Curiosity in prying into Gods Decree before
you use the means; and that fast rooted natural Popery of the soul, which
ever desires to find somewhat in nature, some sense, some feeling, some
goodness, wherewith to be worthy in some sort, to lay hold of Christ.

I should exceed the limits of a short Epistle (if I were able) to reckon up
the free proclamations of the book of God; in all which, Christ in the Act of
apprehending him, tyeth you unto no condition, but freely to take and lay hold.
It may be, you will object, that he calls only the weary and laden, and so
you say you are not: but to leave that question, whether you be laden or not,
and who must be judge, (since for the most part in temptation you belie your
selves) who knows not that Christ in that place rather incourageth such to
come, then precisely shows, that only those who feel such a burden, must,
and can come and lay hold. O that you were not thus injurious to the peace of
your souls, so much to rely upon Sense and feeling, so much debasing the
strength and glory of Faith, which many times without sense (and beyond all
reason) apprehends CHRIST: thus offering violence unto his Kingdom: who thus
apprehended, there follows the spirit of Mourning, and Compassion, Feeling,
and other graces.

I wonder if the Devil can once fasten this temptation upon you, that you must
have such and such a measure of faith, feeling, and repentance, to lay hold of
Christ, what measure his unmeasurable subtilty will be contented with. Sure I
am, if he may be vmpire, you may be dissolved in tears and despair, before he
say hoe. Your strongest let in laying hold of Christ (as may be seen by most
of all your Objections) arises from your prying into the Decree of God, to be
assured of your election: which because you cannot find, (judging of your
selves, according to your former actions, and thinking God like unto you) you
conclude all is in vain, you know you are Reprobates: there is no hope: so
entertaining all threatenings; and rejecting the Promises. Of which pretended
knowledge, if you should be examined by God (as Adam was) whence thus you know
your selves to be naked Reprobates? I imagine your answer (with his) must
needs be, that Satan has deceived and deluded you so to think.

And indeed the truth is, that the most part of you look too much at the
Decree of God; your measure of sense and feeling, desiring the assurance of
salvation, as it were, at your first entry into Christianity: which is the
glorious price and Crown, waiting for you at the end of the race: If you so
run that you may obtain.

I know you would think him an unreasonable Soldier, who should desire to
be a Colonnell or a General the first year, which is not obtained without
long service, great valor, much watching, waiting, and often hazard of life:
And that your servant would much displease you, in demanding his years wages
before he had done a weeks work. Just so is your case, when at first you
would be assured of your Election and Salvation, before you have done a
quarter or half your work; (Nay sometimes scarce begun the same) chiefly when
you refuse the way of life, which is, to walk in the means, whereby only we
attain the assurance of salvation.

It may be you think me a miserable comforter, thus rather to cross you,
then power balm into your wounds, or bewail your hardness of Heart: but
would to God you were not more injurious then I, in robbing your selves of the
strong Tower of your salvation: I mean, of the way to lay hold on Christ for
your life: For indeed so do I pity all of you, that if my soul were able,
and could dissolve it self in tears for you, your sorrows would have an
end: since I know, such and so great is the insupportable terror of Gods
wrath, chiefly, if he (leading the maine battle of his forces) fight against
you, as Jeremy speaks) in anger, in wrath, and in great indignation, that
there is no creature but must sink under the same: but it is the conclusions
some of you draw from thence, which I aim at, and would willingly cut down by
the root: viz: I feel no faith, therefore I have none: I never had faith,
therefore I shall never have any: My former actions have been hypocritical,
therefore I am damned: my Feeling is lost, therefore I shall never have it
again: I never had feeling or sense of Gods love, therefore I shall never have
any: God is angry, therefore he will never be appeased: the Sun shines not,
therefore it will never shine: It is night, therefore it will never be day:
the heart was never moved, therefore it shall, and never can be moved: I have
thus, and thus long heard the word, and it has not renewed nor moved me no
more then a stone, therefore it shall and cannot, for such a heart is
immovable: I am dead in sin, therefore I can never be alive: God is gone,
therefore he will never come again: The means harden me more and more,
therefore I will never hear no more: I cannot bring my he^^^ in temper to
join with my voice in prayer, the (...) it is vain to bring words unto God,
offering outward submissiue obedience: I cannot pay unto one ten thousand
pounds which I owe him, therefore I will pay him never a penny: I cannot do all
I should, therefore I will do nothing: God never loved me, therefore he will
never love me: I cannot repent, nor ever could, therefore I neither can nor
shall: God in the terror of wrath appears my enemy, therefore he will never
have mercy, etc: with a number the like absurdities, the very naming whereof,
may be more then confutation sufficient to any reasonable creature not
infected with the like folly.

But speak now (though I grant unto you all your grounds, many of which for
the most part, are false lies) Why may not you hope to escape, as well as
others before you? Who delivered David, Job, Joseph, Moses, Damell, etc. from
dangers, terrors of soul, the Devil, imprisonment, drowning, and Lions den?
but you say, that you are in the Furnace of his wrath. And why (with the three
Children) may you not be delivered from this fiery furnace? GOD is the same
still (who as the Prophet speaks) even in wrath remembers mercy: Therefore
why may not your bush burn, or (at least) seem to burn with fire, yet not be
consumed: since his mercies are over all his works? he only knowing what he
has decreed. And you, who are (for the present) bound up in hardness of
heart, in the Name of GOD I beseech you, let never this voice of desperation
come from you again: (All is in vain, there remains no hope:) What, is it
possible, No hope? Is God in heaven, who is wonderful in all his works? and
does abundantly above all that we are able to think or speak? and so long
dare any little worm or piece of clay, (a little moate) nay not so much, in
regard of him, who is all in all, to say there is no hope? Oh! there remaneth
always hope so long as we breath. For you know as the Apostle speaks: Hope
that is seen is no hope: For how can a man hope for that which he sees? so
that hope above hope, is hope indeed. O hope still to speed as well as any
hard-hearted who ever were called, as all have been before calling. When then
after effectual calling, you look upon David's secure sleep, and Salomons
strange hard-hearted declining from the ways of God, with the wonderful and
hard-harted impiety of Manasseh, and Nebuchadnezzar, before calling: and the
exceeding mercies of God unto them: and diverse in our age, with (the good
Thief) called home at the last hour: O learn to have a good conceit of God.
It was you know, the first thing that encouraged the prodigal son to come
home unto his Father, because he had a good conceit of him. Therefore, think
you with him, the Heavenly Father has received such and such exceeding sinners
into mercy. Though I have run riot, and straied, yet have I not gone so far
as they, or if I have, yet I will submit my self unto him, it may be, he
will also be merciful unto me. But what shall I say? It is God who must
persuade Iaphet to dwell in the Tents of Sem. It is he who must cast down,
persuade, inlighten, draw, instruct, teach, convert, and enlarge our hearts,
that we may be lifted up, consent, see, come, understand, be taught,
converted, and run the ways of his commandments, which that he would hasten
in his own good time to do, my fainte, few, cold, and weak petitions shall
ever (to my power) beg for you.

Only now (for conclusion) my earnest request unto you is, that since it is
the custom of most of you, either in reading the Scriptures, or any other good
book) to read until you find somewhat (in your judgment) against you, and
then close the book suddenly, as though nothing there did belong unto you;
that you would not so use this little ensuing Treatise: but rather before you
Censure, to read it quite through: rejecting whatsoever herein you find
contrary either to the Word, or experience of the Faithful: which if you shall
do, you shall bind me more then ever to remain,

Yours in the All-sufficent, not-changing, wonderful, EMANVEL. I. H.

The Book to the Reader, chiefly if thou be a Nicodemite.
THy thoughts I know will straight inquire
My Fathers Name with great desire:
Who if he please thee not, why then.
The lines are rude, and naught the pen:
But know thou must thy mind appease;
For though thou ask, I cannot ease
Thy heart: therefore be thou content
To feed on that which God has sent.
And if I iumpe not with thy mind,
Call me not therefore now unkind,
Who proffer thus to ease thy load
Of sorrow's on my shoulders broad:
And if my lines seem strange and new,
Remember how a learned lew
Did wander, when Christ would him gain,
How any could be borne again.
Therefore though thou can not conceive
These things, yet let me pray thee leave,
To say therefore no such things are,
Which do surmount thy reason far:
But rather like a little child,
Who is not with such thoughts defiled,
Be thou content to pass that way
Christ us commands, though sense say nay;
And pray (though now thy eyes be blind)
Him to enlighten yet thy mind
And sight, that thou may clear'ly see,
Things yet not thought or known of thee;
That with that mountaine-seeing man,
Heavens Chariots thou may see and scan,
And so confess with others more,
Thus long, what blindness kept thee so.
But if thou be of gentle kind,
With sorrow's tamed, and now not blind,
My suit is, though I stray and err,
(As mortals) yet thou would defer
Thy censure, to peruse me quite,
When, though I seem not full perfect,
Believe no more then does agree
With sacred lore and verity.
Then this my pains shall counteruaile,
If on my shame thou cast a veil.
To the Right Worshipful, Master William Tothil Esquire, etc.
SON.
IN peace men use for to provide for war,
Best Pylots do wait for ensuing storm's;
Yea, even this wisdom is in silly worm's
(Who though from reasons reach they stray so far,)
In Summer still for winter to prepare,
So though your Sun, Sir, now do shine so clear,
That storm's appear not either far or near;
Yet since experience has found it so rare,
To have two heavens and in them both a stare:
Long time without some crossing gloom tonight;
When Wraths heart gnawing fear's shall dim the sight
Of former grace, filling the mind with Care.
Though still I wish your mind free from such fear's:
Let this yet near (if need be) stanch such tears.
To the right Worshipful, Mistress Katherine Tothil, worthy of all respect.
SON.
HEau'n-shaking Wrath, poured out like flaming fire,
Bending the rocks, tearing the hills asunder,
Tossing the earth, and all things bringing under:
Who would not from the same in haste retire?
Me thinks I quake whilst I the same admire;
No wonder then such wet their couch with tears,
Who but in part conceive these horride fear's,
Not knowing where to shroud them from his ire.
A Fortress strong I know you wish to gain,
Whence sin and Satan you may both defy:
Look then in this where you your state may try,
Freeing your self from fear of endless pain:
Much could I wish, but all must rest in this,
That every thing may serve to augment your bliss.
To the Right Worshipful, Master Francis Drake Esquire, etc.
SON.
IF one Devil loosed so tortur-tosse the mind,
If Princes ire so vex with thousand cares:
If crosses here, so fill men with despaires:
If so with toothache, stone gowt, they are pined,
If here stern conscience gnawing worm so grind,
What sorrows then in Wraths infernal caves,
With matchless might shall wound all Satan's slaves?
To blacknes, darkness, endless woe confi'd?
More, O! but when great judgments voice shall sound
That last retreat, never to meet again.
Me think's I hear what shout's, what shrick's in vain
They bellow forth, to see the Saints so crowned,
Amongst the best, Sir, this shall be your crown,
To mount with these, when those shall be cast down.
To the Right Worshipful, Mistress Ioane Drake, worthy with the worthiest.
SON.
WHilst thoughts of flam's and not consuming fire
(Where tortured soul's howl, yel, cry, never die)
Inflamed with breath of Iah's devouring ire,
(That rents the rocks, and makes the mountains fly)
Did wound with fears my soul, yet you on hie,
With Eagles wings I wished might mount away:
Within the Veil (at last) to dwell for aye:
Such gnashing, lashing, howling, nere to try,
Whilst Sunshine light your face does yet array,
And Bridegroomes coming has not shut the gate,
That restless cries, (which never came too late,)
Might tempests stay, force heaven, and make you way.
And (if you will believe me) here I vow,
My censer always shall keep Wrath from you.
TO THE BOOK.
SON.
HEnce, hence small book, thy foot steps see thou bend
Unto all such whom Satan luls asleep,
Knock hard rowze up, tell them the day does peep
Then unto those whose hearts all sorrows rend:
That Wraths deluge has measure, time and end,
Tell them, and that though stern devouring ire,
Like thunders lightning seem to set a fire,
Their torturd souls, yet wish them but attend
A while, until cloud-vanishde Sunshine light
Appear with joy to give their foes the foil,
Mean while their wounds bind up with ba^^me and oil
Wait still, stay tears and fears with all thy might.
And if for all this, yet thou can not please them,
Weep still with them, for this perhaps may ease them.
A Table of the Contents and sum of this Book.
1 Proofs that there is a God, page 6. 2 Proofs that the Scriptures are the
Word of God. 10 3 Definition of God. 13 4 The Object of His Justice and Mercy,
ibidem. 5 The causes of the proceeding of the wrath of God 14 6 How God is
said to be angry. 16 7 How to discern when wrath is at hand. 19 8 How God
brings about his wrath. ibidem. 9 That Hardness of Heart (though the means
both past and present, have not been effectual) cannot argue Reprobation. 21
10 Signs of temptation. 25 11 The conditions of such who are, and who are not
under wrath, described. 27 12 Who they are who feel wrath, and yet are far
from the same. 27 13 The several conditions of his Estate. 28 14 What a
troubled soul in this estate tossed with diverse tempests of wrath, must do.
29 15 Who they are, who have not a deep sense of wrath, and yet are far from
wrath. 29 16 The several conditions of this estate. 30 17 How to know whether
in hardness of heart, we are under wrath or not. 32 18 Comforts for such, who
are not able to serve God, as they think, in spirit and truth. 33 19 Why God
at first will not be found in the means. 35 20 Who they are who feel no
wrath, and yet remain under the wrath of God. 36 21 The several conditions of
this Estate. 37 22 How far a Professor maybee under this wrath. 38 23
Description of a saving knowledge. 43 24 How to know whether or not Christ has
been laid hold upon. 45 25 Trial of true sorrow. 47 26 The trial of
spiritual desires. 49 27 Trials whether or not one has had feeling. 51 28
Difference of restrayning and renewing virtue of the holy spirit. 52 29 Comforts
in this estate under hardness of heart. 53 30 Essential marks of the renewing
spirit. 54 31 Who they be, who feeling wrath, shall perish in the same. 55 32
What sense Reprobates have being wakened with horror. 56 33 Degrees how this
horror comes unto them. 58 34 Difference betwixt the Elect and them in the
sense of wrath. ibid. 35 Behavior of the child of God under the sense of
wrath. 59 36 How near the child of God may come unto the wicked, in feeling of
the wrath of God. 60 37 How to judge of Gods secret favor in such an estate.
61 38 Faith must not be measured by the fruits thereof, and feeling in the time
of desertion. 62 39 Why and how for the present, one may walk in the means
with small or no comfort, and yet God be true in all his promises. 63 40 Why
Nouices in Christianity have much feeling. ibid. 41 Why aged Christians have
less feeling then at first, yet stronger consolation. 65 42 Why Gods children
so mourn for the want of feeling. 67 43 Why Gods children so much rely upon
feeling. 68 44 Wherefore God gives unto his children such a measure of feeling
at first. 69 45 Why God delayeth to give comfort unto such for so long a time.
71 46 The Rock of refuge in such desertions. 73 47 A Tentation rising from
thence refuted. p. 75 48 How God reuealeth himself unto the soul. p. 81 49
Trial of rue light. p. 82 50 Trial to know, whether the sight of Misery come
by the right Spirit. p. 83 51 Consolations in Hardness of heart, one as yet not
having perceived a change. p. 87 52 Consolations against desperation, though
all ones lifetime he has had no feeling. p. 91 53 The greatest and least
measure of feeling, the Saints have in this life. p. 95 54 What the disposition
of the child of God is, in the least measure of feeling, either under terror or
security. p. 96 55 Why God will have his children to feel stings of
conscience, and hardness of heart. p. 99 56 Effects of former feeling in
desertion. p. 102 57 How fearfully the child of God, after effectual calling
may fall. p. 105 58 How far the child of God may be oppressed with the sense
of wrath, yet remaining in a safe estate. p. 107 59 How far he may stray in
his affections: with the causes of this disorder. p. 109 60 Degrees, how sin
grows upon the Elect. p. 110 61 Whether the child of God may fall into such
gross sins, as wicked men do. p. 112 62 A discovery of the sin against the
holy Ghost. p. 113 1. What it is. 2. Why it is so diversely named. 3. Where the
chief residence thereof is. 4. How there it may be judged of. 5. His
principal quality who commits the same. 6. How many sorts of men may
commit it. 7. Definition of this apostasy. 8. Why thus it is punished? 9. By
what steps it mounts to the height of all impiety. 10. How far one chosen in
the decree of God, may seem to wade in this sin, and yet be called back.
11. Consolation for poor souls: who imagine they committed this sin.
63 Why Gods children fall into gross sins like unto wickedmen. p. 133 64
The state and disposition of the child of God, whilst he sleeps in
impenitency, with the causes thereof. p. 135 65 In this estate, the actions of
the renewed and unrenewed part. p. 138 66 How God raises such after their
falls. p. 140 67 How God works in a more special manner, when he lifts
them up. p. 144 68. That in some sort, the child of God may fall into the same
sin again after true repentance. p. 147 69. Why the tempter does thus beset
Gods children. p. 149 70. The means to withstand this temptation. p. 150 71.
Why God suffers his children to fall again and again in the same sin. p.
154 72. What must comfort and support the child of God, falling into the same
sin again and again. p. 155
A DISCOVERY OF THE CHILD OF GOD, under all sense of Gods most terrible
seeming Anger.
Scholar. I Rejoice Sir now at length in so good a time to meet with you,
whom I have of a long season so earnestly desired to confer with: because of
some doubts which do much disquiet me.


Minister. So do I also rejoice Sir to see my old friend; wishing that it
would please God of his infinite mercy to make me an unworthy instrument of any
comfort to you, or any of his children.


Schol. What speak you? Comfort Sir? I am so far from being troubled, that I
doubt of the foundation of Religion: and whether there be any need of Comfort,
or any thing to be troubled for?


Minist. Psalm. 14.1
This is most strange, that any reasonable creature should doubt of that which
the whole world has universally taken as granted: what mean you in so saying,
that you doubt of the foundation of all?


Schol. The truth is, my tortured soul is much perplexed whether there be a
God or not.


Minist. Whence arises this tentation?


Schol. Isa. 28.15 Isa. 59.15. psalm. 73.12.13.14. 1. Cor. 2.14.
First, from great and strong persuasions that there is none. Next, in that I
see most part of the world to live as though there were neither heaven nor
hell. Lastly, in that I see such a strange seeming confusion, the good being
oppressed, and the wicked scaping unpunished.


Minist. 1. Cor. 2.14.
The strength of tentation, and carnal reason (which I perceive to be the
ground of all you allege) can be no sufficient reasons to prove such dreams.
And whereas you say, the wicked in this life escape for the most part
unpunished: Job. 15. etc. Job. 20.5.6.
It rather proves (as the Scripture speaks) that (like fatted oxen) they are
reserved to the day of slaughter and wrath. Yet, imagine your false foolish
reasons were true. Job. 21.16. etc. 30.
What is this then which so troubles you? why complain you? why do you not
then live in peace, if there be no Deity?


Schol. I cannot, for I feel within me perpetual terrors and vexations, which
bereave me of all manner of rest: yea sometimes thoughts, that I am deceived;
that my Atheistical opinions are damnable; that there is certainly somewhat (I
know not what) both to be loved, Romans 1.4.
honored, and feared.


Minist. Then strive against your tentations. 2. Cor. 5.3. Ioh. 5.44. Ioh. 15.5.



Schol. I am not able.


Minst. Did not your parents train you up in the foundation and knowledge of
Religion?


Sc. They did, at which time me thought I abounded in knowledge, Faith, Love
Practice of all graces, thinking every thing to be plain and easy. But now
(like a ship which has been a long time tossed in the Seas without al sight
of land) I doubt whether there be any such things I formerly imagined: all my
former feelings, faith, repentance, love, (in my sense) are gone: In place
whereof, I remain full of all manner of doubtings, with which, though I be not
struck with any extraordinary terror, yet have I extreme discontentments, not
rejoicing in any thing.


Minist. Certainly there must be some causes of your coffeehouse; you must
banish doubting and carnal reason: believe in God, and you shall find ease.


Sch. If there be a God, this is my infidelity, that I cannot believe in him,
and then is my estate a great deal more fear full in this, Romans 1.28
that all my actions have bin hypocritical; that now I find my self to be
given over to a hardhart, with a reprobate sense; joined with an impossibility
to fight or strive for grace, or (which is more fearful) to have no desire to
strive for the same. 2. Cor. 3.5



Minister. Before we pass any further, let us lay this infallible foundation;
that most certainly there is a God. Psalm. 58.11.



Schol. My infidelity and doubting is such, that I shall never be fully of
your mind, unless by reason I be convinced of the same.


Minist. There must be no disputing, Heb. 11.6
against received grounds and principles: chiefly against this the ground of
all.


Schol. Yet as you remember, I beseech you show me some reasons, proving a
Deity, or that there is a God.


Minist. Nature it self fully proves the same. 1. From the Creation, for if
the world be without beginning so is it also without ending, and so it and all
therein is God, having made it self, which were most absurd to think: but
since it shall have an ending (all the creatures thereof tending to corruption)
hence it follows, that it must needs have a beginning, the Creator whereof,
is God. 2. The excellency of all the creatures show the same: Genesis 1.1. psalm.
1.24.
so infinite in forms, shapes, colors, and diverse dispositions: chiefly the
supernatural spirit of man, not satiate with any thing in Nature. 3. Man
himself, shows that there is a God, for one man leads us to another,
until by degrees we come up to the first. Here I ask, where he had his
beginning? Eternal he was not, which his miserable nature so subject to
alteration and change, well shows, chiefly his dissolutio^; (Eternity and
change, like light and darkness, being so directly contrary.) If it be said,
this change came by his fall; then, I ask, whence he fell? So still, all we can
think, it must lead us unto God the Creator of all. 4. The well ordered
government in the world: things inferior serving still things superior;
until all things join in man's service; show that there is also some supreme
power, unto which he must obey. 5. The harmony of contrary Elements, whereof
all bodies do consist, so far from destroying one another, that they preserve
all and agree: proves a superior causing power. 6. The natural instinct of
all nations, (rather adoring stocks, stones, and beasts, then no Deity at
all) proves the same. 7. The conscience of all, being as it were a law against
us, in giving both testimony, and judgment, is a most strong proof: for it
testifies, neither to men nor Angels: neither fears them. Therefore it must
be God himself. Further, would not our reason tell us by and by, if we were
in some fair built ruinous country or city, that there had some people
dwelt: that some hands had built the same? So may we say of this world, when we
see it so replenished with so many goodly creatures, that some great power did
make the same, and that must needs be God. Moreover, the place of God, proves
that there is a God: for (as one says) every place is in regard of somewhat
contained in the place. So the Earth is full of worms, and such like things;
the sea contains fishes; fair houses contain men and women; Hell it is the
place for devils. Heaven likewise must not be empty, it being the goodliest
of all the rest: when we look upon the same we must needs say, that there
dwelles the Lord of the country, there dwelles God himself. Lastly (but it
were too tedious) I might add how abundantly the Scriptures show the same: as
also the event of things contrary to reason: Miracles, Prophecyings, continual
mercies of fruitful seasons, etc. Which Paul mentions: punishments in this
life, with strange judgments on diverse wicked men; as Herod, etc. with the
wonderful power of the spirit in the experience of the faithful. Further, (as
one observes) that no volume has ever bin written directly in confutation of
the same.


Sch. My mind is no less perplexed concerning the authority of the Scriptures
whether they be the word of God or not.


Minist. The insufficiency of these doubts may soon be showed unto you.
Because, admit once that there is a God: then of necessity it will follow
that he is King of kings; and that as subordinate temporary Princes have
Laws and statutes, whereby they rule their states: so must needs the supreme
Lord of all, much more have laws and statutes whereby to govern the whole
world. And these must needs be the holy Scriptures.


Scholar. Persuasions are no proofs, therefore show unto me how I may rest
assured that the Scriptures are the word of God.


Min. There be many reasons to prove; yet none are powerful to persuade:
unless God join with the same by the effectual working of his blessed Spirit.


Schol. So far as you can remember, I entreat you give me satisfaction.


Minist. The Antiquity, Harmony, Consent, Sincerity, Miracles, and Martyrs,
testimony of the Scriptures, might be sufficient proofs to satisfy any
indifferent person: But if unto them we add, Psalm. 119 69.101.103.
1. That great general inward change which suddenly it makes in men, when but
some plain sentences thereof are dropped into their hearts, Psalm. 107.20.
Psalm. 119.50. Ierem. 23.29.
filling them with horrors, so that when the heart is thus wounded, no other
medicine can comfort or cure the same; save the same word: when all men's
eloquence will not serve the turn. 2. Cor. 10 4. Heb. 4.12 Psalm. 19.7.8.
2. That great power it has to cast down all the strong holds of sin and
Satan: when they join for destruction of the soul. 3. That humble and rich
poverty thereof, that in a sober, yet lofty style, it far surpasses (in
excellency of Eloquence) all the best Orators of the world, containing therein
the foundation of all sciences: we may rest fully assured thereof. Further,
our own doubtings (when Satan and our own corruptions would persuade us, that
it is not Scripture) strongly prove the truth thereof: for Satan is a liar,
Ioh. 8.44.
and the father of lies: therefore, if it were forged, he would contend for
maintenance thereof. As also we may see those who most study and practice the
same, most holy and wise. Contrarily, Psalm. 119.99. Pro. 1.23.24.25. etc.
the others most profane. It were tedious to reckon up all, how miraculously
it has ever been preserved in all ages: how truly all the Prophecies thereof
have been and are accomplished, Deuteronomy. 28 64.65.66 67. Isa. 49.6. Isa. 7. and
11. and 5^ 2. These. 7.8. etc. Mat. 11.13. Ezekiel. 36.26.
both in the rejected wandering of the Jews, the calling of the Gentiles,
Incarnation of Christ, coming of Antichrist, etc. How though it were written
many hundred years ago, it meets with all new sins. How powerfully being
alleged in prayer, It wrastleth with God, Offers violence to the kingdom,
quieteth the soul, keeps off judgments, and obtains mercies, etc. How of
all other writings, Ier. 32.40.
this only is written in the heart: so that at the hour of death when other
knowledge (wholly, or in great part) vanishes, this is most fresh in our
memories, both for our own comfort, and the instruction of others, Genesis 48.3.
1. King. 2.2.3. etc.
as in Jacob, David, etc. So that most certainly, the word is not from men (for
our nature is contrary to it) nor from Satan (seeing he raises up his
instruments against it) therefore from God himself. Ioh. 4.24. Romans 1.20 Psa.
139.6



Schol. What is God? Isay. 66.1 Genesis 15.1 Leui. 19.2 Deuteronomy. 6.4 Matt. 28.19.



Minist. God is a Spirit, Eternal, Infinite, Omnipotent, most Holy, one in
Essence, but three in Persons; the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.


Schol. What is the Essence of God?


Minist. The Nature of God, whereby indeed, God is and does consist.


Schol. What is chiefly to be considered in the nature of God?


Min. The Attributes of God. Gal. 4.8. Exo. 3.14 Revel. 1.8



Schol. What properties are chiefly to be considered in the nature of God
concerning his creatures?


Min. Two principally.


Schol. Which be they?


Min. 1. His mercy. 2. His justice.


Schol. What is the object of his mercy? Romans 9.22 23. Ephesians. 2.4. 5. Tit.
33.4.5. etc. Genesis 2.18. Ezekiel. 18.4. Romans 4.15.



Min. Man's misery.


Schol. What is the object of his justice?


Min. Sin.


Schol. What is sin?


Min. The transgression of the law.


Schol. What is the reward of sin?


Minst. 1. Ioh. 5.4 Romans 6.23 Genesis 2.17
Death, temporary and eternal, both in soul and body.


Schol. But how comes it to pass, that sin is thus rewarded?


Min. Rom 1.18. and 2.8.9.
By reason of the Anger or Wrath of God against all manner of sin, in all
manner of persons.


Schol. Is Anger in God a passion, as it is in man? or may we think there is
Anger in God?


Min. Isa. 27.4.
No.


Schol. How then must we consider of the wrath of God?


Minist. 1. His most just will, and most assured and holy decree in punishing
sin, Ioh. 3.36 Romans 1.18 Hos. 11.9
must be considered. 2. His threatenings against sin. 3. The punishment of
sin it self.


Schol. What kindles the wrath of God?


Minist. Isa. 64.5
Sin.


Schol. But do you think God to be in this sort angry with all men's sin?


Minist. Ephesians. 2.3 Romans 3.23
Yea verily, both against the sins of the Elect and Reprobate.


Schol. Why so?


Minist. Because all sin, Psalm. 5.4.
in all persons, is directly against the holiness of his Nature.


Schol. Do you therefore think that the wrath of God is kindled against all
sin, in all men alike?


Minist. No. 2. Sam. 14 15.



Schol. How can that agree with the former: that God is angry with all sins,
and is not angry yet alike against all sins in all men's persons?


Minist. Because that Christ Jesus has taken away that anger from the Elect,
1. These. 1.10. Isa. 53. 1. Cor. 11.31.
suffering himself that which was due unto them.


Schol. Show me then, how God is angry against the Elect, and how against the
Reprobrate?


Minist. God is said to be angry with his Elect. First, Deuteronomy. 9.19. Deu. 3.26
when he decrees to chastise his Sin. Secondly, when he threatens his
sin. And lastly, when he indeed (in mercy for a while) chastises them for
their further salvation. Mic. 7.9.



Schol. How is God said to be angry with the reprobate?


Minist. Romans 9.14 Psa. 78.49.
When in this life (according to his former decree) he punishes them with
perpetual hardness of heart, Revel. 14.10.11.
or any kind of judgment: And in the life to come, powers out the vials of
his wrath and indignation upon them for evermore.


Schol. What necessity is there that the wicked should be punished for ever?


Minist. Because they do bear their own sins, and the punishment due unto
them: Psalm. 2.12
not having Christ to free them.


Schol. But cannot the wicked relieve themselves?


Minist. No.


Schol. How so?


Minist. Psa. 49.7.8.
Because not being able to satisfy the Majesty whom they have offended, they
must of necessity endure his wrath for ever.


Schol. What is the reason that their sufferings cannot satisfy?


Minist. Because they are but finite creatures, Psa. 49.7. and 15.
not being able to satisfy that infinite offended Majesty: therefore they must
suffer for evermore.


Schol. What may we learn from hence?


Minist. That it is a terrible thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
1. John 3.16. Reu. 19.15. Reu. 5.9. Psalm. 110.12.



Schol. What lesson of comfort may we learn from it?


Minst. That we are exceedingly bound to Jesus Christ, who has suffered this
wrath for us.


Scho. How may we learn to discern and judge of the greatness of this wrath?


Min. Look first upon the destruction of the Angels. 2. Pet. 2.4 Iud. 6. Genesis
3.17 18.19. Genesis 6. 16.
2. The curse which came upon Adam and his posterity for sin. 3. The
destruction which came upon the first world, by the flood. 4. The burning of
Sodom with fire. Genesis 19.24. Isa. 53.5.6. Mat. 25.4.
Next to the sending of Christ into the world, and the wrath of God powered out
upon him for our sins; the everlasting fire prepared for Reprobate men and
Angels.


Schol. Nah. 2.3.4.5.6. Deuteronomy. 32.39.40. Deuteronomy. 29.19.20. Heb. 3.12 13. Heb.
10.31.
What should we learn from hence?


Minist. Three things. 1. To consider seriously of the greatness of the wrath
of God. 2. Not to presume of mercy. 3. Warily to fly to and eschew sin by all
means, least we fall into the hands of the living God.


Schol. How may we know when the wrath of the living God is coming?


Minist. Ier. 10.11 Zec. 7.11.12.13. Leuit. 26 19.20. and 26. Hag. 1.6. psa.
78.32.33.
First, when the word of God wakeneth not. Next, when sin abounds in the
abundance of the word. 3. When God changes the order and constitution of his
Creatures. 4. When God to (waken) sends light judgments, and men are never a
whit the better.


Scho. Which way does God use to bring about his wrath?


Minist. First, Romans 1.28. Deuteronomy. 28.23.24. Deuteronomy. 28.22.26.27 Ibid. 66.67.
he plagueth men's souls with hardness of heart and senslesnesse. Next he
plagueth the creatures which should be for Comforts unto man. Then he comes
upon the body plaguing it with some sensible judgment, often in this life.
Further, pouring out a sensible wrath upon the soul unto destruction. Matt.
10.18.
Lastly he rejects and casts both body and soul into torments for ever.


Schol. Who then is in the most dangerous estate?


Min. Such who lie under the wrath of God, yet being senseless of the same.
Hos. 7.9 Ier. 5.3.



Schol. What if they be not wakened in time?


Min. Then they must perish in the severe wrath of God. 2. The. 1.9



Schol. Now, as ever you mean to see the face of God, and live in heaven for
ever, speak from your conscience. May one who has a long time lived under the
means, for the present shut up in hardness of heart, which he knows and in
part feels: neither being able to help or strive against it, so being and
living under the wrath of God; conclude therefore that he is a reprobate, which
shall at no time, either repent or have a soft heart, and must we believe the
words of such a praty?


Minist. No.


Schol. For what reasons?


Min. First, because let the party be what he can, howsoever hard hearted or
sinful; until he be called, he is but dead, and in the state of nature, like
unto others of the Saints, Peter, Paul, David, Ephesians. 2.1. Isa. 11.6. 2. Tim.
3.1.2. Re. 1.30.
etc. And therefore since all of us were dead in sins and trespasses Bears,
Lions, Wolus, Leopards, before we were tamed, haters of God, despitefull,
proud, disobedient to parents, without natural affection, unmerciful by
nature, and yet have bin raised from the dead; so may such a one be in Gods
own time. 2. Because as when a King does imprison any one for some offenses.
As it were folly for any man to presume to say: The king will never free such a
one, nor he shall never be sorry for his faults. Much more so, were it a fit
of extreme madness, in such a hard-hearted party; Deuteronomy. 9.29. Ier. 32.39.
Ezec. 36.26.27.
to presume to know Gods counsel; or what in time he will work in the heart,
loosing the fetters wherewith he is bound. Since it is the Lords promise and
covenant, to take away our stony hearts and give us fleshy ones: as also the
end of Christ's coming, Isa. 43.9.11.12.
to open the eyes of the blind to bring out prisoners from the prison: and them
that sit in darkness out of the prison house. 3. Because God has neither
appointed any certain manner or time of calling, some being brought home, at
the 6.9.11. hour: Matthew. 20 5.6.
therefore though one have not in effectual calling obtained a soft heart, at
20.30.40. or 50. years of age, he may not thence conclude reprobation. 4. None
but God knows things to come, seeing he challenges this super excellency, as
a proof; Isa. 43.9.11.12.
proper only to the Deity. 5. There is a kind of softnes in that heart, which
knows and feels the hardness of the same, though the party deny it, yet sure
corruption discouers not corruption: Ephesians. 5.13
nor nature, nature, and therefore hope remains. 6. Because, where there is
discontent, trouble in mind, there is hope by Gods grace, repentance may come:
in which estate (though the party plead contentation) yet when we see former
delights vanish, sometimes beloved company displeasing, temptations to appear,
unnatural wishes, unreasonable mad desires in them: Who will not confess that
here is muddy water; which (when the storms are past) may clear again? Mic.
7.8.9.
7. The omnipotency and goodness of God, to other most miserable sinners, in
pulling them spite of their hearts from their sins, without any cause in them:
as Manasses, Nebuchadnezzar, Saint Paul, Marie Magdalen. etc. 2. Chr. 33 Da.
4.34. Act. 9.3.5 6. Mar. 16.9.
May give hope of recovery, since many others in the like estate have found
Gods mercies exceeding great in their conversion. Lastly, most certain it is,
we must not believe or give credit to any who so affirm: for, distempered men
are not able to judge of diseases: no more can the distressed mind of the
estate of the soul, especially joined with a black devilish melancholy
humor, which the devil does oftentimes abuse, to breed causeless fears in
the heart of man.


Schol. Were it possible to persuade any in such an estate, that they are
tempted?


Minister. It is impossible; while the violence of the tentation remains.


Schol. Wherefore?


Minst. Because of the strength of tentation and carnal reason, which for that
present has dominion in them: for then the field is near won, when the
devil is of the party discovered for a devil, the temptation being laid open
to reason and judgment.


Schol. Yet show unto me I beseech you, how may we judge when one is thus
tempted or not?


Minist. There be many signs; but to be brief, three principally; by their
service, language, and unnaturalness.


Schol. Explain your meaning.


Minist. First, for service; It is most certain, when they are so ready to
obey the devil in all things, and disobey God: Romans 6.16.
to serve Satan with pleasure, and God by compulsion, pulled to good duties
viollently, as by the hair of the head; 2. Tim. 2.26.
leaving them off quickly; in that their actions show them to be tempted.
Judge. 12.6.
2. By their Shiboleth, we may judge them to be in a strong tentation, when in
some certain fittes some of them dare to affirm, That they know their hearts
shall never be moved; that it is impossible that ever they should be soft
hearted: Isa. 58.10 11.12.
that because their hearts in time past could not be moved by any thing,
therefore they shall and can never be moved. Psalm. 116 11.
And (which is more fearful blasphemy) that God cannot move their heart,
which for all the world (free from temptation) they durst not affirm. 3. By
their unnaturalness, Nature does seek by all means the preservation of
Nature. Now when they become so unnatural, as to avoid humane society: to
think their best friends their foes, to scoff at Religion, because they have
no hope to disturb and let by all means good duties; Act. 16.16.
like unto that Maid who disturbed Paul and Silas as they were about to pray
in Lydias house, Mat. 9.24.
to seek out witty arguments for the devil against themselves; to laugh at,
and reject all Gods arguments from his word: bringing nothing against them but
carnal, foolish, blind, reasons from the devil, to be desperate in
aggravating sin beyond the mercies of God, to reject prayer, affirming, it is
to no purpose, to request not to be prayed for, etc. If these be not infallible
signs of tentation, then never creature was tempted.


Schol. What if the hardness of heart, come after a precedent softness?


Minist. Then there is good hope (yea assurance) that in Gods good time the
heart may be softer then ever: the party so escaping from under this wrath,
because the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. Romans 11.29.



Schol. In how many conditions do you include men in respect of this wrath?


Minist. In four.


Schol. Which are they?


Minist. First, those who feel deep wrath, and yet are far from wrath.
Division.
2. Those who have not the deep sense of wrath, and yet are far from wrath.
3. Those who feel no wrath, and yet are under the wrath of God. 4. Those who
feel the wrath of God, and indeed shall perish in the same wrath.


Scholar. Who are those who feel


Minister. Those who have their conscience wakened to see their sin, Psalm.
38.2 and 77.2.3. etc.
and to feel the wrath of God for the same; which they hate, because it has
offended God. They mourn for sin likewise, Psalm. 51.4.
not so much for fear of torments, as that they should have offended so good a
God. Ibid. v. 11
They desire for reconciliation, to be at peace with God through Christ. Ibid.
v. 12.
They thirst also for the Spirit, to cause their hearts to love that God,
hungring for the grace of sanctification. And lastly, although they feel
nothing to comfort them, yet above hope, Io. ca. 2.4.
under hope they wait still.


Schol. What should the exercise of the soul be, under this sort of feeling?


Minist. First, it must have recourse to God by strong cries in prayer. 2.
Practice repentance, Psalm. 77.2 and 38.17 21. Psalm. 32.5. and 66. Psalm. 6.9.
Psalm. 94.18.19.
by pouring out bitter tears unto God. 3. Exercise faith in resting upon the
promises of life everlasting through Christ. 4. Cleave steadfastly to the love
of God in his mercy, grace, and goodness. 5. Draw it self away from the
wrath, Pro. 22.3. Psalm. 7.119.49.50.
as fast as may be, least it be devoured thereof. 6. Feed and meditate
continually upon the promise of life. And lastly, John 3.14 15.
hold ever the eye of the soul upon Christ.


Schol. Who are they who have not a


Minist. 1. Those who never have felt wrath, but always peace. 2. Those who
have felt the tentations of despair and doubting; yet afterward have obtained
peace. 3. Such who feel a hardness of heart, and can have no present relief.


Schol. Who be they who have never felt wrath but always peace?


Minister. Those whom God at their first conversion has called with much
sweetness, Hos. 2.14. Act. 16.14.15.
in melting their hearts by little and little for their sins. Next, Act. 8.39.
such on whom God has powered out a sense of his love, working in them a
persuasion of mercy, with joy, renewing the mind: working a study of holiness,
a hatred of sin, and a love of righteousness.


Schol. Who be they who have found the tentations of despair and doubting; and
yet thereafter have found peace?


Minist. Act. 2.37.38. etc.
Those whom God has enlightened to see their sins, and the wrath of God for
them, and have bin terrified, doubting of their salvation and election: Act.
9.9.19.
yet God afterward shines upon their souls, touching them with a sense of
remission of sins, election and glory, whereupon arises that peace of God
which passes all understanding, and that joy of the holy Ghost unspeakable
and glorious. 1. Pet. 1.8.



Schol. Who are those who feel the hardness of their heart, yet are not able
to shake off the same?


Minist. Those who have once felt that mollifying power of the Spirit, Isa.
63.17 Psa. 31.22.
that light which draws the soul to see it self, and it own wildness; to
see also God in the face of Jesus Christ, and yet in the present find a kind
of deadness within.


Scholar. How may it be known that one is not under the wrath of God in such
a disposition?


Minist. First, such a one must look back unto his former experience
remembering the days of old, Psalm 77.5 6.10.
and the years of ancient time: and next again unto his present disposition.


Schol. What must the present disposition be?


Minister. A sense of hardness, Psalm. 42.1.2.3. Psalm. 30.7
deadness and blindness. A sad heart for the absence of God; with a longing
for his blessed presence.


Schol. What must be the exercise of one in this estate?


Minst. A laboring and striving with the heart to attain feeling.


Schol. Wherein must this strife consist? Psa. 42.11.



Minist. In a wrestling with God, against the hardness of the heart, in Prayer
and Mourning.


Schol. But what if one be neither able to wrestle nor strive?


Minist. Yet must he speak unto God, and show him the disposition of the
soul; Psalm. 42.9.
entreating him to help it for his Christ's sake.


Schol. What if one be not able to speak for burden and trouble of soul?


Minist. He must groan unto God, hold up the hands and eyes unto him, desire
to desire; Romans 8.26.
use the outward means (though unwillingly and with torment) for, Consolation
for such, who (as they think) are not able to serve God in Spirit and Truth.
Romans 7.21
when we are not able to use our feeling, the outward means may ease.


Schol. What comfort can this afford to any one, since God will be worshipped
in Spirit and Truth, which he in such a case is not able to do?


Minister. It affoordeth singular consolation: 1. In that we have a feeling of
our selves, and our great misery: Next, in that such a disposition is
unpleasing unto us. Psa. 73.25.
3. In that we would gladly have it made better. 4. In that we feel, there is
no comfort in heaven or earth for us, until God come.


Schol. How should the soul rest in such a hard estate?


Min. 1. Rest in hope. 2. Wait. Isa 8.17. Psalm. 16.9 and 40.1. Lam. 3.26.
Cant. 1.3.
3. Say unto God, Give me such a heart as thou desire Lord, and then require
thou of me such a heart, and such a worship as thou desire.


Schol. Wherefore does the Lord suffer his cildren to have and feel hardness
of heart?


Minst. First, that so much the better they may understand how miserable (by
nature) they are. Psalm. 121.1.2.
2. That they may see where only help is to be found. 3. That being humbled,
Cant. 3.4.
they may not be lifted up with spiritual pride. Lastly, that they may much
esteem and cherish the favor of God, when he comes in the power of the
means.


Schol. In such extremities, at what times comes God to the soul?


Minist. Cant. 3.4. Psalm. 142.3.4. Psalm. 143.6.7.
Unlooked for, when we are at the brinke of despair; or else when we have
yielded as overcome, and almost left desiring: or then when he gives an
earnest and violent desire, which neither can nor will be satiate until he
come.


Schol. Yet why suffers the Lord his children (many times) to use all the
means; and yet not to find him in the means, Why God at first, will not be
found in the means. Psa. 77.7. Isa. 38.27 Ezekiel. 36.22. 1. Sam. 1.10.11.19 Job.
42.7.
before he come thus unlooked for?


Minst. That we may know he only comes when he will, nothing moving him,
but his own good pleasure.


Schol. What should we learn hereof?


Minist. 1. Not to conclude reprobation, because to our feeling we find
desertion. Lam. 2.31 32. Iere. 3.12 Psa 42.11. Mic. 7.8.9. Psalm. 37.
2. Not to measure mercy by our present feeling. 3. To wait until he come
(though we cannot feel his presence) if it were until the last gasp.


Schol. What if in the mean time there be no other sense but of stinging
torments and Wrath?


Minist. Yet must we make claim unto his promises. Psalm. 27.13.14. Hab. 3.2.
Job. 13.15. Isa. 28.16. Isa. 54.7. Ier. 31.37 3. Who they are who feel no
Wrath, yet remain under the Wrath of God.
In wrath beseech him to remember mercy; saying unto him with Job: Lord,
although thou would slay us, yet will we trust in thee: thus waiting until
he come, not being hasty, and then in his own good time, he will appear to
our comfort.


Schol. Who be they who feel no wrath: yet remaining under the heavy wrath of
God?


Minist. First, such as have no effectual calling from God: 2. Such as have
never had any true sense of the bitterness and grieuousnesse of sin. Romans 7
9.
3. Such as are not moved with the love of the truth, neither do love God,
or have had any sense of his love, Iud. 10. 2. Tim. 3.5
or the earnest of the Spirit. Lastly, all such who make a show of godliness,
but have denied the power thereof.


Schol. The several conditions of this estate.
How divide you those who are in this estate?


Minist. They are partly out of the Church, and partly in the Church.


Schol. Who be they that are out of the Church?


Min. Ephesians. 2.12
Those who have not amongst them the profession of the true God, as he has
revealed himself in his word.


Schol. Who be they in the Church, that lie under the wrath, yet feel it not?


Minister. 1. Cor. 15 34. 2. These. 1.8.
First, those who profess without knowledge: 2. Those who have conscience
without knowledge and holiness. 3. Those who have attained light, yet fight
against their enlightening. Lastly, Heb. 6.4 5, 6.
those who through the custom of sin, Ephesians. 4.18 19.
are hardened so, as with greediness they run forward in all outward and
inward impieties: Romans 1.28. How far a Professor may be under this Wrath. 2.
Pet. 2.21. Luc. 8 13. and 1. Cor. 13.2.13.2. Math. 27 4. Numb. 23 ^0. Matt.
19.^6. Heb. 6.4. Mar. 6.20.
God (for the present) having given them over to a reprobate sense.


Schol. How far may one proceed in show of true profession, and yet be
under the wrath of God?


Minist. First, he may have a litterall knowledge. 2. A temporal and
Historical faith; yea, and the faith of miracles. 3. He may have a sorrow for
sin. 4. He may have a desire of heaven. 5. He may taste of the good word of
God, and of the powers of the world to come. Last of all, he may have an
inward restraining power to curb sin with an outward holiness.


Schol. What knowledge is that which a wicked man may have?


Minist. Romans 2.15. and 3.20. 1. Cor. 13.2.
A knowledge of sin, of hell, of heaven, of mercy, of wrath, and of Christ,
and of his meritorious death, burial, resurrection, and second coming, with
all the points of Religion.


Schol. What is the reason that this knowledge keeps them not from this
wrath?


Minister. Isa. 29.13
Because it is not applied close unto the heart, to renew the Spirit of the
mind, to change the will and affections unto the love and obedience of Gods
truth.


Schol. What kind of knowledge call you this then?


Minist. 1. Cor. 8.1
A litterall knowledge which puffs up, but neither humbles nor sanctifies.


Scholar. Who has this knowledge?


Minist. Iam. 2.19
The devils and reprobates, and such who are not truly called by Gods holy
Spirit.


Schol. What is the cause that their faith saves them not?


Minist. Because it is not wrought by the Spirit to apply Christ and all his
benefits unto justification and sanctification. Gal. 2.20.



Schol. What manner of sorrow is this which wicked men may have?


Minist. A worldly sorrow which causes death. 2. Cor. 7.10.



Scholar. Wherefore is this sorrow?


Minist. Not for the right cause, Genesis 4.13.
but for the terrors of conscience, and the punishment of sin.


Scholar. What kind of desire is this which wicked men may have of heaven?


Minist. A natural desire, but not spiritual.


Scholar. Why call you it a natural desire?


Min. Because wicked men would be in heaven, for their own ease, Numb. 23 10.
that thereby they might escape punishment only.


Schol. Wherefore is such a desire natural?


Minist. Ioh. 5.35.
Because therein, nature only seeks the preservation of Nature; and those who
wish to be in heaven, only for their own ease, to be freed of pain, do
only seek the preservation of Nature.


Schol. What kind of feeling is this which wicked men may have of the good word
of God, and the powers of the world to come?


Minister. Iud. 19. 2. Tim. 3.55.
Only fretting motions, wrought by the Majesty of the word which over shadoweth
their souls.


Schol. What is the cause that this feeling is not the true feeling?


Minist. First, because it is not wrought by the Spirit of adoption, after that
special manner, whereby he works in the elect. Next, because it brings no
sure persuasion of election and glory. Ioh. 4.16.17.
As also because it neither feels the love of God: nor is bound close unto
God by a secret love. Lastly, because that kind of feeling neither satisfies
nor setleth the soul to repose in peace upon Christ Jesus.


Schol. What call you this restraining power which the wicked may have to
control sin?


Minister. A secret general working of God, repressing the force of nature, 1.
Tim. 3.5. Mark. 6.29.
but withholding his sanctifying grace and the renewing virtue of his holy Spirit.


Schol. What call you this outward holiness in men wicked and perverse.


Min. An outward conformity with the law of God, Mar. 7.6.7.8.9.
without the inward change of mind, will, and affection.


Schol. Since then wicked men may be under the wrath of God, haueing so many
properties of christian professors: Show unto me, how in this narrow pinch of
affinity, one may rest assured that he is the child of God.


Minst. What is the special thing wherein you would have me to resolve you of.


Schol. First, I would know how to discern when our knowledge may be called a
saving knowledge?


Minist. If our knowledge be spiritual, it is saving.


Schol. What do you mean by that?


Minister. 1 Cor. 1.4 37. Psalm. 119.97. Psa. 40.8.
First, we must try if our minds be rightly informed according to the truth
of Gods word. Next, whether our hearts love that which we know. Lastly, we
must look whether we practice that which we know and love, Romans 7.15.22.23.24
mourning because we are not able to obey, and striving against our rebellion,
that we may obey that light of God which is in our mind: this is spiritual
knowledge.


Schol. But if a man neither know, love, nor obey, what can he then say of
himself, save this; that God is greater then his conscience; and therefore
justly may condemn him?


Min. Yet if there be a desire to love and yield obedience unto that which one
knows; sometimes groaning in the Spirit unto God, Psalm. 119.5. Isa. 1.9. Ion.
2.4. Pro. 1.23.
sometimes mourning and constantly waiting with a heavy heart, until such time
as the Lord shall power forth his renewing grace: all is yet safe.


Schol. What warrant have we so to do?


Min. His own promises.


Schol. Show them I entreat you.


Minist. Blessed are they which hunger and thirst for righteousness, Matthew. 5.6.
Isa. 30.18. Isa. 4.3.
for they shall be filled; whosoever waits on me shall never be ashamed: I
will pour water upon the dry ground; and floods upon the thirsty ground.


Schol. Seeing that the wicked have a certain faith which justifies not; what
manner of faith is that which brings salvation.


Minist. Rom 5.1.
That faith which is a justifying before God.


Schol. who works this faith.


Minist. Ephesians. 2.8.
The holy Spirit.


Schol. What thing is that which the soul apprehends by faith?


Minist. Act. 20.^1. ^. Tit. 2 5. and 2 8. Heb. 10. ^
Jesus Christ, God and man, blessed for evermore, Our Mediator who was humbled
unto the death of the Cross for our fakes, now sitting at the right hand of
God the Father, with all the rich benefits which he has purchased to be powered
out upon us in this life, Romans 4.25
and in the life to come.


Schol. How shall we know whether as yet we have so laid sure hold of
Christ as to make him our own.


Minist. First, we must mark, if our souls have perceived all sufficiency of
grace to be in him, and the Godhead bodily dwelling in him. Col. 2.3.9 Act.
15.11.
Next, we must look if we betake our selves only unto Christ Jesus, to
repose upon him, looking for righteousness and life only in him.

Then must we behold what love we have unto our Redeemer: Io. 21.19. 1. pet.
1.8.
and try whether or not we would gladly love him better then all the pleasures
in heaven or earth.

Further we must mark if ever our souls, have found joy in believing in the
death and resurrection of the Lord Jesus. Lastly, Psalm. 42.1 2. Psalm. 51.12.
look if our hearts be allured with a loving languor to desire for that sense
and feeling we once had of him; resolving to obey him if we were able.


Sc. Seeing that you say the wicked have a sorrow for sin, how should the
Elect know that their sorrow is not the sorrow of wicked men?


Minist. 2. Cor. 7.10.
The sorrow of the elect is a godly sorrow unto life.


Sch. Why call you it a godly sorrow?


Min. Because it is wrought by God himself. Phil. 2.13. Psalm. 31.4 Zach.
12.10. Psa. 31.11.
2. Because the heart breaks not so much for shame and pain as for having
offended so loving and so merciful a Father, the piercing of so loving a
Redemer, and for grieuing of the holy Spirit our Comforter.


Schol. What kind of sorrow is the sorrow of Gods children?


Minist. A bitter sorrow mingled with sweetness.


Sch. Psa. 30.10. Psa. 31.7.8.
Are the children of God ever affected with this grief when they are
sorrowful?


M. No.


Sch. What other disposition then have Gods children in their sorrow? Psa.
38.4.5.6. Psa. 88.31.



Miniis. Bitterness and a terror.


Sch. Whence proceeds this fearful estate to their sense?


Minist. Partly from a feeling of the absence of God, Psa. 22.1.2. Psalm. 51.3
Psa. 32.3.
and hardness of their hearts, and partly in feeling the stings of a guilty
conscience.


Schol. How may one know himself to be in a good estate under such a
disposition? Psalm. 77.5 Psa. 42.5. Ps. 66.10.11.12. Ps. 42.1.2. Psa. 84.2. Psa.
63.1.2. Romans 4 18 Psalm. 119.1.147. Numb. 23 19. Lam. 3.21 Phil. 1.6. Ephesians.
2.1.2.3. Romans 3.21 23.24.



Minister. First, by his former experience that once he did feel the
sweetness of Gods favor. Next, if in some measure (how small soever) he
desire above all things in the earth, the wonted presence of God. Lastly, if he
wait and hope above hope; that he who has once begun will never repent
him, resolving that though God should slay him, yet he would trust in him.


Schol. What may we learn from this sort of disposition?


Minister. First, that by nature we are separate from God: and God from us.
Next, that all Gods children (until grace make a difference) are as hard
hearted as any reprobats.


Schol. Seeing the wicked (you say) may have a desire of heaven: what
difference is there betwixt the desire of the Elect and Reprobate?


Minist. The desire of the Reprobat, or of those in the state of reprobation
before calling, Genesis 25.32. Number. 23.10.
is merely natural, such as was Esaws desire of the birth right, and Balaams
desire of the death of the righteous: but the desire of the Elect, is
spiritual and heavenly.


Schol. Psalm. 63.6.
How may we know when our desires are spiritual?


Min. First, by the acknowledging of that which we chiefly desire. Next of the
end wherefore we desire it.


Schol. What is that which chiefly we must desire?


Minister. Ephesians. 3.16.17.
God in Christ to dwell in our souls here by his Spirit, to sanctify and
quicken us, to raise us up again in the great day, Phil. 3.21.
transforming and making our vile bodies like unto Christ's glorious body, to
reign with him for ever.


Schol. For what end should we desire this?


Minist. Even for God himself the end of all. Psalm. 73.25. Psalm. 116.1.



Schol. In desiring heaven, what should we chiefly respect?


Minister. Not so much our own ease, Romans 7.24. Phil. 1.21 23.
as that being freed from sin in holiness and joy with unspeakable love (as
a vessel full of glory) we may praise and magnify God for evermore.


Schol. Seeing the reprobate may have a certain sort of feeling, how may we
discern, whether our feeling be that sense which is peculiar to the Child of
God or not?


Minist. By the Spirit of adoption.


Schol. Which be the sure marks and fruits of Adoption in us?


Min. Romans 8.16 Romans 14.7.
Persuasion of the love of God toward us, of our Election, Redemption, and
Glorification: joy flowing from this feeling, with increase of persuasion, and
peace which passes all understanding.


Schol. Yet what if the soul have no such disposition?


Minist. Yet must we look back unto what we have felt. Next, we must see
what we desire to feel, and further, what we hope to feel.


Scho. How may one know whether as yet he has ever had any feeling?


Minist. 1. Cor. 2.0. Psa. 13.24.25. Psa. 31.19. Psa 36.7.8.9.
He must look, if ever, in laying sure hold of Christ, his soul has been
filled with a spiritual sweetness above all the pleasures of Nature, which
in some measure has left a seal and stamp of heaven in the soul, that has
thus enabled him to discern betwixt an absence and a presence of God; so that
he is always joyful, Psa. 52.35. Psa. 63.3. Psa. 88.14.
when he has any feeling of Gods love; by the contrary ever sad, and heavy
for his absence.


Schol. Yet seeing the wicked may have an inward restraining virtue to curb
sin, and an outward conformity with the law of God, how may it be known
whether one has a restrayning virtue only, Ezekiel 30.31. Act. 2.37. Zech.
12.10. Ier. 31.9. Eze. ibid. Eze. 20.43. Psa. 51.1.2. Romans 7.24. Psa. 42.1.
Psa. 116.1. Isa. 29.9.
or the renewing virtue of the holy Spirit?


Min. This is most easy to discern.


Scho. Explain your meaning.


Minist. The first internal work of the Spirit, is a sight of sin which
offends the Majesty of God; a sight also of God who has been offended. Next,
a secret sorrow proceeding from a hatred to sin, with a love of that glorious
offended Majesty provoked; then a true desire to be freed of sin, with a
loving heart, and earnest desire to love God for himself. Further also, a
purpose and resolution to consecrate our secret thoughts, will, Heb. 2.1 Psalm.
119.37. Psalm. 39.1
and affections unto his holiness as a living sacrifice. A strife also against
all the pleasures and occasions of sin, Genesis 6.5. Ier. 17.9. Psalm. 32.3.4. 2.
Cor. 7.11.
with an endeavor to keep our thoughts and affections steadfastly upon God and
his will. Lastly, as the mind naturally strais from God, the will being
perverse, and the affections disordered: if there be then a sting in the
conscience bringing true remorse, these be signs of the operation of the true
Spirit by his renewing grace.


Schol. Seeing the work of the spirit is a thing sensible, which is felt in
his renewing virtues, in the slaughter of sin, and reformation unto newness
of life: what if (all this while) one feel nothing but the growth of sin,
hardness of heart, and blindness of mind?


Min. Ier. 14.30. Romans 7.14
First, he must see if he be able to discern his sin, blindness and
hardness of heart. 2. Look if he secretly mislike the same. 3. Mark if he
would willingly wish it removed. Psalm. 51.22. Ibid. ver 9 Cant. 1.4.
4. Consider if he have desire to use, or any way wish he might use the means,
though to his feeling he is no way able to use the same. Ier. 14.22 Mic. 7.8.9.
Psa. 77.9.10. Isa. 8.47. Psa. 44.17.18.19. La. 3.26.32.33.
5. Look back if at any time God formerly did ever give him grace to believe
in him: (for that present) without any sense or feeling, even when not being
able to pray: in languor, patience and hope he waited for Gods presence. 6.
Consider if after earnest prayer and sorrow for sin, at any time he has
found light, joy, peace, a persuasion of mercy with some softness of heart,
the power of sin abated. Lastly, if he find this continually before his
eyes. The good which I would, I do not, Romans 7.19
but the evil which I would not, that do I.


Scholar. Declare unto me then some marks of the renewing Spirit?


Min. A love of God and his image for his own cause, being goodness and love
it self. Psa. 116.1. Psalm. 139.21. Psa. 51.19.
Then an unfeigned hatred of that which offends God. Lastly, a misliking of
our own evil heart, with a true thirst and hunger to have it made better.


Sc. Can a Reprobat have these marks?


Minist. No.


Scholar. How so?


Minist. Because they be the marks of Election, and are wrought by the Spirit
of Adoption; which a Reprobate cannot receive.


Schol. Who are they who feel the wrath of God, and shall also perish in the
same wrath?


Minist. Those whom God in his judgment wakens, giving the conscience over to
find the deluge of torments: 1. These. 2.16.
the sting of reprobation; withdrawing from them his Spirit, either to seek
mercy truly, or to believe that there is any mercy for them, so despairing.


Schol. When does the Lord waken such wicked men to feel these horrors of
conscience?


Minist. Some sooner, some later, Genesis 4.4.13. Mat. 27.4.
some longer before their death, as Cain; some again immediately before their
death, as Judas.


Scho. What kind of sense has a Reprobate when he is thus wakened?


Minist. Light, feeling, and persuasion.


Schol. What light sees he?


Minist. First, all his sins, accusing, Isa. 48.22. Heb. 12.29. Mat. 25.41.
conuicting, condemning, and tormenting him. 2. The great God a consuming fire
to devour him. 3. Eternity of pain prepared for him, and to be given over by
the judge to be tormented for ever, with the devil and his Angels.


Schol. What feels the Reprobate being thus wakened?


Minister. First, that sin is bitter. Genesis 4.13 Isa. 30.33
2. That there is an everlasting wrath prepared for impenitent sinners. 3. That
the conscience (howsoever for a while asleep in hardness of heart) is capable
of wrath. 1. King. 21 27.
4. That it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Heb.
10.31. Mar. 9.45.46. Luke 16.24.
And lastly, that hell torments do take away all peace and comforts, bringing
nothing but sorrow and unquietness, yea, that a little look of hell for one
evil thought, is more fearful and terrible then all the torments in the
earth.


Schol. Whereof is the Reprobate persuaded when he is thus wakened?


Minister. Matt. 27.5.
First, that God never elected him, nor yet Jesus Christ has redeemed him, and
that he was never renewed by the Spirit of grace. 1. Sam. 28 15.
2. That he shall never have comfort in heaven or earth. 3. That there is an
everlasting wrath prepared for him, and that he shall never come forth of
that prison and torment. Lastly, that GOD and his creatures, visiible and
invisible, Genesis 4.14 Pro. 28.1.
Elect and Reprobate, shall all be his enemies, helping to aggrauate his
torments.


Schol. What be the degrees, by which a Reprobate is brought unto this torment?


Minist. First, Profaneness. Heb. 12.16. Romans 2.5. Heb. 3.12 Ephesians. 4.19 Genesis
4.13 Mat. 22.13.
2. Impenitencie. 3. Infidelity. 4. Senselessness and dead security. 5. A
wakening by a sensible wrath. Lastly, a reiection of him into everlasting
torments.


Scholar. What difference is there betwixt the Elect and the Reprobate, in the
sense and feeling of the wrath of GOD?


Minister. First, the Reprobate he feels and fretteth, at the same; Revel.
^.10. Genesis 4.24
Next, his torment paineth him so, that he would gladly be rid of the pain,
but never truly repents him of the sin. 3. The weight of his torment
(proceeding from a guilty conscience, and the sight of God the Judge) makes
him to despair, Matt. 27.5.
cast off mercy, turn his back upon God, and his free promises in Christ
Jesus; so plunging himself (without recovery) in the wrath of God.


Schol. How does the child of God behave himself in the feeling of the wrath
of God?


Min. Being wakened out of the dead sleep of sinful security; Psalm. 38.3
Psalm. 31.4. Psalm. 51.7
First, torment makes him to lament, and sorrow that he should have provoked
his GOD, thus to deal with him. Next, he thirsts for reconciliation with God
through Jesus Christ. Further, he draws near, Psa. 119.49.
laying sure hold upon the promises of the word of GOD, desiring to feel them
by experience. Yea, Gal. 6.14 Phil. 3.8.
more; he sees no salvation for him out of Christ crucified, and therefore
renounceth himself and all that is in him, cleaving only to Gods free mercy
and love in the Lord Jesus. Lastly, Psalm. 71.14.15.
he gives not over, but constantly waits, hanging still on Gods free love,
and the truth of his promises revealed in his word.


Schol. Yet show unto me further, how near the child of God may come unto the
wicked in the sense and feeling of the wrath of God.


Minister. First, Romans 7.18.23.24. Psalm. 22.1. Psalm. 88.4 5. Ps. 40.2. Psa
38.4. Psa 55.4.5.
Gods child will feel all his impediments standing up betwixt God and him. 2.
He may have no kind of feeling, either of the love of God, or of his mercy,
election, redemption, or of the Spirit of sanctification. 3. Gods child will
feel for his sins (in Gods absence) in his conscience, burning wrath,
unquietness and torment. 4. When he thinks of God, he may be troubled:
Eternity will dash him, the conscience of him also (at that time) may bear
such witness against him, Psalm. 88.15.
that altogether he may doubt of his salvation, easily then he may be
persuaded to despair: and if at such a time it were given unto the sense of
his own conscience to judge, he would willingly subscribe his own
condemnation.


Scholar. Declare then, what is that manner of working, by which God uses to
heal a soul being thus diseased?


Minist. Ioh. 3.5.
He has a secret working for that present unfelt by the Patient, yet
afterward fully revealed.


Scholar. But, in such a narrow pinch, how may we judge of that secret
working?


Minister. Psalm. 51. Luc. 15.18. 2. Cor. 7.11.
First, by that grief we have for grieuing of our God. 2. By that desire we
have to be reconciled with God (for still the more grievous that the torment
is, so much the greater will desire of reconciliation be, and the hatred to
sin: Romans 4.18
) 3. By that hope we have above hope, against our feeling, looking unto Gods
free promises, with assurance that he will come, with this resolution, that
though he delayed his coming until our last breath yet for all this, that
we would wait for him.


Schol. When Gods children cannot feel, Isa. 8.17.
should they measure their estate according to their feeling, believing that
God so accounts of them, as for the present their conscience witnesses?


Minist. No.


Schol. Why so?


Minister. Because none may measure the favor of God by their present
tentations: seeing, feeling is a false Judge?


Scholar. Yet when one having sufficient knowledge, walks in all the means
so much as may be, and can for all this have no assurance or feeling of
remission of sins: is not this lamentable?


Minister. It may be so for a while, but it is with such, as with those who
have a bad stomach: who though they cannot make use of their provisions of
knowledge for the present, Psa. 119.^2.
yet when their appetites return, they find better use of it then ever before.


Schol. God (we know) promises to give those who delight in him their hearts
desire. Psalm. 37.4
Yet we see, they have it not always in spiritual things, as true joy;
feeling assurance of his love. etc. How does he then fulfill his promise?


Minister. Psalm. 51.4
It is most certain, the breach is always on our part; for such look aside on
other worldly matters, and not directly upon GOD, making him their sole
delight, Psalm. 104 29.
suffering their corruptions bear sway: and then it is just with God, to take
away for a time their feeling; for he sees, if such had not sometimes a dead
heart, they would have a proud heart (which is worst of all) therefore he
leaves them for a time.


Schol. But they gladly would be freed from both.


Minist. Our hearts yet are so deceitful, Psalm. 119.71.
that God sees we could not escape the latter, but by undergoing the former.


Schol. What then should such think of themselves; who for some years
together, find less feeling in prayer, joy in all good duties. etc. Then in
the former times, although they use the means?


Minister. Such think too hardly of themselves, Why nouices in Christianity
have much feeling. Psa. 77.7, 8, 9.
oftentimes without cause razing the groundwork of their Election: And
calling all the pledges of Gods former favors into question: which indeed
they should not do, but rather gather so many more as they can. For, though
they think that they had better feelings at their first conversion, yet it is
not so: (if for the present they stick close unto all Gods means) for their
first feelings were in a great part, rather sudden passions then grounded
comforts: but after they come to have any true conflicts with their souls, the
mud of the flesh is more purged away, and all things are more sound then at the
first.


Scholar. Yet you know it is written, that the righteous in their old age
shall be fat and flourishing, bringing forth fruit: Psalm. 92.13.14.
what shall some say then, or think of themselves, when they find a decay in
their memories, etc. Deadness in their affections? etc. Though they may not
call their election in question; may they not fear some strange judgment?


Min. Psalm. 44.17.18.19 20.
No surely: for (perhaps) then they may flourish most of all in humility,
holiness, patience, experience, and such like graces, when they want those
stirring and hot affections. Neither ought we to look for such strength of
memory and lively operative actions of grace, in age, in sickness, in great
sorrows and tentations; as at other times in young years free from such
assaults. Nevertheless, in such times God gives graces most fit for those
times; as in age, gravity, ability to give good counsel, to speak from
experience, etc. So that though the aged Christians have not always most life
and feeling, and stirring grace: yet are they better seasoned then young
soldiers: (as the Prophet speaks. Psa. 86.1^.
) Give thy strength unto day servant: so have they a great deal more of Gods
strength to walk with: yea, the greatest measure thereof at their most need:
which if we should attain unto too soon, it would make us proud and secure
to say with the rich man, Soul take thy rest, thou have enough for many
years. Luke 12.19.
And therefore as Hounds do hunt best when they follow the sent, not the
sight (for then they run a madding, ready like to break their necks,) so
aged Christians, though they follow by faith, and have less feeling in sense,
yet do they go on more strongly to heaven, then such who run all upon their
sense.


Schol. How comes it then to pass that Gods children are so addicted unto
feeling? so mourning when they have lost the same? yea, so troubled, that they
imagine all is gone for ever?


Minister. Just as a prick of a pin, or some other distemper in one part of
the body, does so vex us, that we for the present are so grieved with the
same, that we forget that strength and health which is in the rest of the
body: so the feeling and sense of Gods love, Cant. 5.6.
being for a while lost, does so dampe with the sorrow thereof all other
graces in the soul, that for the present we can discern none, and so imagine
all to be lost for ever.


Schol. What makes Gods children so to rely upon feeling?


Minister. Certainly (as I think) because they remember not that it is
written, 2. Cor. 5.7
we walk by faith and not by sight: and so their faith being weak, by reason
they are not well clothed with their spiritual armor, having forgot their
consolation, no marvel they stagger and reele to and fro, Heb. 12.5
having lost the touch of that hand which had wont to guide them. So that I
say, it must be want of faith; the strength whereof appears most in the
least measure of feeling.


Schol. Wherefore then does God give unto his children, such a measure of
feeling at their first conversion, yet afterward withdraws the same?


Minist. Even as we see we may lead a little child when he is young whither we
will, with apples and such like toys: Heb. 5.13
so are we (being babes in Christ) led by feeling at our first conversion;
then we are altogether for rewards: at which time if GOD made us not better
offers then the world, we would forsake him, and cleave unto the same. Matthew.
15 22.
But (with the woman of Canaan) to hold out in repulses, without feeling to
gather strong arguments to move GOD, again and again, argues a strong Faith.
Again, Christians have ordinarily more feeling at first, because then every
thing is new unto them, receiving more from God then they looked for. Neither
are our prayers then so much underpropped with arguments as with feelings, then
we come with simple suits, thinking God loves me, and therefore he will hear
me. Psa. 116.1.
(As little children use to come to their Parents: they bring no forcible
reasons; but I pray you Father. etc. Give me such a thing; neither do their
Parents expect any, but are well content (yea glad) to hear them ask at
first. But when process of time makes those feelings (by use) not to seem so
new, and so not so sensible: God hiding his face; and feeling decaying; then
do they begin to lay about them with their knowledge, to labor for strong
reasons in their prayers, Heb. 5.14 Exodus 32.11.12. and 32.12. Psalm.
40.10.11.12. Psa. 31.22.
to seek how to move God best: by his nature, promises, and former mercies.
And then indeed (whatsoever we think) is the best growth in faith and al
goodness, which after the storm is past, Gods children can see and rejoice at,
yea, and live upon the store a good while after, having those prayers which
they made in their deepest anguish, as the best pillars of their assurance of
Gods love.


Schol. Why does God for the most part so long delay to give comfort and
feeling unto his children?


Minister. Not like unto some Physicians and Surgeons, who with needless
delays put their Patients to extraordinary pains: Mat. 9. and 15.23.
but for their good, to make them spend prayers, whereby they are always
gayners: the pains whereof is but the crossing of the flesh, which the more it
is tamed, 1. Cor. 9.27.
the better it is for them.


Schol. What then should one do when he has long attended without any
comfort or feeling?


Mini. When the soul would most willingly despair (because of the sense of
sin, Psa. 71.14. Job 13.15 Job 19.23 24.25.
terror of conscience, and Gods absence) then believe most, lay surer hold
then ever upon the promises of the mercy of God in Christ.


Schol. How can one say that he believes, not finding in him the fruits of
Faith, which are prayer, comfort, peace, and holiness.


Minister. 2. Cor. 5.7 Psa. 36.3.
Faith and lack of feeling may well stand together; yea, and great doubting:
and he who believes most, and feels least, is he who glorifieth God most:
for, when we feel, we possess (as it were) a beginning of that which shall
be in heaven: we live now by faith and hope, Romans 8.24 25.
not by sight and feeling.


Schol. But how should the conscience in the mean time rest, since feeling is
no competent Judge?


Mini. Build upon that rock, Math. 16 18.
against which the gates of hell cannot prevail.


Schol. What is that?


Minist. To stick close unto Christ, and unto the virtue of his death and
resurrection, remembering the justifying blood of Christ, the satisfying blood
of Christ, the meritorious blood of Christ; the comfortable resurrection of
Christ Jesus: Job 29.24. Mat. 9.13.
And that he came not to call the righteous but the sinners unto repentance;
that he came for the sick and not for the whole; that he bids all laden and
weary sinners come unto him; yea and all such who are a thirst, Mat. 11.28.
Reu. 22.17. Isa. 1.18. Ezekiel. 33.11.
to come unto the waters and drink freely: assuring them that though their
sins were red as scarlet, yet that he will make them white as the Snow: as
also he himself has sworn, that as he lives, he desires not the death of a
sinner; but rather that he should turn from his wickedness and live:
promising, that he will neither break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking
flax, Matt. 12.20. Isa. 61.1. Mat. 10.20. Isa. 61.1. Luke 15.4.23.
but will bind up that which is broken, with the comforts of his Spirit; will
make whole that which is wounded, with the plaster of his precious blood; and
bring home the lost sheep, rejoicing also at the return of the forlorn
son. His love also couers both the multitude of sins, and the sinner, with
his own shining righteousness; Phil. 3.9. Ephesians. 2.1.
he also quickneth and raises up the dead soul that is stinking in the grave
of sin. And (to be short) he says; Romans 9.33. Romans 8.1.
He who believes shall never be ashamed, but shall be raised in that great
day, with a glorious body, like unto the most beautiful body of Christ Jesus,
and shall never be condemned, but have everlasting life. This is the rock I
spoke of, Psa. 61.2. Psa. 27.5. Psalm. 32.7
and on this rock must the soul anchor, when it is tossed betwixt the strong
winds and deep waves of sin and everlasting wrath. For blessed is he who
believes, though he never saw Jesus with his eyes. Ioh. 20.29
Yea suppose one never had any feeling of him, still waiting in hope and
languor, L^. 3.24.25.26.27 31.32.
and resting upon the love and mercy of Christ Jesus revealed in the word; this
is a sure ground to rely upon; that as God is truth it self, Ioh. 3.33. and
14.6. Josh. 23.4. 2. Tim. 1.12.
so he will most certainly perform all his promises in his own good time:
being both merciful and powerful to perform whatsoever he promises.


Scholar. Yet, why may not one, who doubts of his Election, reply? It is
certain, God is merciful, true; and powerful, but what is that unto me,
seeing that I cannot perceive in particular, that he has made a promise unto
me?


Minist. Isa. 43.10 11.12. Isa. 40.13 25.26.27 28.
First, I would have such a party to assure himself, that this is but a iugling
deluding Sophistry of the devil, to make any to pry into the decree of God,
to see whether his name be written there or not, before he use the means: for
then this follows, that because I cannot see Gods decree, therefore I will
use no means, all are in vain: which temptation, if the Devil can once
settle, keeping such parties from the means, then he knows they be sure his
own. Next, I would wish them to remember, Ier. 3.31.32. Gal. 3.28.
that the Lord is so abundantly merciful in making of his promises, that he
excludes no sorts of persons, neither Jew nor Grecian, bond, or free, high
nor low, rich or poor, but the righteousness of God through Jesus Christ is
in all and upon all who believe: Romans 3.23 24.
That there is no exception of persons, for all have sinned, and are deprived
of the glory of God, and are justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption made in Christ Jesus; yea, 1. Tim. 1.15.
that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, whosoever they be,
excluding no sort, nor degree, from laying hold on life, much less any
particular person. Rather (then) must one gather the quite contrary arguments
against the Devil and carnal reason: Ephesians. 2.1.
And thus return their arguments: All Gods children (for the most part) who in
former times have been called and enlightened (when they were dead in sins
and trespasses) at their departure from Sodom, were not so curious as at first
to pry into Gods decree, to know whether their names were written in the
book of life; before they would use the means: but they rejecting sense and
carnal reason, did by degrees use the means to their power; and so by the
constant use of the same, and Gods blessing therewith, by little and little at
length, found their eyes opened, their hearts softened, the whole man in part
sanctified; so attaining unto the knowledge of his decree: therefore I will
also use the means (rather obeying God then the devil) which though by and by
they prove not effectually, yet I will wait Gods good time, Isa. 40.31
and who knows but at length I may speed as well as others? Psa. 1 38.7. 1.
Tim. 1.13. Matt. 9.13. ^am. 4.5 and 5.8.2. Is. 53.4.5 Mat. 11.28.
And so again, though I find not my name in the free Covenant of mercy, yet
since it excludes none by name, I will hope still, though I be most sinful;
yet Christ, he came into the world to save sinners, he justifies all those who
believe in him, how miserable soever they be, yet his righteousness apprehended
couers all their infirmities. But so it is, I am a vile sinner, laden and
burdened with iniquities. Therefore I will believe, Phil. 3.9.
and my Lord will justify me; and I will draw near unto God, and he will ease
me; I will apprehend and cleave close unto his righteousness, how vile and
naked soever I be of my self: and thus I shall escape in the midst of all
tempests. Isa. 55.8.9.1 Psa 8.47.8.9. Ephesians. 3.20
For God (if I be penitent) is more powerful to foregiue and heal my
rebellions, then I am able to provoke his anger. Now the ground of this
consolation is the revealed truth of God, which is as sure as if we did see
him in an extraordinary manner, both feeling and hearing him speak unto the
heart and ear, or rauishing us in visions, as he did to Adam, Abraham, Isaac,
Iaacob, Moses, the Prophets and Apostles, Act. 9.3.
or as unto Paul out of heaven: Mat. 5.18.
for heaven and earth shall pass away, before any title of his word shall fall
unto the ground. Luk ^.54
And he who rests upon this word, out and beyond his feeling, he rests
upon the arm of God; and as God is true, shall undoubtedly find deliverance:
Ioh. 3.33.
but he who measures the promises of God by his feeling, and thinks that he
believes not but when he feels, he sins grievously; for he compares all
undoubted verity grounded upon God (which shall be performed in Gods good
time, Romans 3.4.
Heb. 10.23. Isa. 33.6.7.8.11.
as certainly as God is truth it self) with an uncertain and vanishing
feeling, which may fail us, but the promises of God cannot. He therefore who
measures his faith by his feeling, deceives himself; because, neither is it
permanent, neither have we any warrant of the measure, time, or continuance
thereof: Isa. 59.16.7. Isa. 63.5.
seeing the Lord comes when he will, and as he will, as he sees to be most
for his glory and our good, even in our most need. And as for the chief
grounds of faith, there is no need to go up unto heaven to seek for them,
neither to dig down unto hell to find them out: for (as Moses speaks) the
word of truth is near into us, our eyes see it continually, our hands handle
it, our eyes see it, our ears have the same read and preached unto us. And he
that believes in his heart (as the Scripture speaks) that Jesus Christ is
dead and risen again, Romans 10.9
confessing him also with his mouth, shall be saved.


Schol. What manner of working is that which the Lord works with the soul,
when he reuealeth himself unto it?


Mini. First, he remoueth darkness, Ephesians. 5.8. Act. 26.18. Act. 2.37 etc.
terror, and that which presses down, and doubting. Next, he powers forth
upon the soul. 1. A sensible light 2. A persuading light. 3. A comfortable
light.


Schol. Explain your meaning in so saying.


Minister. I mean this, Romans 5.5.
that when God works with the soul, he will power out the light of his
Spirit upon the same, showing clearly unto the party, that he loves him, and
through love has chosen, redeemed, and in heaven will crown him. This light
brings joy unspeakable and glorious. 1. Pet. 1.8. Phil. 4.7. 1. Cor. 2.9.10.
This light brings that peace of God, which passes all understanding: And
during this light we feel that which the eye never saw, the ear heard,
neither can enter into the heart of man to think of.


Schol. How should we try in such an experience, whether that light we feel
be the true light or not?


Minister. First, we must try how the soul was disposed before that light
came. Next, try what sort of feeling we have in that light. Lastly, we must
mark what stamp it leaves in the heart, and how we are disposed after
feeling.


Schol. What manner of disposition should be in the soul before that light
came?


Minist. A darkness, deadnes, Ephesians. 21. and 5.8. Act. 2.37 Deuteronomy. 28.65.66.
and senslesnes, with torment, at sometimes, doubting and terror: a sensible
absence of the power of the holy Ghost, either to comfort or sanctify.


Schol. Does every man feel this estate?


Minist. No.


Schol. Who then are they who feel this miserable estate of the soul?


Minist. None in a manner but the children of God.


Schol. How may one know when the sight of his misery is wrought by the Spirit
of God?


Minist. Because it is an effect of his working. Act. 2.37.



Schol. Show me that.


Mini. It is a light which must show unto us our darkness, Ephesians. 5.13.
and it is a presence which makes us to feel and see an absence.


Scholar. Yet go on, persuade me I entreat a you more fully thereof.


Minist. Phil. 3.6.
Look then first into the experience of the Saints of God. Saint Paul saw not
himself, until God called him, yea he thought himself without reproof.
Next, let any one who is called looked unto his own experience; Romans 7.9.
and he shall see there was a time when he had no feeling of that miserable
estate. Now when we shall find a change, nature cannot be the worker thereof:
for Nature has not that light to discover unto us our misery: Ephesians. 2.1. Romans 1.
we are dead in sin by nature, and blind also: how is it then possible for
a dead man to see or feel? so that it must needs be a light, surpassing a
natural light, which shows unto us our misery. Again, if it were only
nature which discovers unto us our misery (seeing Nature retains still her
own natural operations) what is the cause that there was a time when we did
neither see our selves nor our misery? for if the sight of our misery were
natural; we ever would have seen the same. So because it is of Grace, blind
Nature could never show the same: Romans 8.26
therefore the sight of our misery is by the special working of the holy
Spirit.


Scholller. But Cain and diners other wicked men did feel their own misery:
how may we discern betwixt their sight and that of Gods children?


Minister. The sight which wicked men have of themselves, and their misery, it
comes after some evil deed done, being guilty and thus convicted of the
crime by their natural conscience. Next, Isa. 33.14 Genesis 4.13.14.
they see the punishment and only therefore tremble. Further, their fear is
for the punishment only, as Cains was: as also they feel not with any
continuance the miserable state of their soul to strive against it, to subdue
it unto true remorse: neither can they see the wickedness of their heart, or
truly desire to have it renewed or brought under a heavenly sense of Gods love
and favor.


Scho. Show unto me also, how sees the child of God his miserable heart?


Minister. The chief thing the child of God looks into, Isa. 63.17 Psa. 51.10.
is the heart. Next, he feels the evil disposition thereof. Further, he is
grieved with the sense of the same. Then he thirsts to have it made better,
rather then to obtain the whole world, and all the pleasures thereof. Gal.
3.17.
There will also be still a strife (at the least) in his desire and will.
Lastly, at sometimes Gods child will feel his heart made better then usual;
that is, Isa. 61.10
he will feel the hardness, blindness, unquietness thereof somewhat
abated: and light, softness, and peace, in place thereof. So that, when the
presence of God is in the heart. Gods child feels it; when it is removed,
he discerns it. For the truly wicked feel not a hard heart, neither know
they what a soft heart means. It is therefore only peculiar to the Child of
God, to be able to discern rightly of his own misery and Gods mercy.


Schol. But what if one do still feel nothing but hardness of heart and
blindness of mind: as yet not being able to perceive a change?


Minister. First, he must try whether that sense of hardness he feels be the
work of God, seeing there was a time, when he had not this sense: Next, mark
if he be pleased with that estate, or rather gladly would have it made better
(if possibly it might be) though it were but like unto smoking flax: Isa.
42.3. Mat. 5.6
Remembering that promise; Blessed are they who hunger and thirst for
righteousness, for they shall be filled. Further, he must warily mark, whether
at any time he is able (how weakly soever) to speak, entreat, and pray unto
God, Isa. 38.14
for mercy to have the heart softened, etc. None can make us to pray in any
measure, save the Spirit: yea although there be but a sigh unto God, Romans 8.28
it is surely wrought by the Spirit. Then see, if after prayer, phil. 4.07.
or in prayer, he has ever obtained any ease or rest. Lastly though he
obtain no ease, yet let him look if he would gladly have a soft heart in
some measure (howsoever weakly relying upon the word) hoping that God in his
own good time will come; ps. 40.1.2.
therefore waiting in patience.


Schol. What learn we hence?


Minist. First, that the sight of our selves comes not of our selves, but of
God. 1. Cor. 11.12.
2. That we are in a blessed and happy estate, when we have a sense and feeling
of our misery, Math. 5.3
being displeased therewith, and desiring from our heart to have it removed.
3. That in such an estate, Mat. 13.16. Luc. 10.24.
we are those with whom GOD is now a working, if we be able to discern
betwixt a soft and a hard heart: betwixt the light of the Spirit and the
darkness of nature. 4. That when we obtain but some piece of desire, and
sometimes some little grace to pray, with a little hope, reposing upon the word
of God, that albeit to our feeling God is not near unto us, Mic. 7.9.
yet that in his own good time he will come again: so that as truly as I
feel an absence, desiring his presence, he will as surely satisfy our
desires, letting us feel his blessed presence. Lastly, Hes. 14.8. Isa. 42.3.
though we be but as bruised reeds and smoking flax, having nothing to
boast of either of holiness or feeling, as the least of all Saints; yet that God
will neither break off our longing, nor quench out desire. And so that finally
we are in the state of grace, notwithstanding all hellish tentations.


Scholar. How should we try whether that be the true light or not, which in
the time of feeling is felt?


Minister. If we mark in the time of feeling, wherewith the soul is filled.


Schol. What then fills the soul?


Minister. An unspeakable power which transformeth the mind, with a sensible
presence of that great light, Romans 8.36
making the soul to exult and rise up in joy, rest in peace, and triumph in
persuasion.


Schol. Whereof is the soul thus persuaded?


Minister. Of the love of God unto us in Jesus Christ, in our election and
redemption; that he has loved and given himself for us: John 3.16
so that by him being saved from condemnation, Ephesians. 2.4. Romans 8.1. and 17.
we shall be crowned with him in glory for evermore.


Schol. Who works this persuasion?


Minist. The Spirit of God, which searches the deep things of God.


Schol. Have not Gods children that sense at all times of this persuasion? 1.
Cor 2.19.



Mini. No.


Schol. When is it felt then?


Minist. At sometimes only, or when it pleases him to reveal himself, for
his own glory and our comfort, Isay. 54.7.8.
according to his own good will.


Schol. Have not all the children God a like measure of feeling?


Minist. No.


Scholar. What if all ones life time he never have felt any such sense as you
speak off; may be therefore conclude that he is one of those, in whom the
holy Spirit dwells not?


Minister. That follows not that he should reason thus: I feel not, nor
ever felt the joys of the Spirit, therefore he is not within me; and I shall
never feel the same. This is a false conclusion. The holy Spirit may be in one
(as it was in a whole Church) even then when he feels handnesse of heart,
terrors, Lam. 3.18
and doubting. Was not the Spirit of GOD in those Saints, who do complain,
and demand of GOD thus. O Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways,
Isa 63.17.
and hardened our heart from thy fear? Was not the holy Spirit also in the
Prophet David: 1. Sam. 27 1. Psa. 31.22.
who suffered the terrors of God from his youth, with doubting of his life?


Schol. Yet declare what that stay is, which should uphold one in such a
tentation?


Minist. First, to look unto God, next unto our own heart.


Schol. What is to be considered, concerning Gods part?


Minist. First, Romans 8.28
that all things (as the Scripture speaks) work togegether for the best,
unto those who love God: Next, that GOD comes when he will, Mat. 10.30.
chiefly in our most need. 3. That God has all the hairs of our head
numbered, so as nothing comes to pass, without his gracious providence: and
thus must we assure our selves, that it is his blessed will to hide himself
from us for a little. Isa. 54.7.8. Exodus 34.6.
4. We must remember, that GOD is mercy and wisdom it self; and that
mercy moves his Majesty to give his presence: but wisdom directs that
presence, as he thinks most expedient to his glory and thy good. So that he
is but foolish, who fretteth in impatiency, 2. King. 6.33.
because God comes not unto him at his pleasure, seeing he (who is wisdom
it self) knows best his own time. Lastly, Deuteronomy. 8.3 16. Iam. 1.2 Psalm.
40.19.
we must remember, that Gods will in thus leaving us, is to try whether without
feeling we can in faith believe his promises, resting and waiting patiently
upon him in humility until he come.


Schol. What should be considered concerning our own heart?


Minister. Cant. 3.1.2. Psalm. 10.1 Psalm. 42
First, to mark if we find a want of Gods presence, discerning an absence. 2.
We must mark whether this absence do grieve us. 3. Mark whether we hunger
and thirst for his presence. Psa. 84.^.
4. We must be sure that either we use the means of the word and prayer, or
at least, have a desire to the same; suffering others to do for us, that we
are not able to do. Isa. 8.17. Isa. 25.9. Hab. 2.3.
Last of all, we must try whether we have resolved to wait in hope, resting
upon his promises in patience, with a constant desire until he come.


Schol. But seeing the Saints of God have not still a like measure of feeling,
show (as near as you are able) what is the greatest measure of feeling they
find in this life, and the least measure they attain unto.


Minister. The greatest measure is, when one is ravished with an unspeakable
presence of God, so that the senses of the body are not felt, 2. Cor. 12 1.2.
but overcome with that fullness, which then the soul receives, as Paul was
ravished: Reu. 1.10. Act. 10.3.
or by an ecstasy of revelation and visions, as befell unto Peter and the
Prophets: or when the presence of God is felt in the word, either read or
preached, or in prayer, that it fills the soul with an unspeakable joy, and
a wonderful peace of conscience, Act. 4.31.
which none can understand, but he who feels the same. Again, the least
measure which the Saints feel, is either under terror, or in the times of
peace.


Schol. What is the least sense which the soul attaineth to under terror?


Minister. The estate of the party must be considered, if he has been
effectually called or not.


Schol. What is the disposition of the child of God under terror, who has
never been called, but for the present is a Patient in the act of calling?


Minist. Bitterness, doubting, terror in the feeling of sin and wrath; yet
there is a kind of weak desire, Act. 16.29.30.
with a hope (although weak) raised by the holy Spirit to wait for better.


Scholar. In such an estate how is the soul supported?


Minist. 2. Cor. 12.9.
By a secret and powerful presence of God, although for the present it be not
felt.


Schol. What is that which maintains this presence?


Minist. Grace to seek grace, grace to languish for grace, Ier. 17.7.
and grace to wait in hope until God come.


Schol. If the child of God have been called, Mic. 7.8.9.
and have tasted how gracious the Lord is; what is his disposition under
terror?


Minist. He is possessed either with a blind terror, or with a terror
proceeding of guiltiness.


Schol. What do you call a blind terror?


Minist. When one is smitten with a confused fear, not knowing the cause, nor
wherefore.


Schol. What is the disposition of the child of God, in such an estate?


Minist. The soul is stupefied, Psalm. 77.3 Lam. 3.15. Psalm. 77.5
dashed, and amazed; almost devoured and swallowed up with the fear. Next,
there remains a certain memory of the presence of GOD once felt. Lastly,
the soul is secretly supported by the Spirit of God to wait; so that for all
this it despaireth not finally.


Schol. But what if the fear proceed of guiltiness?


Minist. 1. Sam. 7.6. Hos. 6.1.2. Lam. 1.22. Psalm. 4.1.
First, God gives grace to pray for remission of sins. 2. He melts the
heart for offending of him. 3. When we cannot sorrow with tears, there will
be languishing sighs. 4. The remembrance of bypast experience, yields some
comfort. Lastly, (though at some times scarce there be any hope felt) yet the
soul will wait for comfort.


Schol. Show then, what is the least measure of feeling, which the child of
God has in the times of his peace.


Minist. Isa. 63.17 Lam. 1.18.
A sense of the hardness of his heart, which he cannot possibly get softened:
a sense of impenitencie, infidelity, blindness of mind, deadness of Spirit;
Lam. 1.13.
an inhabillity to strive against the heart, and the evil disposition thereof,
with any spiritual battle; Ibid. 1.16. and 5.17.18.19.
only there may remain some weak desire of a better disposition: a small
kind of coffeehouse, with the present estate of the soul: with now and
then some heavy faint stolen sighs, looking up unto GOD for some help.


Sch. What is the cause that God will have his Saints to feel such terrors and
stings of conscience?


Minist. First, Psa. 51.3
that they may know that sin is bitter and fearful. 2. That they may
understand that God is angry against all sin, Lam. 3.39.
and has treasures of everlasting wrath, ready to be powered out upon
impenitent sinners. Heb. 12.1
3. That thereby the Saints may learn to hate and detest sin so much the
more. Iud. 23.
4. That they may resolve to follow after holiness, striving to eschew the
garment spotted with the flesh. Psa. 116.1.
5. That so much the more dearly they may love Christ Jesus, who has washed
and redeemed them from their sins, and that most terrible wrath which burns
for evermore.


Scholar. What is the cause that God will have his Saints to feel hardness
of heart, and the miserable estate of their souls?


Minister. First, to make them understand, how barren, dead, filthy Lepers
they are by Nature, through the corruption of sin. 2. That in this feeling of
themselves they may be humbled, Psa. 51.5
and truly acknowledge their misery in shaming and condemning themselves;
Ezekiel. 36.31. and 20.43.
that God in such a sensible confession may be glorified. 3 To make them the
more gladly and joyfully long for the coming of Christ. 4. That when they do
feel, they may learn to discern how precious a heavenly presence is: so ever
thereafter, so much the more careful to entertain the same, Cant. 3.4.
and more thankful for all manner of comforts. 5. That the Saints may know
and understand, that albeit they find sometimes GOD working within them, as
indeed they do: yet that the strength of corruption is so great, that it
quenches these sweet and holy feelings; as also that we may know our
weakness and infirmities to be such, ^^ilest we walk in this Tabernacle of
clay, that we are not able to retain a constant spiritual presence. Last of
all, 1. Cor. 13.14. Psalm. 51.13.
that we may afterward pity and be so much the more merciful unto others in
the like estate.


Scholar. What may we learn hereof?


Min. First, that one sense and feeling is not enough, but God in mercy must
multiply feeling after feeling, and grace after grace. Next, that we should
long to be freed of this body of sin and death, Phil. 1.23
to be clothed with our heavenly husband in glory: 2. Cor. 5. 1. Cor. 13.126.
there immediately to see the face of God, there to feel an everlasting
presence without any absence.


Scho. Is it possible, that God can be in the heart, when we feel the
hardness of our hearts?


Min. It may be so.


Scho. How may that be known?


Minist. Psalm. 32.3 Psa. 38.3.
First, by the feeling of the evil: 2. By the extreme sorrow, heaviness, and
coffeehouse for that evil disposition. Psa. 63.17
3. By that remaining desire, to have the soul truly touched with a sensible
presence of Gods holy Spirit: with a desire to strive, when we are not able to
strive.


Schol. What manner of stamp leaves this light in the heart (being now
departed) in the time of hardness of heart?


Minist. Psa. 61.20.
First, it confirms and setleth the soul to rest upon that God whose presence
was once felt. Next, it makes the soul still bold to draw near unto God.
Further, Psalm. 77.5 6.
the memory of that former presence, brings comfort in tentation, because
we have felt such light, as has sanctified and renewed the mind, will, and
affections. Again, Psalm. 51.10.
it makes a man marvelous humble, to hate sin, to love holiness and
righteousness; to make choice of God, to be his sole pleasure and delight, as
possibly he may: to loath this present life, Phil. 1.23
and the pleasures thereof: to long to be dissolved to be with Christ: To
walk as a stranger in this world: to have his conversation in heaven, by faith
and hope, as the heir and Son of God. The remaining stamp of this light
also, makes the child of God rejoice when he seeeth God honored; Psalm.
119.136.
and contrarily, exceeding sorrowful, when he sees him dishonored.


Scholar. What is the cause that this small remaining light has or can have
such a stamp and effectual working?


Minister. Because this light once shining in the soul, draws it so near
unto God, and God unto it, letting it see and feel clearly in that light,
that it is beloved of God: which when the soul once by a strong apprehension
feels, Psa. 27.8. 1. Ioh 4.19. Romans 5.5.
it answers God with a sweet love again: so that this sense of the love of
GOD once shed abroad in the heart, persuading, comforting, and sanctifying the
same, acquainteth the soul with God: so that neither can he forsake the same,
or it finally forsake him: Ier. 32.40
remaining always sad (at least) when he is grieved: joyful when he is
glorified, either in mercy or justice.


Schol. Is it possible for the child of God to fall into such heinous
presumptuous sins, as wicked sinners do?


Minist. It is possible.


Schol. What is the cause thereof?


Minist. Because that the same vileness is in the Nature of the Child of God,
1. Cor. 6.10.11. Ephesians. 2.3. Tit. 3.3. 2. Chr. 33 9.10. etc.
which is in the prophanest Reprobate.


Scholar. I grant the Child of God before he be called effectually, may go
on for a while in as evil a course as any Reprobate. But can the Child of God
who has been effectually called, fall from his feeling and holiness, in such
sins as makes the Reprobate damned for ever?


Minist. Most certainly he may.


Schol. How are you able to confirm your judgment?


Minist. In place of light, Psalm. 51.10.11.
he may be covered with darkness: In place of feeling and persuasion, there
may come deadnes and doubting; in place of joy, terror: for softness of heart
hardness; in place of holiness, much profaneness.


Schol. Job 3.11.12. Job 6.4.9. psa. 40.12. 1. Kin. 11.4.5.6.7.8
Explain your meaning in so saying.


Minist. It is plain, that there was in Job terror and doubting. And in the
Prophet David, sense of wrath, and grievous fears of wrath. And in Solomon a
strange and fearful declining from good, and a wonderful practice of evil.


Schol. Can the child of God altogether loose the comfort of feeling, and be
oppressed with terror?


Minist. Yea truly, and that so far, that the sense of sin and the wrath of
God, will ouer-burden the soul: as David testifies, when he says: Thy hand
was heavy upon me day and night, Psa. 32.4.
and my moisture is turned into the drought of Summer. And again, There is
nothing sound in my flesh, Psa. 38.3.4.5.
because of thine anger, neither is there rest in my bones because of my sin;
for mine iniquities are gone over my head, and as a mighty burden are too heavy
for me. My wounds are putrified and corrupt, because of my foolishnes. My
reins are full of burning, and there is nothing sound in my flesh: yea he
further testifies that the indignation of God lay upon him. Again he says,
Psa. 88.7.16.
Thy indignation goes over me; and thy fear has cut me off.


Schol. Yet declare further, how far may the Child of God be cast down
(feeling of Gods absence) being in continual vexation by the apprehension of
his anger, yet continuing the Child of God?


Min. First, the Child of God may be driven to such an extremity and narrow
pinch, that (to his feeling) God hides his face from him; the Lord rejects
his soul, Lam 3.8.
and when he roareth, crying out, that he shuts forth his prayer. Next, to
his sense and feeling, he will feel the God of heaven to be his enemies,
pulling him in pieces, causing the arrows of his quiver to enter into his
reins, filling him with bitterness, and causing his soul to be far from
peace. Again, the Child of God, to his feeling, may through the affliction of
his soul, be at the brinke of despair, and at the point of death: yea and
from his youth suffer terrors, Psa. 88.15.
doubting of his life. Lastly, the Child of God through the manifold tentations
of his soul; will be so dejected, that when he prays, his spirit will be
full of anguish and vexation, Psa. 77.8.9.
and agony, thinking that God has either forgotten to be merciful, or that
he has shut up his tender mercies in displeasure: that he has overthrown
and destroyed him on every side: that being gone, Job. 16.7.8.9.10.1^ 12. etc.
God has kindled his wrath against him.


Schol. Can the Child of God after he has felt terror become so senseless,
that he will be hardened from the fear and awe of the majesty of God?


Minist. He may, Isa. 63.17
as the Prophet Isaiah testifies, when he says, Why have thou made us to
err from thy ways: and hardened our hearts from thy fear? as also experience
of the Saints of God in all ages witness the same.


Schol. How far may the Child of God after his effectual calling run
riotously in profane looseness?


Min. First he may stray and fall away in his affections of love and hatred.
Secondly, Reu. 2.4. Reu. 3.15.
he may loose the reins in outward actions.


Schol. How may the Child of God degenerate in his affections?


Minist. First his love and obedience may grow cooler unto Christ Jesus, Reu.
2.4.5
his hatred likewise of sin may be diminished: and the love of righteousness
be removed a little; and yet remain the Child of God. As we see in David,
Mat. 26.7.
a man after Gods own heart, and Peter, Christ's dear Apostle, who thus for a
while did fall away in their affections.


Schol. What are the degrees by which the Child of God comes unto this
disordered riot and looseness in his affectiones?


Min. Iam. 1.14. Psalm. 32.3 4. Heb. 4.12 13.
First, he suffers the presence of God to go forth of his heart; and the
mind to be blinded. 2. He leaves off seriously either to seek God, or to
mourn for his absence. 3. The veil and snares of hardness of heart, thus
comes upon him. 4. The heart becomes senseless and dead. 5. The party thus
lying open unto tentation unarmed, sin deceives, with the enticements
thereof defiling the affections, persuading them to fulfill the lusts of the
flesh. 6. The sense of heaven and of hell become strangely decayed. And lastly,
there may well abide a light to convince and convict the conscience thus
defiled, but no power to resist sin in the act.


Schol. What should we learn from hence?


Minist. First, Heb. 3.12 Heb. 3.12 15. hs. 32.9.
to beware we loose not our peace and communion with God. 2. To shun hardness
of heart, and blindness of mind. 3. Not to suffer the conscience to be
senseless without feeling, but ever to retain a sight and sense of sin, and
the terror of Gods wrath for the same: with some measure of remorse and godly
sorrow. 4. To be watchful, Heb. 5.13.
that the vile bewitching pleasures of sin, benumme not the conscience, making
it consent unto such abominations: for if we so do, the strength of sin
will overcome us; and by the righteous judgment of God we shall fall into some
great danger, which although it bring us not to hell, 2. Sam. 12.11.
shall be a stain in the conscience, and as a thorn in our side all our life
long.


Schol. Is it possible for the Child of God to fall into such gross sins;
as those who are ordained unto destruction? the sin against the holy Ghost
excepted?


Mi. 2. Sam. 11.11.4.
Nothing more certain: he may fall into the same sins, and yet be no cast away.
Esau a Reprobate was a fornicator: Ge. 19.23 Genesis 9.21 Matt. 26.70. Genesis 4^.15.
David an Elect did commit adultery. Lot an Elect was overtaken with drunkenness
and incest: so also was Noah with wine, Peter an elect denied Christ, and
Joseph did swear by the life of Pharaoh: so that he has no freedom (if Gods
spirit be absent) more then these, not to fall into such gross sins: the sin
against the holy Ghost excepted. A discovery of the sin against the holy Ghost.



Schol. What is the sin against the holy Ghost?


Min. There are six names given unto this great sin. 1. It is called, Matt.
12.31. Mark. 3.29. Lu. 12.10 Heb. 6.4. Heb. 10.20. 1. Ioh. 3.16.
a sin against the holy Ghost. 2. A blasphemy, an impious blasphemy,
extremely impious. 3. A sin that never shall be forgiven. 4. A falling away,
an Apostasy. 5. A sin against knowledge and conscience, in great light, in
despite of the spirit of grace. 6. A sin unto death.


Schol. Why is it so diversely named?


Mi. Because God in his word has been pleased so to express the same unto
us: yet, if we list to look more nearly into the same, we shall find sundry
causes. 1. It is called, Matt. 11.31.
A sin against the holy Ghost. Not in respect of the substance of the holy
Ghost, for the essence of the three persons is all in one and the same God: nor
yet in respect of the Person of the holy Ghost, for whatsoever is done against
any one of the persons, is done against all three: but it is said to be done
against the holy Spirit, because done against the immediate effect, work, and
office of the holy Spirit, to wit, against the shining light of the said
spirit: this light is indeed an effect of the Father and of the Son, as well as
of the holy spirit: yet it is said to be against the holy Ghost only, because
it fights against a special immediate work of his, against that light and
work of grace kindled by him. 2. It is called a blasphemy, an impious
blasphemy, extremely wicked. Ma. 3.23 Mat. 9.3. Mat. 12.32. 1. Tim. 1.13.
There be diverse blasphemies, a blasphemy of men, a blasphemy directly against
the Son of man; a blasphemy impious, wicked, such as was Paul's blasphemy,
which because (as he testifies) it was not done wittingly, he was received
into mercy, because he did it ignorantly. But this sin against the holy
Ghost, is a blasphemy exceeding wicked; surpassing his, because it is done with
extreme despite against a manifest conuincing light. 3. It is called a sin
which never shall be forgiven not from the nature of the sin, Luke 12.10.
as if there could be any surpassing Gods mercy (for a finite creature is not
able to commit that sin, which an infinite God in mercy is not more able to
pardon) but it is said to be irremissible, because there is no mercy appointed
for it, because there is to repentance to be given to such a one, and such a
one shall never beg for mercy. Yea I may further add, that the fury of such a
one who commits this sin, is so great against Christ, that suppose he
might have mercy by repentance, yet he would not have it. 4. It is called a
falling away or an apostasy; because it is not only a simple Apostasy, of a
part, Heb. 6.4.
or for a time, nor yet an Epilepsie, or a Spirit of slumber, but also a
total, Hb. 20.6
final Apostasy. 5. It is called, a sin against conscience and knowledge,
with great despite against the spirit of grace: there is no man but he
sins against knowledge, and conscience. So these Pillars of the Church,
Peter and David (before him) sinned, with many more. Note.
Yet all without despite: therefore take away despite, malice, and extreme
despite, and so long, 1. Ioh. 5.16.
there will be no sin against the holy Ghost. Lastly, it is called a sin
unto death, because all sorts of death do follow it, corporal and spiritual,
first and second, temporal and eternal.


Schol. Where does this greatest sin chiefly make residence, in these who
commit the same?


Minist. In the heart and mind.


Sch. How may it be judged of there?


Minist. By six properties or effects, three in the mind, and three in the
heart.


Schol. Declare which be they?


Minist. In the mind it is done against all sorts of light, 1. Against the
general light of all the powers of the mind. 2. Against the particular
special light of the conscience. 3. Against the spiritual light, that light
of the spirit, word and grace. Secondly, in the heart. 1. It must be done
willingly, with a full consent (as the Apostle speaks. Heb. 10.28.29.
) For if we sin willingly, etc. 2. There must be malice in it: as ver. 29.
where such a one is brought in despiting the spirit of grace, etc. 3. There
must be the extreamitie of malice in the same; because such a one treads
under foot the Son of God, and trampleth under, the blood of the New Testament,
as if it were dogs blood: crucifying Christ unto himself, and making a mock of
him; all which are actions of despite, and extreme desperate malice.


Schol. What principal quality must he needs be endowed with, who can commit
this sin?


Mini. He must have a great light and knowledge: for then it is properly said
to be committed, when a man's illumination is so great, that he cannot be
ignorant (though he would) what he does, and yet for all this, will wittingly
and willingly of a desperate malice, oppugn, impugn, Note.
Christ and his Truth more and more, persecuting the same with final
obstinacy, to that end only to withstand and despit him: Job. 6.70.
so that then they become of a devilish nature, or rather very devils: for
still the further one wadeth into this sin, (until the consummation thereof)
the more he partakes both of the knowledge and malice of the devil: As the
Pharisees. etc. Of all others the worst: for some there were who knew Christ in
his cratch, some sucking his mother very young, some nailed on the cross:
others again, could not know him, no not in the greatest light and glory of
his miracles. A 3. sort he had to do with; who knew him clearly by the light
of the spirit, and of his wonderful works: and yet maliciously spoke and did
against their knowledge, blaspheme, scoff, and mock the Son of God; and
these were the Pharisees, whom falling into this blasphemy against the holy
Spirit, Christ reprooueth and threatens.


Schol. To how many sorts of people is it incident to commit this sin?


Minister. As I take it, to two sorts only.


Schol. Which be they?


Minister. First, such who having given their names unto Christ, taking upon
them a profession of him and his truth, yet in the time of tentation do make
defection, continuing in the same, until they fall into an universal
Apostasy, so perfecting this sin. 2. There has been an other sort, who
knew the Truth clearly, by a general, special, spiritual, conuincing light,
nor taking upon them the profession thereof, nor the names of Christians: who
not-withstanding that they were endued with a great light of the Truth; yet did
with all their might in great malice impugn the same, persecuting with great
obstinacy Christ and his members: such were the Pharisees. Of the first sort,
who made defection, we read of Alexander the coppersmith, Iultan the Apostate,
2. Tim. 1.
Porphyrie, etc. Of the other as I have said were the Pharisees. For they knew
that an unclean spirit could not work a true Miracle: seeing every true
Miracle must be wrought by an infinite not bounded power (the whole power of
Hell being limited) which is only of God: therefore to ascribe such
Miraculous works to Beelzebub an unclean spirit (derogating the glory of the
Son of God, and taking away the fruits and efficacy of the Spirit) was in
them as vilde and pernicious a blasphemy as could be: 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Since all the devils in hell (their power being joined) are not able to work
one true miracle: for by them Christ was declared to be the Almighty God
manifested in our flesh. Justly then were they condemned of blasphemy against
the holy Spirit, Note.
because their sin had in it no infirmity: but was altogether of obstinate,
settled, well-aduised malice: whence from them this sin has the name of
blasphemy; as from the first sort of Professors (who have made defection) it
is called Apostasy.


Schol. What do you call, or how do you define this Apostasy from the
truth?


Min. It is not an Apostasy from a natural, moral, or civil truth, from a
truth in these outward things, (for which men so strive) but it is an
Apostasy from a supernatural truth, from a truth concerning our everlasting
salvation, and the lively faith in Christ Jesus. 2. It is not only a
particular Apostasy, from any piece or parcel of this Divine truth, but it
is a general Apostasy, from the whole word of his truth, which we call the
Gospel, and consequently, a manifest defection from the living God, who in
Christ Jesus was manifested in our nature. Neither is it a partial defection
with a part of the soul only: with the mind or heart only: but it is a
total defection of the whole soul: yea, not only of the whole soul, but also
of the whole man, both soul and body. 3. It is a final defection, a defection
without recovery, Heb. 6.
such an Apostasy as Heb. 6. is called a falling away: so that whosoever
falls truly into this sin, falls away without recovery: yet men do not
come unto this universal Apostasy all at once, but by little and little, and
process of time: for first, they chase away and banish their whole light; they
waft and make shipwreck of conscience; they desperately harden their whole
hearts, until they become as it were incarnate devils, Sathanized in a
wonderful manner, until they match Beelzebub himself in their desperate
despite and malice: so that there is no sin which makes a man so spitefully
to detest Christ, as this sin; yea, with such extreme hatred, that although
he might, he will receive no benefit of his Propitiatory and Expiatorie
sacrifice. Note.



Scho. What is the cause that this sin is so severely punished?


Mini. Amongst other causes, because it is so free of infirmity and sudden
fits and passions (which other sins are not free of) and so full of desperate
malicious well-aduised malice, scraping forth all light, banishing all
conscience, fighting against the heavens so far, that because it cannot
attain unto Christ (who now in Heaven sits at the right hand of the Father,
in all glory) it undertakes to be revenged upon his true members, the
militant Church upon earth: which (so far as it can, it persecuteth,
oppresses, and by all means rooteth out: so that it is just with God in his
righteous judgment, to have decreed, never to give repentance unto the same.


Schol. By what steps or degrees does this sin ascend to the height of
impiety?


Min. By four steps it ascendes, or rather descends toward Hell. 1. It makes
a man do actions against knowledge and conscience (and that without infirmity,
usual in other sins) falling from the Faith of Christ. Next, it makes them
to go on forward in the same continually, against the power, effect, graces,
and conuincing light of the Spirit.


Scholar. May not one who in GODS sight and decree is chosen unto life, seem
to begin to fall into this sin, and yet be called back both from
preceding therein, and finishing the same?


Minister. 2. King. 21.1.
As I take it, he may: for we know Manasseh, the Son of good Hezekiah King of
Iuday, ruling in Jerusalem, the place of Gods glory and worship, in the midst
of a glorious Priesthood, many hundred years old: (whereof he could not be
ignorant) did notwithstanding abhominably sin, and seem to go on in the
finishing of this sin for a long time; ouerturning and extinguishing (to his
power) Gods worship, building again those high places which his Father had
cast down and abolished; making a Grove, and worshipping the whole host of
heaven, building Altars (contrary to Gods commandment) in the house of the
Lord, and in the two utter Courts thereof, for the whole host of heaven;
causing his Sons to pass through the fire, giving himself to witchcraft and
sorcerie, to use familiar Spirits and Southsayers: setting up the Image of his
Grove in the house of the Lord: filling and causing Jerusalem to swim from
corner to corner with innocent blood: finally, exceeding those exceedings
sins of the Amorites, yet no castaway, but at length proved to be the child
of GOD for all this. Ios. Ant. lib. 10. cap 1.
Josephus also thus writes of him. He was so impudent, that he spared not to
pollute the very Temple of God, the City and the whole Country: for making
his entry in despite of God, he slew afterward all those who were virtuous men
amongst the Hebrews, and though he had no want of Prophets: yet so it is that
he killed every day some: so that Jerusalem was overflowed with blood, etc.
Thus far we see one went, and was by the mercy of GOD called back again.
Wherefore no poor Christian (howsoever sinful) not coming near the sins
of Manasseh ought not to think he has committed this sin: yet is it good
for all to fly all sins: chiefly, those done with deliberation, against
light, knowledge, and conscience: for we know, the further that even Peter
himself went in Caiaphas Hall, he swore and forswore, denying Christ so much
the more: but it was a great mercy to be called back again: for which, let
all in their fears wish and pray.


Schol. What in the mean time must comfort and uphold poor fearful souls;
who imagine to have committed this sin, therefore forsaking all means?


Minist. In my judgment, a better information of their judgments is of great
consequence to help to sustain them; for though we yield for a while to all
they affirm, yet if they say, that they could wish that they had not so
sinned, certainly viz. a touched heart, a taste of the powers of the word of
truth, a taste of the powers of the world to come, to be partaker of the
Spirit (whence all such who affirm that their former actions, and seeming they
draw others into the same excess of riot with them? Whether shifting,
Sophistical answers, objections, and euasions refuted and discovered, it is
likely by the grace of God and the other means, that the fury of the
temptation will diminish, and their judgments be somewhat enlightened: Since
it is a trick of the devil in temptation (chiefly when he is aided by
melancholy) to make our least sins our greatest, and our indifferent sins, the
sin against the holy Spirit. Therefore now to conclude this point, all such
poor sinners, who either fear to have committed, or to commit this sin, not
having the forenamed properties (for some, or a few of them will prove
nothing) may cheer up their faint-ding spirits, and lift up their feeble
falling hands and weak knees, making straight steps unto their feet (as the
Apostle speaks) least that which is halting be turned out of the way. For
their sin is far, far, far: and not near this most fearful extremely
impious blasphemy, unto which repentance is denied: far from this final
Apostasy and wilful malicious sin, against knowledge, and the conuincing,
cool, well-aduised light of conscience: Far, far, and not near this sin
unto death, called, The sin against the holy Ghost: and therefore may, and
ought boldly to use all the holy means, appointed of God to attain the
assurance of salvation.


Schol. But to return to our former purpose, how comes it to pass that the
children of God fall into such grievous sins; grace by the holy Ghost being
begun in them?


Mi. Because they nourish not the grace of God, Ephesians. 4.29 30.
but suffer the power of sin to overrule them.


Schol. After what manner do the degrees of sin grow upon the Elect?


Minist. First, the mind is blinded the will perverted, and the affections
corrupted with the desire of the pleasures of sin. 2. The graces of the holy
Spirit are quenched by the entertaining of worldly lusts. 3. The inward
restrayning grace being away, Romans 7.22.23.
and so the heart defiled with uncleanness, the members of the body (which are
now become the weapons of unrighteousness) having no power to resist, do
yield and fulfill the will of the flesh.


Scholar. What may we learn from hence?


Minist. Romans 7.7. 1. These. 5.22. Jude. 23. Genesis 3.3. and 39.10.
First, to take good heed, and beware of the first motions of sin. Next,
warily to entertain grace, both in flying all occasions of wickedness, and
entertaining all holy exercises; thereby preventing hardness of heart,
blindness of mind, and deadness of Spirit. Further, Romans 7.24.25.
to have a continual battle against the vildnesse of our inward lusts.
Lastly, although the flesh refuse to fight: yet to be constant, and never give
over striving if it were but with one sigh unto God, from the sense and burden
of corruption.


Schol. What is the disposition and state of the child of God, when he sins
in the aforesaid manner?


Mini. He is senseless either of the joys which he once felt, Psalm.
51.10.11.1^.
or of the terrors wherewith his soul once was pierced, because he has
quenched the Spirit. Next, Reu. 3.1.2.3.4.
the love of sin prevails against that love which formerly he had of God.
Then the heart is hardened; in which, although there abide a memory of wrath,
yet there remains no terror to be as a bridle to curb and restrain sin.
Reu. 3.15 16.19.
Further, there is a sluggish unwilling carelessness, in performance of all
spiritual excercises: he has then no pleasure in prayer, reading or hearing
of the word, etc. Last of all, those small sins which before he made
conscience of, he will neither account so much of them, nor of greater sins,
as before he did of evil thoughts.


Schol. What is the cause hereof?


Minist. First, an inward desertion of the Spirit: Next, the tyranny of the
flesh in the lusts of it.


Scho. What causes the Spirit of God to withdraw himself?


Min. Ep. 4.30.
Sin and impenitencie.


Scho. What makes the affections to be thus vile?


Minister. First, a distaste of the means of Grace. 2. Pleasure in
unrighteousness.


Schol. Does the child of God sin as freely, and as senselesly, as the
wicked and reprobate?


Min. Before he be called, he may.


Sc. But after effectual calling, will he sin as freely and loosely without
conscience as the wicked?


Minist. As concerning the unrenewed part.


Sch. How is it possible that the child of God being effectually called, can
fall, seeing he has the Spirit of God.


Minist. By reason of the weakness of grace, and strength of corruption. Gal.
5.17
Then because the child of God suffers the heart to go loose, Pro. 4.23.
without laying any imposition and burden upon the same, either of terror or
inward strife, by holy exercises of the mind, or outward lawful employments
of an ordinary calling.


Scho. What necessity is there of this burdening the heart.


Min. Because the heart is never idle, but in continual motion: Matt. 15.19.
Genesis 6 5.
therefore when we overcome it not with good things (it being now bent unto all
evil) or when in striving we are not equal unto it: It overcomes us,
making us to fall shamefully.


Schol. Does the child of God for all this sin so freely, that he escapes
in the mean time vnchallenged?


Mini. Romans 2.15
No, for in the time of his sinning, he has a reproving accuser within him.


Schol. What in this does the renewed part?


Minist. It will not suffer him to take his full swinge in him, but he is
displeased with it: Esa. 30.21.
It admonishes, but is not hard: It opposes it self, but has no force to
control, command or restrain, but is overcome by the old floods of
filthiness of the unrenewed part: And thus it lies as it were smoothered,
drowned, and quenched: and so the Spirit comes to be grieved.


Scholar. Now tell me if the child of God can fall after that he has
received great comfort?


Minist. He may, for Peter after that he was ouershadowed on the Mount did fall
grievously, denying and forswearing Christ. And also afterward, when he had
received a far greater measure of the Spirit, Gal. 2.13
did not only dissemble himself, but also drew Barnabas in the same hypocrisy.


Scholar. Can the child of God after that he has been heavily cast down
with terror fall again?


Minist. He may: so Ezechias, Isa. 39.^ 6. 1. Chr. 2 1.
after he had bin greatly terrified, did fall; so did David in numbering the
people.


Scholar. Why suffers the Lords his Saints to fall thus?


Mini. First, to teach him that stands to take heed least he fall. Secondly,
to show unto the Saints their own weakness. 1. Cor. 10 12.
3. To teach them to entertain and cherish God carefully in their hearts. 4.
To make his children earnest in begging the grace of sanctification (yea above
the grace of feeling) that their election may be confirmed so much the surer
unto them thereby.


Scho. Does the Lord suffer his Saints after they have fallen, to sleep in
sin?


Minist. Not always, but in the end he wakeneth them.


Schol. What is the first thing which God works in them at their wakening?


Minist. Genesis 42.21.22.
He works in them, first a sight: secondly, a sense of sin: lastly, a fear
of punishment.


Sc. What manner of sight works he?


Minist. 2. Chr. 34 27.28.
First, he lets them see the heinousness of their sins in having offended
so glorious, dreadful and terrible a Majesty. Then he aggrauateth their
sins so much the more, in that it was against the light of conscience and
feeling, after their effectual calling: Ier. 31.18 19.
therefore the wrath of God to be so much the more incensed against their
sin. Lastly, he shows them to be guilty, and by their own confessions,
Ezekiel. 36.31.
judge and condemn them to be worthy of hell fire.


Schl. What manner of sense is that the child of God has being thus wakened?
Psalm. 88.2 3.4.5.6.7 8.



Min. First a sensible torment: Next, an absence of the holy Spirit, and his
sin standing up betwixt him, and the mercy of God.


Scho. What manner of torment is that which he feels?


Min. The torture-racking conscience drawing him before Gods tribunal,
accusing, conuicting, and condemning him, beginning to be a terrible
executioner, in vexing and tossing the soul, with the intolerable sting of an
unspeakable wrath.


Schol. What in the mean time does the soul in such an estate?


Minist. It suffers under intolerable weights and burdens, doubtings, Psalm
88.15.16.
heavy and conflicting battles, not being able to find any issue. Psalm. 3.4.



Schol. What manner of fear is that which the Child of God has being wakened?


Minist. Psa 71.9. Psalm. 143.7.
A fear of eternal reiection from God. Next, a fear that his effectual
calling (which he once imagined to be good) was but counterfeit. Further, a
fear that the holy Spirit will never come again either to comfort or
sanctify him, in that measure he formerly enjoyed it. Psalm. 51.11.
Lastly, a fear that either his sin will not be forgiven him: or at least
will bring some great shame and punishment upon him.


Scho. In this estate what is the disposition of the Child of God toward
sin?


Minist. Job. 39.37.38. and 42.6.
He wishes from the bottom of his heart he had not so sinned. Next, he has
indignation at sin, not so much for the torment he feels, as that he has
offended so good and gracious a God. Yea, he abhors himself for his sin.


Sch. What learn we from this manner of wakening of Gods Saints?


Minist. First, that God will not suffer his children to sleep for ever in
their sins. Next, that sin has a most terrible, fearful countenance.
Lastly, Genesis 42.22.
that though sin lurk for a while, and seem pleasant to the taste, yet it
brings with it the extremest sorrow in the world: yea, if God but waken any
for an evil thought, it proves more fearful, then all the torments in the
earth.


Schol. Which be the sins that trouble the child of God most?


Min. Those sins which he commits after his effectual calling.


Schol. But, will the Lord suffer his children to lie still thus under terror
and doubting?


Minist. No.


Schol. What, and how works he in his Saints, after that in this manner he
has beaten them down?


Minist. Ier. 31.18 19. Ezekiel. 36.31. Za. 12.10 11.12.
First, he softneth the heart in a bitter sorrow, in the abundance of the Spirit
of prayer and mourning, to pour out the heart before him with many tears and
strong cries. Next, by degrees in process of time, he pours out, first a
hope, then a sense and persuasion of the remission of sins: clensing the
soul from guiltiness, through his most precious blood, all-sufficient merits
and satisfaction, being apprehended and applied by faith, which he then
increases and strengthens to see and lay hold upon the promises of life.
Psalm. 143.8.9.10.11.
Then, hereupon he brings comfort, and more assured persuasion unto the
soul, confirming and settling the weary and troubled heart with the spirit of
peace. Lastly, he gives the trembling soul a free access unto his
countenance, Heb. 4.16. Romans 8.15. Gal. 4.5.6
with boldness to draw near unto the Throne of Grace; and cry Abba, Father.
So that mark how fearful it was before of his dreadful Majesty, and how it
was perplexed in doubting of his love, it will now find him a thousand times
more comfortable and more sweet in pouring out of his love; and the sense
thereof, by the Spirit of adoption, and joy of the holy Ghost.


Sch. What fruits brings this forth.


Mini. In respect of God, the child of God will love him better then ever he
did before. Psa. 116.1.2.3.4.5 6. etc.
The Lord will also be most precious in his eyes: and the promise will be as
meat and drink unto the soul. Next, in regard of sin he will hate and
abhor it more then ever he did, and will be very wary of the
deceitfulness thereof, that it snare and entice him not in the like manner
again. Job. 42.6.
Further he will abhor himself in regard of sin, accounting of himself
as of the most base and miserable wretch in the world. Lastly, he will labor
instantly, Job. 31.1.
in season and out of season, to make a covenant with the eyes, the tongue, and
all the members of the body, watching also diligently over the heart and
affections that, as in former times, they riot not in licentiousness.


Schol. Yet, I would know, whether one feeling the bitterness of his sin and
mourning for the same, and having a sense of the forgiveness thereof, with a
full purpose never to do so anymore by Gods grace: if yet for all this, he can
fall into the same sin again.


Minist. Yea certainly in some sort.


Schol How so.


Minist. First, because in men there is a predominant sin of natural
inclination, which has more power over a man, Heb. 12.1
then any other sin: which cleaves as close unto him, as the skin of his
body. This sin for the most part leads, and ouer-ruleth a man: well it may
be that with much strife, sorrow, mourning, and with many tears he may
obtain grace to see, hate, strive against it, Romans 7.25.
and in part to slay it, but do what he can, he will hardly get it altogether
abolished. Again, because Satan the cruel enemy of our salvation, still
provoke the child of God chiefly with the inticements of that ouer-ruling
sin, working after this manner. First, he watches diligently for an
opportunity to catch us, Lu. 22.31
when we are not upon our guard, or when (being careless) we think and footh
our selves that we have sufficiently overcome and maistered such a sin, and
that we shall not be troubled therewith any more. Then, 2. Co. 2.11
having thus at unawares surprised us (we being unarmed and not able to
resist) his inticements (aided by our inward foes) reenter into us again by
degrees: so causing us to fall by little and little. For, first he casts a
fair smooth veil over the predominant sin of natural inclination, making
it either (if it be possible) to appear no sin at all, Romans 7.13
or at least to be but a small, light, trifling thing and not out of measure
sinful as indeed it is: after which (frailty not being able to resist) the
affections are defiled, inflamed and set a fire, with a love to the enticing
object of seeming delight: which being done (the flesh and carnal reason now
bearing sway) he never leaves until he cause the Child of God to fall into
the same sin again; unless the Lord by special Grace sustain him.


Schol. What moves that cruel enemy to assault Gods children in that
terrible manner?


Minist. The hatred which he has, first, against God, and then against man
because of God. Next, because above all things he would gladliest have one to
fall away, who has obtained Grace: for this he thinks is his glory, to
disgrace the work of the holy Spirit in us; and to cause the name and holy
religion of God to be blasphemed: As also that he may brag (if it were
possible) of his victory over the power and grace of God. And further, because
there is rooted in him an insatiable desire of the destruction of all the
creatures of God, 2. Pet. 5.8
but especially of his Elect children.


Sc. What lesson arises from hence?


Minist. First, Psalm. 97.10. Psalm. 30.22.
to take no truce with sin, because this cruel enemy enters unto the soul
thereby: for dallying with sin is as it were a door for him to enter in us:
the soul then being the place of his residence. La. 3.40.
2. To labor diligently and narrowly to find out all our sins: chiefly
that predominant of natural inclination. 3. We must labor to be in a
continual battle always with all our sins, giving them no rest, nay not so
much as suffering an evil thought to enter into our mind with peace, but to
suppress, pursue and crucify it presently, by lifting up the heart unto
Christ, and striving against it Fourthly, to be sure that we repent us of all
our sins, truly, as often, and so many as possibly we can remember, Psa.
32.5.
craving for those we cannot call to mind; and as our eyes are opened, by
which we see more and more, to be sure we purge all out, conceal nothing from
God: so making a clean conscience. 5. To be at a continual battle with all
our evil affections, pressing them down with a continual remorse and sorrow,
with faith in the obedience, merits, 1. Cor. 16 13.
death and resurrection of Christ Jesus. 6. To watch continually and beware
that the strength of sin on a sudden inflame not so the powers of the soul,
1. Cor. 16.13.
that they break out like fire in the whole man. 7. To be sure above all
things we continue a most earnest constant fight against our predominant sin,
being wary as we love our life and peace, that we suffer not the least motion
thereof to enter in our souls, because this (above all other sins) is the
traitor that will soonest deceive us, under show of friendship. For if we
suffer the thoughts thereof to encroach upon us, it will pass our power to
restrain the same; until (to our extreme sorrow) it have burst forth in
action. Further, to labor to fill the heart, both with the word, Romans 7.11
and with a sense of our continual guiltiness, because we drink iniquite
continually, Col. 3.17.
like unto water: endeavoring therefore to let the fear of God so possess
the soul, as to terrify it from every little sin whatsoever, remembering
also continually the excellency of that euer-glorious Crown prepared for all
those, who with a true (though weak) endeavor (according to grace given)
strive for the same, Heb. 12.1
with patience, running that race which is set before them, least with the
damned they burn in hellfire for ever. Ps. 51.17 Romans 7.18 19.
Then, to labor with all our might to keep a broken and contrite heart, soft
and humbled, not only for the evil we do, but also for that good we should
have and do. Further, to be familiar with God in prayer, laboring so to
settle the heart, that we may be more and more acquainted with him. In which we
must mark what our disposition is before we pray, what comfort we have in
prayer, and how we are disposed after prayer: when if we find no comfortable
presence or sense of his love; we must look back unto our former actions
since last we received comfort, viewing what Jonas causes this tempest: Ion.
1.8.
which found, Tit. 2.13.
we then must never give over, until by a sound repentance we have purged the
heart thereof. Lastly, to endeavor (whatsoever the world think) still to keep
a sorrowful and lowly heart, Tit. 2.13.
longing for his blessed Majesty until he come: when we feel him present,
blessing him for the same, and diligently retayning him by faith and a good
conscience.


Scholar. Seeing the Lord has all grace in his own hand, and both bids us
be holy as he is holy, and has power to make us holy: What is the cause that
he suffers his dear Saints to fall sometimes again and again into the
same sins which they hate, being sorrowful for them, and desiring earnestly
to leave them?


Minist. To exercise their faith and repentance, Job. 42.6.
and humble them least they should grow proud. To make them loath this present
life (in regard of sin) when they behold and feel themselves thus snared
against their wills, Phil. 1.23
to long for that life where they shall never sin any more: but serve their
God willingly, perfectly, and constantly for ever and ever.


Schol. May any one then conclude that he is under the eternal terror of Gods
wrath reprobated, when he feels an absence of God, a presence of sin after
remorse and true for sorrow falling into the same sin again?


Minist. No.


Schol. In such an extremity, what must then uphold?


Minist. Three things. 1. To look unto that which God works in us: 2. To
look diligently into the nature of God. 3. Unto the examples of the Saints.


Schol. What should be observed, concerning GODS working in us?


Minister. First, that seeing we consist of diverse contrary parts, renewed and
unrenewed; that there may be in the renewed a misliking of the evil, that we
may say with Saint Paul: Romans 7.15 Verse. 20.
It is no more we, but sin, which reigns in us doing the evil. Verse. 19.
So again, The thing which I hate, that do I, and the good thing which I
would, that do I not. Next, we must be sure, that so often as we fall, we
must immediately fly unto GOD by repentance, to obtain new remission and
pardon, not delaying the time, least ere we be aware, deadness and hardness
of heart steal upon us, seeing he who is unfit to day, shall be less fit to
morrow; remembering there-withall, least Satan (who warcheth but an opportunity
to drown the soul in perpetual sorrow) (suggest some lie or slander upon
the truth of GOD: That the just man (as it is written) falls seven times a
day and rises again: Pro. 24.16.
and that when a sinner repents him of his sins, from the bottom of his
heart, Ezekiel. 133. Ezekiel. 18.21.
God will put away all his iniquities out of his sight. And further, that since
he himself (the Lawmakers) in the Gospel has commanded us, to forgive our
brother not only seven times; but also seauenty times, Luke 17.3
a day; not to doubt (seeing he is the perfect pattern and fountain of
mercy) but that he will put in practice his own commandment. Further, we
must observe, whether the falling into sin, brings with it a new and more
mortal hatred unto the same sin, with new exercises of faith; so that look
how fast and often sin assaileth us, we be as busy laboring and thinking of
new engines, with which we may resist, destroy, and expel the same; resolving
by the grace of God never to give over, until we obtain victory over it:
with a resolution to fight constantly against it, though GOD should humble us
with such a cross until our last breath; here trying whether yet in this
extreme sorrowful estate (we have a secret hope) with heavy, low, drowned,
stolen sighs, that God will one day in his own good time relieve us; we in
the mean time retaining a holy humble jealousy over our selves: altogether
relying upon GOD, and mourning as often as we are able for strength against it:
chiefly then, when we imagine all peace, the power and rage thereof being quite
subdued. Then also, we must mark, if our love unto God makes also our love
unto Christ Jesus to grow bold and violent; so that we run unto him with all
our might, laying hold of him and his righteousness for our life, with a
vehement love (grounded upon his nature) which will not be put back with
whatsoever ever checkes: Mat. 15.27. Cant. 8 1.2.
thus crying unto him continually for a sense and feeling of the remission of
our sins (for those, unto whom much is forgiven, they love much) it being
unto us a most sure token of forgiveness, when our souls are bound up with a
secret sweet love unto Christ Jesus. Lastly, we must take heed, and be sure,
that we have this disposition in us, that because we have so often found God so
exceeding good and merciful in forgiving us again and again, that (if it
were possible) although there were no hell, yet for the love of God only,
Psalm. 26.3
we would abstain from sin and the occasions thereof.


Schol. What should we look to in the nature of God?


Min. 1. Ioh. 4.16. Ioh. 3.16. Ezekiel. 36.22.
That he is mercy and love it self, and through love has sent Christ to
redeem us: and that he looks not unto our unworthiness, but unto his own
mercies. That as the pitiful Parents tender the good of their children in all
chastisements: Psalm. 103.13. Heb. 12.10.
so does God in all these crosses, procure the good of his Saints. That there
be more mercies in God, Psalm. 145.8.9.
then sins in us. That as he is able to forgive us one sin, so is he able
to forgive us many hundred thousand sins, Isa. 1.18. Luke 17.3.4.
even so often as he gives unto us faith and repentance. For the Lord never
bestows these graces upon any, whom he also therewith forgiueth not.


Schol. What should we have regard unto, in the examples of the Saints?


Minist. First, look how they have fallen after grace obtained. 2. Consider
how God has freely forgiven them. 3. Consider that they not only obtained
mercy for themselves, but that they also might be the examples of the mercy of
God unto others. Paul, he obtained mercy, that Jesus Christ might show upon
him all long-suffering, 1. Tim. 1.16.
for an example unto all such who should in time to come believe unto eternal
life. And Abraham, Romans 4.23 24.
his faith was counted unto him for righteousness; and it is written, not for
him only, but also for us who believe in him, who raised up Jesus our Lord
from the dead.


FINIS.
A Prayer for the Distressed.
O Most mighty, most glorious, eternal, just, holy, omnipotent, all-seeing,
and everliving God, who art full of terrible Majesty in all thy works, just
in all thy judgments, yet most of all wonderful in thy Christ: Since now it
has been thy blessed will to send unto thy poor distressed servants this
weak help, how to know, shun, and judge of thy wrath: Be graciously pleased
also by the bowels of all thy tender mercies in thy Christ, to give a blessing
unto the same, accompanying it with the powerful working of thy marvelous
Spirit: that thereby it may be able to minister a word in due time to their
weary souls, effecting that for which thou have sent it. And for the glory of
thy Names sake, so remove thou the darkness, blindness, ignorance,
obstinacy and terrors of their mind, eyes, understanding, will, and
conscience; that the abused powers of their souls, may no more be stayed by
any deluding fancies, from effecting their proper functions: To effect which, O
be pleased thou boundless bottomless Ocean of mercy, for Jesus sake to
remove from before them that veil which is drawn before, and spread over all
flesh, that they may see and judge of things invisible: thus attaining to have
a good conceit of thee their most gracious and loving God. O, since all
Nations are as nothing before thee, and in that they are, it is because thou
call things that are not, as though they were, (thus causing them to be)
therefore but call thou them, which in their own eyes and feeling are not, and
they shall presently be somewhat: for so long as their abused fancies present
thee unto them as their enemy, persuading themselves not to belong unto thy
decree, what can they do but run away from thee? Therefore for thy mercies
sake in redemption, pass thou by all their transgressions, only looking
through the all-sufficient merits of thy well-beloued Son upon them, that
thus their sins may not stay thy mercies. And give them willing hearts to come
unto the place where thy honor dwells: that in thy good time the means may so
soften their hard hearts (by thy mighty assisting power) that they may attain
unto the Spirit of mourning and compassion, thus teaching them to lay hold upon
Christ (that Altar of refuge) for their life. And since Faith and Repentance
are thy gift; give unto them these graces for thy Christ's sake, that so
confessing their sins, they may call unto thee for mercy, thy mercy by
repentance; thus giving them assurance of remission of sins, that so
remission of sins may give them assurance of salvation. And for those who lie
now as thunder-beaten under the terror of thy wrath: O look upon them also in
the multitude of tender compassion: hear them now speedily, when their spirit
fails, put their tears in thy bottle, and secretly comfort them with thy
choice consolations, giving them a lively hope in expectation of their joyful
deliverance. In the mean time persuade their souls that they are thine, that
fury is not in thee, that all these things shall work together for the best
unto them. And, good Lord, so temper thou the severity of thy justice and
terrors of their consciences, that as thou castest them down with the one
hand, so thou would raise and hold them up by the other: as thou show
unto them the threatenings due unto their sins (and thereby the exacting
rigor of thy justice) so open their eyes to see thy manifold free promises in
Christ Jesus; that they may apply the merits and virtue of his obedience,
death, passion and blood, unto their trembling souls. Oh, as thou art mighty
to save, so show thy mighty power in confounding all their enemies; in wrath
remembering mercy. And grant unto them for thy Christ's sake, grace to be truly
humbled under thy mighty hand, and draw near unto thee, that thou may raise
them up in thy good time: Until which time, give them patience, hope, faith in
thy promises, the Spirit of prayer, many comforters; and in the multitude of
thy exceeding mercies, accept of their faint and weak groans, sighs, desires,
wishes and prayers, giving a blessing unto all their endeauours. And good Lord,
of thy most exceeding rich mercies, for Christ's sake, confound Satan and all
his suggestions in any of these thy children, by thy mighty and irresistable
power: and though thou suffer him to tempt, yet let him never overcome them.
But discover thou the Tempter in his colors, that so (discerning him to be the
Father of liars) they may no more believe his suggestions. And teach them all
so to believe thee in thy word (using the means of their salvation) that in
thy goodtime, they may find peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost.
And good Lord, because, if thou present thy self unto them as a consuming
fire, no creature dare approach the mount of thy Holiness: O put off thy
glittering sword for a while, and arm thee with all thy attributes of mercy,
that so these poor souls may with boldness draw near unto thy Throne, so
confessing their misery, and giving thee praise of thy glory, that thou
may restore unto them their peace. And blessed Lord, although thou come not
until the fourth watch, yet come at last, and suffer them never to depart this
life, until thou say unto their souls, that thou art their everlasting
salvation. And in the mean time, although thou come not so soon as they call:
yet until thou come, (least Satan deceive them) overthrow, aiminish, and
delay all his fiery temptations, that even by this they may know thou fauourest
them, because this their enemy does not triumph against them. And when thy good
ti^^ shall be, though now (in their sight sense and feeling) thou seem to
tear and rend the mountains before thee, in such terror, as though thou
either were bent to destroy, or had never loved them: yet appear thou (for
thy Christ's sake) at last in that still and soft voice, wherein thou use to
speak peace unto thy children: so comforting them according to the days,
wherein thou had afflicted them: that thus both the one and the other (yea all
of them) may glorify thy great name much more, by their conversion and
consolation, then ever formerly they dishonored thee, in the time of their
sins, temptations, and former ignorance; And that only for Jesus Christ's
sake thy dear Son, in whom alone thou art well pleased: To whom with thee
and thy blessed spirit, be all honor, glory, power, praise, might, and
dominion, world without end, for ever and ever, Amen.


