NEWS OVT OF the Coast of Spain.

The true Report of the honorable service for England, performed by Sir
FRAVNCIS DRAKE in the months of April and May last past, 1587. upon Cales,
and also since that in the Cape S. Vincent and Cape Saker: discoursed at large
with every several exploit of their fortunate success, according to their
own Letters, which likewise is confirmed by those that came from thence.



Imprinted at London by W. How for Henry Haslop, and are to be sold at the
Sign of the Gunne at the North door of Paul's, by Edward White. 1587.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable Charles L. Howard, Baron of Effingham, Knight of the
Honorable Order of the Garter, and high Admiral of England, Ireland, and
Wales, the dominions and Isles of the same, of the Town of Callice, and the
marches thereof, of Normandy, Gascoigne, and Guines, and Captain general of
all her Majesty's Seas and Navy Royal; increase of honors, and happiness to
his hearts desire.
IT has ever (Right-Honorable) been an observation amongst scholars, when
they intended to commit their exercises to the judgment of others, to shroude
them selves under the patronage of some honorable personage; but I more
honoring the noble minded, the^ able to express my good will, follow his
opinion, that if he wrote of the dignity of a Crown, dedicated his labors to a
King: if of the estate, to a grave Counselor: if of religion, to a Judicial
Divine: if of tillage, to the experienced Husbandman: but if of the Seas, to
the learned Admiral. So I, writing of high matters, concerning the good
fortune of the Seas, shrowde my self under the sails of the L. High Admiral,
whose heroical mind I know to be such, that your repute it fellonie to rob a
Soldier of his honor, and injury to hide what deserved honor is won by a
Subject to his Sovereign: for virtue joined with noblenes, is a mixture of
true humanity. And because (as Dion says) the world is a huge cave of mingled
conceits, and the multitude, as a many hedded beast, rumoring they know not
what, and murmuring they know not whereat, some forward and wishing well, others
froward and discoraging the well minded: which made me the bolder to publish
for the comfort of my countrymen, the honorable service of that fortunate
English soldier Sir Frauncis Drake, according to such coppies as I have
compassed of the same, which I have conferd with diverse that were eye witnesses
in that expedition: in which I carry this consideration, that such as prove
apostatates from the field, backsliding from their service, might be preferred to
be field bishops, and such as have not yet seen the honor and danger, may be
spurred forward to reap in this harvest of renown: For when Darius king of
Percia clapped Nabarzanes on the back saying, now Nabarzanes for thy country, he
made way as a fire through the throng of the Macedonians, that before studied
what he were best to do and the applause of the people to the success of that
Conquering Affrican, put a double edge to his sword, and added a triple courage
to his mind to dye immortal, for honor is like spice which as the more it is
punned in the motter, the sweeter it smells; so honor, the more it is tossed in
the minds and mouths of men truly, the higher it climes: In this respect am
I animated to this enterprise, and this I humbly beseech your honor to
countenance, that as some do* so all true English hearts may rejoice, and
pray for his prosperous success, which the Almighty God direct and defend in
all their proceedings.

Your honors humble in all service H. H.

The most fortunate and honorable service for England, performed by Sir
FRAVNCIS DRAKE in CALES the 19 of April, 1587. with his latest exploits in
Cape S. Vincent and Cape Saker, done the 21. of May: written by a Gentleman of
his company to one of his friends, as the very truth of this expedition and
success.
WHen we recount the incomparable commodities daily flowing into this Realm,
especially from the first foundation thereof; how can we do less then speed
to the temple of the Lord to speak the praises of his name? When we observe
the infinitenes of our sins, and compare them with the mercies of the Lord,
then with contrition of heart, and humility of spirit may we say; Sure the
Lord has done great things for us, he has hardened the heart of Pharao, but
drowned his multitudes in the Sea: he cut off Achitophell in his pride, and
preserved David in his prosperity: he has unto our enemies laid out a
punishment, by the frowning of the heavens, by the barrenness of the earth,
and emptines of the sea: but unto us has he reigned plenty, and Manna, even
in the wilderness of our wickedness: Every wind blows home into our houses,
the good and fortunate success of our friends, every sun shines to our
comforts, every river flows with increase, and every day brings new tidings
of Englands happiness, which God in mercy long and ever continue. But if we
compare other Realms with this, and withal search the memorable histories
that registers the lives of our forefathers, we then may in agony of heart
burst out and say: Our unthankfulness does threaten punishment, and there is no
way to withstand the wrath of the just God. Run over the lives of a few
Romans, and observe their care of their common wealth, (and as thou read,
let not the life of this Englishman be forgotten which occasioneth my
discourse.) Caius Marius, when he had conquered his countries enemies, and
brought Rome to her height, triumphing as a goddess over the world, in
conclusion of every exploit, dedicated his sacrifices to the Gods, as the
authors of every good that had befortuned him: although in his face he
carried the countenance of majesty, and by his speech he bred terror to his
enemy. Scipio that Affrican conqueror in all his victories, did never ascribe
his success to himself, but gave the honor to the Gods, sacrificing his
whole honor to them, and disposing himself for his country. Yet died not
Scipio, without the slander of old Cato: nor should honor live in any,
without the envy of many.

When Julius Caesar had ouerrun the world (almost) with his multitudes
subiecting the Gales, Caesar's Comment. li. 4.
leading Belgic captive, terrifying Spain by his report, and carrying Afric
at his girdle (in a manner.) Yet said he, not Caesar has done this, but the
gods: giving the glory to the heavens, and leaving the honor to his name. So
the heathen set us down a rule, that is to dispose our lives for our country,
to ascribe our honors to God, to begin in his fear, to continue in his truth,
and to end to his praise: so has this memorable man Sir Fraunces Drake done:
he has studied to withstand his countries enemies, labored to enrich us by
their impouerishment, and made us strong by their weakening: his first attempt
was concluded with a golden purchase, his second ended with no less honor,
and his last service is now known to be no less fortunate then the prowdest
Roman whose honor Plutarch reports to the full. The Author of that mirror of
Tragedies touching British princes, Mirror of Magistrates.
amongst others brings in Ninius, complaining that his honors were
forgotten, and left unwritten, and discoursing his life sets down how his death
was only by offe^ding Caesar and defending his country, making his Catastrophe
mightily to persuade other to the like honor. Then let not this servant of our
Cassibilane rest without his reward, but register his deeds, write his honors
in gold, and pray for his success ^he has not incountred Caesar, yet taken
away his sword: he has not freed his country, yet he defends it, by
wounding the enemy, and breaking his spear: and in all his actions observe but
his order, and then can you not but confess it is full of honor. The
distaunce of his being has not bred any forgetfulness of his friends: his
letters are at large of his success, and his exploits expressed rather by
others then himself (saving what in duty he must of force set down. His
love unto M. Fox.
) But the friendly lines full of love that he writ to that reverend father M.
Fox shows his devotion, and confirms his religion, wherein amongst other
matters was these words in effect: hearty thanks for his pains, his love,
and prayers, with an earnest request that he would continually pray for him, in
that he resolved that he sped the better for his good prayers, but all too
soon for us was the good old father of the Church departed before his letters
came, to the sorrow of the sender, bringer, and hearers.

His service and success is seen hourly amongst us, which because the
coppies are common, and the publishing may be offensive to some, I will trip
over them swiftly (as the dogs of Nilus drinks) least I fall into danger.

He having discovered (by advise of 2 ships of Middleborough that came from
Cales, with whom we met in 40. degrees the 16. of April) and by them
understanding that there was great provision in Cales and there about,
appointed to come for Lishbourne, he with all speed possible did bend his
force thither to cut of their power and provision.

So as the 19 of April an hour before Sun setting, he entered the Harbor of
Cales, and his Fleet: there checked with us at the entering thwart the Town 6
Galleys, but they in short time retired under their fortresses.

There were in the Road 60 ships, and diverse other small shipping under the
fortresses.

There fled some 20 French ships to Port Royal, and some Spaniards which could
not be hindered of the flight by reason of the shieldes.

There were sunk by us at our coming in with shot one Argozie of 1000. tun,
furnished with xxx. pieces of brass, and richly laden.

There were ij. Galleys more came presently from port royal, and ij. other
from S. Marie port, but all in vain therpence of powder and shot the greatest
gain to themselves.

There were to the number of 38. ships undertaken before night, and victors of
the Rode, the Galleys retyring under the fortres.

Twenty hulkes Hollanders confiscated to the king, and their goods sold to the
kings use, xxiiij. of them were fired, the other six were at port royal laden
with wines, and bread, and to be presently full laden for Lishborne.

One Carrick of 1400. tons appertayning to the Marquis of S. Cruse, fired.

Five great Biskeis fired, four of them, lading and taking in of victual for
the kings provision for Lishborne, the fifth a ship of 1000. tun bound for
Lishborne, having in her great store of Pipes, much iron, nails spikes, iron
hoopes, and such like, fired.

One shattey laden with wines, of 200. and 50. tons for the kings provision,
which we brought to sea with us, and discharged at sea part of her wines for
the provision of the fleet, and then fired her.

Three fly botes of about 400. tun laden with biscuit, whereof the one being
of 200. tun and vpwardes, we half vnladed in the harbor and fired her, the
other two are yet with us in company.

Some ten Barks more laden with wines, reasons, figs, oil, wheat, and such
like fired.

By supposition xxxviij. ships and barks fired, sunk and brought away with
us, amounting in judgment 13000. tun of shipping.

There rid in sight of us at port royal by estimation above 40. sails
besides those that fled from Cales rode.

They gave us little ease during our abode there, with their shot from the
Galleys, as also from the fortresses and from the shore, where continually they
planted new ordinance at all places convenient to offend, notwithstanding
their ships we continually fired as the flud came thereby, to be cleared of
them, which terrible fires were pleasant unto us to behold, and mittigated the
continual burden of travel which lay upon us day and night in discharging,
firing, and vnlading such provisions, with observations for good and gardable
defense for the enemy.

It pleased God by the General his great care and pains day and night to
fynish this happy action in her Majesty's service in one day and two nights,
and came forth again the friday in the morning, with very little loss
thanks be to God.

Of xij. Galleys and those that came from port royal and S. Marie port, ten of
them came forth after us as it were to make some pastime with their great
ordinance, at length the wind scanting, we cast about again and stood in for
the shore, and came to an ankor within a league of Cales, where their Galleys
suffered us to ride quietly.

There were also three Fliebotes more at Mallegoe laden with Biscuit bound for
Cales, and so for Lishborne we understand of great provisions and forces
provided within the straights, we doubt not but as God has begun this work
in great happiness, to the daunting of the enymye, so God will bless this Army
in cutting daily their forces shorter, to the great annoyance of the enimye,
and to the honor of our prince and country.

We now have had the experience of Galley fights, wherein I can assure you, that
these only four of her Majesty's ships, will make no account of xx.
galleys, so as they were alone and not driven to guard others.

There were never galleys had place fitter for their advantage in fight upon
shot, they had present succor to ground under the town, which they sundry
times did, we riding in a narrow gutte the yielding no better, in that we
were driven to maintain the same until we had discharged and fyred the ships
which could not conveniently be done but upon the flood, thereby that they might
drive clear of us.

We rest now victualed with bread and drink for six months in our ships,
and bread besides in ij. Fliebotes to maintain a good army three months.

It may seem strange or rather miraculous that so great an exploit, should be
performed with so small loss, considering the place so convenient, and their
force so great as well appeared, from whom were shot at the least at us ij.C.
Culuering and Cannon shot, but in this, as in all other our actions heretofore
(although dangerously attempted, yet most fortunately performed) our God will,
and has always made his infinite power to all papists apparent, and his name
by us his servants under our blessed prince (whose life the Lord prolong) to be
continually glorified.

Your loving Cossin Thomas Fenner.


And thus having set down our full action hetherunto performed as a beginning
or entrance into greater matters, although this being wayed, considering the
quantity of victual provided, the disapointment of the same, the infinite
loss in goods (besides his shippings) I can by no means rate it at less then
one hundred thousand pounds in spoil, this I say considered, may be thought an
honorable piece of service, the honor whereof we attribute to the giver of all
victories, whose name be praised, and the credit to our general, whose travel
and pains being so great cannot be rewarded with too much praise: his due I
wish him, nam operarius mercedem meruit.

This was the first exploit of his last voyage: the second was thus as
follows in this Letter dated May 21.
Master W. you shall understand that since the departure of Captain Cross, we
have continued about Cape Saker, where we landed, and the better to have the
benefit of the water, as also to ride in harborough at our pleasure, we
assaulted the same Castle and three other strong holds, which we took, some
by force, and some by submission.

We have taken at several times of shipping, Barks, and Caruels above an
hundredth, laden with hoopes, gallyoares, pipe staves, timber, and other
provisions of the king of Spaines, for the furnishing of his forces intended
against England, which we burned, and have consumed all the Fisher boats and
nets thereabouts, to their great hinderance.

Thence we came before the Haven of Lishbon, ancouring near unto Cast Cales,
where the Marquis of S. Cruse was with his Galleys, and seeing us chase his
ships ashore, to take and carry away his Barks and Caruels, was content to
suffer us there quietly to tarry and likewise to depart, and never charged us
with one Cannon shot.

Thus for want of time I leave the discourse of every particular event unto
Captain Parker, who has been an eye witness, and an actor in all our
services past.

From Cape Saker abourd her Majesty's good ship the Elizabeth Bonauenture,
the 21. of May 1587. Your loving friend F. Drake.


And this is the last and all the service yet done whereof news is come to
England, being full of valor, danger, and honor: a maime to the enemy, and
an arm to us, in that by their waining we wax stronger. It has been ever, a
custom amongst the ancient Romans, to surname such renowned soldiers, as
Scipio was called the Affrican of his conquest: Haniball the scourge of Rome:
Licurgus the proppe of Athens: Alexander the fire of Persia. And to come nearer
(for our own Chronicles wants no coppie of such honors) Edmund was surnamed
Ironside of his valor: William the Norman, conqueror: Edward the third, the
sting to France: Henry the fifth, the furrower of Gallia: Henry the 8. the
terror of his enemies. And to come yet nearer: we have now some living who for
their honorable service against the enemy, are called rash and fortunate:
others forward, but unlucky: others hot and terrible: and infinite honors are
ascribed to the^, drawn forciblie by their valors out of the mouth of ye
adversary. Amongst al which, wherein (for a subject) is this Scipio inferior
to Haniball? who is feared for his fortunes, Note this comparison
and honored in his service. I remember in the time of Edward the 3. king of
England, and in the French expedition, that Edward the black prince (so
surnamed for the black battails he fought in France) seeing his honorable
subject and friend the Lord Audley wounded to the death in the forefront of the
service, of his bounty gave to him and his heirs yearly for ever 4000.
crowns, whether he ever or never recovered. The languishing noble man
accepting the gift, and learning of his Lord and general (as well as taught by
nature) to be honorable, in the presence of the Prince, gave the same annual
sum for ever to his four Esquiers that attended on his body: whereof being
reproved by the giver, he answered, that in the service he had shown, those
four were no less forward to defend him, and offend the foemen, then
himself: and being now robbed by the enemy of a master, he knew it was his
honor to leave them maintenance: and wished withal, that he were as able to
enrich his whole company of followers severally, as he did these willingly.
Herewith (though lamenting his death) the Prince consented to his gift, and so
will we bury him with our discourse of him. Yet here out I observe this, that
Generals in actions of expedition, are bound by honor to reward the well
deserving, yet is it not in the power of any subject to exceed the limits of
his ability, but to reward where he is led by honor, and to content the rest
as he is commanded or allowed of those that exceed him in authority. If we do
but look warily into ye worlds estate, we may then conclude with our Divines:
Mischief has sheathed deceit, and hypocrisy draws it. And wisely was the
estate of France compared to a set at Primero: and properly do those of
Belgia figure their country by a woman assaulted on the foreside by a
Frenchman, and entrapt with palm on the other side by a Spaniard. And in
another impreasa, they figure her rent by the hair of the head by the French,
disrobed by the Italian, bowelled by the Spanish, and succored by the English:
in which anatomizing their widow cuntrie, whom do they commend and submit
unto but their succorers? whom do they reward with honors and riches but
their soldiers? whom do they reverence, pray for, and cleave unto, but their
Captains, whom the Athenians called walls of their cuntries, whom the
lawless Scithians follow as stars, the gluttonous Persians adore as Gods,
the rude Boetians run after as heads, and whom the hardy Lacedaemonians reckon
as comets, that blaze ever against good fortune. In Rome, what troops of
Senators, flocks of Nobles, and herds of Commons, would burst as a sea forth
the gates, to reverence the welcome conqueror, that either brought home honor
or riches? and that was the cause that encouraged the better sort to clime to
virtue by honor, and enraged the worser sort to hunt after honor with a thirst
of virtue. They that spare the praise, are unworthy ye profit: a deserved
commendation is a spur to the mind, and he that obscures the honor of a
soldier or a scholar, wounds Mars, Honors portraiture. Virtue joined with
noblenes is a mixture of true humanity. Man in all ages.
and slayes Mercury. Apelles drawing the counterfeite of Honor, portraieth her,
holding a star in the one hand, and in the other a stone: meaning by this
emblem, ye although noble minds entitled with dignities should reach as high
as the skies, yet ye inferior might by virtue catch of stars. And as a Noble
man without virtue is like a sun beam covered with clouds: so is a meaner man
without valor like the bird Fawrus, ye has a great voice, and almost no body.
Man in all ages is maintained thus: In his cradle with milk, in his childhood
with rods, in green youth with shame and good discipline, in man's estate
with arms, in elder age with counsel, and last of all with a staff till he
go senseless to his grave: then if thou be a child, obey thy parents; if a
man, serve thy Prince, and die for thy cuntrie; if old, counsel others to
honor soldiers when they serve not, and to serve for honor when they enter
arms. This made the wolves Nursery Romulus become both the first king and
builder of Rome: This made the abject Cirus wear the first Crown in Persia,
Justinius the swineheard Emperor in Constantinople, Valentinus the husbandman
Emperor in Rome, Telephanes the soldier king of Lidia: and this made
Tarquinius Priscus a stranger borne in Corinth, the son of one Demaratus a
banished merchant from his Country, become a king in Rome. Yea, and by this in
his life he became so famous, that he enlarged the confines of Italy,
amplified the wealth and state of the cuntrie, augmented the number of
Senators, increased the orders of Knighthood, and left Rome so happy at his
death, that the Citizens thereof would have travailed so far as Corinth to
speed of so noble a Prince. Then must every man prease in service for
preferment to honor, which springs of desert, and such as are not fortunate,
must learn to follow and hope to find, must leave to envy and grieve to
slander, ever carrying the upright mind of a religious subject, that in
hearing evil spoken of the good, to enter into consideration straight of the
man and the matter, and so shall he sift him out, either an enemy to the
Estate or the Religion, that by rumors withdraw the willing and abuse the best,
to bring them in hatred of the worst, because he knows the common multitude
is like a many headed beast. But study every man rather to look into the
danger of such services (I mean in respect of their bodies that performs it)
and to thank God for the victories, to pray for their prosperity in their
enterprises, and to encourage others to their supplies, so shall God be
glorified, Nobility be honored and animated, the peace of the Land
maintained, and all men pleased.

FINIS.

