HEZEKIAHS RECOVERY. OR, A SERMON, SHOWING what use HEZEKIAH did, and all
should make of their deliverance from sickness.

First preached, and now published by ROBERT HARRIS, Pastor of HANWELL.

LONDON, Printed by R.Y. for John Bartlet, at the golden Cup in the Goldsmiths
Row in Cheape-side. Anno M. DC. XXVI.

TO THE PRESENT READER, ESPECIALly to his once-Hearers about LONDON; THE AVTHOR
WISHES all peace and goodness.
MVch honored, and respected in the Lord; its no time to dwell upon private
passages, all our spare hours are too few for public prayers and praises:
Peter's Enlargement.
of those I have said something already, I only add this for the present. The
estate of the Church abroad, or States assembled at home, challenge our utmost
performances in that kind. Of these I cannot (indeed, who can?) say enough.
The mercies of God are wonderful toward us, as men, as Christians, as English
Christians. When I lay our selves by other Nations and Churches, I cannot read
what Moses said to his Israel, and not make it ours. Happy art thou O England,
who is like unto thee, O People saved by the Lord? etc. Deuteronomy. 33.29. For what
Nation is there so great, who has God so nigh unto them (the only glory of a
Nation) as the Lord our God is, in all things that we call upon him for Deuteronomy.
4.7. What public suite did we ever prefer that did not prosper? instance
one; nay judge, what could have been done more for this Vineyard, that the
Lord has not done in it? Esa 5.4. If peace be worth thanks, we have had it, if
plenty, we have had it, if victory, we have had it, if the Gospel, if all,
we have had all; if we have lost anything, thank unthankefulnesse, if we
loose more, it will be our own fault: for God takes no forfeiture, but what
unthankefulnesse makes. Let us not then stand still till the Lord recever his
own from us, as once from Israel: but whilst he blesses us, Hos. 2.9.1. Chr.
29.14
let us present him with his own, and show our selves truly thankful, whilst
he is infinitely bountiful. Now true thankfulness, is not a lesson soon
learned; 1. the thing it self is made up of many parcels: 2. the party that
undertakes it must be more than a man: David, Psalm. 9.1. intimates so much,
Psalm. 9
when for the matter, he delivers it in four parts: (...) unde (...) and
(...), Graec. For of (...) Cyphar seems to come.
whereof, the first is acknowledgment of God in all, the second, a cypharing
and summing up of special mercies, the third an expression of spiritual joy
in God, as well as in his gifts, and the fourth, a dedication of our songs and
selves to his Name, Verse. 1.2. And for the manner, presses, 1. integrity, for
subject and object, Ver. 1.2. sincerity, for affection and end, Verse. 2. If
then we intend true thankfulness, we must so see Gods Name written upon every
token of his love, that withal, we keep a register of the chiefest, and so
look upon the gift, that in it we relish the giver, and sacrifice our selves
to his Name. We be too short, if we arise no higher than to Gods blessings:
the blessed God is far and far beyond all created blessings; he is better
than health, than wealth, than peace, Iam 1.1.
than grace: all these be but streams that lead us to the fountain, but beams
that guide our eyes to that father of lights, to that Son of righteousness,
Mal. 4.2.
God reconciled, God incarnate; God, made ours by his own gift and goodness,
is our peace, our help, Ps. 18.1.2.
our health, our life, our every thing, as David can never say enough this way:
and when we see, and taste, and feel all comfort, sweetness, happiness in
him, and there upon unite our selves to him, be transformed into him, pass
into him, as that holy Austen speaks, and make him our joy, our fear, our
trust, our Lord, our food, our house, our covering, our all, then, then are we
truly thankful. Let us not then look upon health, peace, other blessings in
themselves, look upon them as they be in God; see him healing, blessing,
saving: nay look not so much what he is to us, as what he is to the whole
body, nay, what he is in his Christ, nay, what in his blessed self: how
glorious, how rich, how good, how far above all creatures, Nch. 9.52.
all praises, all thoughts: O the pretiousnes of his thoughts to us! O the
height, depth, breadth, length of his love in Christ: these cannot be fadomed
by a David, by a Paul: but O the boundless, bottomless sea of beauty, glory,
excellency, power, wisdom, goodness, that is in the fountain it self! O
the matchless splendour that is in that un approcheable light, that no mortal
eye, no immortal Angel can be hold; here not to loose our selves in
admiration, is not to love; not to beer apt and ravished with the Church, is
not to praise aright: Aad thus we shall never praise, till we see the great God
in the least mercy, Ps. 51.15.
and an universal good in particular blessings, nay, when we do so, unless
God open the mouth and enlarge the heart, our lips will not praise him:
therefore we must have help from God if ever we will sing to him: Aug.
For as no man can define God without God, so neither can he praise him. Labor
therefore to be sild with the fulness of God, with the Word of God, Col. 3.16.
with the Spirit of God, Ephesians. 5.13. with the comforts and goodness of God, and
then our mouths will be full of songs, then we shall sing to his Name, as the
Prophet says, Ps. 63.52.
magnify him, live to him, do all to him, which is true life, true
thankfulness. This is that thanks giving which here I call upon every Reader
to perform, especially upon my self, and my Christian friends about the City.
It has pleased God to wound and heal us as he de did Hezekiah, there are not
many of us, who did not (I think) receive in our selves the sentence of death,
is Hezekiah did: now we are restored to life again, what should we do, but
sing with him all the days of our life? I have begun to you, as I was then
able, when God (after personal and domestical sicknesses) brought me into his
House; I beseech you second me, and let not any prejudice frustrate my
exhortation.

Truth it is, I have not been able to answer your loves, your desires; but
reckon that amongst my crosses, not my faults: It Is true, I undertook you with
much fear, but that did slow frons your sufficiency, and mine own
inabilities. I left you quickly; it is true, and in so doing, if I did not
deserve praise, here I am, I did pitry. Beloved, I never had, I never look to
have in this pilgrimage, that comfort in my labors that there I found: What
dashed so hopeful beginnings, time will speak when I am speechless. In the
mean, I am upon a better argument: When I speak of man, I speak of a poor
nothing; I am now in speech of the great King, Psalm 45.1. When I speak of men's
infirmities (as needs I must, if I will heal my self) I am raking in a
channel; Traducatur nomen sibi ut appar humanitas domini. Chry. ad Pop. Ant.
hom. 12. Aug. de Donatist.
whilst I am contemplating Gods excellencies, I am in a garden of spices:
pardon me, if I prefer this to that; and in case I forget my own name to
magnify Gods, and be content to receive a scar, that many may escape a wound,
hold me excused: it suffices me that wisdom is satisfied. As for
wilfulness (which will not yield to truth, because it is wedded to fancy, and
passion) and ignorance, Foelix seelus virtus vocarur, and contra.
(which names virtues and vices from the event) they are unsatisfiable. Me
thinks this conclusion should content modesty. If at any time, in any thing I
have given offense, I humbly crave a par^on; where none is given, none will be
taken by the charitable: For the rest, I say with that Angelical man, So
Chrysostom. of Paul.
let them be honest, it suffices, though I be as a reed, 2. Cor. 1.17. as a
Reprobate, 2. Cor. 13.7. And now my worthy friends, let me proceed in my
exhortation. Should I not love you, I were not a man: for your love to me has
exceeded all desert and expectation; and all the while some (by occasion of
your call) have gamed more by my poor labors, than I can possibly loose, I
have no reason to repent me of this acquaint ance, but more abundant cause of
blessing God, and loving you; only whereas I could not here to fore in person
correspond as was fit, let me at least in writing make that expression of my
love, that I am able, before I go the way of all flesh. Now what expressions
can be expected from a Preacber, but prayers, praises, exhortations, etc? When
you dyed, I prayed for you as I could: now you live, I rejoice with you, and
call upon you to sing with me. And whereas (as it is well noted) we usually are
best when worst, Optimos esse nos dum infirmi sumus. Pli.ep.l.^. Max. Tales
esse sani perseveremus, and cibib.
and live best when we dye fastest, I call upon you, as upon my self, to
remember) your selves, and not only cast (as the Heathen teaches) how to hold
your own, but rather to exceed. I ever dealt freely with you, let me not now
alter. Famce says, that London is as covetous, as proud, as wanton, as secure
as ever. I cannot believe it: it is almost impossible, that so great a
judgment, so gracious a deliverance should so soon be buried. Alas (London)
thou have as yet scarce buried thy dead: the noise of bells, the cry of parents,
the scrichings of thy widows are not yet out of thine cares, the grim face of
death stands yet in thy sight, thy bloody wounds are scarcely stanched as yet:
If thou could forget judgments, thou can not be unsensible of Gods
mercies and thy change. If London should, yet do not you (Beloved,) let others
security be your fear, others impenitency your sorrow; and the less others
take to heart Gods great, Gods remarkable works, by so much the more do you
improve the same to all holy purposes. More would I say to you, but that I have
prevented my self in my more public exbortation; both that and this (more
privately spoken out of my special relation and affection to you) I now
commend to your serious consideration and Gods blessing, who alone can speak
to the heart, beseeching him, Aug. in Ioh. op. Minatur poenas, ac poenas
inferat. Theod, in Exe. cap. 7.
who therefore threatens that he may not smite, to give us cies to see plagues
afar off, and hearts to profit by less, that we may not feel plagues yet
seven times more, yet seven times worse than all yet felt, Lev. 26. Amen.

Hanwell, March 20. Yours ever in the Lord, ROB. HARRIS.
GEntle Reader, I entreat thee correct these faults (being the most material)
with thy pen.
In the Epist. page 1. l. 8. read our. p. 4. l. 9. for here r. fure. ib. in
marg. r. servi. In the Sermon. p. 16. l. 23. r. no more. p. 22. marg. r.
Videatur. p. 26 l. 11. r. Noble Hezekiah. p. 29. marg. l 8. and to. r. quod. p.
33. l. 11. r. finnefull poverty. p. 41. marg r. Tacuimus. p. 42. marg. for
vol. r. Reg. p. 43. l. 29. r. much.

HEZEKIAH'S RECOVERY.
ESA. 38.9. The writing of Hezekiah King of Judah, when he had been sick,
and was recovered of his sickness.


LO here a double condition and behavior of King Hezekiah; 1. he was ficke,
and then he prayed: 2. he is recovered, and now he gives thanks. Our business
lies in this latet part; which is made up of these two: 1. an Inscription, 2. a
Description of the Song.

The Description presents unto us the parts of it; 1. an aggravation of
Hezekiah's former misery: 2. an amplification of the present mercy.

The Inscription acquaints us, 1. with the author of the Song, King Hezekiah.
2. with the nature of it, a Poem written. 3. with the argument of it, a Song of
thankesgiving for the removeall of sickness, and restoring of health. And first
to the first: the passage is clear, sick Hezekiah prays, etc.

Sick Hezekiah prays, found Hezekiah sings: as comfort succeeds his cross,
so praises his prayers. Hence this:

After prayers, Doct. 1.
praises. Prayers and praises do not so enterfaire that they can never be
separated, neither is there any necessity of premising pertitions to each
particular thanksgiving; only in a generality this is regular, when we have
removed afflictions by prayer, we should welcome deliverances with songs. So
much was 1. established by Law, Shelamim.
Levit. 3. and 7. after sacrifices of pacification, followed sacrifices of
payments and thanksgiving. 2ly. ratified in the Gospel. Its a general Canon,
Is any afflicted? what if? Let him pray; Is any merry? what then? Let him sing.
It Is not unlawful to pray in mirth, to sing in misery, ordinarily; but it is
simply necessary in afflictions to be prayerfull, in the midst of mercies to
be thankful, and to entertain several conditions with different
behaviors. Hereof is it that the Apostle. S. Paul does so often link prayers
and thanksgivings together: as who would say, when the one is put over, you
must pass to the other. So much (3ly.) upon particular occasions is 1.
prescribed by God, 2. practiced by his Saints. Particulars will not be
needful to men who know the general course of Scriptures. So much (4ly.) S.
John foretells, and in a sort undertakes for sucoceding ages, in his Revelat.
What singing there should be after persecutions by Heathenish Rome, he
foretells in his fifth chapt. what there was, Eusebius reports, especially in his
last book. Again, what songs should follow upon the Churches deliverance from
Rome Christian, or other (whether seducers or persecutors) S. John
fore-prophesies, V. Jubilees of the reformed Churches.
time partly has already, and more fully will hereafter discover. So much
(5ly.) Education and Reason taught Heathens, and must persuade us. For, first,
Reas. 1.
if we look to God, he is (as the Prophet says) worthy to be praised; 1.
all excellency is his, therefore all honor, says reason in Philosophers. 2.
All Religion is due to him, therefore all thanks, which is a religious act;
for to the highest Majesty is due the loweft subjection, and that is Religion,
which subjects the soul. 3. He is the first spring and author of good: all
excellency and honor is invested in him, and derived from him, and therefore
must return to him, Romans 11. ult.

2. If we consider the thing it self; Reas. 2.
thanks is due after mercies received, and we cannot withhold it without many
incongruities: first (as is implied) Religion is violated, which tells us that
we 1. owe to God all possible service; 2. that thanksgiving is a special
worship, wherein we transfer all honor from creatures to God, Psalm. 50. ult.
3. that we are no less bound to acknowledge Gods workings in our praises,
than his willingness in our prayers.

2. Charity is violated, which bids us love an enemy, much more a God; to
bless those that curse, much more those that bless us; to overcome evil with
good, much more to answer goodness with goodness. V. Arist. Ethics.
Indeed kindness, by the rules of friendship and love in the Heathens
judgments, does challenge either recompense, if we deal with our matches, or
acknowledgement where the distance is great; and the greater this, the greater
that. Now betwixt God and us the distance is infinite, and if twere possible
our love and thankfulness should fill up that distance, and extend it self
into infiniteness.

On the other side, not to be as forward with our praises as prayers, argues
base self-love and servilitie, and makes it appear that we love not God but
his gifts; nay, in truth that we secretly hate him. For we begrudge no man
the praise of his kindness, but whom we either envy or hate: now God is
above the reach of our low envy; and therefore our lothnesse to acknowledge
him, proceeds from our inbred enmity against him, when of the twain we had
rather deny his grace, than yield our selves beggars and dependants,

3 Justice is violated: we owe God thanks, 1. in point of Law and covenant;
It Is our profession, our promise, our cheefage and rent that is due to him:
Gratia specialis pars justitiae. Cic. l. 2. de inzent.
so that the Orator spoke not over, when he intimated that Ingratitude was a
kind of Unjustice. For what more unjust, than to detain, against all desert
and covenant, Gods right? 2. In point of morality and honesty; in manners we
must reciprocate with men, much more with God: nor can he be an honest man, who
is not ashamed to be an unthankful man.

3 If we compare the duties, Reas. 3.
no reason but we should be as full of thanks as prayers: 1. I am sure we have
as many mercies as crosses, comforts (in present and reversion) as wants. 2.
All our sorrows and afflictions are deserved, all our comforts undeserved: if
that must not weaken our prayers, surely this must greaten our thanks. 3.
Thankfulness will become us as much as beging, nay (as the Prophet adds) as
much benefit us, Chrysostom.ad pop. Ant.Hom. 11.
as much comfort us: Thankfulness holds old mercies, and wins new; yea,
greater thankfulness is a surer evidence of love and sincerity than prayer,
and no less a cause than a sign of joy; if not senior to prayer in the world,
yet of more lasting, at least of more excellency in the world to come.

Once, it is at least as needful for us to give up praises as prayers, for
these reasons: First, we are (for certain) as forgetful of the consolations
as of crosses, nay more, because we are more sensual than intellectual, and
fullest of self-love. Secondly, we are as likely to miscarrie in prosperity as
in adversity, unless the one be sanctified by thanksgiving, as well as the
other by prayer. As Crosses without prayer will embitter us, so Blessings
without praises will swell us, and make us giddie, unless we allay our wine
with some of this sugar, thanks I mean, which is sweet in it self, most
comfortable to us, Cant. 7 9.
and more acceptable to God than sweetest Wines or Incense.

Well, we hear what should be; Use 1.
now by way of reflection lets do two things: whereof the first is: fee what
we have done. Prayers and praises should sucoced each other, as day does night
summer winter; what say you? has it bin so? The truth is, when I cast my
thoughts backward unto public proceedings, I find what does somewhat comfort
me; I find, first, that after public humiliations in 88. our most happy
Queen was most public and solemn in her thanksgivings: next, after our
deliverance in 1604. Nov. 5. a set time appointed for solemn praises; thirdly,
after deliberation had, some thanksgivings added to our public prayers. But
when we look into private passages, alas we are all too blame: we go to God
in our distresses, as Turks use to go to their Mahomet, or others to their
Lady, by troops and Caravans; but when we be delivered, we return like those
Lepers in the Gospel, scarce one in ten, in twenty, in a hundred. To speak
sooth, most of us have small reason to glory in our prayers; they be too
faint, too few, too much overrun with pride and unbeleefe: but in thankesgiving
we are stark naught, worse than naught. first, we will not see wood for
trees, mercies for blessings; when we cannot tell how to look besides them,
we will not fall upon them in our thoughts: wants we see, and so are still
craving; favors we will not see, and so are never thankful. When speech is
of crosses, we have all; crosses in body, crosses in soul, crosses in estate,
crosses in friends, our life is made of crosses: when of mercies, we can find
none about house, no money in purse, no corn in barn, no comfort in the
house, no friend in the world, we see no land, nothing but sea.

Secondly, when we see, we will not speak: when we fall upon crosses, we
are cloquent beyond truth, we add, we multiply, we arise in our discourse,
like him in the Poet, I am twice, thrice miferable, nay ten times, nay twenty
times, Aristop. in Plut. Act. 4. sc. 3. (...).
nay a thousand times miserable; But when it comes to mercies, we speak of
them as malefactors do of their faults, yield no more than what can be
extorted from us, or proved against us, as if we were loath to peach God or our
selves. Or if (thirdly) we say any thing, it is rather to set up our selves
than God, and the sacrifice is intended to our netts, wits, providence, more
than to Gods mercy: in truth we serve our selves in praises as Ignorants do
in prayers, they set up flesh and estalish merit; under a color of prayer; and
we under a flourish and varnish (of God be thanked) vent our pride, and stroke
our selves. The worst unthankfulness is, when men love not to be beholden to
God. Or lastly, if some thing be said; that's all, for little is done: True
thankfulness stands in a reciprocation of affections and actions. We should
return love for love, and service at least for kindness; but we do not so.
It fares with us as once with Israel; the care, which tastes words as the raste
does meats, V. Chrysostom. hom. 11 ad pop. Ant. Anima tristis non and it.
was so filled with choler, that they could relish no comfort ( Exed. 6.9.)
whilst Moses and Aaron spoke: and our thoughts be so sowred with the taste of
crosses, that we can taste no mercies, at least we cannot taste the sweetness
of the giver in the gift; and thence it is that our affections lie dead within
us, whilst his mercies swarm about us. He shows his power in the greatness,
his wisdom in the seasonablenesse, his truth in the constancy, his grace in
the freeness, the riches of his mercies in the fullness of his blessings; but
nor one nor other affect us. Our hearts are so far from David's zeal
hereupon, as that (like Nabals) they are cyther as cold or heavy as a stone.
Miserable hearts, and miserably dead, when so manic warming and reviving
comforts cannot raise them upwards: but in the mean, what hope of quick
actions, when we labor with so dead affections.

^ For deeds: true thankfulness improves the gift, to the givers honor. A
friend gives me a Ring, I Will wear it for his sake; a Book, I Will use it for his
sake; a Jewel, I Will keep it for his sake, that is, so as may best express my
love, and report his goodness. Were we truly thankful to our God, we
would use all his tokens for his sake; cate our meat to him, Zach. 14.
wear our clothes to him, spend our strength for him, live to him, sleep to
him, dye for him: but (out upon our unthankefulnesse) we use his blessings as
Ich^ did Icherams messengers, David Goliab's sword, we turn them against their
Master, and fight against heaven with that health, wit, wealth, those friends,
means, mercies that we received thence. If this be thankfulness, to be so much
the more proud, idle, secure, wanton, scornful, impenitent, by how much the
more we are enriched, advanced and blessed, I cannot tell who may be called
unthankful. Brethren, understand your selves, there is not this day a Nation
under heaven more bound to God than we be; if now, we shall wast that time in
spying out flawes in the State, and matter of complaint at home, that should be
taken up in recounting mercies, it is just with God to lay us even with other
distressed Churches, and to make us know what we had by what we want. If any
place be yet left for admonition, be we all advised to call to mind, with
Pharaoh's Butler, Genesis 41.9.
this day our fault, even that fault which is our national sin, the sin of
unthankefulnesse: and be it granted (by you and me, and by us all) that never
people have had more cause, but taken less occasion of blessing God.

2 And now (to speak forward) let us take forth Hezekiah's lesson; Use 2.
after sighs lets send forth songs, as he did: nay, 2. Reg. 10.19.
he in the midst of sorrows can find some matter of praise: nay, Lam. 3.22.
the Church when she only lived, could yet say It is his mercy that we have so
much. If the best people can sing in troubles, should not we in peace? If they
can when distressed, should not we when delivered? If they be so sensible of
one blessing, should not we of a hundred, of a thousand? Ob.
It may be their undertakings in the day of affliction were more. No, Ans.
in fears and sorrows we are as ready to vow and promise thanks as any; and
if to promise should we not to pay? Ob.
It may be our deserts are greater. No, Sol.
nor we nor they can challenge any thing but by ve^me of the promise, Ob.
and that was theirs as much as ours. It may be their engagements were more
than ours No, Sol.
whether we look to the freeness of the giver, or greatness of the gifts, we
owe as much as who does most.

For the first, the Lord has cast upon us blessings, not only undeserved but
undesired, unexpected; he has been better to, us than his promise, than our
prayers, than our hopes: he has prevented us with some which we never
forethought, yea done more for us than we are aware of; and he has given us
others, which we never durst once hope for. I think the man lives not, that
ever durst promise to himself so many days of happiness, so long a peace, so
sudden cure of the land, so flourishing a Church, so happy a time as we have
enjoyed; and what gifts more free than such as prevent all prayers, exceed all
hopes, and are not only above but against all deserts.

For the second thing, which great us a kindness, to wit greatness and
multitude of kindnesses, who is able to recount (particulars shall I say, nay)
the several kinds of them: First, we have blessings privato as many as soul
and body; house and field, field and town, to we and country can hold.
Secondly, we have blessings public and national beyond number; other nations
bleed we sleep; other beg, we abound; others starve, we surfeit; others
grope in the dark, our Sun still shines; others are quite disjoined and
dismembered they are members without heads beads without bodies, for lorne men,
without Law, without Gospel, without Churches, or Teachers, or Livings, or
Books, or all: we have all; Magistrates, Ministers, Laws, Trades, Schools,
Churches, Towns, all, and all of the best; of Kings the best, of Courts the
best, of Law the best, of Books the best, of Sermons the best, of air, of
fare, of water, of all the best: and can we not yet see matter of thankfulness?

O but these be blessings sarre off, Ob.
they touch not thy particular.

No do? Ans.
have we not all our private interests in the public weal? But speak in
good earnest, have thou no particular favors no blessings privative, none
positive? for shame yield both.

Yea but where be they? Ob.


Nay where be they not? thou have eyes, Ans
ask the blind whether that be not a blessing; thou have cares, ask the
deaf whether that be not a blessing thou have a tongue, what thanks the dumb
of that? thou have hands, feet, wits, limbs, life, bones, sinews, reins,
mercies ^now betwixt head and foot to sill a volume, is all this nothing: Nay
tell me, which way can thou look, but thou sect mercies? what can thou touch,
but thou feel mercies? where can thoutread, but thou stand on mercies?
But of what art thou compounded of but of blessings every sense, every joint,
every splint, every nail a blessing: nay, what is thy house made of but
blessings: what is it filled with but blessings of blessings of the Barn,
blessings, of the Field, blessings of the Womb, all blessings: nay, what is the
World made of but blessings? V. Basil in Iulit. Mart.
Heavens, Stars, Fire, Air, Water, Earth, with all in the one, with all in
the other blessings; all things blessings, all persons blessings, all estates
blessings, all times blessings, as S. Paul discourses, 1. Cor. 3. ult. Now
when the Lord does so lade us with benefits, and that daily, shall not we be
thankful? Bless, says our Savior, when you are cursed; and shall we not
bless being thus blessed?

All this while I speak nothing of spiritual blessings; indeed no tongue can
reach them: we can close them all within one word, one syllable, God has given
us Christ; but what a gift is that? In him he has given us a new world: the
old world was forfeyted in a day; De jure.
house, ground, furniture, all forfeited in Adam: then came in the promised
seed, the blessed seed Christ, and in him all things are made new; new heavens,
new earth, new Church, 2. Cor. 5.17.
new tenure, all things renewed, bettered with infinite advantage to us, but
cost to Christ: What a thing was that, for the Creator to become a creature,
for life to dye, for happiness to weep, for glory to be buffeted, for
immortality to be buried! O Lord Christ, who would have done thus for an
enemy, for a friend, besides thy self? But it is done; he was made flesh,
seen of angels, slain of men, laid in grave, raised to glory, and we are now
redeemed, justified, sanctified, glorified in him. Redeemed, justified,
sanctified, glorified! what words be these: what things? No man, no Angel can
conceive the worth of these things: when we have said all, all is this, God
has given us Christ, that is, God has given us himself, and all the
creatures in heaven and earth. God has delivered us from the evil of all
evils, and has given us the blessing of all blessings, the marrow of all
comforts; the earth is ours, the heavens ours, the word ours, the spirit ours,
God ours because Christ is ours. Now then when in Christ our head we are
estated in the whole world, have we not matter of thankfulness? yes (we now
see it) if we had hearts.

But how shal's get a thankful heart first, Ob.
and express it next?

Labor for three saving graces; 1. Humility; Ans.
2. Faith; 3. Love. All these send a man abroad, and make him seek himself in
others.

First, Humility empties a man of all great opinions of the creature, and
fills him with an high admiration of the Creator. The humble man so well
understands himself, and other creatures, and Gods excellency, that he sees
that too much cannot be ascribed to God, too little to man: and therefore he is
very willing that God should carry all the praise and glory from all
creatures; and the more he can abase flesh and exalt God, the more glad he is.
Labor then to be humble men with Jacob and you will findy our selves leffe than
the least favor, then you will see; V. Bradford.
matter of thankfulness there, where the proud finds matter of murmuring.

Secondly, Faith is another emptying virtue: it lays up all its treasure in
another house, and leaves it in another hands for fear of robbing. The
faithful man's treasure is Christ, his life is Christ his crown and glory is
Christ: if Christ has, honor, he has honor enough; therefore he willingly
carries all to Christ. Labor then for faith: for if faith once unite you to
Christ, that you be one, and unite you to God through Christ, that you can look
upon God as your God, then you will seek his honor as your own.

Thirdly, love seeks not its own (either prosite or credit) it liwes in
another, and it works for another: in that measure that we love God, we will
seek Gods glory, we will speak good of his name, Amas and laudas. in Ps. 85.
sic and Chrysostom. ad pop. Ant. bo. 64
and set out his praises. O love him who is love beauty, nay glory inselfe:
and if thou love, thou praisest, as Ausben speaks.

Thus the heart will be tuned and set right, if it be a broken heart,
abeleeving heart, a nealous heart, twill endite well, praises will stream from
it as naturally as water from a fountain, Psalm. 45.1. but then (in the next
place) the outward man must concur, the tongue must walk apace like a swist
pen; to that end, do but own thine own words, first, tabe up the complaints
thou made in thine afflictions, he as eloquent in enlarging thy forrowes now
past, as thou wast then; speak now what pains, seanes, griefs, somes God
has now delivered thee from, as Hezekiah does here: inprove thy then somewes
to present thankfulness.

Secondly, ^^^^^unt thy vows and promises then, call (...) what thought is
thou then had, what vows thou then made; O if God would this once help
me, these faults should be left, and these duties done: now pay thy vows.

1 Hear the other creatures, they sing, etc. 2 Thy flesh must rejoice (as
David speaks) in the Lord, thy face and countenance must take up and look
clearly, thy feet must be lift up as Jacobs were, thy hands must be set on
work, thankfulness must be acted, not only talked of. Here know, first, that
he is most thankful that lives best, Qui recte agit Deum laudat. Aug. in Ps
34.
that leaves most faults and does most good.
Secondly, that all we do or forbear, must be done out of thankfulness for
what we already hold, or have good bonds for.

Thirdly, that our thanks must in some measure answer Gods mercy, and our
former misery; the more our sighs were, the more our songs must be; the more
prayers were made, the more praises must follow (for those be double mercies
that follow upon prayer). and next for God, the more remarkable the
deliverance was, the more solemn and hearty the thanksgiving must be, for
singular mencies we must do some singularthing, set apart some time, some
Present, some gift, do some thing that may scale up our humblest
acknowledgement of Gods goodness, else great mercies will work great thoughts,
as Hezekiah found for a time, 2. Chron. 32.25.

Now to particulars, first, to the title, secondly, to the ^ed^^^ of the Song:
The title acquaints us with the qualities of the Song, a Wr^^^ing, the matter
of it, a Narration, 1. of his sickness; 2. of his recoverie: which two parts
make up the whole Song following.

For the first, the things enquirable about this Song are chiefly three: first,
what kind of writing it is; secondly, by whom it was written: thirdly, for what
use.

Which three questions shall receive these three short answers following.

1 The writing is Poetical, and delivered in Verse, for the help both of
memory and affection. 2 For the Penman, we cannot say much of certainty, nor
is it much material; this is certain, Hezekiah made cyther the descant or
plainsong. 2. the Worthies of God, Job, David, Saloman, etc. were much
delighted with Poetry. 3. the Kings of Judah (sundry of them) were endued with
an extraordinary spirit, and a divine sentence was often in their mouths, as
we see in the writings, and speeches, and prayers of diverse of them: wherefore
if we say that Hezekiah pend this with his own hand, we say more than what
seems reasonable in it self, and probable to others. Howbeit if any will
contend (from the phrase) that the work was Esaias, V. Sixth. Sen. and de Tena.
in his Isag.
and the motion only from Hezekiah, we will notgainsay it: it suffices, that
Hazekiah was the first mover, and that the Lord has now pleased to add it to
the Canon, V. Sanct. and MuscuLad locu^ergo it is not so well entirled by the 70
(...).
as he did also his Letters, 2. Chran. 30.
For the third question, the good Kings meaning was to consecrate (with this
song) himself and his life to God, and to leave this upon record as a pledge
and proof of his thankfulness to all posterity.

In his practice, take notice of our duty.

We must add to our present thankesgivings some pawn and monument of our
thankfulness for the future. Doct. 1.
We must, for great blessings, stake down present thanks: that is one duty,
but that is not all; we must leave some monument thereof (as we may) to
posterity, and cast how we may eternize Gods praises, and procure him honor
in surviving ages.

This (first) God commands; Tell it (says he, when he speaks of great
mercies) to thy childrens children.i.e. convey thankfulness to posterity,
and keep on foot Gods praises to the worlds end, if possible. Hereof is it,
that the Lord sets a special Accent upon special mercies, and takes order
that they may be reported to succession. Thus when he had set Israel over
Jordan, and in possession of his country, Set up (says he) stones, Josh.
4.7, 8, 9.
some in the water, some on the land, that may witness my mercy, your
thankfulness, for after times; let the very place speak it. And elsewhere,
Day unto day (as here place to place) must utter his goodness and man's
gratitude. Hence those solemnities of the Passe-over for one mercy, Levit. 23
of Pentecost for another, of Tabernacles for a third, of Trumpets for a
fourth, of new Moons for a first, etc. God for great mercies would have a
commemoration, a day of public thanksgiving throughout all generations.

Secondly, as God commanded, so his people practiced this duty; sometimes
they set out time, Est. 9.
as in the feast of Purim; sometimes they set up Altars, as Abraham often;
sometimes they leave a mark upon the place, 2. Chr. 20
as Iehosaphat in the valley of Beracah; sometimes they multiply sacrifices, as
Solomon, etc. sometimes they dedicate songs, as David often; sometimes they
present and hang up some monument of victory, recoveric, or the like, 1. Sam.
21. Judge. 8. V. Rainel.praelect. 208. del. Apoc.
as David Goliah's sword, Gideon his Ephod-like present, what ever it was,
Hezekiah his Poem, whether in parchment, brass, marble, etc. and all this to
this end, that Gods praises might outlive them, and be sung by men as then
unborne, as David speaks. Thus they of old, reason calls for the like from us.

1 It Is but civilitie to return blessing for blessing: an Heathen will do it.
Now God blesses us beyond this life, not only in heaven but upon carth, in our
names, estates, posterity, kindred; and why should not we future and prorogue
our blessings beyond life also? 2 It Is but honesty to pay our debts: now do
what we can, we shall die in Gods debt. Since we be not able to pay all at once,
And so make Christ our keyre, as Chrysostom. de land Dei. V. Ang. in Ps. 91.
lets be paying in our heirs and executors to the worlds end. 3 It Is a course
we take with earthly Benefactors, we would perpetuate their fame to eternity
if we could, and do we not owe more to God? 4 It Is good policy to build Gods
name, for then God will build ours, 1. Sam. 2.
as he said to K. David of an house: if we honor him, he will honor us. 2.
Chr. 32.32.33.
indeed Hezekiah eternizeth his own name in thus magnifying Gods.
Lastly, it is a sure evidence of our sincerity and true love to Gods name, when
we desire that it may outlive ours, and be glorified by others as well as by
our selves.

Having thus concluded the point, Use 1.
the application shall run all one way, and this it is; What so good a King
practiced, so great a God challenges, so clear reason persuades, let us now
practice. Tell me (my brethren) are not we in Gods debt as well as Hezekiah?
Was not he as thankful for the present as we can be? Are not we bound, to
pay our debts, to edify posterity as much as he? Well then, if you have as
much cause as he, as great need as he, as maine motives as he, do as he did,
prase God with a lasting song; do something that may set the world a singing
when you are sleeping in the dust. Want ye as yet motives? Look to your
Father; It Is 2 sign of the best goodness to aim at publ. goods.
his goodness lives for ever toward you, let your thanks be immortal to
him: look to your Redeemer; he is the same for ever to you, be the same to
him, in all manner of thankfulness: look to predecessors; they have lest us
monuments of their love to God and us, lets reach them with advantage to
posteritic: look to successors; they heir our sins and sorrows, lets leave
them some song's and matter of joy as well as cause of mourning: look to our
Adversaries; they upbraid us, V. Camp. aliosque etc.
as Penninnah did Hannah, with our unfruitfulnesse: they crake that all our
Churches, Hospitals, Colleges are theirs. And albeit enough is said and done
already to break the teeth of their slanders, yet if possible lets (as our S.
Peter advises) muzle them quite by doing more good. 1. Pet. 2.15.(...)


You will say (perhaps) the lesson is good and not unseasonable, Ob.
but it concerns Hezekiahs, great men, rich men, learned men, that have means
of expressing themselves publicly; but alas we are poor, simple, obscure,
etc.

Yea but hear me; Ans.
you are in Gods debt too, are you not? You must pay your debts, must you not?
Tenants must pay their rent, a cheefage, etc. must they not? Well then, if you
owe less, pay less: if you hold not so much of your landlord as another
does, yet I pray you pay for your cottage, and for that you hold: you are a
tenant to God as well as King Hezekiah, pay your rent.

Ob. But twill not be accepted, it is so poor.

Sol. Come, that's a put-off; a Mark by the year from a Cottier, is accepted
as well as a hundred pounds from a Farmer. Understand that God weighs
circumstances, and it is accepted according to that a man has: Goats hair
pleases him as well as Jewels from some hands; two mites as well as two
millions. He needs not gifts, he respects the giver, and it is possible for him
that has but a subjects purse to have a kings heart, as it is said of Araunah, he
was but a subject, but yet gave like a King, 2. Sam. 24.23.

Ob. O but we have no such encouragements to give as Hezekiah had.

Sol. And why, I pray? 1. God wrought a wonderful deliverance for him; he has
wrought as great for thee, for me, for us all, it may be bodily, certainly
spiritual.

2 The world was not so bad then as now; a man can publish nothing but it is
carpt at, settle no perpetuity but it is perverted, Schools, Colleges,
Hospitals, all abused. Come, come, this is but shifting: 1. the world is still
like it self; all never were, never will be good: 2. these and such like
objections were long since answered by Solomon, Eccl. 11. view them at leisure.
In the mean, mark what I say to thee: first, if thou can not trust
posterity, and all honesty must needs die with thee, do something whilst
thou have time, Gal. 6. O but what is that to posterity? Yes, I Will show thee how
thou may now lay a foundation for posterity, and do that this year, this
month, which may turn to Gods honor a thousand years hence. How is that?
Thus: Art thou a father of children? 1. write Gods mercies upon their names (so
thou be not fantastical) and let thy children wear therein Gods praises to
their graves; at least write them in their memories and hearts, tell thy
children, and charge them to deliver it downwards to theirs, what God has
been to thee, what great things he has done in thy days, and so make walking
Libraries and living Books of thy children: A godly posterity is a breathing
altar. 2. Art thou childlesse? yet set up an altar in thy house, work thy
people to heavenward; sow good seed amongst thy servants, and some of them and
theirs may bless God for thee a hundred dred years hence. Art thou a poor
man? be rich in grace, ready to every good work, and thy name shall live
when thou art dead: no men in Scripture more commended and renowned, than poor
men and women; God himself writes their lives, and records their good deeds.

O but I am so poor, that I have no means of showing my thankfulness. Do
not say so, he never wanted means that did not want an heart, get that, and
God will fit thee with oportunities as he has with abilities. Never tell me;
thou may make the world the better for thee a great while hence if thou will.
How?

1 If thou would borrow a little from back and belly, Videtur Rogers in Fox.
twenty to one thou moughtest lend God something. 2 If that cannot be, say
with Peter, Act. 3.6. Silver and gold I have none, but such as I have I give;
I Will pray, I Will work, I Will advise, I Will plant, sow, do something that shall do
good hereaster: there is not the least toe but it has its use and excellency
in the body. Art thou learned? do good that way, V. Tornial.
as Hezekiah did. Some conceive him well seen in the Mathematics (belike
because of his buildings, watercourse, and the sign given him by God)
howsoever, we have his Epistle and Poemeextant, and they hold out instruction
to the worlds end. If God has given thee sufficiency in this kind, thou
may speakethy mind to men yet unborne, and convey to them that light which
God has reached to thee. Be not too curious this way; thou seeft that some in
this scribbling age set forth their own wits, some their own folly: do thou
set forth Gods praise, and aim at man's good; write something (as thy gift is)
that may do posterity good. V Fox Martin H. 6.
We are infinitely bound to God for the blessing of Printing, and to our fathers
for their labors: and we of England are much to blame, if we leave not Arts
and Tongues more resined and perfected than we found them, and the Scriptures
more fully opened; no people living better furnished with means, no writings
extant better accepted abroad, or to better purpose at home. O that in stead of
tristers, Scholars would make themselves public, and not bury their treasure
with them like misers, or leave their works like fatherless children to the
mercy of strange mid-wives, when themselves are gone.
Art thou rich? let King Hezekiah be thy pattern: he was a good
Common-wealths-man, Read his life in Kings and Chron.
he built much, he conveyed water to the City, he fortified the land, and did
good in war and peace: 2. He was a good Churchman, he countenanced the
Ministry, he restored their means and livings, he repaired Gods house,
advanced Gods worship, defaced the contrary. Thy place (happily) will not suffer
thee to hold pace with him in all, yet follow him as thou may: 1. as a
citizen and member of the State, rast the public good; see what good may be,
done in thy Jerusalem, the town of thine abode, fre what houses need thy
help, what grounds, what neighbors: here is a man over-renied, try whether
thon-canst not case him; there is a man wants corn for his land, stock for his
stuff, help him; there is a third that has will and skill to trade, but he
wants credit; there is a fourth that could live with a little help, else he
and his estate sink, O come quickly before the man be drowned with all his
family; a fist there is that is able to breed some but not all his children,
hence he is disheartened, take away one Lamb and put it to another Ewe.

2 When thou have done so, cast thine eyes over Indah with him; look abroad,
and see how present wants threaten posterity with misery, and as thou can
prevent it: I. see how many grown ones there be that play, or steal, or beg
for want of employment, and set thy wits on work to find out some trade, some
husbandry, some business that may give some employment. 2. see how many
little ones there be that might be useful if they had breeding; but alas
their parents (if living) have neither means to breed them Scholars, nor money
to bind them apprentices: call upon thy self and others, saying, There Is a
witty child, lets breed him a Scholar; there is a strong child, lets train
him up for a Soldier, make him an apprentice, etc. who knows what service he
may do the Church or Country oneday: O what good might rich men do this way
if they had hearts! If they fear to erect public standing Schools or
Colleges, or to give some Fellowships for perpetuity, let them (if they mind
the common good) take some particular children that are most hopeful, and
breed them, 1. in the Country, 2. in the Universitie till they be sit for
public service. Here Is no danger, unless they will say, these may prove ill;
which is with the sluggard, ( -Pro. 26.13.) to lie still left a Lion should be
in the street: do thou go on till thou see thy seed lost, and then stop
there, and try an other ground.

2 Be, with Hezekiah, a good Churchman; 1. repair Gods house, and let it
never be said, that our Churches lie like Barnes, and that Our Father lets
down what Pater noster set up. 2. Promote Gods worship, and allow some oil to
his Lamps: do not Pharaoh-like call for Brick without materials. What? expect
Sermons, many Sermons; learning, much learning (so that our Preacher must be
able to answer any question) and yet deny him means! Means? by all means we
would have him have a competencie. A competencie; how much is that? who shall
judge of that? Now the good Lord keep his Clergy from the vulgars
competencie. I speak what I know, and I speak it with a wet face and a
bleeding heart, I know Preachers of excellent parts, that spend their strength
in the Pulpit, who cannot lay out sistie shillings in sive years upon books,
but they must fetch it either off the backs, or out of the bellies of their
poor children. Call you this a competencie? Well, if we deserve no kindness,
yet do us justice, lets have what your fathers gave us. Hezekiah found things
alienated and turned out of course; no doubt wits were working then: Take heed
(Sir) of Innovations, of making your Clergy too rich; the State has thought
fit to lessen their means: men can now prescribe against them, we can show a
composition, and prove our custom, etc. But what answers this good King?
Custom me no custom, we must not make a custom of robbing God. Were these
things once Gods? either show me Gods release, or else restore them home. Now
would I could say of him as a Father said of Ahab, Amb. de Na^. quotid. e
nascitur A^hab, etc. In redeeming Church livings.
Hezekiah ever lives, never dies: and the Lord put it into the heart of our
trebble Hezekiah to advise also about this point.

In the mean, let my speech to rich subjects proceed: Would you leave some
proof of your thankfulness behind you? follow those Worthies who of late
have gone before you in this kind, hyre men to be honest in restoring to God
his due: and if you have ought in your own hands that of right belongs to the
sons of the Prophets, Genesis 20.
hear God speaking to you in King Abimelech, Restore to the Prophet his own,
and he shall pray for you: if you do not, his blood in his children, the flesh
upon his body, the anguish upon his spirit, the souls that depend upon him
for food will cry against you, and will lay your houses level with the ground.
Do not turn off all with a Tush, Tithes were Leviticall, the Gospel speaks
nothing of a Tenth, etc. 1. answer what is written; 2. show us where the old
apportion is reversed, and which is that quote pars now that conscience must
rest in, and when that's done, then give us a just Commentary upon that, V.
Cartw. in Prove.
Prove. 20.25. and tell us who has authority to take that (from a Church shall
I say? nay) from God, that has hene once given him? And when you have reduced
and resolved all into a competencie, yet let it be S. Paul's competencie, 1.
Cor. 9.
Let him that preaches the Gospel live upon the Gospel, as he that makes
shoes, or heels hose, lives upon his labor. I speak no more than what
every Scholar, who is acquainted with a course of study and reading, knows
to be true: all that means which usually is thought sufficient to defray all
charges, to satisfy all payments, to answer all expectations of wife and
children for portions, of strangers for hospitality, is little enough to buy a
constant Preacher books, and physic. Now then, if you will be competent
arbitrators, allow him something more, some bread, some clothes, something to
keep his wife and children from begging or starving.

You are weary (I dare say) of this discourse, I have now done, I have
discharged my conscience in delivering my errand, and have showed you how you
may witness your thankfulness to succeeding times, if you please. There Is
first, your own family and posterity to be molded; secondly, there be poor
Orphans and children to be bred, Schools to be erected, poor Students in the
Universitie to be maintained, poor Preachers to be encouraged, Church livings
to be redeemed and augmented: and if this be not sufficient, there be poor
Laborers to be employed, poor debtors to be relieved, yongue Tradesmen to be
credited; and if this do not like you, there be in the country, fields to be
trenched, woods to be planted, highways to be amended, correction-houses to
be builded, public storehouses and Granaries to be appointed, youths and
soldiers to be trained; and in the Cities, waters to be conveyed, fire-engins
to be invented, etc. And in both, Churches to be repaired, prisons to be
furnished with some Teachers, and other employments more than a few: stand not
idle now all the day long, because none sets you on work; House, Town, Field,
Country, City, Church, Common weal, Men, Women, Children, Tradesmen,
Churchmen, blind, lame, poor, all call upon you to work: nay, Christ says,
whilst its day work; the Spirit says, whilst you have time, do good; your
Father says, Give to seven and eight, be not weary in well-doing; your labor
is not lost, your cost is not lost, God will pay you all again, honor him he
will honor you, bless him he will bless you, give him immortal praise, and
you shall receive an immortal Crown.

We have heard, first, that King Hezekiah was thankful; secondly, that he
was thankful to purpose: Now lets see for what he is so thankful; 1. that
his sickness was removed; 2. that his health was restored. We will shut up
both in one.

Freedom from sickness, Doct.
enjoyment of health, are two mercies which call for many thanks. Need we
prove this? First for sickness, we have the voice of God and man, that it is
amercie to escape it; 1. God promises freedom from it, Exodus 15.26. Lev.
26.16. Deuteronomy. 28.22.
as a blessing upon the obedient; 2. He threatens the inflicting of it as a
judgment upon the rebellious, and accordingly proceeds.

Secondly, all men be of the same mind; first, good men will bless God for an
Eagle-like-body, Thence called (...) S. Epiphan.
a body full of strength and life, of action and motion like the Eagles, which
is most lasting Ps. 103. Secondly, natural men rank this in the forefront of
mercies, yea reckon of health as an abridgement of all blessings, and of
sickness as the sum of all outward miseries. And that not-altogether
without reason.

For first, sickness must be numbered amidst natural evils: how soever it will
stand with universal nature, and the all wife God can improve it to singular
use, yet in it self, it must be deemed evil in its nature, being against the
private welfare of the patient; evil in its cause, man's sin; evil in its
term and issue, it tends to death; evil in its effects, it adds to our
misery: whereas some evils wound with sorrow, some threaten us with
destruction, this does both.

Secondly, it maimes nature, and hinders goodness; the body is deprived of
cheerfulness and activitie, Malum contristivum quae voluntati, corrupti^um
quae naturae, contrariatur: est affectus vitians actione^. Galen.
the soul disappointed, like the Traveller that rides a tired horse, it can
neither receive that good, nor do that good that otherwise it could. There Is
no man knows, but he that knows ficknesse, what a disadvantage it is to the
soul to be ill lodged in a ruinous body: Its even stifled within it self for
want of motion, and move it cannot for want of organs, but very lamely: The
understanding is clouded, memory weakened, judgment dazzled, fantasy
disturbed, affections distempered, in short, the whole frame of Nature so
dis-jointed, that like broken bones it can neither rest nor move. Nor is the
stroke only upon natural actions, but upon moral also; the soul in diseases
chronicall becomes so lazy, listlesse, neutrall, that it has no mind to pray,
no stomach to food, no heart to do any thing for it self; and in diseases
more acute is so taken up and transported with pain and anguish, that it
minds nothing but what cannot be had, sleep and ease, etc. Hence we may put
that difference between sick and sound that the Heathen put between poor
and rich; ciog.
the healthful man may study when he will, walk when he will, eat when he
will, sleep when he will, work, play, fast, feast, ride, run when he will:
but the sickly man must study, preach, travel, eat, sleep when he can; he
is not his own so command: he has not himself, much less other comforts.
No marvel if sickness at one blow deprive us of the comfort of our meats,
beds, houses, grounds, friends, wife, children, etc. it deprives a man of
himself: he has wit, but not use of it; memory, but not the benefit of it:
yea it turns him well-most into an Image; he has eyes, and scarcely sees;
ears, and hears not; mouth, and speaks not; feet, but walks not: nay yet
further, those senses and parts which let in comfort to the sound, occasion the
sick man's trouble, the sight of his cupps, glasses, boxes makes him sick, the
smell of his meats sick, the taste of his drinks sick, the least noise
offends him, the least air pierces him, in a word, this turns his comforts
into crosses, his bed tyres him, his chair troubles him, his friends disquiet
him, their absence offends him, and so does their presence, their ^^^ence
offends, and so does their talk, their mirth does, and so does their sadness:
poor man, somewhat he would have, but he cannot tell what; he is not well,
and therefore nothing is well about him; he is sick, and so all the world is
made of sickness to him, as to the giddie all things run round.

Now as sickness is a great affliction, so health as great a mercy: it comes
from mercy, Hence called in Hebr. length. on.
and presupposes many blessings; good temper, good air, (at least for us)
good food, at least a wonderful blessing upon poor means. 2. It tends to
mercy, health tends to life (the greatest blessing) to a long life, yea
immortality so far as that goes. 3. It carries with it a troop of mercies,
1. it sweetens all other crosses and wants; health makes thin coats warm,
hard fare sweet, a mean lodging good, it is the poor man's sauce at's table,
his cloak in his journcy, his warming-pan in his bed, his boots in the mire,
and when he is at worst he can leap and say, as the country phrase is, Health
is worth all. 2. It puts him into possession of all other blessings: 1. He
enjoyes himself, his wits, senses, limbs be his own, he has their use and
service. 2. with himself he enjoyes all things about him; the light is
pleasant, the air sweet, his meat good, drink good, bed good, now all
that was naught before becomes good. Again, he relishes all, he finds
contentment in all: now he sees a wife to be a wife, children to be children,
friends to be friends, whereas before all the world was made of his humor,
whether bitter or sour. Not to^^ long, health is the just temper of nature;
there all is quiet, cheerful, Actiones coaservat and tuctur. Fucksiast.
fit for action: a good body helps the estate, the family, the soul; all
within one, all upon him, all about him smile and prosper in time of health:
and therefore this motion from sickness to health. i. from sadness to mirth,
from pain to ease, from prison to liberrie, from death to life, must needs be
a happy motion, worthy thanks.

If sickness needs many prays, Use 1.
and health deserves many thanks; lets so bestow our selves, that if it be
possible, we may prevent the one, and enjoy the other: for the first, beware
(to keep me to mine own profession) of sin, all sin; sin is the
mother, sickness the daughter: man never saw the one, til he matched himself
with the other. More specially four sorts of sins must be as much abhord as
sickness, as death.

1 Sins of death: Pro. 5.9.11.
God has adjudged whoredom, Pro. 5. murder, etc. and such like capital
offenses to sickness, to death. 2 Sins of rebellion, committed against the
clear light and letter of the Word: 2. Sam. 3.29.
these are threatened with all manner of diseases, Levit. 26. Dent. 28. 3 Sins
of contemptuous prophanenessc: the Lord has said that he will be sanctified in
all that come nigh him; And when any in their approches were securely profane,
the hand of God was upon their bodies, to death, or sickness: so Nadab, etc.
so Vzziah so 1. Cor. 11. 4 Sins that have their root in the body, or at
least work powerfully upon the body. (...) Vi. Alsted. Rhet.
Of this sort we name only those three, which the Rabbis touch in one
Proverb and three letters: The first is poverty, which at the first may seem
but little to impeach health; but if we look upon it in its cause, idleness,
unthriftinesse, intemperance most an end; or in its effects, theft, robbery,
etc. fretting; or in its companions, ill lodging, ill fare, ill clothing, etc.
this may well pass for one cause of weakness. The second is pride, a sin
that so swells the soul that it breaks the skin and case, the body: pride
breaks the wits, witness Nebuchadnezzar; breaks the heart, and wounds it
self, witness Saul, Achitophol, and breaks ones sleep, ones peace, body,
estate, all; a sick disease: a proud man is never without some ailement. The
third is drunkenness or intemperance: a man of this distemper, lies as open to
diseases as an unwalled Town to invasions and assaults. Pro. 25.27.28.
To him is woe, redness of face, etc. Pro. 23. Brethren, if you would not be
sick, have nothing to do with these forerunners: prevent sickness in the
cause.
For the second, Health, great Solomon has written a Physics for us, as well
as Ethics, in his Proverbs: there you may read of the Country man's three
Doctors, Quiet, Diet, Mirth. For the first, health is nothing but Natures rest
and repose; health gives peace, and peace yields health: outward peace is a
great blesing, and very wholesome, but that comes from peace within; which is
double, 1. peace of Justification, 2. peace of Sanctification. So long as
there is war in the conscience, war in the affections, one power and lust
conflicting with another, alas there is no more quiet to us than was of old to
Rebecca: Genesis 26.
but when Faith heales the conscience, and Grace hushes the affections, and
composes all within, then the soul looks out of the body, and sits in the
face with a checrefull countenance. If your flesh, with David's, shall rejoice,
labor for this peace; get faith in Christ's blood, get the virtue of Christ's
resurrection, get wisdom, i. all saving grace, and that makes for health, and
is a medicine, Pro. 3.8.

2 For Diet, Solomon gives rules, 1. for time, Eccl. 10.16, 17.2. for quality,
Pro. 23. speaking of wine-bibbers, Pro. 25.27.
fleshmongers, Pro. 20. and 3. etc. 3. for quantity; eat not too much honey,
which is true in the letter: V. M. Mason of Fasting.
let not out the appetite, left it cut thy throat, Pro. 23.2. but rather be of
the restraining hand, feed with fear, as Inde speaks, tise with an appetite,
Aureliam.
and use the Emperors Physic, cure all exceedings by abstinence.

3 For Mirth, Solomon is much in that argument: he 1. Pro 15.13. and 17.12.
commends the thing, a good heart. i. a cheerful heart is health to the bones, a
very medicine: 2. he persuades the means, Put sorrow from thy heart (says he)
rejoice with thy wife, be lightsome in thy clothes, cheerful at thy meals,
etc. diligent in thy calling, than the which nothing is more availeable to
comfort, after spiritual means of prayer, thanksgiving, etc. And he that in
Gods means puts himself into possession of these, shall arrive at so much
health as shall be behoovefull.

Secondly, Use 2.
if this double blessing be worth double thanks, lets prize it accordiagly,
and praise God for it, and 1. remember that there is a twofold deliverance;
one, which keeps us from sickness; another, that helps us out of sickness: a
double blessing, one in continuing health without sickness, another in
restoring health after sickness. If we enjoy either, let God have the praise,
and conclude for thy body, Et qua feci mala, and quae non feci, etc.d. med.
as Amstem for his soul, bless God that he has kept off some, and taken off
other sicknesses. For the first, there be some men who never knew what back-ach,
toothache, headache meant, they scarce know what it is to have a finger ache,
Galen. desan. tuend. l. 1. c. 4.5.
at leaft they have enjoyed some good measure of health which has its
latitude; these men I confess can hardly weigh sickness, or prize health:
the best course will be to send them to an Hospital, or to the house of of
mourning, there shall they find silence, solitariness, sadness, light shut
out, air shut out, misery shut in, children weeping, wife sighing; the husband
groaning, Oh my head, O my back, O my stomach, sick, sick, sick, I cannot
tell what to do, where to rest, help me up, help me down, O I sink, I
cannot stand, I cannot sit, I cannot lie, I cannot eat, I cannot sleep, I
cannot live, I cannot die, O what shall I do?

Brethren, if you have not felt sickness, yet hear it, view it see how it
racks and tortures a poor man, and that done, reflect upon thy self and say,
O Lord how much am I bound to thee for health! I can eat, my brother cannot; I
can walk, he cannot; I sleep all night, he never lays his eyes together; O
Lord give me a merciful heart to men, a thankful heart to thee for this
blessing:

For the second sort; have we been sick and now made sound? lay both estates
together with Hezekiah, and provoke thy self to thankfulness. Call to mind
what then thine anguish was, how sick thy stomach was, how sad thy friends
were, how tedious the night, how long the day, how terrible the thoughts of
death, the apprehension of judgment: think now thy thoughts then, acknowledge
now thy then purposes and vows. Did thou not then think, and promise, Oh if
God would reprieve me once more, I would become a new man, more careful of my
ways, more thankful for health than ever I have been: think now what the
price of health was then, what then thou would have given for one nights
sleep, one hours ease, one draught of drink, one vomit, one stool, one the
least of those mercies which now thou enjoyest: think how little wealth,
house, land, friends, all seemed to thee without health, and now thou have all
restored again in this, lift up thine eyes and hands to heaven with
Nebuchadnezzar, and say, Sickness put me out of possession of all, but with
health all is come back again; my stomach is come to me, my sleep, my flesh,
my strength, my joy, my friends, my house, my wealth, all is returned: O what a
change is here! erst nothing but pain, now nothing but ease; not long since
stripped of all, now possessed of all, as if I were another Job.

Thus, would we look either downward or backward, we should become more
thankful; but in any case take that with you which is said before of
thankfulness in general, and apply it to this particular of health. Nibil
prodest verbis praeserre virtutem, factis destruere zeritatem. Cypr de mortal.
Job 23.10.
Thankfulness stands not in words and complements: if you will be truly
thankful for health, thus do.

1 Come forth of affliction as Job did, that is, as the gold comes out of the
fire, purged from your dross: let sickness draine the soul as well as body,
and leave your humors, your pride; self-love, worldliness, hypocrisy, etc.
weaker than it found them: and now you be made whole, take your Saviors Item,
Sin no more, Job. 5.14.
lest a worse thing happen to you; fall not to your old diet, lest you fall
into your old diseases and relapse. The chiefest use of sickness is to be made
after it: in sickness we must resolve against sin, our special sin; but
after sickness we must second our resolutions with performances. Now then pay
thy vows, sin over thy sins no more, but lay down the practice of gross
sins, the purpose of all, and shun at least the occasions of them. And then
in the second place, offer to God the ransom of thy life, as the Law runs,
Exodus 31. I mean, leave some seal and pawn of thy thankfulness to God,
Vid. Cic. de not. deor. l. 2. Tibul. elog 1. ad. Isi^e^. Strab. l. 8. Plut de
oracul. Pyth.
as Hezekiah did, nay as Heathens, did; they after a shipwreck and danger,
would offer something, after a fit of ficknes would consecrate something to
their gods. If thou will not be before hand with Philistims to offer in thy
misery, yet at least return with the Samaritan, being recovered, and present
something, let some Church, some Parish, some one Preacher, some few poor men
be witnesses of thy thankfulness, and bless God with and for thee. I shall
ever suspect that thanksgiving, that spends it self in empty words: the man
truly thankful, will make a shift to pay his Physician, much more to praise
his GOD. with hand as well as tongue. Real thankfulness, is the best
preservative of health: let Hezekiah lengthen Gods praises, and God will
lengthen his days, and give him such a protection as never subject had.

Nor is it sufficient to present the Lord once, and to confine our
thankfulness to any one particular instance; we must, in the third place,
consecrate our strengths and lives to God, and offer up our selves as living
and acceptable sacrifices to him Romans 12.
that is, woe must use all our time, all our wit, all our health, Opus nostrum
Psalterium nostrum est. Aug. in Psalm. 91.
every limb, every thing that he has folded up in our health, to the
setting up of God in our hearts und lives; love him more than ever, fear him
more, trust him more, pray more, read more, hear more, do more worship, at
least more purely than before in our Christian calling; and in our particular
calling be more upright, constant, cheerful, fruitful than before, more
humble, more helpful, more merciful, more true, just, charitable than before:
in one, better Christians, better Churchmen, better Commonwealths men, better
husbands, better Masters, better parents, children, servants than before. This,
this is true thankfulness, when we heal in soul and body together, when we
grow in spiritual strength as well as in bodily, when we spend all that
sufficiency upon GOD and the public, which we have received from God; and
this is the thankfulness which I now call you and my self unto, O be thus
thankful for your private safety, and for the public. Our prayers for
London, etc. have engaged us unto thankfulness for them; for if we were bound
to pray for them being visited, we are bound to praise God for them being
delivered: This was preached before the public thanksgiving.
and would the one might be as solemn as the other.

2 Now if we must be thankful for other, must we not for our selves? O my
brethren, lets cast an eye toward our head City, and see what desolations are
there made; go into some places, and there is silence: ask, where dwells such a
one. and the answer will be, he is dead: where is his wife? dead: where his
children? dead: where his man, his maid? dead: who is in the house? death: and
who dwells there? death: and who at next house? death: and who next that? death,
death; pale death keeps shop, sits in the windows, seals up doors and holds
possesion, so that none dare enter. Pass from streets into some houses, and
what see you? some children, but nor father nor mother; ask, child where is
father? gone: where is mother? gone, he knows not whither nor how. Pass on,
and see in others sad silent parents, mourning like Rachel, because their
children are not: To make the matter short, do but think what once their
fears were, what now their griefs are for their friends, then sick, now
dead; and then come home, and say, In this common calamity God hides our
town, there is no crying in our streets, no rolling of bells, no tumbling of
carkases, no sealing up of doors, brethren meet together in the Church,
neighbors together in the fields, parents dare keep their children by them,
husbands and wives live together; we be not a terror or danger one to another,
but a comfort, a safeguard: O who can be sufficiently thankful for these
mercies? why should we whine for a few wants? we lack money, lack corn, etc.
O thou have thy life for a prey; thou, thy wife, thy children, thy manservant,
thy maidservant, thy kindred, thy neighbors, thy cattle-live, and life is
more than raiment, food, money, all things under Christ. bless God for this,
and say, I am poor, but yet I live; my wife is sickly, but yet she lives; my
children weak, lame, but yet they live: whilst there is life, there is mercy;
Exodus 18.4. Ps. 118.18.
where there is mercy, there should be thankfulness: the dead cannot, the
living, the living, says Hezekiah, must praise God, and that whilst living, as
David speaks, Ps. 146:3.

POSTSCRIPT.
ANd here London, let me address one exhortation to thee: Hitherto we have
stood amazed at thy misery and sudden change, sometime sorrow has thrust out
sad complaints, How does the City sit solitary that was full of people, etc.
Lam. 1.1. sometimes silence has swallowed up all words and left us
speechless, like, lob, friends: now me thought we heard thy in habitors
crying, Is it nothing, etc. Lam. 1.12. now again thy friends standing aloof
for fear, as once men shall for Babel crying our, Alas, alas that great City
(...) bo^re is thy judgment come etc. Rev. 18. Latuimus quis tuta civitas
exhausta. etc. Chrysostom. hom. 11. ad pop. Ant. Sir W. Ral.
In this case thou wast not at leisure to hear not we in case to speak: At
such a time to tell thee of thy faults, had been (as one who wanted not wit,
spoke) to upbraid thee with thy fortune, (...) than to seek thy reformation.
But now the case is altered, the heavens are cleared, and thou with them. Now
its time for all thy friends to call upon thee, for thee to call upon, thy
self. We have waited long to hears when thou would say, O all ye that
mourned for me, now rejoice with me, and repay as many thanks for me, as I
have had prayers from you. Take head, no thankfulness soon spends what
prayers has bin long in geting; forfeit not all again for want of thanks.
Look upon Hezekiah, he was sick and prayed, he recovered and song. If I
should say that he was sick, of your sickness, I should not say it without an
Author: V. Vales. ser. Philos. Abulens. in 4. zol. c. 20. q. 3.
this I can say, his sickness was but personal, yet he is thankful; whatever
his disease was, you will yield the plague to be a sickness, yea custom
says, The sickness, The plague, The visitation. This granted, there is great
reason that thou should be as thankful for a thousand as he for one, and
add deeds to words as well as he: To this purpose, run his method; 1. Make
thy self sensible and mindful of thy misery past: (...) Luc. 7.21. Mic 6.9.
sickness is a rod, as the Gospel tells us; the voice now to the City is,
Hear the rod and who appoints if. the rod has a mouth, if thou have an ear;
that speaks its errand, and gives thee thy lesson. If thou will hear me, I Will
deliver it to thee with the same affection (degrees excepted) that Eltha did to
Job, chap. 34.31.32.

Surely it is meet, Job 34.31.
and it becomes thee to say, and that to God, I have borne chastisement; this
the first lesson. Far be it from thee to say in thy heart, It Is true, I have
buried many children, but what were they? of the baser and poorer sort, such,
whose lives were burden some, whose deaths are beneficial to me: nor let it
enter into thy heart to think, Well, I see the error; had such a place been
scoured, such traffic stayed, such means used, this had been prevented,
hereafter I Will be wiser. No, it is thy wise dome to see Gods Name written upon
this rod, as Micah speaks, and to acknowledge him: we wish thee to use all
secondary means, but not to rest there; thy experience has taught thee, that
the plague nothing fears, either thy new fields, or fresh waters, etc: it
comes of Gods errand, and when it comes, take knowledge of it, for it will not
away without its errand. Therefore in the second place, improve the affliction,
Job, and say, I Will sin no more. First, Job 5.6.
see why the rod is sent as well as by who. The rod buds not out of the dust,
it has a root, and that root is sin, and that sin is manifold. A King
does not use to smite down his subjects by thousands for small offenses; a
father will not draw a sword upon his children for toys and trifles: London,
thou must take the height of thy sins by the compass of the punishment, and
judge of that by this.

What I have thought of thee, and thy government in general, I have spoken
elsewhere seasonably enough, as I think; but now I speak to thee, I earnestly
entreat thee to take into thy consideration Ezekiel. 22. and therein note how the
Lord charges her not only with such crimes as were committed by her, but also
in her, In thee, says God, were they, etc.

For thine own government and practice, I cannot tell how to hope almost that
it should be much better in so populous and various a place, nay I know not the
Citieunder heaven, that is better ordered and disciplined: nevertheless in such
a confluence of people of nations, it cannot be avoided but such sin will be
committed in thee, if not by thee; and these sins, so far as connivencie
and baseness makes thine, Tuum est quad tibi non displic^t Hier.
will endanger thee. When therefore thou have surveyed thine own ways, cast
into the account thine-other-mens-sinnes, thine-other-land sins, thy Dutch
sins, thy French sins, thy Spanish sins, thy Italian sins,
thine-owne-countrey-sinnes; see whether there be not in thee those that eat
upon the mountains, and those that for lucre sake both harbor and hide them.
Whether in thee there be not such as never yet saw Christ's face, or heard his
voice in the Assemblies: whether in this wonderful light, there be not in thee
who know not whether Christ be a man or woman: whether there be not in thee
men, who study new oaths and lies, as men doc new fashions: whether in thee
there be not who never see the Sabbath light, but lie either buried in bed, or
drowned in drink: whether in thee children be not so wantonly bred, that they
slight father and mother; and, to make short of a long bed-roll; whether in
thee there be not wretched men that set open their doors to all the bankrupts,
unthrifts, gamesters, robbers, cheaters, harlots that the country pursues:
whether in thee there be not some that set all to sale, wife, child, servant,
name, conscience, soul, all. And if upon search these or any of these shall
be found within thy walls or reach, O glorisie God in his visitation, and save
thy self by disclayming these sins. Thine they be not, if thou where thou
may do reform them, and where thy power fayles do bewail them. Howbeit
this is not all; as sin must be seen, so must it be left: and therefore thou
must proceed, Job 34.31.
and say, I Will offend no more: as a Christian, I Will reform my self; as a
parent, my children; as a Master, my family; as a Magistrate, my charge; as a
tradsman, my courses. And to the end thy reformation may be acceptable, learn
two things more of Elihu, first, Verse. 32
be willing to see and know thy faults; pray that GOD would add to correction
instruction, that he will open thine heart to hear, and some mouth to speak
home to thy case, thy soul; Psalm. 94.12.
and when light is commin, wink not with thine eyes, shut not the door
against it. Secondly, carry ever about thee this resolution, Let God teach,
I Will learn; speak, I Will hear; convince me of a sin, I Will leave it whatever
becomes of me; be it my living, be it to me as my life, if God will say it is a
sin, I Will leave it in the practice, in the purpose, in the allowance of it;
this murtherous sin that has slain my child, my friend, so many of my
neighbors, nay my Savior, shall never have place again in my heart or house.
And this is not only the way to thankfulness, but also a proof and piece of
it: know that so many sins as the love of God constraines us to leave, so
many songs are presented to God; Chrysostom. de laud Dei.
every slain lust is a gratulatorie sacrifice.

Secondly, thou must proceed with Hezekiah, and see from what, to what God has
brought thee: shall a City conceive and bring forth in a day? it has been so
with thee. I may say of thy sorrows, what Job speaks of his comforts, they
have been swifter than a shuttle: Job 7.
Did thou or any man living think, that within one Summer thou should
bury so many, and so few weekly? could it be imagined, that when thy
channels were discovered in so low an ebb, that thy banks should be so
suddenly filled again? O London look upon thy self, and wonder at thy self:
invert now Ieremies lamentation, and say, How is the solitary City become
full! how is she that was barren, made fruitful! Sit down with Hezekiah, See
the plague at Asex in Cypr. and Eus
and consider what thy bitterness was when death walked in the streets, raged
in the chambers, when death was in the pot, in the bed, in the dish, in the
hall, in the parlour, when the bells spoke nothing but death, the doors
presented nothing but death, and every man thou saw, thing thou touchedst,
place thou satest in threatened thee with death: consider what thy cares, fears,
griefs, thoughts were then; and now whilst thine eyes behold as it were a
resurrection to life, so that now life is in the streets, life in the house,
life in the Church, trading, building, singing, etc. alive again, bless thy
GOD that has wrought this change, and get up with Hezekiah to the house of the
Lord: Strange it was, that he in so short a space should measure the whole
distance betwixt death and life; yesterday dead in nature, as unlikely to live
as the sun to go backward, and to morrow so strong that he could show
himself in the Lords courts: This is wonderful, and this made him wondrous
thankful. And what (I pray) wants thy deliverance of this? how much less
wonderful? how fast did sickness come in, how fast did it gallop out? how
fast did it rise from scores to thousands, how fast did it fall again from
thousands to scores? London, lay these things together, and forget not him who
has done so great things for thee.

In the third place, Hezekiah loves not to dispatch all at one journey: he
begins his song as soon as might be, but it is not ended yet; he has left a
pattern for thee to work by. Think it not sufficient to complement God with a
few words, and a short song, for along deliverance; write this mercy with a pen
of Diamond, in a book of Marble; call upon all within thee, Psalm. 103.1.
as David did within him, to speak of this deliverance to childrens children,
and do something that may set men on singing 500. years hence: Thou have
sons of all sorts; some Enginers, some Artists, some Poets, some of excellent
invention, some of great activity, some very daring and undertaking, some
strong, some wise, some rich, of all ranks some; call upon them, some to write,
some to build, some to invent, some to give, that cirie, country, Church,
State, sea and land may take occasion thence of blessing God, whilst London or
England stands. Now happy Hezekiah, and happy sickness of his that ended so
well: his afflictions sent him to God with prayers, his recovery with praises;
nor God nor man lost by this bargain: God had more service, Hezekiah more
experience, we gain a good copy, and Hezekiah has his lease renewed for
fifteen years: And thus afflictions conclude, which begin with prayer and end
in thankfulness. London, make thy self againer by thy loss, join praises to
thy former prayers, grow more wise, holy, humble, temperate, just, merciful,
fruitful, and thou art a winner; thy gains exceed thy losses present, and for
the future, thou have opened a fair prospect to a constant peace. The best
security from future miseries, is to profit by former; believe it, thou can
not take a better medecin against the Plague, than to profit by what is past.
Now the Lord has promised to teach us to profit, by Esaias, and he perform it
for his mercies sake, that so the controversy may end here, and the Lord may
not be put to saddle his pale horse of famine, which has made parents to eat
up their children, once, and to wish them alive again, that they might eat
them again. Amen.

FINIS.

