THE ARCH'S OF TRIVMPH Erected in honor of the High and mighty prince. James.
the first of that name. King, of England. and the sixth of Scotland. at his
Majesty's Entrance and passage through his Honorable City and chamber of
London. upon the 15th. day of march 1603

Invented and published by Stephen Harrison. Ioyner and Architect: and graven
by William Kip.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR THOMAS BENNET KNIGHT, LORD MAYOR OF THIS CITY, THE
RIGHT WORSIPfull the Aldermen his Brethren, and to those Worshipful Commoners,
elected Committies, for the Managing of this Business.
THE love which I bear to your Honor and Worships: and the duty wherewith I
am bound to this honorable City, makes me appear in this boldness to you;
To whom I humbly Consecrate these fruits of my invention, which Time has
now at length brought forth, and ripened to this perfection. That Magnificent
Royalty, and glorious Entertainment, which you your selves for your part, out
of a free, a clear, and very bounteous disposition, and so many thousands of
worthy Citizens, out of a sincere affection and loyalty of his Majesty, did
with the sparing of no cost, bestow but upon one day, is here new wrought up
again, and shall endure for ever. For albeit those Monuments of your Loves
were erected up to the Clouds, and were built never so strongly, yet now their
lastningnes should live but in the tongues and memories of men: But that the
hand of Art gives them here a second more perfect being, aduaunceth them
higher then they were before, and warrants them that they shall do honor to
this City, so long as the City shall bear a name. Sorry I am that they come
into the world no sooner: but let the hardness of the labor; and the small
number of hands, that were busied about them, make the fault (if it be a
fault) excusable. I would not care if these unpainted Pictures were more
Costly to me, so that they might appear curious enough to your Lordship and
Worships; yet in regard, that this present Age can lay before you no President
that ever any in this land performed the like, I presume these my endeavors
shall receive the more worthy liking of you. And thus Dedicating my Labors
and Love to your honorable and kind Acceptations, I most humbly take my
leave, this 16 of June 1604.

Most affectionately devoted to your Lordship and Worships, Stephen Harrision.

Ode.
Babell that strove to wear
A Crown of Clo^^es, and up did rear
her foreheadhye,
With an ambitious lust to kiss the sky,
Is n^w or dust, or not at all,
proud Nymrods wall,
And all his Antique monuments,
Left to the world as presidents,
Cannot now show (to tell where they did stand,)
So much in length as half the Builders hand.
The Mansolaean tomb;
The sixteen curious gates in Rome,
which times prefer,
Both past and present: Neroes Theater,
That in one day was all gilt over:
Ad to these more,
Those Columns, and those Pyramids, that won
Wonder by height: the Col^sse of the Sun:
The Egyptian Obelisks: are all forgotten:
Only their names grow great: themselves be rotten.
Dear friend! what honor then
Bestow'st tho^ on thy Country men?
Crowning with praise,
By these thy l^bors, (as with wreathes of bays)
this royal City: where now stand,
(built by thy hand)
Her Arches in new state; so made,
That their fresh beauties n'ere shall fade:
Tho^ of our English Triumphs rear'st the Fame,
Bo^e those of old; But above all, thy nam^.
Tho. Dekker.

Ode.
Tri^mphes were wont with swet and blood be croun'd:
To every brow
They did all^w.
The li^ing La^r^r which begirted round
Their rusty Helmets, and had power to m^ke
The Soldier smile, while mortal wound did ache.
But our more civil passages of state
(like happy feast
of In'-^rd rest
Which bells and woundlesse Canons did relate,)
Stood high in Joy: since warlike Triumphs bring,
Remembrance of our former sorrowing.
The memory of these should quickly fade,
(for pleasures stream
is like a dream.
Passant and fleet as is a shade,)
Unless thy self which these fair Models bred,
Had given them a new life when they were dead.
Take then (good Country man and friend) that merit,
which folly lends.
(not i^dgement sends,)
To foreign sh^res for stranger to i^herit:
Perfection must be bold with front upright,
Though En^y g^ash her teeth whilst she would bite.
Ioh. Webster.

The Device called Londinium.
THese five Triumphall Arches were first taken in hand in the beginning of
April 1603. presently after his Majesty was proclaimed. It being expected that
his passage would have been through his honorable City and Chamber to his
Coronation upon Saint James his day ^ollowing: But by reason of the sickness,
it ple^sed his Majesty to be solemnly Crowned at Westminster, without sight
of these Triumphs: Notwithstanding the business being set on foot, went on
with all expedition; till Bartholmew-tide and then ceased because of the great
mortality, 40. days more was given for the preparing of this Triumphall Arch.
In which time, the str^etes for that purpose were d^l^gently surueyed,
heighths, breadts and distances taken, as it were to make Fortisications for
the ^lemnities: Seven pieces of ground lik^ so many fields for a battle) were
plotted forth, upon which these Triumphs should be erected: The gladsome and
long ^esired Morning at length is come, In which the Streets seem to be
paued with people, that in heaps flock together, to behold their proud heads
that were advanced in this manner.

THE first ^egme was erected in Fanchurch-streete, the back of it so learning
on the East end of the Church, that it ouer-spread the whole street. And thus
we describe it.

It was a Flat-square, builed upright; the Perpendicular-line of the whole
Frame, (that is to ^ay, the distance from the bottom to the top,) as the
Ground-line, is (also in this, so in all the rest) to be found out and tried by
the Scale, divided by 1. 2. 3. 4. and 5. and set at the lower end of the Piece:
By which figures feet are represented: So that in all the descriptions, where
mention is to be made of Heights, Breadths, or any other Commensurable
proportions, you shall find them left thus -- with a blancke, because we wish
you rather to apply them to the Scale your self, then by setting them down,
to call either your skill or judgment in question.

And note withal, that the Ground-plot has not the same Scale which the
upright has, for of the two Scales, which you see annexed, the Lesser is of
the Ground, and stands in the Ground-plot, the Greater, for the Edisice or
Building it self.

This Gate of Passage, then (into which his Majesty made his first entrance)
was derived from the Tuscana (being the principal pillar of those 5. upon
which the Noble Frame of Architecture does stand,) for the Tuscane Column is
the stro^gest and most worthy to su^port so famous a Work, as this Fabric
was, considering that upon his Rusticke Pillars, the goodliest Houses, Turrets,
Steeples, etc. within this City, were to be borne: And those Models, stood as a
Coronet on the forehead or Battlements of this Great and Magnificent Edisice.

The cheeks or sides of the Gate, were (as it were) doubly guarded with the
Pottraitures of Atlas King of Mauritania, who (according to his own shortness
and thickness) from the Symetry of his foot, caused a pillar to be made,
whose height with Base and Capital was 6. times the thickness in height. And
so is this of ours, bearing the name of Tuscana, as we said before, and
reaching to the very point of the Arch, from whence we did derive Dorica which
bore up the Architiue, Frize, and Coronixe, and was garnished with Corbels or
Croxtels sitting such work, besides the beauty of Pyramids, Beasts, Water,
Tables, and many other inrichments, which you may find expressed in the Piece it
self.

From a Gallery directly over the gate, the sound of loud Music (being the
Waits and Hault-boyes of the City) was sent forth.

At the foot of the Battleme^ts was in Capital letters inscribed this word
Londinium, and beneath that, these words Camera Regia.

In this Pegme or Arch Triumphall, were placed 12. personages, of which she
that had the preeminence to sit highest, was called Monarchia Britannica.

At her feet sat Divine Wisdom. On her right hand sat three of the
daughters of Genius Vrbis, whose names were
Veneration, Prompt^tude, Vigilance:
On her left, the other three, viz.
Gladness, Loving Affection, Vnanimit^se.


Beneath all these stood the Genius of the City, richly attirde, being
supported on the right hand by a person figuring The Council of the City; and
on the left by a person figuring the Warlike force of the City.

Directly under these, in an Abacke thrust out before the rest, lay Thamesis
the River, leaning his Arm upon a ^^^rde, out of which, water with live fishes
were seen to run forth, and play about him.

The speakers were only Thamesis and Genius, who uttered these speeches
following on the other side.

The speeches of Gratulation.
GENIUS. TIme, Fate, and Fortune have at length conspired,
To give our Age the day so much desired.
What all the minutes, hours, weeks, months, and years,
That hang in file upon these silver hairs,
Could not produce, beneath the Britane stroke,
The Ro^an, Sax^n, Dane, and Norman yoke,
This ^oint of Time bath done* Now London rear^
Thy forehead high, and on it strive to we^re
Thy (...) Gems^ Teach thy ste^pe Towe^s to rise
H^gher with people: S^t with sparkling eyes
Thy spacious windows: and in eu^ry street,
Let thronging ^oy, Love, and Amazement meet.
Cleave all the air with showtes, and let the cry
Strike through as long, and universally
As thunder; For, thou now art blist to see
That sight, for which thou did begin to be.
When Brutus plough first gave thee infant bounds,
And ^, thy GENIUS walk's auspicious rounds
In every furrow; Then did I forelooke,
And saw this day marked white in Clotho's book.
The several Circles, both of change and sway,
Within this Isle, there also figured lay:
Of which the greatest, perfectest, and last
Was this, whose present happiness we taste.
Why keep yo^ silence Daughters? What dull peace
Is this inhabites you? Shall office cease
Upon th^aspect of him, to whom you owe
(...) Shall TIME know,
That (...), wherein your flame stood still,
An (...) Now heaven auert an i would
Of that black l^oke. Ere pause possess your breasts
I w^sh you more of Plagues: "Zeal when it rests,
Leaves to be zeal. Up thou tame RIVER, wake,
And from thy liquid limbs this slumber shake:
Thou drown'st thy self in inofficious s^eepe;
An^ these thy sluggish waters seem to creep,
Rather them flow. Vp^rise, and swell with pride
Above thy banks. "Now is not every Tide.

THAMESIS. TO what vain end should I contend to show
(...) powers, when Seas of pomp overflow
The Cit^ies ^ace: and cover all the shore
With san is more rich than Tagus wealthy ore?
When in the stood of I^y, that comes with him,
He drownes the world; yet makes it live and swim,
And spring with gladness: Not my fishes here,
Though they be dumb, but do express the cheer
o^ these bright streams. No less may These, and I
Boast our delights, albe't we silent lie.

GENIUS. INdeed, true Glad^esse does not always speak:
"Joy bred and borne but in the tongue, is weak.
Ye^ (least the feruor of so pure a flame,
As this my City bears, might loose the name,
Without the apt euenting of her heat)
Know greatest JAMES (and no less good, than great.)
In the behalf of a^l my virtuous Sons,
Whereof my eldest there, thy pomp forerunnes,
(A Man without my flattering, or his Pride,
As worthy, as he is blessed ^o be thy guide)
In his grave name, and all his Brethrens right,
(Who thirst to drink the Nectar of thy sight)
The Council, Commoners, and Multitude;
(Glad, that this day so long denied, is viewd)
I tender thee the heartiest welcome, yet
That ever King had to his Empires seat:
Never came man, more longed for, more desired
And being come, more reuerenc'd, loved, admired:
Hear, and record it: " In a Prince it is
" No little virtue, to know who are ^is.
With like devotions, do I stoopet'embrace
This springing glory of thy Godlike race;
His Countries wonder, Hope, Love, Joy and Pride:
How well does he become the royal side
Of this erected, and broad spreading Tree,
Under whose shade may Brittane ever be.
And from this branch, may thousand branches more
Shoot over the Maine, and knit with every shore
In bonds of Marriage, Kindred, and Increase;
And style this Land, the Na^ill of their peace.
This is your Servants wish, your Cities vow,
Which still shall propagate it self, with you;
And free from spurs of Hope, that slow minds (...):
" He seeks no hire, that owes his life to Love.
And here she comes that is no less a part
In this days greatness, then in my glad heart.
Glory of Queens, and Glory of your Name,
Whose Graces do as far out-speake your Fame,
As Fame does silence, when her Trumpet rings
You Daughter, Sister, Wife of several Kings:
Besides Alliance, and the style of Mother,
In which one title you drown all your other.
Instance, be that fair shoot, is gone before
^our eldest Joy, and top of all your store,
With those, whose sight to us is yet denied,
But not our zeal to them, or ought beside
This City can to you: For whose estate
She hopes you will be still good Advocate
To her best Lord. So, whilst you mortal are,
No taste of sower mortality once dare
Approach your house; nor Fortune greet your Gra^^
But coming on, and with a forward face.



The Italians Pegme stood in Gracious-streete.
THE second Triumphall Arch was erected by the Italians: the cost theirs: the
Invention their own: It took up the whole breadth of Gracious-streete (on
which it stood) being -- foot: the height of it was -- foot. The lower part
of this Building, was a large square, garnished with four great Corinthia
Columns: In the midst of which square, was cut out a fair and a Spacious hie
gate, Arched, being -- foot in the Perpendicular-line, and -- in the
Ground-line: directly over the gate were advanced the Arms of the Kingdom,
the Supporters whereof were fairly cut out to the life.

On the top of this first square (being flat) was erected another Square which
bare in the fore side four more lesser Columns, on which were all the
garnishments belonging to those pillars: as namely, the architriue frize and
Cornish, on which Square was placed a great Canted Pedestall, which with his
moldinges did diminish upwards to smaller Cants, on which top was fixed a
Personage carved or molded out to the life, her left hand leaning on a sword,
with the point downward, and her right hand reaching forth a Diadem, which,
she seemde by bowing of her knee and head, to bestow upon his Majesty.

On the four Corners of this upper part, stood four naked Portractures (in
great) with artificial trumpets in their hands.

All which Shapes that were erected in most lively colors, together with
Pyramides, long Streamers, Galleries, and all other inrichments belonging to
this Archtriumphant: I refer you to the Model or Piece it self, for the
Front of it, as the next leaf will show you, so likewise proportional was
the back side to the fore- Front.

The Italians, were placed within two little Galleries very richly and stately
hung, under the Arch of the Passage: In whose behalf, thus much Latin was
delivered.

The Italians Speech.
Salve, Rex magne, salve. Salutem Maiestati tuae Itali, foelicissimum Aduentum
laeti, foelices sub te futuri, precamur. Ecce hic Omnes, Exigui Munere, pauculi
Numero: sed magni erga Maiestatem animi, multi obsequij. At nec Atlas, qui
Coelum sustinet, ne; ipsa Coeli Conuexa, altitudinem attingant meritorum Regis
optimi, Hoc est, eius quem de Teipso expressists doctissimo (Deus!) and
admirabili, penicillo, Beatissimos populos, vbi and Philosophus regnat, and Rex
Philosophatur. Salve; Viue Rex Potentissime, foeliciter. Regna, Rex
sapientissime, foeliciter. Itali optamus Omnes, Itali clamamus Omnes, Omnes,
Omnes.

The same in English.
ALL hail mighty Monarch! we (the Italians) full of Joy to behold thy most
happy presence, and full of hopes to enjoy a felicity under thy Royal wing,
do wish and pray for the health of thy Majesty. Behold, here we are all;
mean in merit: few in number: but toward thy Sovereign self, in our loves
great, in our duties more. For neither Altas, who bears up heaven, no nor the
Arched roof it self of heaven, can by many-many degrees reach to the top
and glorious height of a good and virtuous Kings deseruings. And such a one is
he, whom (Good God!) most lively, most wisely, and in wonderful colors, thou
did then pencill down in thine own person, when thou saydst those people
were blessed, where a Philosopher rules, and where the Ruler plays the
Philosopher. All hail thou royallest of Kings; live thou mightiest of
Princes: Reign thou wisest of Monarchs in all prosperity: these are the
wishes of us Italians: the hearty wishes of us all: All, even All.



The Pegme of the Dutchmen.
THE third welcome that his Majesty receiude, was from the Belgians, who had
builded^^ stately Triumphall Arch, to entertain him in, and thus was it
contriude.

So wide did the body of it extend it self, that it swallowed up the breadth
of the whole street, near the Royal Exchange in Cornehill. The Passage of
state was a gate, comely, and large, ascending -- foot in height, and -- foot
in the breadth, neately Arched, and graced with two lesser Posternes on the
sides, whose dimensions you may behold in the model.

Sundry inscriptions were in golden Letters to be seen, both over the Gate,
and in the Tables, filled with excellent Pictures; as the King in his Imperial
Robes: with other Portractu^es of Princes, and Poetical Emblemes of Peace,
etc. On the back part also were pieces, wherein were drawn the people of the
Seventeen Provinces at their Husbandry; their Exchange: their Mart: Also
seventeen children on the fore side, representing the seventeen Provinces,
sat in degrees, each of them having a Scutcheon in his hand, figuring his
Province.

On the shoulders of this Belgicke body, stood rows of Balysters with
Pedistals, that supported Lions rampant, bearing up Banners: And above them in
the midst of another square about with Balysters likewise, was advanced a woman
(figuring Divine Providence, her feet fastened to a great Pedestall, whose
top was curiously connexed and knit together with the tails of two D^lphins.

Other Garnishments there were that gave illustration and beauty to this
building, as Columns, Pyramids, etc. whose proportions your eye may measure on
the other side. The speech, wherein the love of these Strangers was testified,
was delivered by a boy in Latin, and is thus much in English.

The speech of the Dutchmen.
GREAT King, those so many Scepters, which even fill thy right hand, are all
thine own, only by the Providence of heaven. Behold, heaven it self laughes
to see thy Subjects smile, and thunder out l^^a Plaudities, to hear their
Aues. This honor of Sovereignty being at the beginning of the world bestowed
but upon few; upon the heads of few were the cares of a Crown set, for to sway
only but one Empire (happily) as it is a labor hard: So none can undergo the
weight but such as are mighty: But (with a beck as it were) to control many
Nations (and those of different dispositions too) O! the Arm of man can never
do that, but the finger of God. God therefore (that guides the Chariot of the
world) holds the Raynes of thy Kingdom in his own hand: It is he whose beams
lend a light to thine. It is he that teaches thee the Art of Ruling, because
none but he made thee a King. And therefore as thou growest in years, thou
waxest old in Virtues: of all thy Virtues, Religion sitting highest. And most
worthy; for by Religion, the hearts of barbarous Nations are made soft: By
Religion, Rebellion has a yoke cast about her neck, and is brought to
believe, that those Laws to which thou submittest even thy royal self, are
most easy. With Religion Justice keeps company, who once fled from this
profane world, but hearing the name of King James she is again returned. By
her side sits her sister Fortitude, whose life is ready (in Heroike actions)
to be spent for the safety of thy people. Besides to make these Virtues full,
Apollo and the Muses, resign, the one his Golden lyre, the other their
Laurel, to thy royal hands, whilst Plenty (daughter to Industry) lays the
blessings both of Country and City in heaps at thy feet. These are the
gifts of heaven: the fame then spreading it self so far, that (to wonder at
them) both the Poles seem to come together. We (the Belgians) likewise come,
to that intent: a Nation banished from our own Cra^l^s, yet nursed and brought
up in the tender bosom of a Princely mother, Eliza. The love which we once
dedicated to her (as a Mother) doubly do We vow it to thee, our Sovereign,
and Father: Entreating we may be sheltred under thy wings now, as under hers:
Our Prayers being, that he who through the loins of so many Kingdoms, may
likewise multiply thy years, and le^gthen them out to the age of a Phoenix: And
that thy Queen (who is one part of thy self) with thy Progeny (who are the
second hopes of thy people,) may both give too, and receive from, thy Kingdom
Immortal glory.



The Device called, Noua foelix Arabia, The new Arabia foelix.
THIS Pegme presented it self above the great Conduit in Cheap: and carried
the name of the New Arabia, under which title the whole Island of Britannia was
figured.

This was beautified with a large Gate in the midst: On each side was cut out a
Posterne, either of which was -- foot wide, and -- foot high: before which
Posternes two Portals were built from the same, having their sides open four
several ways, and serving as Pedestals (of Rusticke) to support two great
Pyramids, whose bases were held up with four great Bals, and four Lions.

This Mechanicke body had other dead limbs, (which you may behold cut out on
the other side.) The lively and stirring parts were these. viz.

In the most eminent place was advanced a person, representing Arabia
Britannica, and within a Nesete (beneath her) stood Fame.

Directly under her, in a wide hollow square, were exalted five green Mounts,
the one swelling above the other; upon which the five Senses, (Hearing, Seeing,
Feeling, Smelling and Taste,) sat heavily drooping: before which Mounts, an
Artificial Lauer was erected, called the Fount of Virtue; out of which (from
sundry pipes) upon his Majesty's approach, ran wine very plenteously.

At the foot of this Fount lay Detraction and Oblivion, Sleeping till his
Majesty's approach; but being arrived at the place, and the Trompe of Fame,
starting up the Senses, they two likewise awaked, doing their best, with clubs
to beat down the Fount, but were hindered by the Senses, and a person
representing Circumspection.

Upon several Ascensions, (and close adjoining to the Pyramids,) were seated
at one side, the three Graces, and on the other side the three Hours.

The speakers were Fame, Hours, Euphrosine (one of the Graces) and
Circumspection, who was mounted on a Stage, raild round about with Pilastres,
being drawn forth some thirty foot in length from the other Building. And
thus sounded their voices.

FAME. TVrne into ice mine eye-bals whilst the sound,
Flying through this brazen tromp, may back rebound,
To stop Fames hundred tongues, leaning them mute,
As is an untouched bell, or stringlesse Lute,
For Virtues Fount, which late ran deep and clear,
Dries: and melts all her body to a tear:
You Graces: and you Hours that each day run,
On the quick errands of the Golden Sun,

Hereupon Fame sounding her Trumpet, the Senses start up, Detraction and
Oblivion, awaken, and vanish, whilst Circumspection appears, uttering thus
much to the King. Great^ Monarch of the West, whose glorious Stem,
Does new support a triple Diadem,
(...) more then that of thy graund Graund-sire, Brute.)
Thou that may make a King thy Substitute,
And do besides the Red-rose and the white,
With the rich flower of France, thy garland dight,
Wearing about kings now, or those of old,
A double Crown, of Laurel and of Gold,
O let my voice pass through thy Royal care,
And whisper thus much, that we figure here.
A new Arabia, in whose spiced Nest,
A Phoenix lived, and did in the Suns breast,
Her loss made Sight, in Tears to drown her eyes,
O say? to Virtues Fount what has befell,
That thus her Veins shrink up.

GRACES -- HOURS. We cannot tell.

EVPHROSINE. Behold the fiue-fold guard of Sense, which keeps
the sacred stream, sits drooping: near them sleep,
Two horrid monsters: Fame, summon each sense,
To tell the cause of this strange Accidence.
The Ear grew deaffe, Taste like a Sick-man lies,
Finding no relish: Every other Sense
Forgot his office, Worth and excellence,
Whereby this Fount of Virtue began to freeze,
Threatened to be drunk up by two enemies,
Snaky Detraction, and Oblivion,
But at thy glorious presence both are gone.
Thou being that sacred Phoenix, that does rise,
From th'ashes of the first; Beams from thine eyes
So vertually shining, that they bring
To Englands new Arabia, a new spring:
For Joy whereof, Nymphs, Senses, Hours and Fame,
Eccho-loud Hymns to his Imperial name.

At the end of this speech, a song (to an excellent Music) was delivered,
which being finished, his Majesty went on.



The Device called, Hortus Euporiae, Garden of Plenty.
THE fifth Pegme was a summer Arbor, and seemed to grow close to the little
Condu^t in Cheap, which ^oyning to the back of it, served (or might be
supposed to have been) as a Fountain to water the fruits of this Garden of
Plenty.

This green bower spread it self likewise (as all the rest did) over the
whole breadth of the street^; having two Gates arched and grated Arbor-wise, to
the height of -- feet, and breadth of --: the sides of which gates were borne
up with four great French terms, standing upon Pedestals, which contained in
their full height -- foot. Between these open Passages were a pair of
st^ires mounted, at the bottom of which (on two pillars) were fixed two
Satyrs, carved out in wood. Both the roo^e and sides of these Gates, were
Artificially hung with Pompions, Cowcumbers, Grapes, Cherries, Pears, Apples,
and all other fruits, which the land brings forth. The upper part also
(which was closed with three round tops, Fortune standing on the midst of the
three) was garnished with lesser fruits, and with all sorts of Flowers, made by
Art.

The whole Frame of this summer house, stood (at the Ground-line) upon --
^oote, the Perpendicular, stretching it self to --.

Peace and Plenty had the highest places in this Bower, and sat to gether:
directly under them, sat two other persons, representing Gold and Silver,
supporting the Globe of the world between them: On each side of them sat two
other persons, the one Pomona, Goddess of Fruits, the other Ceres, Goddess of
Corn.

Upon two large Descents (a little below these) were placed at one end the
nine Muses, at the other end the seven liberal Sciences.

Syluanus, and his followers, (who upon sight of his Majesty, played upon
Cornets) gave entertainment to his Maiesti^, in these speeches following.

The speech.
MOST happy Prince, pardon me, that being mean in habit, and wild in
appearance (for my richest livery is but leaves, and my stateliest dwelling but
in the woods) thus rudely with piping Syluancs, I presume to intercept your
Royal passage. These are my walks, yet stand I not here to cut off your way,
but to give it a full and a bounteous welcome, being a messenger sent from the
La^y Eirene my mistress; those that sleep under the warmth of her wings
adore her by the Sacred and Celestial name of P^ace; her daughter Euporia
(well known by the name of Plenty) is at this present with her, (being indeed
never from her side:) Under yonder Arbor they ^it* which after the daughters
name is called Hortus Euporiae (Plenties Bower.) Chaste are they both, and both
maidens, in memory of a Virgin to whom they were Nu^se-children, for whose
sake (because they were bound to her for their life) me have they charged to
lay at your Imperial ^eete, (being your hereditary due) the tribute of their
love. And with it thus to say. That they have languished many heavy months for
your presence, which to them would have been, (and proud they are that it shall
be now so) of the same operation and influence, that the Sun is to the
Spring, and the Spring to the Earth; hearing therefore what treble preferment
you have bestowed upon this day, wherein besides the beams of a glorious
Sun, two other clear and gracious Stars shine cheerfully on these her
homely buildings; Into which (because no du^^ should be wanting) she has given
leave even to Strangers, to be sharers in her happiness, by suffering them to
bid you likewise welcome: By me (once hers, now your vassaile) she intreates,
and with a knee sinking lower then the ground on which you tread, do I humbly
execute her pleasure, that ^re you pass further, you would deigne to walk
into yonder Garden. The Hesperides live not there, but the Muses, and the Muses
no longer than under your protection. Thus far am I sent to conduct you
thither, prostrately begging this grace (since I ^are not, as being unworthy,
Lackey by your Royal side) that yet these my green Followers and my self may
be ^oyfull fore^^unners of your expected approach. Away Syluans.



The Device called, Cozmoz Neoz, New World.
THE sixth Triumphall Arch, was (in the shape which you see it caries on the
other side) erected above the Conduit in Fleetestreete; extending it self over
the whole street, to the length of -- foot, and in height -- foot: The Gate
of it was -- foot wide, and -- foot hie. The two Posternes were answerable to
those of others set down before: and were cut out of the two round Towers
which riz up in proportionable measures, from the ground on the foreside with
battlements and Ballisters round enclosing the tops, containing in all their
heights -- foot: over the Gate, and just in the midst of the Building, (which
was spacious and left open) a Globe was seen to move being filled with all the
estates that are in the land; And this Engine was turned about by four
persons, representing the four Elements, (Earth, Water, Air, and Fire) who
were placed so queintly, that the Globe seemed to have his motion even on the
Crowns of their heads.

The lively garnishments to this Building were 23 persons, of which the
principal and worthiest was Astraea (Justice) who was advanced to the highest
Seat: Beneath her in a Cant by her self, Arete (Virtue) was placed: and at
her feet Fortune, who trod upon the Globe.

In a dark and obscure place (near Virtue) sat Envy: beneath whom, on
several Ascensions were placed the Cardinal Virtues, Justice, Fortitude,
Temperance and Prudence; and in an opposite seat, the four kingdoms,
England, Scotland, France and Ireland.

Zeal was the Presenter of this Device, who spoke thus.

ZEAL. THe populous Globe of this our English I Will.
Seemed to move backward at the funeral pile
Of her dead female Majesty: All states
From Nobles down to Spirits of meaner Fates,
Moved opposite to Nature and to Peace,
As if these men had been Th'antipodes.
But see, the virtue of a regal eye,
Th'attractiue wonder of man's Majesty,
Our Globe as drawn in a right line again,
And now appear new faces and new men:
The Elements, Earth, Water, Air and Fire,
(Which ever c'ipt a natural desire,
To combat each with other) being at first
Created enemies, to fight their worst,
See: as the peaceful presence of their King,
How quietly they move without their Sting.
Earth not devouring: Fire not defacing,
Water not drowning: and the Air not chasing:
But propping the queint Fabric that here stands,
Without the violence of their wrathful hands.
Mirror of times, lo, where they Fortune sits
Above the world, and all our human wits,
But thy hie Virtue above that: what pen
Or Art, or Brain, can reach thy Virtues then?
At whose Immortal brightness and true light,
Enuies infectious eyes have lost their sight:
Her Snakes (not daring to shoot forth their stings,
Against such a glorious Object) down she flings
Their forkes of Venom into her own mawe,
Whilst her rank teeth the glittering poisons chawe,
For it is the property of Enuies blood,
To dry away at every Kingdoms good,
Especially when she had eyes to view
These four Maine Virtues which here figure you,
Justice in causes: Fortitude against foes,
Temperance in spleen; and Prudence in all those:
And then so rich an Empire, whose fair breast
Contains four Kingdoms by your entrance blessed,
By Brute divided, but by you alone,
All are again united, and made One:
Whose fruitful glories shine so far and even,
They touch not only earth, but they kiss heaven,
From whence Astraea is descended hither,
Who with our last Queens Spirit fled up thither,
Fore-knowing on the earth she could not rest,
Till you had locked her in your rightful breast,
And therefore all estates, whose proper Arts
Live by the breath of Majesty, had hearts,
Burning in holy Zeales Immaculate sires,
With quenchlesse Ardors and unstained desires.
To see what they now see, your powerful Grace,
Reflecting Joys on every Subjects face.
These painted flames and yellow-burning stripes,
Upon this roabe being but as shows and types,
Of that great Zeal; And therefore in the name,
Of this glad City, whither no Prince ever came,
More loved, more longd for, lowly I entreat
You Would be to her as gracious as you are great:
So with reuerberate shoutes our Globe shall ring,
The Musicks cloze being thus, God save our King.



The Device called, Templum Iani, Temple of Ianus.
THE seventh and last Pegme (within the City) was erected at Temple-barre,
being adjoined close to the Gate: The Building was in all points like a
Temple, and ^ dedicated to Ianus Quadrifrons.

Beneath that Foure-fac'd head of Ianus was aduancd the Arms of the Kingdom,
with the Supporters cut out to the life: from whence being remoude they now are
placed in the Guild Hall.

The walls and gates of this Temple were brass; the Pillars silver, their
Capitals and Bases gold: All the Frontispice (downward from those Arms) was
beutified and supported by twelve rich Columns, of which the four lowermost,
being great Corinthian pillars, stood upon two large Pedestals, with a fair
V^^x over them in stead of Architriue, Frieze and Cornice: Above them, eight
Columns more, were likewise set, two and two upon a large Pedestall; for as
our work began (for his Majesty's entrance) with Rusticke, so did we think
it fit, that this out Temple, should end with the most famous Column, whose
beauty and goodlinesse is derived both from the Tuscane, Doricke, Ionicke and
Corinthian, and received his full perfection from Titus Vespasi^n, who advanced
it to the highest place of dignity (...) his Arch Triumphall, and (by reason
that the beauties of it were a mixture taken from the rest) he gave it the name
of Composita or Italica: within the Temple stood an Altar, with burning Ince^se
upon it, before which a Flamin appears, and to the Flamin comes the Genius of
the City. The principal person in this Temple, was Peace. At her feet lay
War groueling. At her right hand stood Wealth. On the same hand likewise, but
somewhat remote, and in a Cant by her self, Quiet was seated, the first hand
maid of Peace, whose feet stood upon Tumult. On the left hand (at the former
distance) Liberty the second hand-maide of Peace had her place, at whose feet
Servitude lay subjected. Beneath these (on distinct degrees) sat two other
hand maids of Peace, Safe^y and Felicity, Safety trampling upon Danger and
Fel^city upon Unhappiness. Genius and Flamin spoke thus much.

GENESIS STay, what art thou, that in this strange attire,
Dare kindle stranger, and unhallowed fire
Upon this Altar?

FL. Rather what art thou
That dare so r^dely interrupt my vow?
My habit speaks my name.

GE. A Flamin?

FL. Yes,
And Martialis called.

G^. I so did guess
By my short view, but whence did thou ascend
Hither? or how? or to what mysticke end?

FL. The noise, and present tumult of this Day,
Rowsd me from sleep, and silence, where I lay
Obscured from light; which when I wak^ to see,
I wondering thought what this ^reat pomp might be.
When (looking in my Calendar) I found
The ^des of March were entered, and I bound
With these, to celebrate the Geniall feast
Of Anna styled Perenna, Mars his guest;
Who, in this Month of his, is yearly called
To banquet at his Altar^; and instald,
A Goddess with him, since she files the Year,
And knits the oblique scarce that gyrts the sphere.
Whilst four faced ^anus turns his vernall look
Upon their meeting hours, as if he took
High pride and pleasure.

GE. Sure thou still do dream.
And both thy tongue, and thought rides on the strea^e
Of Fantasy: Behold here He nor She,
Have any Altar* Fane, or Diety.
Stoop; read but this Inscription: and then view
To whom the place is consecrate. It Is true
That this is Ianus Temple, and that now
He turns upon the Year his freshest browe;
That this is Mars his month; and these the Ides,
Wherein his Anne was honored; Both the Tides,
Titles, and Place, we know: But these dead rites
Are long since buried, and new power excites
More high and hearty flames. Lo, there is he,
Who brings with him a greater Anne then she:
Whose strong and potent virtues have de^ac'd
Stern Mars his statues, and upon them placed
His, and the worlds blessed blessings: This has brought
Sweet Peace to sit in that bright state she ought
Unbloody, or untroubled; has forced hence
All tumults, ^eares, or other dark portents,
That might in^ade weak minds; has made men see
Once more the face of welcome Liberty:
And does (in all his present acts) restore
That first pure world, made of the better Ore.
Now Innocence shall cease to be the spoil
Of ravenous Greatness, or to sleep the soil
Of raised Pesantrie with tears, and blood;
No more shall rich men (for their little good)
Sul^^^ to be made guilty; or vile Sp^es
Emoy the lust of their so murdering eyes:
Men shall put off their Iron minds, and hearts;
The I^me forget his old malicious arts
(...) this new minu^e; and no print remain
Of what was thought the former ages stain.
Back Flamin, with thy superstitious fumes,
And s^nse not here; Thy ignorance presumes
Too much, in acting any Ethnic rite
In this translated Temple: Here no wight,
To sacrifice save my devotion comes,
That brings in steed of those thy Masculine gummes.
My Cities heart, which shall for ever burn
Upon this Altar, and no Time shall turn
The same to ashes: Here I fix it fast,
Flame bright, flame high, and may it ever last.
Whilst I, before the figure of thy Peace,
Still tend the fire; and give it quick increase
With prayers, wishes, vows; whereof be these
The least, and weakest: that no Age may leese
The memory of this so rich a day;
But rather, that it henceforth yearly may
Begin our spring, and with our spring the prime,
And first account of Years, of Months, of Time:
And may these Ides as fortunate appear
To thee, as they to Caesar fatal were.
Be all thy Thoughts borne perfect, and thy Hopes
In their events still crowned beyond their scopes.
Let not wide Heaven that secret blessing know
To give, which she on thee will not bestow:
Blind Fortune be thy slave; and may her store
(The less thou see it) follow thee the more.
Much more I would: but see, these brazen Gates
Make have to close, as urged by thy Fates;
Here ends my Cities office, here it breaks:
Yet with my tongue, and this pure heart, she speaks
A short farewell; and lower then thy feet,
With fervent thanks, thy royal pains does greet.
Pardon, if my abruptness breed disease;
He merits not to offend, that hasts to please.



Lectori Candido.
READER, The limbs of these great Triumphall bodies (lately disioynted and
taken in sunder) I have thou see (for thy sake) set in their apt and right
places again: so that now they are to stand as perpetual monuments, not to be
shaken in pieces, or to be broken down, by the malice of that envious
destroyer of all things, Time. Which labors of mine, if they yield thee
either profit or pleasure, thou art (in requital thereof) to pay many thanks
to this honorable City, whose bounty toward me, not only in making choice
of me, to give directions for the entire workmanship of the five Triumphall
Arch's builded by the same, but also (in publishing these Pieces,) I do here
gladly acknowledge to have been exceeding liberal.

Nor shall it be amiss in this place to give thee intelligence of some matters
(by way of notes) which were not fully obserude, nor freely enough set down in
the Printed Book of these Triumphs: amongst which these that follow are
chiefest.

His Majesty departed from the Tower between the hours of 11. and 12 and
before 5. had made his royal passage through the City, having a Canopie borne
over him by 8. Knights.

The first Object that his Majesty's eye encountered (after his entrance into
London) was part of the children of Christ's Church Hospital, to the number of
300. who were placed on a Scaffold, erected for that purpose in Barking
Churchyard by the Tower.

The way from the Tower to Temple-Barre was not only sufficiently grauelled,
but all the streets (lying between those two places) were on both sides
(where the breadth would permit) raild in at the charges of the City, Paul's
Churchyard excepted.

The Liueries of the Companies (having their Streamers, Ensigns, and Banerets
spread on the tops of their railes before them) reached from the middle of Mark
Lane, to the Pegme at Temple Bar.

Two Marshals were chosen for the day, to clear the passage both of them being
well mounted, and attended on by six men (suteably attirde) to each Marshall.

The Conduits of Cornehill, of Cheap, and of Fleetestreete, that day ran
Claret wine very plenteously: which (by reason of so much excellent Music,
that sounded forth not only from each several Pegme, but also from diverse
other places) ran the faster and more merrily down into some bodies bellies.

As touching the Oration uttered by Sir Henry Mountague (Recorder of the City)
with the gifts bestowed on the King, the Queen, and the Prince (being three
Cups of gold) as also, all such songs, as were that day sung in the several
Arch's, I refer you to the Book in print, where they are set down at large.

And thus much you shall understand, that no manner of person whatsoever, did
disburse any part toward the charge of these five Triumphs, but only the
mere Citizens being all freemen; heretofore the charge being borne by
fifteenes and the Chamber of London (as may appear by ancient presidents) but
now it was leauied amongst the Companies. The other two Arch's erected by
Merchant-Strangers ( viz the Italians and Dutchmen) were only their own
particular charge.

The City elected 16. Committies to whom the managing of the whole business
was absolutely referred: of which number 4. were Aldermen, the other 12.
Commoners, viz. one out of each of the 12. Companies. Other Committies were
also appointed as ouer-seers and surueyors of the work. Farewell.

Imprinted at London by John Windet, Printer to the Honorable City of London,
and are to be sold at the Authors house in Lime-Street, at the sign of the
Snayle. 1604.


