Actus Primus.
Our heavenly blessing, be with you euerychone

Omnes simul. All praise and glory, to your majesty alone.


Christi lex. Here still to tarry, I think it be your mind.


Nature Lex. My office ye know, is to instruct Mankind.


Moseh lex. Than God be with you, we leave you here behind.


Finit Actus Primus.
Incipit Actus secundus.
Exeunt. Nature lex. THe law in effect^, is a teacher general
What is to be done, and what to be laid aside
But as touching me* the first law natural
A knowledge I am, whom God in Man does hyde
In his whole workynge, to be to him a gyde
To honor his God, and seek his neighbors health
A great occasyon, of peace, and publyque wealth.
A sore charge I have, Mankind to ouerse
And to instruct him, his lord God to obaye
That lord of heaven grant, I may so do my duty
That he be pleased and Man brought to a stay
His bry^tle nature, his slyppernes to way
Much does provoke me, but if God set to his hand
He shall do full well, for none may him withstand.

Infidelitas. He comes in singing.

^Brom, brom, brom, brom, brom. Bye brom bye ^Bye. bromes for shoes and
powchrynges, botes and ^busayus for new bromes. Brom, brom, brom.

Marye God give ye good even
And the holy man saint Steven
Send ye a good new year
I would have brought ye the paxe
Or else an image of wax
If I had known ye here.
I will my self so handle
That ye shall have a candle
When I come hither again
At this your sudden mooyon
I was i^ such devotion
I had nere broke a vain.

Nature lex. That might have done ye smart^.


Infidelitas. No, no it was but a fart
For pastyme of my heart
I would ye had it forsooth
In syroppe or in sowse
But for noyaunce of the house
For easement of your toth,
Now have I my dream in deed
God send me well to speed,
And sweet saint Antony
I thought I should mete a knave
And now that fortune I have
Among this company.

Nature lex Why do thou call me knave?


Infidelitas. I said I would be your slave
If your grace would me have
And do your work anon.
I would so rub your botes
The rofe should from the rotes
When ye should do them on.

Nature lex. Thou art dysposed to mock
Sone may thou have a knock
If thou with me so game.

Infidelitas. Your mouth shall kiss my docke
Your tongue shall it unlock,
But I say what is your name?

Nature lex. I am the law of Nature


Infidelitas. I thought so by your stature
And by your ancient gature
Ye were of such a nature
When I first heard ye speak.
Ye commoned with God lately
And now ye are his bailey
Mankind to rule dyscretly
Welcome sy^ huddyp^ke.

Nature lex. If thou use such vyllanye.
I shall dysplease the truly.

Infidelitas. By the mass, I the defye
With thy whole Cukoldrye
And all that with the hold.

Nature lex. Why do thou me blaspheme
And so ungodly deem?

Infidelitas. For by this blessed book
I wend ye had been a Cook
And that made me so bold,
For a Cook ones, having age
With a face demure and sage
And ancient to behold.
As you have here in place
With a bearde upon your face
What is he but a Cook old?

Nature lex. Ye are dysposed to dallye.
To leap and ouersallye
The compass of your wit
I counsel ye yet in season
Somewhat to follow reason
And gnawe upon the bytte.

Infidelitas. Then after our great madness
Let us fall to some sadness
And tell me what ye entende.

Nature lex. God sent me unto Man
To do the best I can
To cause him to amend.
Such creatures as want reason
My rules obey each season
And that in eueryborder
The son and moan does move
With the other bodies above
And never break their order.
The trees and herbs does grow
The sea does ebb and flow
And varyeth not a nail
The floodes and wholesome sprynges
With other natural things
Their course do never fail.
The beasts and birds engender
So do the fys^hes tender
According to their kind
Alonely man does fall
From good laws natural
By a froward wicked mind.

Infidelitas. Now will I prove ye a liar
Next cosynto a friar
And on the gall ye rub
Ye say they follow your law
And varye not a straw,
Which is a tale of a tubbe.
The sun ones in the clyppes
Away the clearenes slyppes
And darkened is the day
Of the planettes influence
Aryseth the pestylence.
To many ones decay.
Does not the sea sorage
That none can it aswage,
And swallowe in town and streate
The air which gives breath
Someyme infecteth to death
By his most pestylent heat.
The beasts of vndemure
Which were left to man's cure
Will him sometime devour
Thus are you rulers forgote
As things of slendre note
In Creatures day and hour.

Nature lex. It is the will of God
To use them as a rod
Of his just punysshment
When Man does not regard
The lord nor his reward
Nor to his laws consent.
They never are so ronnysh
But when God does Man ponnysh
For his unhappiness
From God they never fall.
Nor from laws natural
Doing his business.

Infidelitas. And you are the same law
That kept them under awe
By your most polytyke wit?

Nature lex. God has appointed me
Mankind to ouerse
And in his heart to sit
To teach him for to know
In the Creatures high and low
His glorious majesty
And on his name to call,
Or power celestial,
In his necessytie.
To think him euerlas^ynge
And wonderful in workynge
And that he creates all
Both govern and conserve
From them he never swerue
That to such faith will fall.

Infidelitas In deed here is good sport.
But why do you resort
Unto this present place?

Nature lex. Man always to exhort
To seek all health and confort,
Of the only God of grace.
First in the hearts rejoice
And than with open voice
To worship him alone
Knowledgynge his deytie
His power and eternytie
When he shall make his moan.

Infidelitas. I shall keep ye as well from that
As my grandame kept her cat
From lyckynge of her cream.

Nature lex. What will thou keep me fro?
Tell me ere thou farther go
Me think thou art in a dream.

Infidelitas. From causynge of Mankind
To give to God his mind
Or his obedyence.

Nature lex. What is thy name? tell me.


Infidelitas. Marye Infydelyte
Which never will agree
To your benyuolence.

Nature lex. Thou canste not keep me from man.


Infidelitas. Yet I will do the best I can
To trouble ye now and than
That ye shall not prevail
I will cause ydolatrye
And most vile Sodomye
To work so vngracyouslye
Ye shall of your purpose fail.

Nature lex. I defye the wicked find
With thy whole vene mouse kind
God puts now in my mind
To fle thy company.

Infidelitas. Ye are so blessed a Saint
And your self so well can paynt
That I must me aquaynt
With you no remedy.

Nature lex. Avoid thou cruel enemy
I will none of the truly
But shurne thy company
As I would the devil of hell.

Exit. Infidelitas. And are ye gone indede?
Small wyttam be your speed.
Except ye take good head
I will be next of your counsel.
Now will I work such masterye
By crafts and su^yle polycye
The law of nature to poison
With pestylent ydolatrye
And with most stynkynge sodomye
That he shall have no foyson
Where are these vyllen knaves?
The deuyls own kytchyu slaves
That them I can not se
I conjure you both here
And charge ye to appear
Like two knaves as yebe.

Monachu^ Sodomismus. Ambo is a name full clean
Know ye not what I mean?
And are so good a clarke.

Infidelitas. By Terragramaton
I charge ye appear anon
And come out of the dark

Intrantsu^^t. Sodomismus Have in than at a dasshe
With swasshe merry annetswasshe
Yet may I not be to rasshe
For my holy orders sake.

Necromantia. Idololatria. Nor I son by my troth
Tha cau^^a ^orage of sloth
And such a comberouse cought.
Yeh wot not what to do.

Infidelitas. At Christmas and at Paske
Ye may dance the devil a mask
Whiles his great cawdron pla^e
you such a pretye mynyon
And you now in relygyon
Such two I never saw
Is not thy name Idolatrye*

Sodomismus. Yes, an wholesome woman verelye,
And w^lls^n^ in phylosophye
Men's fortunes she can tell
She can by saying her Aue marye
And by other charms of sorcerye
Ease men of the loath ache by and bye
Yea, and farche the devil from hell
She an c^nyike the Cow and hunte the fox
And help men of the ague and pox
So they bring money to the box
When they to her make mdne.
She can fatche again all that is lost
And draw drink out of a rotten post
Without the help of the holy Ghost
In workynge she is alone.

Infidelitas. What sometime thou were an he.


Idololatria. Yea, but now yeh am a she
And a good mydwyf^ perde
Young children can Icharme*
With whysperynges and whysshynges
With crossynges and with kyssynges
With blasynges and with blessings
That sprytes do them no harm.

Infidelitas. Then art thou like to Clysthenes.
To Clodius and Euclides,
Sardinapalus and Hercules
Which them selves often transfourmed
Into a woman's lykenes
With agylyte and quyckenes
But they had venus syckenes
As writers have declared.

Sodomismus. Let her tell forth her matter.


Idololatria. With holy oil and water
I can so cloyne and clatter
That I can at the latter
Many sutelties contryue
I can work wyles in battle
If I do ones but spattle
I can make corn and cattle
That they shall never thryue.
When ale is in the fat
If the Oruar please me not
The cast shall fall down flat
And never have any strength
No man shall tonne nor bake
Nor meat in inseason make
If I against him take
But lose his labor at length.
Their wells I can up dry
Ca^se trees and herbs to dye.
And slay all pullerye
Where as men does me move
I can make stoles to dance,
And earthen pottes to praunce
That none shall them enhaunce
And do but cast my glove.
I have charms for the plowghe
And also for the cowghe
She shall give milk ^nowghe
So long as I am pleased
Apace the myl^ shall go.
So shall the credle do
And the musterde querne also
No man therewith dyseased.

Infidelitas. Than art thou for me fytte.


Sodomismus. The woman has a wit
And by her gere can sytte.
Though she be somewhat old?
It is mine own sweet bullye
My muskyne and my mullye,
My gelouer and my cullye
Yea mine own sweet heart of Gold.

Infidelitas. I say yet not to bold.


Idololatria. Peace fondelinge, tusshe a button


Infidelitas. What will thou fall to mutton?
And play the hungrye glutton
Before this company?
Rank love is full of heat
Where hungrye dogs lack meat
They will durty pu^dynges eat
For want of befe and conye.
Heyghe mynyon for monye
As good is draffe as honye.
When the day is whote and sonnye,
By the blessed rode of kent.

Sodomismus. Say forth your mind good mother
For this man is none other
But our own loving brother
And is very well content.

Idololatria. I never mysse but paulter
Our blessed ladies psaulter
Before saint Sauers altar
With my bedes ones a day
And this is my comoncast
To here Mass first or last
And the holy frydaye fast
In good time might I it faye.
With blessings of Saint Germyne
I will me so determyne
That neither for nor vermyne
Shall do my chyckens harm
For your gese seek saint Legearde
And for your duckes saint Leonarde
For horse take Moses yearde
There is no better charm.
Take me a napkyn folte
With the byas of a bolte
For the healynge of a ^olte
No better thing can be
For lamps and for bottes
Take me saint Wylfrides knottes
And holy saint Thomas lottes
On my life I warrande ye.
For the cought take Judas ^are
With the paring of a pear
And drink them without fear
If ye will have remedy
Three syppes are for the hyckocke
And. vi. more for the chyckocke
Thus my pretty pyckocke
Recover by and by.
If ye can not sleep but slumber
Give Otes unto saint Un^umber
And beans in a certain number
Unto saint Blase and saint Blythe
Give onyons to saint Cutlake
And garlycke to saint Cyryake
If ye will shurne the head ache.
Ye shall have them at queen hythe.
A dram of a shepes tyrdle
And good saint trances gyrdle
With the hamlet of an hyr^le
Are wholesome for the pyppe
Besides these charms before
I have feats many more
That I keep still in store
Whom now I over hyppe.

Infidelitas. It is a sport I trow
To heat how she out blow
Her witchecraftes on a row
By the Mass I must needs smyle.
Now I pray the let me know
What seeds that thou can sow
Mankind to overthrow
And the law of nature begyle.

Sodomismus. My self I so behave
And am so vile a knave
As nature does deprave
And utterly abhore
I am such a vice truly
As God in his great ^^^rye
Did punysshe most t^^ryblye
In Sodom and in Gomorr*
In the flesh I am a fire
And such a vile desire
As bring men to the mire
Of foul concupyscence.
We two together began
To spring and to grow in manne,
As Thomas of Aquyne scanne
In the fourth book of his sentence.
I dwelt among the Sodomytes
The Beniamytes, and Madyanytes
And now the popysshe hypocrytes
Embrace me every where
I am now become all spyrytuall
For the clergy at Rome and over all
For want of wives to me does fall
To God they have no fear.
The children of God I did so move
That they the daughters of men did love
Workyng such ways as did not behoue
Till the floude them over went.
With Noes son Cham I was half joined
When he is dronken father scorned
In the Sodomytes I also reigned.
Till the hand of God them brent.
I was with Man not unacquainted
When he on the ground his increase shed
For me his brethren Joseph accused
As Genesis does tell
David ones warned all men of us two.
Do not as mules and horses will do.
Confounded be they, that to images go
Those are the ways to hell.
Both Esaye and Ezechiell
Both H^etemy and Daniell
Of us the abhominacions tell
With the prophets euerychou
For us two God struck with fire and water
With battle, with plages, and fereful matter
With paynefull er^l^, than at the latter
Into Egypt and Babylon.
As Paul to the Romans testyfye
The gentyles after Idolatrye
Fell to such be stiall Sodomye
That God did them forsake
Who follows us as he confess
The kingdom of God shall never possess
And as the Aparalyps express
Shall synke to the burning lake.
We made Thalon and Sophocles
Thamiras, Nero, Agathocles
Tiberius and Iristoteles
Themselves to use unnaturally
I taught Aristo and Fuluius
Semiramis and Hortensius
Crathes Hyliscus, and Pontius
Beasts to abuse most monstrouslye.

Infidelitas. Marrye thou art the devil him self


Idololatria. If ye knew how he could pelf
Ye would say he were such an elfe
As none under heaven were else.

Infidelitas. The fellawe is well decked
Dysgysed and well necked
Both knave balde and pypecked
He lacks nothing but help.

Sodomismus. In the first age I began
And so perseuerde with manne
And still will if I can
So long as he endure
If monkysshe sects renew
And popysshe pre estes continue
Which are of my retynue
To live I shall be sure.
Clean Marryage they forbid,
Yet can not their ways be hyd,
Men know what has betyd
When they have been in parell
Often have they buried quycke
Such as were never sick
Full many a propre trycke
They have to help their quarrel.
In Rome to me they fall
Both Bysshope and Cardynall
Monk, friar, pryest, and all
More rank they are then antes
Example in hope Iulye
Which sought in his furye
Two laddes, and to use them beastlye.
From the Cardynall of Nautes.

Infidelitas. Well, you two are for my mind
Step forth and do your kind
Leave never a point behind
That may corrupt in man
The law writ in his heart
In his flesh, do thy part Ad Sodo.

And his soul so pernart Ad Idol.

Do thou the best thou can.
Here have I pretye gynnes
Both brouches beads and pynnes
With such as the people wynnes
Unto Idolatrye
Take thou part of the^ here Ad Idol.

Beads, rings, and other gere
And shortly the be^ete
To deceive Man properly
Take this same staff and scryppe
With a God here of a chyppe
And good beldame forewarde hyppe
To set forth pylgremage Ad Sodo

Set thou forth Sacramentalles
Say dyrge, and sing tre^^alles
Study the popes Decretals
And myxt them with buggerage
Here is a stoale for the
A ghostly father to be
To here, Benedicite
A box of cream and oil
Here is a purse of rellyckes Ad Idol.

^agges, rotten boues, and styckes
A taper with other tryckes
Show them in every soil

Sodomismus. I will corrupt Gods Image
With mos^e unlawful usage
And bring him into dottage
Of all concupyscence.

Idololatria, Within the flesh thou art
But I dwell in the heart.
And will the soul peruart
From Gods obedyence.

Infidelitas. Spare none abhomynacion
Nor detestable fasshyon
That man's ymagynacion
By wit may comprehend
To quycken our sprytes among
Sing now some metysonge
But let it not be long
Least we to much offend.

Post cantion^m, Infidelitas alta voce dicet. Oremus. OMnipotens sempiterne
Deus, qui ad imaginem et similitudinem nostram formasti laicos, da quesumus, vt
sicut little sudoribus diuimus, ita coru^ vxoribus filiabus et domicellis
perpetuo frui mereamur. Per domin^ nostrum Papam,

Infidelitas. Now are these horesons forth
It will be somewhat worth
To se how they will work
The one to poison the heart
The other the outward part
Ingeniously will luck.
The law of Nature they will
Infect, corrupt and spyll
With their abhomynacion
Idolatrye with wickedness
And Sodomye with fylthynesse
To his most utter dampnacion.
These two will him so use
Each one in their abuse
And wrappe it in such evil
That by their wicked cast
He shall be at the last
A morsel for the devil.
Now underneath her wings
Idolatrye has kings
With their No^ylytie
Both dukes, lords, knights and ^arles
Fair ladies with their pearies
And the whole comynaltie.
Within the bownes of Sodomye
Does dwell the spyrytuall clergy
Pope, Cardynall and pryest
Nonne, Chanon, Monk and friar
With so many else as do desire
To reygne under Antechrist.
Detestynge Matrymonye
They live abhomynablye,
And burn in carnal lust.
Shall I tell ye farther news?
It Rome for Prelates are stews
Of does kinds. This is just.
The law of nature I think
Will not be able to wy^ke
Against the assaults of them
They having so high prelates,
And so many gteat es^ates
From hens to Jerusalem.
Pause now a little while
Mine ears does me begyle
If There not a sound
Y^n folk has sped I guess
It is to by the Mess
Away now will I round^.

Exit Nature lex. I think ye maruayle, to se such altera^ion
At this time in me, whom God left here so pure
O^ me it comes not, but of man's operacion
Whom daily the devil, to great sin does allure
And his nature is full bryttle and unsure
By him have I got this foul disease of body
And as ye se here, am now thrown in a leprye.
I wrought in his heart, as God bad tr^estlye.
Him often provoking, to love God over all
With the inner powers, but that false Idolatrye
Has him perverted, by slayghtes dyabolycall
And so has Sodomye, through his abuses carnal
That he is now lost, offendynge without measure
And I corrupted to my most high dyspleasure.
I abhor to tell, the abusyous bestyall
That they daily use, which boast their chastytie
Some at the altar, to incontyuencye fall
In confession some, full beastly occupied be
Among the close Nonnes, reygneth this enormytie
Such children s^eythey, as they chance for to have
And in their preuyes, provide them of their grave.
Ye Christen rulers, se ye for this a way
Be not illuded, by false hypocrysye
By the stroke of God, the world will else decay
Permyt prestes rather, Gods lawful remedy
Than they should i^c^r^^, most bestyall Sodomye
Regard not the pope, nor yet his whorysshe kingdom
For he is the master, of Gomor and of Sodom
With Man have I ben, which has me thus defiled
With Idolatrye, and unclean Sodomye
And worthy I am, from God to be exyled
Pytie me yet lord of thy most bounteous mercy
I will forth and mourn, till thousende remedy
Promise haste thou made, to a glorious lybercie
To bring heaven and earth, the^ wylt thou (I trust) restore me.

Incipit Actus tertius.
Moseh lex. THe lord perceiuyng, his first law thus corrupted
With unclean vices, sent me his law of Moses
To se him for sin, substancyallye corrected
And brought in again, to a trade of godlynes
For I am a law of rygout and of hardenes
I strayghtly command, and if it be not done
I threti^, I curej, and sle in my anger sone.
To God I require a perfyght obedyence
Con^empnynge all sache, as do it not in effect
I show what sin is, I but de^ sore man's conscience
To him am I death, when his life is infect
Yet if he take heed, to Christ I him dyrect
Forgyuenes to have, with like health and saluatyon.
Least he shuloe dyspayre, and fall into dampnacion.

Infidelitas. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,
A pastyme quoth a, I know not the time nor when
I did laghe so much, sense I was an honest man
Believe me and ye will, I never saw such a sport
I would ye had been there, lie might have made the fort.

Moseh lex. Where would thou have had me, tell me good brother mine.


Infidelitas. At the Mynorasse sir, late yester night at complyne.


Moseh lex. At the Mynorasse? why what was there a do?


Infidelitas. For such an other, would I to South ampton go
In deed yesterdaye was their dedycacion
And thythe^ in Gods name, came I to se the fasshion
An old friar stood forth, with spectacles on his nose
Begy^nynge this Anteme, a my faith, I do not gloss.
^

^^pides pr^ciosi.


Moseh lex. And what did follow of this?


Infidelitas. I shall tell ye by Gods bliss
Then came Dame Isbell an ^lde Noune and a cal^e
Crowynge like acapon, and thus began the Psalm.
^

Sepe expugnauetun^ me a i^uent^te (...)


Moseh lex. And what includes this mysterye?


Infidelitas. A simple problem of bytcherye
When the friar begone, before the Nonne
to sing of precious stones
From my youth says she / they have comfort me
As it had been for the nones

Moseh lex. I assure the plain, I set not by such gaudes
Thy usage show the, to be brought up among baude^

Infidelitas. It was a good world, wha^ we had such holsom story^s
Preached in out church, on sondayes and other feryes
With us was it in^rye
When we went to Berye
And to our lady of grace
To the blou^e of hayles
Where no good chere fayles
And other holy place.
When the pryestes might walk
And with young wives talk
Than had we children plentye
Then Cuckoldes might leap
A score on a heap
Now is there not one to twenty.
When the Monks were fat
And rank as a ratte
With bellyes like a Bore.
Then all things were dear
Both beafe, bread and bear
Now grudge the iourers sore.
When Bysshoppes might burn
And from the truth turn
The syllye simple soul.
Than dut^^^ no man creake
Open mouth nor speak
Of Christ nor yet of Powle.
No we are the knaves bold
With Scriptures to bold
And teach them every where
The carter, the sowter
The bodger, the clowter
That all will away I fere.
At us so they pulle
Our lyuynges are dulle
We are now like to fall
If we do not fight
For the churches right
By the Mess we lose all.
But I pray ye sir, tell me what is your name*

Moseh lex. The law of Moses, to lie were I to blame


Infidelitas. In the same parties, what do you intend?


Moseh lex. Mankind to refourme, that he his life amend
I show what sin is, and what thing pleseth God
I comfort the just, and the ill, I ponysshe with rod
The common people, have thought it commodyous
Diverse Gods to have, with rytes supersticious.
My commandment is, to seek one God alone
And in all their needs, to him to make their moan
Among the Gentyles, was it thought none iniurye
If a man were hurt, to slay his aduersarye
This thing I forbid, and say, thou shall not kill
Law is the revenger, the man may do no ill.
Some persons there are, that inordynatlye love
Those are persuaded, all things them to behoue
Which I inhybyte, saying contynuallye
No rape shall thou do, nor yet commit aduouteye
Thou shall do no theft, nor coueyte that is not thine
Against thy neighbor, shall thou not falsely dyffyne.

Infidelitas. We may do nothing, if we be pynned in thus
Neither you nor God, to that hard trade shall bring us
We must have one God, and worship him alone
Matye that in deed, would make a Turk to g^^ne
If we be stryken, we may not stryke again?
Aprope^^ ^gyne* and dyscretlye v^t^ r^d ^la^ne
For companyes sake, ye say we may not love
I defye your worste, and to you there is my glove.

Moseh lex. What? thou wylt not fight thy wits are better than so.


Infidelitas. In the quarrel of love, I shall prove ye ere I go
By the Mess I think, to put ye to your f^ure.

Moseh lex. Thou were much better, to keep thy pacyence.


Infidelitas. Nay by Cocks soul frynd, I must lay ye on y^ coat
In loves cause to fight, ye may soon have m^a f^^ ar^
Nay but have at your py^ch^, defend ye if ye may.

Moseh lex. Such a fool art thou, as sekes thine own decay
If I ones meddle, t^ the, it will be death
Dyddest thou never here, that law sleeth in his wrath.

Infidelitas. By the blessed lord, than will I play Robsons part.


Moseh lex. Why what part will thou play?


Infidelitas. By cocks sou^e give over, so soon as I feel smarte


Moseh lex. It will be to late, it I one scupple with the


Infidelitas. Then let me a^on^, and we shall soon agree
And I shall be glad to be acquaynted with ye.

Moseh lex. Acquaintance good felaw, thou may soon have of me


Infidelitas. The worste fault I have, I am hast^e now and than
But it is sone gone, I took it of a woman
But what mean those tables, y^ ye have in your hand.

Moseh lex. Keep scylence a while, and thou shalt understand
Three things I declare, the first are y^ precepts moral
Next, the laws judicial, and last the rytes ceremonial
The moral precepts, are Gods commandments ten
Which ought evermore to be observed of all men
The laws of Nature, the moral precepts declare
And y^ plesaunt works, to God they teach and prepare
They stir man to faith and provoke him also to love
To obey, to serve, and to worship God above
Into s^ony tables, God wrote them first of all
That they should remain, as things contynuall*
The first has but three, which tend to Gods high honor,
Seven has the second, and they concern our neybour.
The first does expound, the first law natural
The ^ext the other, making them very formal
Inspryt^ i^ the first, y^ we should God honor and love
To outward workynge the second does us move
For^ydoynge all wrongs preserving just marriage
Norysshynge true peace, and other godly usage.

Infidelitae. What is the effect, of your laws Iudyciall?


Moseh lex. Such things to command, as are cyuyle or te^porall
From vice to refrain, and outward iniurye
Quiet to conserve, and publyque honesty
These are to supporte, the laws of the second table
Ceremonyall rytes are also commendable
In holy days, garments, temples and consecta^ions
Sacryfices and vows, with offerynges and expi^acions
Which are unto Christ, as fygures, types, and shadows
As Paul does declare, in his Epistle to the Hebrews
These are only fygures, and outward testymonies
No man is perfyght, by such dark ceremonies
Only perteyne they, unto the third commandment
Of the Sabbath day, till Christ the lord be present.
In his death ending, the whole Judicial presthode.


Infidelitas. Good days might ye have, ye speak full well by the roode.
I am a poor lad, and by my troth bent earues^lye*
To wait upon ye, and to be your very lackye.

Moseh lex. What art thou called, I pray the hartelye.


Infidelitas. Graye friar am I none, by the Mess I can not flatter.
I am Infydelytie, to tell the truth of the matter.

Moseh lex. And have thou so long dyssembled thus with me?


Infidelitas. Yea, for advantage to smellout your subtyltie.


Moseh lex. Avoid hens I say, thou false Infydelyte.


Infidelitas. Nay that I will not, by yngham Trynytie.


Moseh lex. Wylt thou not in deed, tha^ will I fet hither the pour
Of Judges and kings, to subdue the within this hour.

Exit. Infidelitas. Such knights will I have, as shall co^founde the^ al*
Is S^dduces and scrybes, with the sec^ pharysaycal^
By help of my children Idolatrye and Sodomye
The law of Nature, I cast ones in a leprye
I have yet two more, Ambycion and Coneytousnes
Which will do as much to the law of Moses
Where are my whorsons, that they come not away.

Iutisconsu^tus. Auaritia. Yea, whoreson on thy face, even in thy best array
I will thou know it, I am a worshypfull Doctor
A Scrybe in the law, and a profitable proctour.

Infidelitas. Guppe with a vengeance, how come thou so alofte.


Auaritia. I shall tell the man, if thou wylt comen more solte
By feigned flattery^, and by colored adulation
Ambycion here also, ^ose of a like foundation.

Infidelitas. Come, are me blessing, pretye boys apace


Ambitio. I will not bow sure* to such a folys^he face.


Infidelitas. Axe blessing I say, and make me no more ado.


Ambitio. Unsemely were it, we Prelates should do so.


Auaritia. For no compu^syon will I do it by sweet Marye.


Infidelitas. I must fatche ye in, there is no remedy
A noughty horsons, have I brought ye up hitherto?
And know not your father, ye shall drink both ere I go

Ambosimul. No more at this time, forsooth we cry amercye.


Infidelitas. Down on your knees than, and axe me blessing shortly.


Ambosimul. Bless me gentell father, for sweet saint charytie.


Infidelitas. Arise noughtyknaues, God let ye never to the
Though among our selves, we mu^mur^, brag, and face
Sometime for lucre, sometime for the higher place
Yet for advantage, in this we all agree
To blind the rulers, and deceive the com^ynaltie.

Auaritia. Art aduysed of that, by the Mess we are in deed
Yet of our knaueryes, the fo^le and will neuertake head.
To labor with a spade
Our color would it fade
We may not with that trade
We love so much our ease
We must live by their sweat,
And have good drink and meat
When they have not to eat
The substance of a pease.
We lead them in the dark
And so their conseyence mark
That stutdye they are and stark,
In every wicked evil
We teach Idolatrye
And laughed full merelye
To se each company
Run headlonges to the devil.
Ifwe may have the tythynges
And profitable offeryages
We ca^e not to what doings
They customablye fall
We are such mercenaryes
And subtyle propryetaryes
As from the flock all carries
The w^lle, skin, flesh and all.
In our perambulacyons
We look for commendacions
And lowly salutacions
In temple, house and street.
Our lowsye latyne hours
In borowes and in bowres
The poor people deuoures
And tread them under fete.

Ambitio. I am Ambycion, whose bysposycyan
Is honor to appete
I gape for empire, and worship desire
As Mynos did in Crete
I look up Aloft, and love to lie soft
Not carynge for my flock
Have Jones the flese, with pigs, lambs, and gese
They may go turn a Socke.
Lucifer I made, so hyghly to wade,
To God he would be equal
Of Adam and Eve, I slew the believe
And caused them to fall
What need I rehearce, the gyauntes most fearce
With the buylders of Babell
Nemrod the tyrraunt, with them there applyaunt,
Agreed to my counsel.
From me would not go, cruel Pharao
No more would Amalech
Saul, Achitophell, Absolo^, Iesabel
Nor Adonisedech.
I made Roboam, and Hierobeam
With Nabuchodouosor
Triphon, Alchmius, and Simon magus
To abuse them evermore.
Inpryde I excede, and no people feed
But with lies for advantage
As Mantuane tell, to lead men to hell
Is my most common usage.
High things I attempt, and will in exempt
From princes iurisdition
A am such an enyll, as bring men to the devil
Without any contradiction.

Infidelitas. Here is a prelate even for mine own toth
Such an other is, not in the whole South
Clappe thou somewhat more, as thou have begun
I like well your ta^kynge, by the holy Nun.

Auaritia. I Coutyse am, the beuyll or his dam
For I am insacyate
I rauysshe and pluck, I draw and I suck
After, a woluys she ra^e.
Father nor mother, Sister nor brother
I spare not in my mood.
I fear neither God, nor his ryghtfull rod
In gatherynge of good.
But house and medowe, from the poor wydowe
I spare not forto take
Right heirs I rob, and as bare as Job
The fatherles I make.
With me took Nadab, Nabal and Achab
With all the clergy of Bell
Judas and Giezi, with the sons of Hel^
And the sons of Samuel.
Iannes and Iambres, also Diotrephes
Wrought wylfull wickedness
So did Menelaus, with false Andronicus
And all for Coueytousnesse.

Ambicio. With vices seven, I close up heaven
And spear up paradyce
I oppen hell, by my counsel
Mayntaynynge every vice.

Auarititia. For Silver and gold, with falsehed I hold
Supporting every evil
I have it in awe, for to thoke the law
And bring all to the devil.

Infidelitas. By the blessed Trynytie, no men more fyt for me
To do my busynes.
Ambycion to begyle, and Auaryce to defyle
The law of Moses.
Tell me first of all, what will thou do Ambycyon.

Ambitio. I am thine own child, thou know my dysposycion
I will sure do, as did the Phylystynes.

Infidelitas. Why what did those knaves?


Ambitio. They stopped up Abraha^s pyttes, as Genesis diffynes
With mudde and with mire, and l^f^^ them full unclean

Infidelitas. By the same practyse, tell me what thou do mean.


Ambitio. With fylthy gloses, and dyrtye exposition,
Of Gods law will I hyde, the pure dysposycions
The keye of knowledge, I will also take away
By wrastynge the text, to the scriptures sore decay.

Infidelitas. And what wy^te thou, my fellow Coueytousnes?


Auaritia. A veil will I sprede, upon the face of Moses
That none shall perceive, the clerenes of his cou^tenau^ce
Which is the law, the meaning and true ordinance.

Infidelitas. Wy what will ye say, unto the ten commandments


Ambitio. We must poison them, with wylworkes, and good inte^tes
Where as God does say, No strange gods thou shalt have
With Saints worshyppynge, that clause we will deprave.
And though he co^m^unde, to make no graued image
For a good intent, yet will we have pylgremage
Though he will us not, to take his name in vain
With tradycions yet, thereunto will we constrayne.
No Sabbath will we, with Gods word sanctyfye
But with lyppe labor, and yd^e ceremonye.
To father and mother, we may owe none obedyence
Our relygion is, of so so great excellence.
Though we do not slay, yet may we hertyckes burn
If they will not soon from holy Scripture turn
What though it be said, thou shall do no fornycacion
Yet will we maintain, much greater abhomynacion
Though theft be forbid yet will we contynuallye
Rob the poor people, through prayer and purgatory
God has inhy^yted* to give false testimonye
Yet we will condemn the Gospel for Heresye.
We should not coueyte our neybours house nor wife
His servant nor b^ast, yet are we therein most ryfe
Of men make we swyne, by the draffe of our tradycions
And cause them nothing to regard but supersticions
As Dogs unreasonable, on mos^vyle carren feed
So will we cause them, seek ydolles in their need.
And always their ground, shall be for a goodintent


Infidelitas. More myscheuous I trow, the devil could not inue^t
Than you two can do, by the Mess ye are alone
Little could I do, were ye ones from m^ gone
To the corruptynge, of the law of Morses
Go forward therefore, in your deceytful^es

Auaritia. With superstitions, the Jews ceremonial laws
I will so handle, they shall not be worth* ii. strawes
The laws Judicial throug^e cawtels and d^layes
I will also drown, to all ryghteous me^nes decay
To set this forward, we must have sophystrye
Phylosophye and Logycke, as science necessary
The Bysshoppes must hold their priests in ygnorau^ee
With long laten hours, lest knowledge to them chance
Let them have long mattens, long even songs and long Masses
And that will make them as dull as ever were asses
That they shall never be able to prophecye
Or yet preach the truth, to our great iniurye.
Let the Cloyster^rs be brought up euerin scylence
Without the Scriptures, in pain of dysobedyence
Se the lay people, pray never but in latyne
Let them have their Creed, and service all in latyne
That a latyne believe, may make a latyne soul
Let them nothing know, of Christ, nor yet of powle
If they have English* let it be for advantage
For pardons, for Dyrges, for offerynges and pylgremage
I teken to make them, a new Creed in a while
And all in English, their Conscience to begyle.

Infidelitas. Rehearse unto me, the Artycles of that Creed.


Auaritia. The Artycles are these, give ear and take good head
First they shall believe, in our holy father Pope
Next in his decrees, and holy decretals.
Then holy church, with sencer, cross and cope
In the Ceremonies, and blessed Sacramentals
In purgatory then, in pardons and intrentals
In prayenge to saints, and in saint Frances whoode
In our lady of Grace, and in the blessed roode
They shall believe also, in relyckes and relygion
In our ladies psalter, in frewyll and good works
In the ember days, and in the popes remyssyon
In b^des and in belles, not used of the turks
In the golden Masses, against such sprites as lurkes
With charms and blessings. This creed will bring in money
In English therefore, we will it clarkely conueye.

Infidelitas. Yea, and burn the knaves, that will not believe ye creed
That into the dytche, the blind the blind may led.

Ambitio. Then I hold it best, that we always condemn
The Bible readers, least they your acts contempue.

Infidelitas. Yea, never spare them, but evermore play the bytar
Expressyng always, the tropes and types of thy mytar

Ambitio. Why, what do thou think, my mytar to sygnyfye.


Infidelitas. The mouth of a wolf, and that shall I prove by and by
If thou s^oupe downward, lo, se how y^ wolf does ga^e
Redye to devour the lambs, least any escape
But thy woluyshnes, by three crowns will I hyde
Making the apope and a captain of all ^ryde
That when thou do slay, such as thy laws co^tempne
Thou may say, not I, but the powers did the^ conde^pne
The Cabels betoken, the laws of se non and cannon

Ambicio. I trow thou w^ldest say, the. ii. laws Cyuyle and Canon


Infidelitas. As I spoke I thought, and still think by saint Johan
Yea, persecute still the instructers of the people
And thou Coueytous^es, let no bell ring in Steple
Without a profyght. T^sshe, take money every where
So nygh ^lyppe and shave, that thou leave never a here

Aua^itia. I caused the Pope, to take but now of late
Of the graye friars, to have a canonyzate
Franciscus de pola, three thousand duckattes and more
And as much besides / he had not long before
For a Cardynall hatte, of the same holy order
Thus draw we to us, great goods from every border
Pope Clement the seventh paid ones for his papacye
Three hundred thousand, good duckates of lawful money

Infidelitas. I maruayle how he could come to so much good.


Auaritia. Yes, yes, by pollage, and by shedynge Christen blood.
Crosers and Mytars, in Rome are good merchandyce
And allto little, to maintain their pomp and vice

Ambitio. The pope for whordom, has in Rome and Uiterbye
Of gold and silver, a wonderful substance yearly
Tush they be in England yt much rather would to dwell
Whores in their dyoceses, than the readers of Christ's Gospel.

Infidelitas. They do the better, for by the^ they may have profyght
As for the other, do trouble them day and night
Well, now step forewarde, and go do your busynes
To the corruptynge, of the law of Moses.

Auaritia. Doubt not but we shall, make him a crepple blind.


Infidelitas. Sing then at our farewell, to recreate our mind.


Finita catiuncula exeunt ambo. Infidelitas. Now am I left alone, And these.
ii. merchants gone
Their myschyefe to seclude
I think within a while, they will trap and begyle
The worthy law of Jude.
Ambycion first of all, with his rytes bestiall
Will make the people swyne
In draffe will he them led, and with tradycions feed
Where they shall suppe or dyne
Coueytousnes will warke, that many one shall bark
Like dogs against the truth
Some shall gods word defyle, and some will it reuyle
Such beastlynes ensu^th.
Ambicion has this hour, all the whole spyritual pour
And may do what him lust
Now coueytousnes does rule, and has both horse and mule
All matters by him dyseust
Now bysshopryt^es are ^ol^e, and the holy ghost for gold
The pope does bye and sell
The truth may not be told, under pains manyfolde
With sendynges down to hell
The people priests do famysshe, and their gooddes from them rauysshe
Yea and all the world they blind
All princes do they mock, and rob the sellye flock
Nothing they leave behind
On the face of Moses, a veil they have cast doubtless
The light of the law to hyde
Least me^ to christ should come, from ceremonies do^me
As to their heavenly gyde
The law can never be, at any liberty
Where such two enemies rain
Now is it time to walk, of this more will I talk
When I come hither again.

Exi^* Moseh lex. If pytie may mou^, your gentle christen hearts
Let it now stir ye, to mourn this heuye chance
Two enemies with me, have played most wicked parts
And left me stark blind, God knows to my sore greuaunce.
And I think also to your mothe hynderaunce
To lead you to Christ, sometime a gyde I was
Now am I so blind, I can not do it, alas.
Most rygorously those enemies now of late
Did fall upon me, and spoil me of my sight
One was Ambycion, which ever ought me hate
And Coueyeousnesse, the other enemy hight
Now forsooth and God, iutheyr most cruel spyght
The one made me blind, the other made me lame
And wha^ they had done, thereat they had great game.
Thus a blind cryple, I wander here alone
Abiding the time and grace, of restauracion
By the son of God, to whom I make my moan
My cause to pytie, and grant me supportacion
Least I be left here, to utter desolacion
And extreme decay without any remedy,
If he did not help of goodness and of mercy.
Ye christen princes, God has given you the pour
With scepture and sword, allvyces to correct
Let not Ambycion, nor Coueytousnesse devour
Your faithful subjects, nor your officers infect
Have to your Clergy, a dylygent respect
And se they do not corrupt the laws of God
For that does require, a terryble heuy^ rod.
God gave me to man, and left me intables of stone
That I of hardenes, a law should specyfye
But the Pharysies, corrupted me anon
And took from me clean, the quyueru^s of body
With cler^uesse of sight, and other pleasures many
Now will I to Christ, that he may me restore
To more perfection, than ever I had before.

Finis Actus tertius.
Incipit Actus quartus.
Euangilium. UN faythfulnes has, corrupted every law.
To the great decay, of Adams posterytie
were it not for me, which now do hither draw
Al flesh would perysh, no man should saved be
I am Christ's Gospel, and infallyble verytie
Such a power of God, as saves all such as believe
No burden nor yoke, that any man will gr^ue.
In the blood of Christ, I am a full forgyuenes
Where faith is grounded, with a sure confydence
I am such a grace, and so high tidings of, gladness
As raise the sinner, and pacyfye his conscience.
I am spyryte and life, I am necessary science
I require but love, for man's iustyfication
With a faith in Christ, for his health and salvation.

Infidelitas. Gods beneson have ye, it is joy of your life
I have heard of ye, and of my maystresse your wife.

Euangilium. If thou hardest of me, it was by the boy^e of God.


Infidelitas. Nay, he that spoke of ye, was ^ellynge of a God
In an Oystre bote, a little beyond queen hythe
A Northen man was he, and he besought ye to be blythe

Euangilium. If he spoke of me, he was some godly preacher.


Infidelitas. Nay sir by the roo^e, nor yet a wholesome teacher.


Euangilium. After what manner dydhe speak of me? tell.


Infidelitas. He swore like a man, by all contents of the Gospel
He swore and better swore, yea, he did swear and swear again.

Euangilium. That speaking is such, as procures eternal pain
Will not the people, leave that most wicked folly?
And it so damnable, to hear it I am sorye
But what dyddest thou mean, whau thouspakest of my wife?

Infidelitas. Nothing, but I thought it was joy of your life
That ye were so good to your neighbors as ye are

Euangilium. Why, how good am I? thy fantasye declare.


Infidelitas. Ye ease them among, if it be as I hear
When ye are abroad, there is fine merycheare.

Euangilium. As thou art, thou speak after thy hertes abundaun^e
For as the man is, such is his vtteraunce.
My wife is the church, or christen congregation
Regenerate inspyryte, doing no vile operacion
Both clean and holy, without either spot or wryncle
The lamb with his blood, did her wash and bespryncle.
This is not the church, of dysguysed hypocrytes
Of apysh shauelyng^s, or papisticall Sodomytes
Nor yet as they call it, a temple of lyme and stone
But a lyuysh building, grounded in faith alone
On the hard rock Christ, which is the sure fosidacion
And of this church, some do reygne in every nation
And in all cou^treyes, though their nombre be but small

Infidelitas. Their nombre is such, as has run over all
The same Danes are they, men prophecye of plain
Which should over run this realm yet ones again.

Euangilium. What Danes speak thou of? thy meaning show more clearly.


Infidelitas. Da^e Johan, Dane Robert, Dane Thomas, and Dane Harrye.
The same are those Danes, that lay with other men's wives.
And occupied their lands, to the detryment of their lives.
These are acccounted, a great part of the church
For in Gods service, they honorably wurche
Yellynge and cryenge, till their throtes are full sore.

Euangilium. That Church was descrybed, of Esaye long before
This people (says God) with their lyppes honor me
In vain worship, they teaching me^nes fatuyte
Apparaunt is that church, and open to the eyes
Their worshyppynges are, in outward ceremonies
That cou^terfetchurch stands al by me^nes tradycions
Without the scriptures, and without y^ hertes affections
My church is secret, and evermore will be
Adorynge the father, in spyryte and in verytie
By the word of God, this church is ruled only
And does not consyst, in outward ceremonye
This congregation, is the true Church mylytaunt
Those Counterfayte Desardes, are the very Church malygnaunt.
To whom Christ will say, I know none of your sor^

Infidelitas. Much are they to blame, that brethren so report


Euangilium. Such are no brethren, but enemies to Christ's blood
As put salvation, in shaven crown mytar, or whoode.

Infidelitas. I pray ye how long, have your sweet spowse co^tynued


Euangilium. Sens the beginnynge, and now is in Christ re^ued.
Adam did promise, of Christ's incarnacion
So had Abraham, with his whole generation
Which was unto them, a preaching of the Gospel
Into salvation, and delyueraunce from hell.

Infidelitas. By this time I hope, ye have a fair increase?


Euangilium. She is not ba^^en, but bears and never cease
The Corinthes first epistle, has this clear testymonye
In Christo Jesus, per Euangilium vos genui
I have begot you, in Jesus Christ says Powle
By the Gospel preaching, to the comfort of your soul.

Infidelitas. Than are ye a ouckolde, by the blessed holy mass
As I said before, so comes it now to pass
For I am a prophet, by high inspyration led
Now like I my self, much better than I did
Ye say y^ saint Paul, begat your wife with child.

Euangilium. By mysunderstandyng, thou art vngracyously begylde
An only mynyster, was paul in that same doing
That he therein did, was by the Gospel preaching
His mind is the Gospel, to have done that operation
And this must thou hold, for no carnal generation.

Infidelitas. Mary so they say, ye fellows of the new learning
Forsake holy church, and now fall fast to wyuynge.

Euangilium. Nay they forsake whordom, with other da^pnablevsage
And live with their wives, in lawful marriage
Whiles the popes oyled swarm, ^aygne still in their old buggerage

Infidelitas. Yea, poor married men, have very much a do
I count him wysest, that can take a snatch and to go?

Euangilium. Thou semest one of them, that detesteth matrymonye*
Which is before God, a slate both just and holy.
Of such as thou art, saint Paul did prophecye
By the holy Ghost, that a certain company
In the latter days from the truth of God should fall
Attendynge to spyrytes, of error dyabolycall
Which in hypocrysye, will teach lies for aduau^tage
With marked conseyences, inhabytynge maryages
Thou apperest by thy fruytes, to be Infydelyti^

Infidelitas. I am none other, but even the very he
And hither now come I, to co^menthe matter with ye

Euangilium. Avoid cursed fend, and get the out at the gates.


Infidelitae. Nay first will I serve ye, as I lately served your mates
And hence will I not, for this place is for me
Who should here remain, but I Infydelyte?

Euangilium. Well, than for a time, I must depart from hens
But this first will I say, before this andyens
Easyer will it be, concerning punysshment
To Sodom and Gomor, in the day of judgment,
Than to those Cities, that resyste the verytie
At the suggestions of Infydelytie.
That people will be forever and ever lost
For it is the great sin, against the holy Ghost
In the old law first, the father his mind expressed
Then came his son Christ, and made it more manifest
And now the holy Ghost, is come to close up all,
If he be not heard, extreme dampnacion will fall
No prayer remains, nor expyracion for sin
To them that no profyght, of the word of God will win.
Take good head therefore, and say that ye have warnyng

Exit. Infidelitas. God send your mother, of you to have a fondelynge.
By the mass I think, he is wel^ out of the way
Now will I contryue the dryfte of an other play
I must work such ways, Christ's law may not co^tynue,
In a while am I like, to have none else of my retynue
Com^ anyons I have, to begin this tragedye,
Namely false Doctrine, and his brother Hypocrysye
They will not belong, I suppose now verelye
By cocks soul me think, I se such a company
Hem, I say children, will not my voice be heard
As good is a beck, as is adewe vow guard.
By my honesty welcome, mine own companyons both

Intran^ Pseudodoctrina. Thou shall have a livery of the same cloth,
Gramatcyes by God, my old friend Infydelyte.

Hypocrisy. What brother su^psuap, how go the world with the*


Infidelitae, What, fryre ^^ypflap, how say ye to, Bendicite?


Hypocrises. Marry nothing but well, I cry now aduau^tage


Infidelitae. At her purse or arse, tell me good fryre fuccage?


Hypocrisy. By the Mess at both for I am a great penytensar
And sit at the pardon, tush I am the popes own vycar
If thou lackest a piece, I know where thou may be sped
With choice of a score, and brought even to thy be^*

Pseudodoctrina. Art thou not ashamed, to talk so like a knave?


Hypocrisy. No, for it is such gere, as the holiest of us will have
Pope, cardynall, bishop, monk, chanon prist and fryre,
Not one of ye all, but a woman will desire.

Pseudodoctrina. Our ordres permyt us not, to have them in maryag^


Hypocrisy. No, but ye fatche them in, by an other carryage.
Ye do even as we do, we both are of one rate.

Infidelitae. By the Mess I laugh, to here this whoreson prate*


Pseudodoctrina. What fasshion use ye, to us here intymate.


Hypocrysie. Ego distingu^, whyther ye will have Lions or Paris.


Pseudodoctrina. Of them both to show, it will not be far amys*


Hypocrisy. In Paris we have, the mantell of saint Jews
Which women seek much, for help of their bare^nes.
For be it ones laid, upon a woman's bellye
She go thens with child, the miracles are seen there daily
And besides all this, ye would marueyle in confession
What our fathers do, to assoyle them of transgressyon
Johan Thessecelius, assoyled a young woman ones
Behind the high altar, till she cried out of her bones
And as for lions, there is the length of our lord
In a great pyller, she that will with acorde
Be fast bound to it, and take such chance as fall
Shall sure have child, for within it is hollow all
Tush, I could tell ye, of much more wondre tha^ this
In course to here them, I think ye would ye blys.

Pseudodoctrina. As thou have begone, go forward in it and te^^.


Infidelitae. Such a knave I suppose, is not from hens to hell.


Hypocrisy. In our relygyon, was an holy popysh patryarke
Which of all bawdrye, might be the great monarke.
The Nuns to confess, he went from place to place
And two hundred of them, he broached in that space
Many spyces he eat, his courage to provoke
Such a fellow was he, as of that gere had the stroke

Pseudodoctrina. Now somewhat will I tell, to confyrme thy tale withal
In king f^^dina^ds time, in Spain was a Cardynall
Petrus mendoza, was the very man that I mean
Of lemmans he had, great nombre besides the queen
One of his bastardes, was an earl, an other was duke
Whom also he abused, and thought it no rebuke.
Ioannes Cr^mona an other good Cardynall
For reformation, of the clergy spyrituall
Came ones into England, to da^pne priests matrymony
And the next night after, was taken, doing bytcherye
Doctor Eckius also, which fearcely came to dyspute
In ^psia with luther, myndyng there him to con^ute.
For marriage of pryestes, three children ^ad that year
By this may ye se, that sometime we make merry cheer

Euangelium. Mary that do ye, I shall bear ye record now
But how will ye answer, for breaking of your vow.

Pseudodoctrina. We never break vow, so long as we do not marye
Though we in whordome, be never so bold and busy.

Infidelitas, By your order than, ye may walk much at large
What have thou hypocresy, to lay for thy dyscharge

Hypocrisy. Saint Frances habyte, with the holy gyrdle and whoode
Noue can go to hell, that therein dye by the roode
In case saint Frances, be sure upon their side
Else may they fortune, to be of their purpose wide
For I teade of one that should have gone to the devil
But the spyrytes of hell, could do no him no evil.
Till saint Frauces came, and look from him this cowle
Then went he to hell, the friars did here him howl.
I will therefore serve S Frances, with heart and mind
With daily memoryes, that he may be my frynde
And than I care not for all the deuylles in hell
That I have told you, is more true then the Gospel.

Infidesitas. Then are ye more sure, than monks for your heritage
For their lands are here, but ye claim heaven for advantage.

Pseudodoctrina. Yet is it to them, a very pleasant thing
Their Abbot at home, tobe called lord and king.

Infidesitas. Nay monk and churl, for here ^s no king but one,
If he be a king, his mace is a mary bone
And his crown a cowtorde, such knaves as come from the carte
Must be called kings, for playenge a popysh par^^.

Pseudodoctrina. It becomes not the, the Romyshe pope, so to lurche
Considering he is the highest of the church.

Infidesitas. If he be the highest, than is he the ^^thercocke


Pseudodoctrina. Ah, now I per^eyne, thou art dysposed to mock
Of all holy Church, he is the pry^eypall head.

Infidesitas. Mary that is true, he sends out bulls under lead
And he has two ^^yes, the one to open hell
The other spea^eth heaven, thus do new here tyekes tell
They report also that Dogs have no devotion
To his holy laws, nor his old instruction.

Pseudodoctrina. Why should dogs hate him? make that more evident


Infidesitas. They love no p^se portege, nor yet red herynges in lent
Steckfysshe nor oysters, but curse him body and bone
And would his red sprottes, and rotten fysshe were gone
Tush, I hear them I, and that makes me full sad.

Hypocrisis. Either thou do mock, or else thou art sure mad.


Infidelitas. Theare the people complayue very much of the.


Pseudodoctrina. What is their pratlinge, I pray the heartily tell me.


Infidelitas. They say thou teach, nothing but lowsy tradicto^s.
And lies for lu^^e, with damnable supersticions
And thus they conclude, that the draffe of popysh prysies
Is good enough for Swyne, by whom they do mean the Papystes.
Yea, and they say also, the diet of men is all
To most byle carryen, the dogs will soonest fall

Pseudodoctrina. Than do they compare, the papists unto dogs.


Infidelitas. Marye that do they, and to such swynys she hogs
As in swyllandsosse, are brought up all their life
Such are the Papists, they say both man and wife
They say also, that thou art a noughty knave
By prowlynge and ly^^ge, ye friars would all have
Thine order they say, is spronge even out of hell
And all this knowledge, they have now of the Gospel.

Hypocrisis, Why, where is he now, I beseech the heartily tell.


Infidelitas. By the mess abroad, and I warrande ye makes revel.
I comoned with him, and he did us despise
Against him therefore, somewhat we must de uyse.

Pseudodoctrina. Mary that must we, or else it will be wrong
He will sure dystroye us* if we do suffer him long
Needs must we serve him, as we ones served Christ.

Infidelitas. Why mad bray^ed whorsons, how did ye handle Christ


Pseudodoctrina. As he preached here, we followed from place to place
To trap him in snare, and his doctrine to deface
Than found we the means, to put him so to death
Least he against us, should open any more breath
And we set four knights, to kept him down in his grave
That he never more, our living should deprave.
And thus must we serve the Gospel, no remedy
Else will he destroy our lyuynges perpetuallye.
B^tt^r one were lost, than we should perysshe all
As Cayphas ones said, in Counsel pharisa^call.

Infidelitas. By god well said, when ye have him in his grave
Sta^pe him down, till he shyte, and serve him like and knau^

Hypocrisis. We must so order him, that he go no more at large.


Pseudodoctrina. Four knights wyllwe hyre, whom we shall streyghtlye charge.
To keep him down hard, the first are ambycyous Prelates.
Then Coueytous lawyers, that Gods word spyght fuliye hates.
Lords without learning, and justices unrightful
These will keep him down, and rappe him on the sc^ll.
Their Somners and their Scrybes, I warrande ye shall stere
With baylyurs and catchp^lles, to hold him down every where
I trow Rug and Corbet, at Norwit^h will do their part
With wharton of ^ongaye, and for my sake put him to smart.

Hypocrisis. And I will raise up in the vnyuersyties
The seven slepers there, to advance the popes decrees
As Dorbell and Duns, Durand and Thomas of Aquyne
The master of sentens, with Bachon the great deuyue
He^ricus de Gandauo, and these shall read ad cletu^.
Aristotle and Albert, de secretis mulierum
With the Co^mentaryes, of Aui^en and Aueroyes
And a Phebo Phebe, which is very good for boys

Infidelitas. Yea and let the pope, as Gods own Uicat here
In his hand* iii. cro^ses, and. iii. crowns on his head ^ere
His power betokenynge in heaven, in earth, and in hell
That he may comau^de all kings, and subdue the gospel

Pseudodoctrina. His self may do that he need comaunde none other
Is not he the head of the holy church out mother
May not be make sayuts and deuyls at his own pleasure
Which has in his hands, the ^eyes and churches tresure
So well as he made saint Herman first a saint
And twentye years after, of Heresye him attaynte.
First he sent him to heaven, by his canonyzacion
And from thence to bell, by auexcommunycation
We read of formosus, that after he was dead
One pope his fyngars, another cut of his head
And threw his Carcass, into the floude of Tyber
With the head and fyngers, as Platina does remember
In token that he, is judge over quycke and dead
And may dampne and save, by his pardons under lead
Syluester the second, to the devil himself ones gave
For that high office, that he might dampne and save
He offered also his stones to Satan, they say
For priests chastytie, and so went their marriage away

Hypocrisis. Here is one coming, inquire what he entende.


Infidesitas. Ha? it is the Gospel, from him God us defend.


Exit secreto, Pseudodoctrina. Show me brother mine, who did the hither send.


Euangelium. The father of heaven, of his mere beuyu^lence
I desire therefore, of free audyence.

Pseudodoctrina, Ye mind than to preach before this company?


Euangelium. In the laws of God, would I instruct them gladly
For none other way, there is unto salvation
But the word of God, in every generation
That qayckeueth, that saves, yt brings unto heaven.
As before his death, Christ taught the Apostle aleuen.

Pseudodoctrina. Preach here thou shall not, without the Aucthorytie
Of pope or bys^hop, or some of their affynytie.

Euangelium. Gods word, never takes his auctorytie of man.


Pseudodoctrina, Thou shall not here preach, do thou the best thou can.


Hypocrisis. Gods blessing on your heart, it is spoken even like a man.
Ye knowethis day sir, we have a full holy feast
And must go processyon, with the blessed roode of reast
We have long mattens, long lauds, long hours, long pryme.
Mass, euensong, complyne, and all must be done in time
Sensynge of the Aulters, and casting of holywater
Holy bread making, with other necessary matter.

Euangelium. Have God commanded any such things to be done


Pseudodoctrina. What is that to the? go meddle with old shone
Can thou say, but they are good sygnyfications?

Euangelium. I say they are fruytes of your ymagynacions.

To bring in luere, and darken Gods high glory.
Of you God does axe, no such vain beggerye
Christ never sent his, to she we sygnyfications
But his living word, to all the Christen nations
Ye forsake the Lord, as Esaias does tell
And hyghly blaspheme, the holy of Israel.
In his first chapter, this horrible sentence is
Quis hec frusteanea quesiuit, be manibus Bestris,
Who has required, of yousuche sacryfyce
In vain offer you, that vnto^ maunded service
Your incense to me, is great Abhomyuation
I sore abhorte it, and much detest your fasshyon
When ye pray to me, I give ye none attendaunce
But auert my face (says God) and my countenance
By this ye may se, that the lord does not regard
your mangre mutteryng, neither grant it any reward
No man wylleth Paul, to speak in the congregation
In a strange language, without interpretation.
In your latin hours, the flock do ye not consider
But declare your selves, to be Romys she all together
Be not led about (says Paul, by any strange letuyng
What else is your doctrine, but a blind popysh thing?
He testifyeth also, Non enim vt baptizatem
Dis^t tu^ Christue, sed vt Euangeliz^rem.
Christ has not me sent, that I should baptyse, says Paul
But to preach his word, to the comfort of man's soul
Loo, though baptyme be a thing very necessitye
yet must it give place, to Gods word, no remidye
Why than preferreye, your draffys she ceremonies
To the Gospel preachyuge, O dampuable iniuryes.

Hypocrysis. Why suffer ye him, to pratle here so long?


Pseudodoctrina. Get the hence shortly, or with the, it will be wrong.


Intran^. Infidelitas. Peace be here and God, master Doctor by your leave
That I may declare, a pardon here in my slene
Of our Lady of Boston, Ingham, and saint Johannes Frarye
With the indulgence, of blessed saint Antonye

Pseudodoctrinai Well, take thy pleasure, and do it hardelye.


Hypocrisy. Sir he does me wrong, for this day it is my stacion
To preach my brotherhed, and gather my lymytacion

Pseudodoctrina. Who first spoke, first speed, step forth and read thy
pardon
And when he has done, your course is, father warden.

Euangelium. What course appoint ye, for preaching of the Gospel


Pseudodoctrina. I would thy Gospel, and thou, were both now in hell


Euangelium. Why and shall this baggage, put by the word of God


Pseudodoctrina. Thou wylt not be answered, till thou feel a sharper rod


Infide^ita^, Good Christen people, I am come hither berelye
As a true poctour, of the house of saint An^onye
Of clean remyssyon, I have brought ye indulgence
A pena et culpa, for all your sin and ^ff^ure
By the Auctorytie of pope Leo and pope Clement
Pope Bonyface, pope Pius, pope Johan, and pope Innocent.
And here I bless ye, with the wynge of the holy ghost
From thundre to save ye, and from spyrytes in every coo^^
Lo, here is a bell, to hang upon your hog
And save your Cattle, from the bytynge of a dog
So many as wyllcome, to this holy frater^ytie
Come pay your money, and ye shall have letters of me

Pseudodoctrina. Let me have a letter, for I will be a brother


Hypocrisy. Then give me a bell, for I will be an other.


Euangelium, O damnble leadyuge, of Babylonicall sodomytes
Your selves ye declare, to be shameful hypocrytes
Lord pytie thy people, and take away these gydes
These scorners, these robbers, these cruel homycydes
Such prophets are they, as God did ueuer send
As Hiere mye says, they damnable ways pretend.
Woe Hypocrytes woe, for here ye tryfie and mock
With christen people, and the kingdom of heaven up lock
Ye count it a game, to lose that Christ has bought
With his precious blood, and here most derely sought
O ye are wretches, and pestylent Antichrists
Mynysters of Dagon, and most deceytfull papists.
Like tauenouse Wolves, poor Wydowes ye devour
By title of prayer* eternal dampnacion is your
Your own dreams ye follow, but matter much more wayghtye
Ye do not esteem, as judgment, faith, and mercy
Woe Pharyses woe, ye make clean outwardelye
But inwardes ye are full, of coueytousues and bawdrye.
Painted tumbes are ye, apryenge tyght beautyfull
But within ye stynke, and have thoughts very shameful
Ye slew the prophets, your doing yet bear wytnes.
How think ye to avoid, that point of unrighteousness
Oh ragynge serpents, and vyperouse generation
How can ye escape, the danger of dampnacion

Pseudodoctrina. Who made the so bold, to meddle within my cure?
And teach new learning? an heretyke art thou sure
If due search were made, we should find the (I think) no pryest

Euangelium, Yes, anointed of God, but no popysshe Antichrist.


Pseudodoctrina. Let me se, where are the letters of thy ordres?


Euangelium, Where Christ his self is, and not in the same borders
No such pryest am I, as is anointed with oil
But the holy Ghost, for I am none of this soil.

Pseudodoctrina. Here I attache the, for a buysye scismatyke
And will the accuse, for an haynouse heretyke
Lay hands upon him, and depryue him of this apparel
H^c Best spotiatum sordidiori^us induunt.

Loo, thus will I handle al the^, that shall take thy quarrel
Hold away with this gere, and lay it forth aside.

Hypoc^isis. Nay, tarry brother mine, for away shall thou not slide


Euangelium. I am not going, why do thou slander me?


Infidelitas. But ne him to ashes and show to him no pytie.


Pseudodoctrina. Brent shall he not be, if he will no more do so.
Fellow how say thou? wylt thou here abiute or no?

Euangelium, I will neither abjure, nor yet recant Gods glory.


Pseudodoctrina. I offered the reason, and thereto thou wylt not applyd,
Well get the forewarde for thou shall sure dye
The temporal power, shall judge the to the fire
At our Accusement, and holy relygyous desire.

Euangelium. Thought you for my sake impryson men cruellye
Famysshe them, stock them, and them with fagots frye
Hurt me ye shall not, for I can never dye
And they for my sake, shall live perpetually^.

Pseudodoctrina. Here is a pratynge, with a very vengeance he^nce.


Ex^unt cum ^ol Hypoc^isis, This horrible hetetycke, now shall we well recompense


Infidelitas. Yea, hurne him well fryre, and let him no longer reign
Lay on grieve faggottes, to put him to more pain
By the mess I laugh, to se how this ge^e does wurke
He is like of the^, to have no more gra^r than a turk
For such knaves they are, as a man shall not lightly find.
And take over hell, companyons they are to my mind
My business all, is now at good conclusion
That I have brought these. iii. laws to confusion
Now shall I be able, to live here peaceablye
And make frowly^e chere, with hey how frysfa Iolye
The law of Nature, I cast first in a leprye
By the secret help, of ydolatrye and sodomye.
The law of Moses, I made a crypple blind
Auaryce and Ambycion, to help me were not behind
And now Christ's law, I have br^ut for heresy^
By help of false doctrine, and my cosyn hypocrysye
On these same three laws, all other laws depend
And can not prenayle, now these are at an end.
If Christen gouerners, do not these laws uphold
Their Cyuple ordynaunces, will soon be very cold
Well, this valeaunte George, has made them all to stoop.
Cheer now may I make, and set cock on the houpe
Fill in all the pottes, and bid me welcome hostess
And go call me hither, mine own sweet mynyon Besse*

Finit Actus quartus.
Incipit Actus quintus.
Uindicta Dei. QUid gloriaris in malicia? qui potens es in iniquitate.
Thou vengeable wretch, replete with poison and vice
Why do thou thus, rejoice in cruelty and maiyte?
Thynkest thou that God slepeth, and will not his defend
And that thy myschyefe, shall never have an end
The blood of Innocents, to him for vengeance call
And therefore this hour, must I fearcely upon the fall

Infidelitas. Thou spyryte of the air, I straygtly conjure the here
By Panton and Craton, and charge the to come no nere.

Uindicta Dei. Thynkest thou to stop me, with thy foolysshe co^suracion
Whom God sends hither, for thy abhomynacion.

Infidelitas. What art thou called? thy name to me rehearse.


Uindicta dei. I am Uindicta Dei, in punysshement most fearce,
With water, with sooerde, and with fire I must thee pearce

Infidelitas. Be good in thy office, and thou shall have money and meat


Uindicta Dei. By fylthy rewards, thou can not me entreat
But that I will do, as God has me commanded
For if worldely gifts, my furye might have changed
The buyuetfall world, had been drownde with water
Nor Sodom and Gomor, with so fyery fearful matter
Nor yet the Israelyties, with terror of the sword
With hungre and pestylence, in the anger of Gods word
Pharao in Egypt, the plagues had never felt
Might I have been stopped, for silver or for g^l^e
Into Egipte I brought, ten terryble punysshementes
Upon the people, for breaking his commandments
Their wholesome waters, I turned into blood
I multyplyed frogs, to poison therewith their food.
I made waspes and Dranes, them grievously to stynge
And all kinds of flies, soon after did I in bring
Upon their cattle, I threw the foul pestylence
Both botche, byle, and blayne, they had for their offense
Lyghtenynges and haylynges, destroyed their Corn and fruit.
A swarm of hungry locustes, their pastors destytute
The space of three days, I gave the^ palpable darkness
I slew the first gotten, of man and beast, for thy rudenes
For I never stryke, but for the Infydelytie.

Infidelitas. Stryke for me quoth ^? By y^ mary Mass I defye the^


Uindicta Dei. What thou will not so, thy brains are not so light


Infidelitas. Anger me not to much, for if thou do, I fight


Uindicta dei. All that will not help, thy wicked workings now
When the stronger come, the weaker must needs bow
The law of Nature, infected thou have, with a leprye.

Infidelitas. Nay, it was not I, but that wytche Idolatrye
And that polde shorn knave, that men call Sodomye

Uindicta Dei. Of whom syronge they first? but of Infydelytie?
Therefore thou shalt have, that plage of penalty
Which they first tasted, for their Iniquity
For those two vices, I drowned the world with water
In token whereof, I plage the, with the same matter.
Hic Infidelitatem ^ ^^^pha perc^tit,


Infidelitas. Tusshe, I defye thy worst, this shall not drive me he^^^
For after the floude, with Cham had I resydence
And so continued, till Moses law came in
With his iolye tryckes, a new rule to begin

Uindicta Dei. And him thou cortuptest, with Auaryce and Ambicion
And so dydst leave him in miserable condycion
Thou shalt have therefore, that than to them was due
Most terryble battle, the Israelties untrue
That time did suffer, for their Infydelytie
Wherefore with this sword, I iustlye banysshe the.
Because thou shall here, give place to Christ's gospel
Gladio Infidelitatem denuo cedit.

Infidelitas. Yet will I not hence, but again ones rebel.
Did not I remain, with Judas, and other more?
When Christ prea^hed here, and taught them to ve^^ him sore.
Yes, and after that, was I with Simon Magus
With Saunder Coppersmyth, with Elimas and Demetrius.
And now I persevere, among the rank rabble of Papists
Teaching their sho^lynges, to play the Antichriste^^

Uindicta Dei. The Innocent blood, of saints contynually
Does all unto God to revenge their iniurye*
Against false doctrine and cursed hypocresye
Whom thou have raised the glory of the Gospel
To darken, and his fryndes most myserably to quell.
Wherefore thou shall have like as thou have deserved
For thy wicked doings, thy punysshme^t now doubled.
Ignis ipsum precedet. The Prophet David says thus.
Atque inflammabit in citcuitu inimicos eiue.
A consumynge fire, shall run before the judge
His enemies consumynge, they shall find no refuge.
Ob scesera et culpas hominum, titusque nephandes
In cineres ibit tissus, tenuimque fauillam
As Mantuan writes, for the wickedness of the
The earth to ashes, by fire, shall turned be.
Ignis flamnia Infidelitatem (...) coget.

Infidelitas, Credo, credo, credo. I say, credo, credo, credo,
To the Denyll of hell, by the Mess I wene I go.

Exit. Deus Pater. As ^e have seen here* how I have stryken with fire
The pestylent vice of Infydelytie
Sowyll I destroy, in the fearcenes of my^tyre*
All sects of error, with their enormytie
Which has risen out of that iniquytie
For as it is said, that my hand has no set
Shall up by the root, no power may it let.
The Apostle Johan, in the Apo^alyps does say
He saw ^ new he even, and a new earth appearing
The old earth and se, were taken clean away
That heaven is man's faith, that earth his understanding.
Whom we have renewed, by our most sexxet work ynge
The old cauered earth, exylynge with the sea
Which is supersticion, and Infydelytie.
A new Jerusalem, the said John also se
As a beautyfull (...) to her husband
Our ^^ue faithful church is that same fair City
Who^ we (...), by the power of our right hand
As a s^ouse to Christ, in every Christen land
(...) the ^ecres, of Babylonicall poperye
That^^^ in ^^y^yte, may walk to our glory.
(...) three l^wes, for you will I ^lere also
Of such infections, as by Infydelytie
Ye have reciyued, that ye with he^ may go
Declarynge the ways, of Christen liberty
(...), she may take, (...)
For her only God, and be our people still
In our laws walking, according to our will.

Omnes simue. At your commandment, we are most blessed lord,


Deus pater. Approach nyghar than, and ye shall be restorde.

Thou law of Naturewe first begin with the
Restorynge the again, to thy first purytie
Avoid Idolatrye, Avoid vile Sodomye.
We charge ye no more, this law to putryfye
Keep still that same heart for a sign perpetual
That thou were written, in man's heart first of all.
Thou law of Moses* give me that veil from the
No longer shall thou, neither blind nor crooked be
Hence thou Ambycion, and cut sed Coueytousn^s
I here banysche you, from this law ever doubtless
Lose not those tables, which are a token ture
That thou in the flesche, shall ever more continue.
Thou law of the Gospel, though thou be last of all
In operation yet, thou art the pryacypall
From the I exyle, hypoetysye and false doctrine
With all that depend, upon the papisticall^yne
Reserve the came book, for a sign of heavenly pour
For ye book thou art, that John from headue^ did devour.

Nature lex. Everlasting praise, to thy glorious majesty.


Moseh lex, Our heavenly governor, great is thy gracious pytie,


Christi lex. Of mankind thou art, the eternal felycitie.


Nature lex. Now leauest thy servants, in thy perpetual peace
To do the service, from hence, will we notcease.

Moseh lex. For your eyes have se^e, what thou have now prepared
For thy peoples health, which has benhere declared.

Christi lex. A light thou have sent, which is thy joyous Gospel
To the consolacion of the house of Israel.

Nature lex. In rejoice of this, make we some melodye.


Moseh lex. The name of our God, to praise and magnyfye.


Christi lex. I assent thereto, and will sing very gladly.

Hic ad Dei gloria^ canta^unt. In exitu Israel de Aegipto, ^^l aliud simile.


Deus Pater, Now have we destroyed, the kingdom of Babylon
And thrown the great whore, into the bottomless pyt
Restorynge agayae, the true faith and relygyon
In the Christen church, as we have thought it fyt
Depurynge these laws, so to continue it
Man is our creature, and has grace in our sight
To dwell with him now, is our whole hearts delyght.
Man is our people, his God we are again
With him will we have, contynuall resydence
A way will we wype, from all sorrow and pain
He shall no longer dyspayre, for his offense
Nor have in his soul, any carefuldoubte of conscience
The old popyshnes is past, which was dampuacion
We have now re^ued, our Christen congregation.
Stand forth Christen faith, and take our aduertisme^t
We here appoint the, to govern our congregation
Se thou do nothing, without the admonysshement
Of these three laws here, Imprynt their declaration
Of my sweet promyses, and than make thou relation
To my folk again, that they may walk to me
Without popysshe dreams, in a perfyght liberty.

Fid^^ Christiana. Most heavenly maker, in it thoudoest command me
Evermore will I, full prompt and dylygent be.

Deus Pater. Thou law of Nature, shall ^^ache man God to know
And thatto refuse, whereby any ill may grow.

Nature lex. From this your precepte, shall I not varye I crow*


Deus Pater. Teach thou him also, to worship one God about
And his proper neyber, to persecute with love.

Moseh lex. I hope blessed lord, to do as me shall behoue.


Deus Pater. And thou shall teach him, to love God in his heart.
And those to forgive, by whom he sufferethsmarte.

Christi lex. In your appoyntmentes, will I do also my part.


Deus Pater. Work thou in the heart, a knowledge necessary
In the flesh, work thou, by outward Ceremonye.
Change thou notto the sp^et* ^ workyn^s of these ^wo
And cause our people, in a perfyght way to go
Take heed christian faith, to the techynges of these three
And move our people, to walk in the verytie.
The promyses we made, in all these three are Gospel
We would thou should so, to our Congregation tell
Our eu^rlastynge b^estynge, be with you ever more.

Omnes simul. To thy sweet name lord, be praise and perpetual honor*


Fides Christiana. It has pleased God, to put me in this office
To govern his church, and christen Congregation
And theri^ do, as ye shall me entyce
Give me I pray you, such wholesome exhortation
As may be to Man, aclere edyfication
And I will be glad, to take your adurttyshment
As it shall become, any child obedyent.

Christi lex. Ye speak it full well, than mark what shall be said
And dylygently, look that it be obeyed.

Nature lex. The effect of me, is for to know the lord
Everlasting, strong, most gracyous and godly
And as touching Man, to have fraternall concord
F(...)r to norysshe, and to do non iniurye
To (...) ^^uenasites made, and love true matrymonye
T^ese noble effects, so temper you in Man.
That them to fulfill, he do the best he can.

Moseh lex. The effect of me, is for to worship the lord
As one God alone, and to fly from Idolat^ye
Not to flee nor stele, nor yet to bear false record
To show what is sin, and to seek the remedy
Publyque peace to hold* and sore to punysshe the gyltie
From these good effects, se that man never soo^rue
Thau shall he be sure, that God will him preserve.

Christi lex. The effect of me, is for to worship the lord
In the inward spyryte, and to favor friend and eumye
And in all points else, with Gods will to accord
To preach remyssyon, to save and to iustyfye
In Christ all to se^elyfe, justice, peace and mer^y^
These heavenly effects, in man so incorporate
That he may in spyryte, be newly regenerate.

Fides Christiana. More sweet than honye, are your three exhortacions
And regestred they be, in my memoryall
Now will I forward, to all the Christen nations
And se in effect, these laws observed all
To the abolyshment, of the dreams papisticall
Now the light is come, the darkness dies away
I trust in the lord, men will walk in the day.
Good Christen people, to these three laws apply
First know that ye have, a living God above
Than do him honor, and his name magnyfye
Worship him in spryte, as the Gospel you does move
Than obey your quen^, like as shall you behoue
For she in her life, that lord does represent
To sauegard^ of the just, and fynners punysshement.
Se that ye regard, such laws as she does make
For they are of God, as Solomon does report
Of these laws doubteles, those laws their groundynges take
To the publyque wealth, to give aid, strength, and comfort
For preseruacion, of all the christen sort
In no case follow, the ways of ^eygnolde Pole
To his dampnacion, he doubtless plays the fool.
Have ^ due respect, unto your country natyue
Which has brought ye up, and given ye noryshment
Even from your cradelles, to these days nutrytyue
Do that ye may do, to her wealth and preferment
Mynyster to bet, no hateful detryment
A dog to his friend, will never be vnlouynge
Let reason in ye, not lose his natural workynge.

Nature lex. Who lives without law, shall perysshe without law
And therefore we have, three laws to you descrybed
That after their lives, ye should in your living draw
We have also showed, how they have been corrupted
By foul Idolaters, and Sodomytes poluted.
By coueytous priests, and by ambytyous prelates
Hypocrytall friars, false Doetours and false Cutates

Mose^ lex, Who has restored, these same thyr laws again
But your late Josias, and valeaunt king Henrye
No prince before him, took ever yet such pain
From England to banysshe, Idolatrye and foul Sodomye
Coueytousnes, Ambycion, false Doctrine and hypocresye
It was he that brought, Christ's verytie to light
When he put the pope, with his fylthynes to flight.

Christi lex. From da^pnable darkness, as my brother here does say
He has delivered, this realm of England godly
Bringing his Subjects, into the true path way
Of their souls sauegarde* if they now follow it wisely
And left them he has, the same way still to fortyfye
His noble son Edward, such a king of God elect
As questionles, while helyued, did perform it in effect

Fides christiana. Pray we to the lord, for the long contynuaunce
Of Queen Elizabeth, in this worlds habytacion
And that of her Noblesse, she have true mayntenaunce
In the pryncyples of this most worthy foundation
that she may to Christ, bring us from desolation
And for her noble Counselors, to god let us all pray
That in the true faith, their hertes direct he may.

Amen.
The ten comaundementes bryefelye.
Love thy Lord God. Swear thou no oath
Thy sobbeth keep. Please thy fryndes both.
Wytnes none ill. Hold no man's wife.
Brybe man's good. Slay not with knyfe
Wysshe no man's house. Nor Ox nor Ass
As thou will have. Do thou like case.
These Commandments need not be rehearsed in the Interlude.
A song upon Benedictus: Compyled by John Bale.
BEnedictus dominus, Deus Israel Which has over thrown, the migh tie Idol
Bell
The false God of Rome, by power of the Gospel
And has prepared from the deep lake of hell.
Rede^ptionem ple^i^ su^.
^t ^rexit cornu, of mercy, health and grace
That cruel Tyrant, now clearly to de face
Whose blodye kingdom, dymynyssheth apace
By the word of God, which lately has take place.
In ^omo David, pueti sui*
Sicut Iocutus est, the Lord celestial
That Romys she Antichrist, is like to have a fall
With his whole rabble, of sects dyabolycall
And now the nombre, will florysshe over all
Prop^etatum eiu^.
Salutem ex inimicis, now we may daily hear
The enemies of Christ, with him does witness bear
Saul is become a Paul, and preaching every wheare
Now may we receive, most heavenly wholesome gear
De manu little qui ^d^^^^t nos.
Ad faciendam misericodiam
The son of our God, from his high gloryecam
To redeem the sin, of the children of Adam
And to remember, to faithful Abraham
Testamentisui sancti.
Ad iusiurandum, which God has made before
Unto our fathers he will keep evermore
Promised he has if we regard his lore
For sakynge the Pope, with his dampnable store
Daturum se nobis.
Ut sine timore, from Romysh tyrauntes fre
The lord grant us grace, that we may speakers b^
Of his holy word, and therein to agree
That in the Gospel and Christen liberty
Seruiam^^ i^^i.
In sanctitate, and pureness of life
Let us now travail, both maiden man and wife
All tyghtrous doings, in us be ever ryfe
That we perseuet, without debate orstryfe
Omnibu^ dicbus nostri^.
Tupuer Propheta, elected of the lord
Our Queen Elizabeth, to have Gods law restorde
Folowest Josias, therofto take record
In all thy doings, and in Gods holy word
Patate via^^iu^.
Ad dandam scicentiam, for men's health and save guard
Christ's holy Gospel, by the is freely heard
Wherein does cousyst, their life and full reward
With preseruacion, from dangerous i^oba^dye.
Peccatorum little.
P^t viscera misericordie
Christ our dear master, us daily ouer^^
Least we here perysshe, in our iniquytie
Our mediator, continuallye is he.
Ori^ns ex afto.
Illuminare, sweet lord we the desire
To menin darkness, and in the popysshe mire
Let not his baggage, thy faithful servants tire
But us deliver, from them and from hell fire.
In viam pacis.
Amen.
THVS ENDS this Co^medye, concerning three Laws, of Nature, Moses, and
Christ, corrupted by the Sodomytes, Pharysies, and Papists most wicked.
Compyled by John Bale.
IMPRYNTED AT London / in S. brydes Churchyard, over against the North Door
of the Church, by Thomas Colwell.

Anno Domini. M. D. LXII. vi. Die Nouembris.


