A CORDIAL FOR THE AFFLICTED. Touching The Necessity and Utilitie of
Afflictions. Proving unto us The happiness of those that thankfully receive
them: AND The misery of all that want them, or profit not by them.

By A. HARSNET, B. D. and Minister of Gods Word at Cranham in Essex.

The Second Edition enlarged, with direction touching Spiritual Afflictions.

LONDON, Printed by Ric. Hodgkinsonne, for Ph. Stephnes and Chr. Meridith, at
the Golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1638.

TO THE HONOrable Lady, the Lady JOHAN BARRINGTON, The Wife of that Noble, and
renowned Sr. FRANCIS BARRINGTON, late of Barrington Hall: and to the Right
Worshipful, The Lady MARY EDEN, the Wife of Sr. THOMAS EDEN, late of
Ballingdon Hall.
Much honored Ladies:
IT is too true a saying, that Greatness, and Goodness seldom go together; for
not many mighty, not many noble are called. Yet (blessed be God, for his
mercies to you-wards) we find both of these, in both of you. For your
Greatness (next under God) ye are beholding unto your Parents, out of whose
loins you came. For your Goodness, ye are in in some measure beholding unto
Affliction, by which The Lord has done you good: so as I make no question but
that ye may both of you say with David, It is good for me that I have been
afflicted. Hereupon (worthy Ladies) I have adventured to put forth this small
Treatise, touching the Necessity, and utility of Affliction, under your
Ladyships names, and Patronage: joining you both together, because God has
already conjoined you so near in affinity, by the marriage of your Pious and
Religious children: beseeching your Ladyships to accept of these my poor
labors, being such as tend to the furtherance, and increase of your comfort in
present, or future trials. For allbeit ye be good proficients in the School
of Affliction; Yet (peradventure) ye may have forgotten some good lessons
which Affliction has formerly taught you; or else have not attained (as yet)
to that good, wherein it may hereafter instruct you. To help you in either, or
both of these, be pleased (I heartily beseech your Ladyships) seriously to
peruse, what is here tendered unto you: and then I doubt not, but (by Gods
blessing) ye shall be able to make that good use of Affliction, that ye shall
not only bless God, the Father of mercies, and God of all comfort (who as he
has afflicted, so has he comforted you, in all your tribulations) but ye
shall also be able to comfort others, which are in Affliction, by the comfort
wherewith ye your selves have been comforted of God. Which fruit that ye may
reap, I shall sow my Prayers before (...) throne of Grace, and for ever rest,

your Ladyships to be commanded in the Lord, AD. HARSNET.
Cranham.
TO THE CHRIstian Reader; Increase of Faith, Hope, and Patience.
SVch is our blindness, and ignorance, that we are too ready to judge amiss
of our selves: as may appear by two extremes, into which the most run. The
one is self-conceitednesse, or flattering our selves, in, and about our
spiritual estate: persuading our selves that we are in the estate of Grace,
and that we have the love and favor of God, when as it is neither so, nor so.
For the redressing of which mischief, I have heretofore undertaken the
discovery of true and sound grace, from false and counterfeit; that so we may
no longer be deluded by an overweening of our selves, and too high an opinion
of our goodness, as if we were that which we are not, or were not that which
we are. The other extreme is a diffidence, and distrust of Gods love, and our
own happiness, through the sense, and smart of some troubles and afflictions
wherewith it pleases the Lord in mercy and wisdom to exercise and try us.
Whence it comes to pass, that too many of Gods dear ones, are ready to
ce^sure themselves as outcasts (or at the best) as a people, but meanly
beloved, or regarded of God, in that they are so sorely afflicted. For the
healing of which error; that there may be no mistaking, that we neither charge
the Lord with any want of love to us ward, or hard dealing with us in
afflicting of us, nor surcharge our selves with unnecssary, and needles fears,
and cares; nor yet causelessly increase our grief, by adding of more sorrow to
our affliction, I have now undertaken this Treatise. Wherein my desire, and
aim is to minister some comfort to such as are in affliction, that so they may
not cast off their hope of hapines in Heaven, because they are exercised with
judgments upon earth: but rather believe that the Lord it now refining and
pollishing them, that so they may be the fitter for that glory which is
prepared for the^. I know it is a hard thing to obey in suffering: yet because
it is that which makes for our good, we should with the more willingness, and
cheerfulnes, undergo whatsoever afflictions it shall please the Lord to exercise
us with. If our afflictions brought God out of love with us, or us more in love
with that which God hates and is hurtful unto us: or if our afflictions were
sent unto us as curses, we had great cause to mourn in them: but seeing they
make so much for our good (being sanctified unto us) and the word of truth
tells us, that we are blessed in the^, have we not great cause to be
thankful to God for them? the Lord sees how ready we are to plunge our selves
into perils, if we be but a while exempted from afflictions: therefore that we
may not be too bold with sin, the Lord will have us to fall into affliction,
least (being let alone) we fall into condemnation. For where God is most
silent in threatening, and most patient in sparing, there is he most inflamed
with anger, and purpose of revenge. And seeing we are willing to receive (being
sick or diseased) any medicine from the hand of him, that can truly say,
probatum est, good experience has been made of the worth, and working of it;
let my counsel (good reader) be acceptable unto thee, and give me leave to tell
thee, how much good thou may gain by affliction, if through thine unbelief,
and impatience thou do not put it from thee. I assure thee (by good
experience (that howsoever affliction be untoothsome, and unpleasing to the
flesh, it is most sovereign, and profitable unto the soul as in the Treatise
following, I have made plain unto thee. Now if the style, and phrase dislike
any, because it is so plain, and homelike; let him know that I prepared this
provision for poor and hungry souls, unto whom course and mean things are
welcome, and bitter things are sweet; not for queasie, and full stomachs, which
despise an hony-combe. He that is fallen into a pit, will refuse no hand that may
help him out of it. He that has a wound in his body, will be glad of any
plaster that may heal or ease him. Accept then, of these my poor labors,
which (I desire) may be as a hand to help thee out of affliction, or as balsume
to heal those gashes which affliction has, or may make in thee, or to give
thee some ease and comfort in them. Read in faith, and receive in love, what is
here tendered unto thee. If any comfort, or content may hereby accrue unto
thine afflicted soul, and grieved mind, let God have thy praises, and let me
have thy prayers, who desires to rest

Thy servant in the Lords Work. A. H.

An Alphabeticall Table of the chief things contained in this BOOK.
A.
AFfliction the portion of all Gods children. Page 12. Affliction is physic
for the soul. 40. Afflictions are instructions. 52. Afflictions fit us for Gods
service. 70. Afflictions weane us from the World. 78. Afflictions conform us
unto Christ. 110. Afflictions of the godly, and the wicked differ. 190.
Afflictions are ordered by God. 348. Afflictions do not satisfy the Justice of
God. 546. Afflictions serve to better us. 554. Affliction must not be added
unto the afflicted. 564.
B.
Believers though they be weak in faith, are not rejected. 486. Benefits of
God never so much prized as in affliction. 74.
C.
Censure not afflicted ones. 122. Children of God can not spare afflictions.
228. 230. Children of God, why under long afflictions. 293. Children of God often
sad in trialls. 424. Children of God may be in horror of conscience. 442.
Chance, how understood. 275. Comfort for the afflicted. 211. Conquerors, how
we are so. 142. Conscience when it accuses, is a sore affliction. 438.
Contented with our condition. 494. Covenant of God stands firm. 455. Creatures
at Gods command. 271.
D.
David, his afflictions. 17. Death, how it may be desired. 237. Death frees us
from evils. 238. 241. Deliverance out of trouble is Gods work. 363.
Despairing is a sad condition. 440. Devotion quickened by affliction. 102.
E.
Our Enemies are Gods rods. 313.
F.
Failings do not nullify Gods Covenant. 455. Faith makes affliction
profitable. 490. Fear of God wrought in us by affliction. 536. Fear of God is
profitable. 540. Fortune a mere Fancy. 274. Francis Spira, his Condition. 439.
G.
God in afflicting us, loves us. 387. God will do us good by our afflictions.
397. Good things are most prized in the time of afflicton. 74. Grace, the truth
of it tried by affliction. 59. Grace, the strength of it tried by affliction.
299. Grace weakens sin, but does not wholly destroy it. 480. A gracious heart
will be thankful for afflictions. 504.
H.
Hand of God in all our afflictions. 257. Hard hearts softened by afflictions.
294. Heart if good, grieves more for sin, then for punishment. 499. Heathens
ignorant of the Divine Providence. 262. Heaven and Earth filled with Gods
presence. 267.
I.
Injuries and wrongs, must be put up. 317. Inward and spiritual afflictions
are very necessary. 437. Job his afflictions. 15. Joy succeeds sorrow. 301.
K.
We come to know our selves by afflictions. 5^4.
L.
Love of God seen in affliction. 387. Persuasion of Gods Love will help us to
be are affliction. 488. God loves us if our afflictions do bring us nearer unto
him. 496.
M.
Man, how author of his own woe. 265. No misery can make a child of God
miserable. 401. Mourning for sin is profitable. 445. Mourning for sin does
make way for comfort. 466.
O.
Offer of God is free. 448.
P.
Patience needful in affliction. 287 Patience, how it is helped forward. 303.
Patience, how attained unto. 330. By Patience we possess our selves. 339.
Patience conformeth us to Christ. 341. Perplexity in affliction, from whence it
grows. 411. Pray in time of affliction. 90. Prayer helpful in affliction.
197. Diverse objections against Prayer in affliction, answered. 204. 207.
Prayers of Gods children often interrupted by Satan. 464. Whither we may pray
for affliction or not. 585. Prepare for afflictions. 134. 140. 147. How to
prepare for afflictions. 157.
R.
Relapsing is dangerous. 474. Child of God may relapse, if God leave him. 477.
Repentance preventeth affliction. 175. Repentance purges out sin. 444.
S.
Sadness in affliction hurtful. 379. Sadness often in Gods children. 429.
Satan must be resisted. 457. Satan's assaults shall not hurt us, if we cry to
God against them. 459. Sin found out by affliction. 29. Sin purged by
affliction. 37. Sin prevented by affliction. 46. Sin not hurtful, if not
doubted in. 484. Sin causes trouble. 176. Sin disliked by afflictions.
296. Sin is beaten by afflictions. 511. Sin rightly judged of in time of
affliction. 518. Sinners are often met withal in their own kind. 524. Strength
to bear affliction is from God. 356. Spiritual simonie. 448. Stubbornness
causes the rod. 550.
T.
Tempests are ordered by God. 283. Thankful for afflictions. 502. Thirsting
shall be satisfied. 449.
U.
Virgin Mary, her afflictions. 20. Unbelief a child of God is subject unto.
446. Unbelief a breach of Gods Commandment. 450. Unbelief robs the heart of
all sound joy and peace. 486. Unthankfulness hurtful. 470.
W.
Want of affliction is woeful. 243. Weakness supported by God. 462. Weaned
from the world b^ affliction. 78. Wicked ones, though long spared, yet at last
soundly punished. 216. Will of God works all things. 269. Word of God able to
comfort us in all our afflictions. 163. Word of God is most effectual in time
of affliction. 519.
Z.
Zeal, what it is. 8.
FINIS.
A TABLE, OF the Contents of this BOOK.
Doctr. I.
AFfliction is the lot, and portion of Gods best children. Page 12. Confirmed
by the example of Job. 15. Of David, 17. Of the Virgin Mary. 20. And of Christ
himself. 26.
Reason. I.
1 Affliction helps us to find out sin. 29 2 Affliction serves to purge
out sin. 37. 3 Affliction preventeth sin. 46. 4 Affliction teaches us many
good lessons. 52. 5 Affliction tries the truth of grace in us. 59. 6
Affliction fitteth us for Gods service. 70. 7 Affliction helps us to prize
Gods benefits. 74. 8 Afflictions weaneth us from the world. 78. 9 Affliction
stirs us up to prayer. 90. 10 Affliction quickens our devotion. 102. 11
Affliction conformeth us to Christ. 110. 12 Affliction prepares us for glory.
114.
Uses.
1 Censure not the afflicted. 122. 2 Prepare for afflictions. 134. 3 Store thy
self with comfort out of Gods Word. 163. 4 Break off thy sins by repentance.
175. 5 Seek unto God by prayer. 197. 6 Comfort for the afflicted. 211. 7 Desire
to be with Christ. 236. 8 Woe to such as are not afflicted. 243.
Doctr. II.
2 All trialls and afflictions come from God. 256.
Reasons.
1 God fills both heaven and earth. 267. 2 God works all things as he will.
269. 3 All creatures are at Gods command. 271.
Uses.
1 Away with Fortune. 273. 2 God disposes of all tempests. 283. 3 Patient in
affliction. 287. Long afflictions upon the godly for diverse special end. 293.
unto 302. Helps to the patient bearing of affliction. 339. 4 Comfort for the
afflicted. 344. God does order our afflictions. 348. 5 Seek to God by prayer.
355. Sadness in affliction does much hurt. 379.
Doctr. III.
The persuasion of God, love will help us to bear our afflictions, 387.
Reasons.
1 God will then help us to bear them. 396. 2 God will do us good by our
afflictions. 397. 3 No misery can make us miserable, if God love us. 401.
Uses.
1 Whence it comes to pass that many are so perplexed in their afflictions.
411. Of inward and spiritual afflictions. 432. Diverse objections from fear
and unbelief answered. 462. 2 Be persuaded of Gods love. 488. Tokens of Gods
afflicting of us in love. 493. 1 If he gives us a contented mind. 494. 2 If
affliction brings us nearer to God. 496. 3 If they work godly sorrow in us.
498. 4 If thankful for afflictions. 502.
Doctr. IIII.
The chief end of Gods afflicting of us, is the bettering of us. 508.
Reasons.
1 By affliction we come to know our selves. 514. 2 By affliction we come to
judge aright of sin. 518 How we may find out that sin, for which we are
afflicted. 524. 3 Affliction makes us to fear God. 536.
Uses.
1 Satisfaction is not made to God by our affliction. 546. 2 Our stubbornness
provokes God to afflict us. 550. 3 Amend by little, else greater affliction
will come. 554. 4 Add not affliction to the afflicted, but rather comfort
them. 564. 5 Be thankful for afflictions. 578. Whether we may pray for
afflictions. 585.
Errata.
PAge 91. line 14. for complaining, read complains. p. 92. l. 17. Esa. 64.7,
8, 9. p. 96. l. 13. for their r. they. p. 105. l. 12. r. set to. p. 159. l. 16.
r. so much. p. 190. l. 3. r. it may. p. 199. l. 9. r. as ready. p. 217. l. 1.
for, and with r. for. p. 333. l. 7. for originally r. organically. p. 340 l. 5.
r. makes him. p. 341. l. 13. r. and disquiet. p. 453. l. 16. r. drawest back.
p. 456. l. 4. so much, put out. p. 461. l. 6. r. as is implied. p. 480. l. 13.
for ever r. never. p. 489. l. 12. for being r. be. p. 524. l. ult. for baiting
r. biting.

A CORDIAL FOR THE AFFLICTED. Touching the Necessity and Utilitie of
Afflictions.
REVEL. 3.19. As many as I love, I rebuke, and chasten: be zealous therefore,
and amend.


THese words are a part of that Epistle which was written unto the Laodiceans.
In which Epistle there is set down first, the Inscription, or, Superscription
of the party unto whom it was sent, to wit, The Angel of the Church of the
Laodiceans, verse. 14.

Secondly, there is a Description of the person from whom it was sent, set
forth by a twofold property. The first is his fidelity and truth, from whence
he is entitled Amen, or according to the original, the, or that Amen; which
is an Hebraisme, and signifies as much as Truly, or Truth it self, explicated
in the next words, That faithful and true witness.

The second is his Eternity or Power, noted in these words, The beginning of
the Creatures of God.

Thirdly, there is laid down the Narration or matter of the Epistle, wherein
there is Conviction of the Angel his sins: the first whereof is
Lukewarmnesse, verse 15. which is such a temper as is neither hot, nor cold. He
was (as all hypocrites are) good only in outward show and appearance; for he
wanted both the metal, and making of zeal, and piety. He had only an outside,
and face of religion, but wanted both the power of Gods word, and the zeal of
his Spirit: in this allied to the Cretians, who professed that they knew God,
but by their works they denied him, being abominable, disobedient, and unto
every good work reprobate. Titus 1.16.

Commination,or the Punishment which the Lord threatened to inflict upon him for
this sin of Lukewarmenes, and that is Rejection, in the end of the 16. verse.
I shall spite thee out of my mouth.

The second sin for which the Angel (and in him the whole Church of Laodicea)
is taxed, is his Pride or Boasting, verse. 17. For thou say I am rich, and
increased with goods, and have need of nothing.

The third sin was Ignorance of his wretchedness, and misery, And know
not that thou art wretched, and miserable. Which misery consisted in three
particulars, Poverty, Blindness, and Nakedness, in the end of the 17. verse.

Epistle, is a Remedy prescribed for the curing of these three forenamed
miseries; unto each misery a several remedy.

For the bringing of him out of his Poverty the Lord counsels him, verse 18.
To buy of him gold tried by the fire, that he might be made rich. For the
covering of his Nakedness, he advises him to furnish himself with White
raiment, that he might be clothed. And for the healing of his Blindness, he
would have him to Anoint his eyes with eye salve, that he might see.

Rebuking and chastening of them, in these words which I have read unto you,
verse. 19. Whom I love, I rebuke and chasten, etc.

Which words are as a comfortable cordial prescribed by a wise and loving
Physician unto his sick diseased patient; to whom he has formerly administered
some bitter pills, or unpleasing potions. The Lord before threatened to reject
the Laodiceans for their lukewarmnes, whereupon lest they should altogether
despair of regaining his love and favor, he does prevent their fear, by
telling of them that his correcting of them was no argument either of his
hatred, or of their rejection, but an evidence of his love; beating them, that
he might better them. Whom I love, I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore
and amend.

These words consist of two parts.

The first acquaints us with the Lords practice.

The second lays down the drift, and end of his practice.

His practice in these words, As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten. The end
and drift of his practice in the latter part of the verse, Be zealous, etc.

I will briefly unfold the sense of the words, and then (the Lord willing)
collect Instructions out of them.

As many as I love, I rebuke. (...).
This word rebuke in the original signifies not a bare and fingle reproof, but
even such a reproof as is uttered with some strong arguments, and reasons to
convince the party reproved, implying unto us, that when the Lord rebukes man
for sin, it is an argument of his dislike and hatred of sin. And chasten.
This also must not be understood of ordinary correction, but such a
chastisement, as a loving father gives unto the child of his love: (...).
for the original is taken from a word which signifies a child: that as a
father uses to teach and instruct his child, so the Lord correcting all those
he loves, intends thereby to teach and instruct them.

Fervent Zeal what it is.
Be zealous therefore. These words are in opposition to their luke-warmnes,
and therefore Beza well renders it, be hot. Zeal or spiritual heat, is an
affection compounded of two qualities, love and hatred. The love of God and his
truth, and the hatred of every evil which tends to the dishonor of God, or
to the clouding, or eclisping of his truth: against which evils when the child
of GOD shall any way bestirre himself, he is said to be zealous for the Lord.

So that to be zealous, is to show love to God, and hatred of error, and false
ways; to be grieved at those things which may dishonor God, or cross his
truth, to oppose them with might and main, and to the utmost of our power to
resist them.

And amend, or repent. These words have relation to their Lukewarmnesse. The
Lord will have them to leave off their Lukewarmnesse, to repent them of their
sinful temper, being negligent, and careless in good duties and promoting the
glory of God.

Paul set down as a fruit and effect of repentance. For writing unto the
penitent Corinthians, 2. Cor. 7.11. He says, Behold this thing, that you have
been godly sorry, what care it has wrought in you, yea what zeal: making zeal
an effect of repentance.

Laodiceans to the practice of that duty, which they had altogether neglected,
being a lukewarm, a remiss, and careless people. Therefore having before
reproved them for their sin of Lukewarmnesse, he does now exhort them to be
zealous; and not only so, but to repent them of their former remissness. The
words of the verse may be thus metaphrased.

Those that are my dearest children, my best beloved, I do rebuke, and convince
of their sins, yea as a loving father tendering their good, I do in mercy
correct, and chastise them: therefore see you be not so Lukewarm as heretofore
you have been, but show more love to me and my word, and more hatred to error
and evil ways, be grieved and sorry for your old courses, and amend your
lives.

Come we now to the raising of some Instructions out of the words. In that the
Lord tells the Laodiceans, that he rebukes and chasteneth as many as he
loves, we may in the first place from hence learn, that None, no not the best
of Gods dear children are without their trials and afflictions. Man is born
unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward, Doct. 1. The best have afflictions.
Job. 5.1. Affliction is the lot and portion of all Gods children. It was a cup
which Almighty God did temper and put into the hands of Christ his best beloved
Son. Shall I not drink of the cup which my father has given me? John 18.11.
And in this cup Christ will have all his members to pledge him, as appears,
Mat 20.23. Ye shall drink indeed, of my cup, and be baptized with the baptism
that I am baptized with. Hence it is that Trials and afflictions are by Paul
called the marks of the Lord Jesus. Gal. 6.17. I bear in my body the marks of
the Lord Jesus. The cross is Christ his badge, and cognizance. If any man will
be my follower, let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow
me, Luke 9.23. The way wherein Christ went to glory was affliction, and in this
path all that shall be glorified with him must foot it after him, for, Acts.
14.22. Through many afflictions we must enter into tho Kingdom of God.

The way to heaven, and happiness is not strewed with rushes, or set with
violets and roses, but with briars and thorns; it is not a milky, but a thorny
way; not a fair, broad, smooth, and easy, but a narrow, cragged, crooked and
cross way, through many difficulties and troubles. As the children of Israel
were evil entreated in Egypt, groaned under heavy burdens, sighed, and cried
for their bondage, before they could be possessed of that land which flowed
with milk and honey; so must we know what troubles, and sorrows mean, before we
come at our place of rest, our spiritual, and Heavenly Canaan.

True it is, that some have but a few trials in comparison of others, yet the
most have many, and the best (yea all) have some, for all that will live godly
in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution, 2. Tim. 3.12. Do you desire examples
for the better settling and confirming you in the truth of this point? Sooner
may I find where to begin, then where, or how to make an end; therefore out of
an heap, and a cloud of witnesses I will take but an handful, some few drops.
Job was a holy man as the Lord himself has witnessed of him. Job 1.8. An
upright, and just man, one that feared God and eschewed evil. Yet how great
were his trials; how sharp and bitter were his afflictions? Stripped of all his
outward means, brought unto a morsel of bread; bereaved at one time of all his
children, and that by sudden death, yea whiles they were eating, and drinking,
not having (it may be) breathing time to call and cry for mercy. We should
take it to be a heavy judgment, and think that the Lord were highly displeased
with us, if out of ten children, some two, or three of them, should be made
away by an untimely and sudden death; but to be at one blow bereaved of all our
children, to lose ten at one clap, where is the man that would lay his hand
upon his mouth in so great a tentation, and not murmurre against the Lord?
Besides, the Lord came nearer to Job, fighting against him with many personal
terrors, afflicting his body with aches, and botches, vexing his soul in the
day time either with the words of a foolish woman his wife, or with the biting,
and taunting speeches of some which came to visit him, whereas in truth (like
miserable comforters, Job 16.2.) they came to vex, and gall him: And in the
night time how was he tumbled, and tossed up and down? Job 7.4. for when he
said, My couch shall relieve me, and my bed shall bring me comfort; then was
he feared with dreams; and astonished with visions, Job 7.13.14. So that he
was a burden to himself, grew weary of his life, cursing the day wherein he
was born, wishing that he had died in his birth, that he might not have lived
to see and feel the miseries and sorrows which he sustained.

David also was a man after Gods own heart 1. Sam. 13.14. Yet how sorely did
the Lord (almost all his life time) exercise and afflict him? He was daily
punished and chastned every morning. Psalm. 73.14. So as he roared day and night
through extremity of grief: his bones were consumed with sorrow; and his
moisture was like the drought in summer. Betrayed by his false-hearted friends,
persecuted, and pursued from place to place by Saul, 1. Sam. 26.20. As one
would hunt a partridge in the mountains. And, which went nearer him then any
other troubles (his sins excepted) what heartbreaking sorrows did he sustain
through the wickedness of his children? defiling each other, murdering each
other, yea and (most unnaturally) seeking to depose him from the Kingdom. It
would fill a volume to set down the manifold afflictions, which are recorded of
GODS children. I will therefore speak but of one or two more, which I cannot
omit, because their examples will tend much to our satisfaction, if we will
compare our trials and afflictions with theirs, and consider how far theirs
have exceeded ours.

One would think that if any upon earth should escape scot free (as they say)
and be without afflictions, the Virgin Mary, the mother of our Lord might, she
being a woman so freely beloved of God, Luke 1.28. and so near unto Christ.
But if God would have the mother to be exercised, because a sinner, yet (me
thinks) her son ( being the only begotten of the Father, without sin, and
one in whom the Father was well pleased. Mat. 3.17.) should go untouched? No,
no, it might not be; both these drunk deep of afflictions, as I shall make it
evident unto you.

First concerning Mary, let us consider what old Simeon said unto her, Luke
2.35. A sword shall pierce through thy Soul. She under-went not only
out-ward, and bodily afflictions, but also in-ward and spiritual trials even
such as pierced her very Soul. A sorrowful spirit dries up the bones, says
Solomon, Pro. 17.22. And Prove. 18.14. the spirit of a man will sustain his
infirmities, but a wounded spirit, who can bear it? It was not then any
pinching poverty, nor the rough handling of the Roman exactors, who forced her
(being big with child), to take a painful journey to Bethlehem; nor the
poor entertainment, which she and her tender babe found in the Inn; nor
Herod's blood-thirsty rage which made her (with her tender little one) to fly
into Egrpt, where being a stranger no doubt) she endured adversity her belly
full; nor the fear of Archelaus after her return; nor her long deferred hopes
all the while that Christ lived a private life ( though Hope deferred be the
fainting of the heart. Prove. 13.12. nor yet the malice or hatred of those
bloody people, the high Priests, the Scribes and Pharisees, who not only
opposed her son, but blasphemed his person, and doctrine; no nor the pains and
torments of his bitter passion, of which she was an eye witness, and
spectator; none of all these were the sword that pierced her Soul, though these
were great burdens for a poor woman to bear, and the last more grievous then
all the rest.

How did Jacob take on when he beheld but the bloody coat of his son Joseph?
Jacob rent his cloths, and put on sackcloth about his loins, and sorrowed for
his son a long season. Genesis 37.34. How did David lament the death of his
traiterous son Absalom, though he heard but the report of his slaughter? 2.
Kings 18.33. O Absalom my son, O my son Absalom, would God I had died for thee,
O Absalom my son, my son. And read we not that Agar went aside at her
child's fainting, her mothers heart not enduring to behold the death of an
Ismael. Genesis 21.16. How then (think we) was Mary affected at the sight of so
many and so great miseries which befell her son? And yet all these (as I take
it) were but the beginnings, and occasions of greater internal
heart-breakings, and spiritual agonies, with which her soul conflicted. For
what perplexed thoughts (may we think) did assault her soul, nay what did not,
when she saw every thing directly to thwart, and cross her preconceived hopes
grounded upon the warrant and truth of Divine Oracles? Might not Mary have thus
complained, What, is this he that should be the Savior and Redeemer of Israel?
the horn of Salvation unto them, to be thus maligned and crucified? And yet
while he lived, there was some hope (though no likelihood) that God might work
miraculously for his advancement, and by means unknown, make good his promises;
but now that he is done to death, that shameful and accursed death of the
cross, what hope is left? I thought that he should have restored the Kingdom
again to Israel. But alas how can that be, he being now dead, and laid in his
grave? Surely Mary had sunk under this burden, her faith, her patience had
failed her, had she not with Abraham (the father of the faithful) above hope,
believed under hope, not regarding the outward miserable condition of her
son, but fastening the eye of her faith upon the Lord, true of his Word, and
just of his promise; yet for all her faith and patience, behold and see if any
sorrow were like unto Mary her sorrow? The mourning of a mother for her son,
her only son, the son of her hopes, her hearts delight: nay that son, in
whom she expected that all the kindreds, and nations of the world should be
blessed, and yet now dying, dying a most ignominious, shameful and accursed
death, now perishing without hope of recovery. Lo here was the sword that
pierced her soul through and through: whereupon the Fathers dispute the case
whether Mary were not a Martyr; and they conclude that she was more then a
martyr, because in martyrs, the more fervent their love is to Christ, the more
it lesseneth the pains of their sufferings, but Mary's love the more intense,
and the greater it was toward her son, the more it augmented her sorrows. But
let us leave the mother and (last of all) take a view of her son his
sufferings. Who though he were the prince of our salvation, yet was he
consecrated by afflictions. Heb. 2.10. Was he not in this world reputed as an
abject amongst men? lived he not in penury, in poverty? Mat. 8.20. The foxes
have holes, and the birds of the heaven nests, but he had not whereon to rest
his head. How was he reviled and rayled upon by those foul-mouth'dJewes? who
called him a Wine-bibber, a Pot-companion, a friend of Publicans and sinners, a
Conjurer, one that wrought by the help of Beelzebub: was he not buffeted, spit
on, whipped, crowned with thorns, and last of all despitefully crucified? and
terrors which had seized upon him, conflicting with the wrath of God, and
undergoing the curse with greatest extremity: all which made him (as one
rejected and given over of the Lord) in a most heavy and doleful manner to cry
out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Matt. 27.46.

If then Job an upright and just man, one that feared God and eschewed evil;
If David a man after Gods own heart, one that walked before the Lord in truth
and righteousness, and uprightness of heart with God; 1. King. 3.6. If Mary,
the mother of our Lord, a woman so freely beloved of God; And to conclude, if
Christ the only begotten of the Father, could not come to glory but through
many tribulations, and afflictions: I hope the doctrine, which I have delivered
stands without contradiction, and that it is a most undoubted and undeniable
truth, that, None, no not the best of Gods children, are without their trials
and affflictions.

Affliction finds out sins.
And if any should demand a reason, why the Lord does thus deal with his dear
ones, many may be rendered: some whereof respect the sins of his children,
either as they are past, present, or to come.

Sometime the Lord afflicts his children that so they may ransack and search
their own hearts and consciences, and so find out some sins which have a long
time lurked in their breasts, and are not as yet repented of: Lament. 3.39, 40.
Man suffers for his sin, let us search and try our ways. The heart is
deep, yea, deceitful and wicked above all things, who can know it. Jere. 17.9.
It has many turnings and secret corners, many holes for sin to sculk and
lurk in, so as it will very hardly be found out unless a privy watch be set,
a narrow search be made. In the examination of a crafty, a cunning thief, the
Justice or Judge had need to gather his wits together, and to have his eyes in
his head, least he be not able to find out that villainy which will never be
confessed, though the evidence be clear against it. Affliction will quicken our
wits, and clear our eyesight, so as we shall be the better able to find out
those sins which otherwise (peradventure) would never have been discovered.
That person that cannot by affliction be wrought upon to search what is amiss
in him, will never do it. If the conscience which has been rockt asleep in the
cradle of prosperity, cannot be awakned by affliction, it is in a deep, if not
a deadly sleep. Joseph's brethren could be touched in their consciences for
their unnatural, and cruel usage of their brother, when they were in some
straights, suspected (as they conceived) to be spies, and one of their brethren
taken, and bound before their eyes. Genes. 42.21. Whereas for diverse years
before, they had no check of conscience for their sin.

Job in the day of his adversity could call to mind old sins, afflictions
could bring them fresh to his remembrance: Thou writest bitter things against
me, and make me to possess the iniquities of my youth. Job. 13.26.

Job 36 8, 9
Elihu has an excellent speech to this purpose, If they be bound in fetters,
and tied with the cords of affliction, then will he show them their work and
their sins.

Teaching us hereby, that until such time as the Lord by some affliction or
other does hamper and shackle us, we have no list to find out our sins, but
had rather cover, and daube them over. Whereas affliction (like unto a
prospective-glasse) will show us things a far off; and discover unto us many
corruptions, which we have either buried, or else slighted over. In affliction
we can see our formalitie, barrenness, loosnesse, dead-heartednesse,
lithernesse in good duties, pride, hypocrisy, earthly-mindednesse,
uncharitableness, and many more old, and new sins, which before we took
little, or no notice of. Therefore if thou be now under the rod of God, or
hereafter may be, say unto thy heart, surely there lies some wedge of gold,
or Babylonish garment hid, which the Lord would have me search, and find out,
certainly there is some Jonah that has raised this storm, there is some sin
or other that has caused all this affliction to befall me, which must be found
out, yea, and cast out of my heart, (as Ionab was thrown out of the ship)
before this storm will be calm, before the Lord will take off his hand from
afflicting me. Therefore do not repine at the Lords wise and righteous dealing,
but let thine anget and indignation reflect upon thine own vile heart, cast thy
self with all humility, at the feet of God, beg some of his eye salve,
whereby the eyes of thy understanding may be enlightened, that thou may be the
more able to gage and search the bottom of thy heart, find out that, or those
sins which have provoked the Lord against thee, lest thou perish through
impenitency. St. Paul writing unto the Corinthians, about their profaning of
the Lords ordinance, their abuse of the Sacrament, tells them that for this
cause many are weak and sick among you: and many sleep, for if we would judge
our selves, we should not be judged. 1. Cor. 11.30.31. implying thus much;
that Gods hand lay upon them, that so they might search out, see and confess
their sins, that so God might pardon them. Therefore as at all times, so
especially in the time of affliction we should narrowly sift, and search our
hearts, lest any corruption lie lurking there to do us a mischief. And if ever
we be brought to a sight and confession of our sins, it will be while the
rod is upon our back: when the Lord had thoroughly jerked Ephraim, he could
smite on his thigh, be ashamed and confounded, because he did bear the
reproach of his youth. Jerem. 31.19. Old sins could bleed afresh before them
when the hand of God did crush them. The Lord by the Prophet Ezekiel, told
Jerusalem, that he would judge her after the manner of harlots, and would give
her the blood of wrath and jealousy. Ezekiel. 16.38. Because thou have not
remembered the days of thy youth, but have provoked me with all these things;
behold, therefore I also have brought thy way upon thine head, says the Lord
God: yet have thou not had consideration of all thine abominations. Verse. 43.
Teaching us, that the end of Gods correcting them, was to bring them to a
consideration and sight of their sins.

Affliction purges out sin.
A second reason of the Lords dealing sharply with his children, is, to purge
them, and cleanse them from all their filthiness of the flesh and spirit. This
appears by diverse places of Scripture. I I will turn my hand upon thee, and
purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy sin. Esa. 1.25. And some
of them of understanding shall fall to try them, and to purge them, and to
make them white. Dan. 11.35. And so in Esa, 4* 4. When the Lord shall have
washed away the filth of the daughters Sion, and shall have purged the blood of
Jerusalem from the midst thereof, by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit
of burning And Esaias. 27.9. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and
this is all the fruit, even the taking away of his sin: not by justifying,
but by sanctifying them; by the rod of affliction beating sin out of its old
corners; for as Elihu said, Job 36.10. He opens their ear to discipline, and
commands them that they return from iniquity. when the Lord does afflict us,
he does really call upon us, and charge us to turn from our evil ways. He
knows my way, and tries me (says Job 23.10.) and I shall come forth like
the gold. Behold, says the Lord, I have fined thee; I have chosen thee in the
furnace of affliction. Esa. 48.10. The Lord compares affliction unto a furnace,
into which the Goldsmiths does cast his metals to fine them, to purge them from
that dirt and dross which is mingled with them. Prosperity, health, ease,
liberty, are occasions of contracting, and gathering soil, and dross;
therefore the Lord (who loves to see his children clean) will bring them through
the fire, and will fine them as Silver, and try them as Gold is tried. Zach.
13.9. Hence it is that the Apostle Peter says We are in heaviness through
manifold temptations, that the trial of our faith being much more precious then
gold that perishes, might be found to our praise. 1. Pet. 1.6.7. He does
chasten us for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness. Hebr.
12.10. Which we cannot be unless we be washed and cleansed from the filth of
sin. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit,
and grow up into full holiness in the fear of God. 2. Cor. 7.1. Hence it is
that David Professes, It is good for me that I have been afflicted. Psalm.
119.71.

Affliction is physic for the soul.
Afflictions often times make a bad man good, they always make a good man better.
Therefore take this for a sure ground, That the Lord never afflicts the body,
but for the souls good, he never brings any evil upon our bodies, but with an
intent to better the soul. When the Lord does afflict us, he is in a course of
Physic with us, to purge out those malignant humors, which in the days of our
prosperity we have contracted unto our selves.

Therefore as we are content to receive bitter pills, sick vomits, and
unpleasing potions for our bodily health, striving to take them down, though
they go sore against our stomach: As we endure sharp salves, and strong
eating plasters, and powders to be applied to bodily sores, for the taking
down of our proud, and eating out our dead flesh; so must we be patient in the
time of affliction, seeing it is a means of helping, and curing our sick
distempered souls. Sin is the souls sickness, and affliction is that physic
which the Lord that wise and good Physician sees meet to be applied unto us for
our health, and recovery. Therefore as that man's body is in a dangerous (if not
desperate) case upon which physic will not work, or working but a little, does
little, or no good unto him, so as still the dissease prevails, and the body
languisheth: even so it fares with our souls, if afflictions cannot better us,
our case is desperate. Eze. 24.13. Thou remainest in thy filthiness and
wickedness, because I would have purged thee, and thou wast not purged: thou
shall not be purged from thy filthiness, till I have caused my wrath to light
upon thee.

Gods corrections are for our reformation, and amendment, but if they cannot
reform us, they make way either for greater judgments, as Levit. 26.21. Where
the Lord tells us that, if we walk stubbornly against him, and will not obey
him, he will then bring seven times more plagues upon us, according to our
sins. Or else they prepare us for confusion and destruction; for he that
hardneth his neck when he is rebuked, shall suddenly be destroyed, and cannot
be cured. Prove. 29.1. Some by accustoming themselves to sin, are brought at
last into an incurable condition; so that we may say of him, and to him, as it
was spoken to the King of Ashur, There is no healing of thy wound. Nahum 3.19.
To be never the better for affliction, is to bear the brand of a wicked person.
This is King Ahaz, who in the time of his tribulation did yet trespass more
against the Lord. 2 Chro. 28.22. And this will seal up unto all incorrigible
persons, Gods heavier judgments, which he will one day bring upon them.

True it is, that many are so far in league with sin, that none of those
blows which God gives them will break that cursed league betwixt them and
their sin; all that the Lord does unto them is little enough to bring them to
a sight of sin: But God will have sin out of request with us, and us out of
love with it, that sin may stink in our nostrills, as it is unpleasing to the
Lord. Many having a stinking disease in them or upon them, seek not out for
cure because it savors not amiss to them, the smell thereof is not offensive
unto them: but when once they begin to be annoyed with their own stinck, then
they seek out for help and remedy: Affliction searches sin to the quick,
stirs up the bottom of our corruption, makes it stink in our nostrils, so as
we begin to grow out of love with that evil which sometime has been most
delightful and pleasing unto us. Therefore if iniquity be in thy hand, put it
far away, and let not wickedness dwell in thy tabernacle, said Zophar. Job.
11.14. This was good counsel given to Job in his affliction: he must purge his
hand and house, yea, and heart too of all wickedness, then he should lift up his
face without spot, he should be stable, and not fear. Job 11.15. then should
he be justified of the Lord, freed from the stain of his sin, and be without
all fear of judgment, yea, says Zophar, Thou shall forget thy misery: Not
only be an end of troubles, but ease and joy shall come in the place of them.

Affliction preventeth sin.
Thirdly, as affliction serves to find out sin past, and to purge sin
present, so also to prevent sin to come: which the Lord (who knows us better
the^ we know our selves) sees we would run into. Hence it was that a thorn
in the flesh, the messenger of Satan was sent to buffet Paul, lest he should be
exalted above measure. 2. Cor. 12.7. The Lord was pleased so highly to honor
Paul, as to take him up into Paradise where he heard words which cannot be
spoken, which are not possible for man to utter; whereupon, least Paul should
grow too high in the instep, and think better of himself, then there was
cause, the Lord in wisdom takes him down a peg, sends a satanicall messenger
to buffet him, that so he might not be exalted. The Lord sees we are ready to
cast our selves into some perils and dangers, or to run into some evils, which
would tend to the dishonor of his name, or the scandal of our profession;
therefore, by affliction (as with a bit, or bridle put into our mouths) he
does restrain us, and so, wisely, prevents those sins, which (if affliction
were not) we should fall into. God in his afflicting of his children looks not
always* backward upon their sins past, but sometimes forward upon sins to
come? and makes them his principal aim and end of afflicting his children.
There is a preventing Physic, for preservation of our health, as well as
Physic for recovery, out of some desease already grown upon us. And yet I
would have none to be mistaken in this particular; as though God did at any
time afflict any without cause. Although the Lord does sometimes afflict, and
not for sin; yet never without sin, either inherent, or imputed. God is so
far from picking holes in our coat, so far from afflicting any without just
cause, that he may see enough in the best of us, yea even in our best
services, and performances to afflict us. The best of us brought with us into
the world so much corruption, and do carry about us such bodies of sin, as
may expose us to all the plagues of this and another life. Every one of us has
in himself sufficient fuel for the fire of Gods wrath to work evermore upon
him, if the Lord in his justice would be pleased to kindle it. Let no man
therefore question Gods justice in afflicting the best of his children, because
(as I have said) he sometimes afflicts us to prevent some evil to come, which
through our natural propension, through some violent occasion, or through some
strong temptation we may be drawn into.

Ephraim was mad upon sin, therefore says the Lord, Hos. 2.6. I will stop
thy way with thorns, and make an hedge, that she may not find her paths. Too
much sunshine will dazzle our eyes. Too much honey turns to gall: so too much
prosperity and ease breeds security, and makes us proud, or wanton; therefore
lest our rank blood should cause some inflammation, it pleases God (our wise
and loving Physician) to open a vein, to cool us, and to keep us in good
temper. Horses that are full fed, and pampered, grow (many times) restif:
Vessels unused do quickly grow rusty: even so our nature would soon contract
some evil, if the Lord should not now and then take us into affliction's
scouring house. The Lord sees, that prosperity and immunity from affliction
blunts the edge of our devotion, cools the fire of our zeal, and dulleth our
eager pursuit after Heaven and Heavenly things, and therefore he afflicts us to
prevent these evils, as he took away Jeroboams son by death, lest if he had
lived longer, he might have trod in the steps of his wicked father, and been
tainted with his sins. It may be the Lord sees that we would run into some
danger, if he should let us alone, therefore as he snached Lot out of Sodom,
lest he should have perished in their flames, so he catches hold of us by
affliction, thereby to deliver us from some sin we are falling into.

Therefore whatsoever trial and affliction, does befall thee, lay thy hand
upon thy mouth, murmr not against the Lord, but be thankful unto him, and
say, O Lord thou know the distemper of my soul, thou know how prone I am
to sin and wickedness, and thou (who see things to come as if they were
present) see, I was inclining to some evil, but in mercy have by this
affliction prevented me, keep me therefore from falling into evil, by what
means thou please, suffer me not to sin against thee.

Affliction teaches us.
Fourthly, the Lord does afflict us, to teach us some good lesson, which
(without affliction) he sees we shall hardly learn. Psalm. 119.71. It is good
for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes. Corrections
are instructions. (...).
God will have none of his to perish, for want of instruction. he sends his
word amongst us, to teach us his ways, that so we may walk in his truth. Psalm.
86.11. But outward prosperity so thickens our ear, and so hardens our heart,
that we cannot, we will not hear to our profit: Jerem. 22.21. I spoke unto
thee when thou wast in prosperity, but thou said, I will not hear: this has
been thy manner from thy youth, that thou would not obey my voice; therefore
the Lord opens the ear of men, even by their corrections, Job 33.16. For such
as will not hear the word, shall hear the rod, Mica. 6.9. Manasses learned that
lesson in the school of affliction, which could never be taught him in the
school of the Prophets. 2 Chronicles. 33.12. In his tribulation he humbled himself
greatly before the God of his fathers. He that was proud, and could set
himself against the Lord and his truth, and all that professed it, all the
while he was in prosperity, and upon his throne; when the Lord caused him to be
cast in prison, and put chains of iron upon his legs, in stead of a chain of
Gold about his neck, he could then learn to be humble, and obedient unto the
Lord. Nabuchadnezzar being pulled out of his Babel, driven from men, to have
his dwelling amongst the beasts, could at length come to praise, extol and
magnify the King of heaven, whose works are all truth, and able to abase those
that walk in pride. Dan. 4 34. Our hearts are very hard and sturdy, so as the
word will not break them, until the Lord by affliction subdues, and humbles
these hearts of ours, making them soft and yielding, so as the word may take
some impression in us. Hence it is that Solomon tells us, Prove. 15.32. He that
obeys correction, gets understanding. Some say, that many (and I have found
it true in some) children after a sickness grow both in ripeness of
understanding, and in stature of body: so it is with the Lords children:
affliction brings them to a better understanding of heaven, and heavenly
things (as Nebuchadnezzar confessed, Dan. 4.33. Mine understanding was restored
unto me) and causes the inner man to grow more then before. It teaches us to
walk in the right way, and to keep Gods Word, as Psalm. 119.67. Before I was
afflicted I went astray: but now I keep thy word. What havoc did Paul (before
the Lord met with him) make of Christ's flock? entering into every house he drew
out both men and women, and put them into prison, Acts. 8.3. And being armed
with malice, and authority, he posteth to Damascus, to put in execution his
bloody commission: but the Lord meets him by the way, unhorseth this
persecutor, strikes him down to the ground, and smites him with blindness; and
what followed? Paul was now a new man: Act. 9.6. He then both trembling, and
astonished, said, Lord what will thou that I do? What had become of Paul, if
affliction had not been? Which of Gods children cannot say as David said, It
is good for me that I have been afflicted? Nay, what affliction has at any
time befalne us, which we could have spared? Nay (let me go a little further)
is it not best with us, when we are under the rod? Would it not be better with
us (think you) if the Lord should afflict us more? If thou be the child of
God, I appeal to thy conscience, whether thy case had not been far worse,
then now it is if affliction had not been. Many are like unto those kind of
fishes which seldom or never (without much difficulty, and labor) can be
caught but when the water is troubled. So before troubles do befall many, they
cannot be caught with the net of the Gospel, all the cost that is bestowed upon
them, all the pains that are taken with them, do them little or no good. All
the good that the most of us learn is in the school of affliction. So that
affliction may say (concerning the good we have) as Laban in another case said
to Jacob, Genesis 31.43 All that thou see is mine. So in some sense may
affliction say, Thy humility, thy faith, thy charity, thy obedience, etc. all
mine: from whence had thou them? of whom did thou learn them, but of me?
and therefore may thank me for them, Blessed is the man (says David to the
Lord: Psalm. 94.12.) whom thou chastisest and teach him thy Law. If we can
pick no good out of our afflictions, learn nothing from them, woe will be unto
us, that ever we were corrected. The judgments which are upon others should
better us, according to that of Esaias. 26. 9. Seeing thy judgments are in the
earth, the inhabitants of the world shall learn righteousness. If God will
have us to profit by the calamities, and miseries, which do befall others, how
much more by those afflictions, which touch our own skin, or come into our own
bowels? But, alas such blocks, such non-proficients we are, that the Lord may
justly complain of us, as he did of Israel, in the days of Amos, I have thus,
and thus corrected you, Yet have you not returned unto me says the Lord.
Amos. 4.8, 9, 10.

Affliction tries the truth of grace in us
Fifthly, the Lord does sometime afflict his children, to try the truth of grace
in them: 1. Pet. 1.6, 7. Ye are in heaviness through manifold tentations, that
the trial of your Faith, being much more precious then gold that perishes,
might be found unto your praise. Apoc. 2.10. Some of you shall be cast into
prison, that you may be tried. The Lord thy God led thee (says Moses to
Israel, Deuteronomy. 8.2.) this forty year in the wilderness for to humble thee, and
to prove thee, to know what was in thine heart. Why, does not God know the
secrets of al hearts? does not he understand our thoughts afar off? Psalm. 139
1. Why then should he afflict his children, to prove what is in their hearts?
That we being afflicted, may know our own hearts the better, and that others
also may discern the truth of grace in us. Every one almost will be good
whiles all things go according to their hearts desire; as the old saying is,
The devil is good while he is pleased. Even the wicked whiles there is
nothing to thwart and cross them, will carry themselves temperatly, and
smoothly; But let the Lord set fire upon their hedge of prosperity, let the
Lord, but a little, lay his hand upon them, and you shall see that verified in
them, which Satan maliciously, and falsely laid unto Jobs charge. They will
curse God to his face, they will in a blasphemous manner, spit out their
venom, and poison against the Lord. There is a bottomless gulf of
self-deceit in the hearts even of Gods children, whence it comes to pass, that
they can hardly be brought to believe, there is so much corruption in them, as
indeed there is: but affliction, yea sometime the fear of danger does discover
it unto us: as appears in Peter; who (hearing Christ say, that all his
Apostles should be offended that night, and fly from him, Matt. 26.31.)
utterly disclaimes such unfaithfulness, and therefore tells Christ, that
whatsoever became of the rest, he would not forsake him; whereas the very fear
of some danger or trouble, made him deny, and forsware his master, as if he
knew him not. Little do we believe what filthy stuff lurketh in these wicked
hearts of ours, until such time as the Lord stirs, and provokes us by
afflictions. A man's strength is never known, until such time as it be tried,
and he have some enemy to resist him. Afflictions are tentations to try both
the truth, and the strength of grace in us: our faith, our patience, our
humility, our obedience, our love, our courage, and heavenly mindedness then
appears, when affliction (which is so contrary unto our nature) does
encounter us. For that corruption which dwells in us, being exasperated, and
provoked by affliction, will then or never show it self in its proper colors.
Our frowardness, impatience, and infidelity will then appear, when we are
pained or pinched by affliction; for then the flesh begins to kick, and winch,
because Heb. 12.11. No chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but
grievous, though afterward it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness unto
them which are thereby exercised. So that by affliction every one comes to have
an experimental knowledge of the truth, and measure of any grace in him.
Whence he may say of himself, and others may believe, and report of him, as
the Lord said to Abraham, when he saw how ready and willing he was to offer up
his only son Isaac, whom he so dearly loved, Genes. 22.12. Now I know that
thou fear God. Whiles the Gospel does go with a fair, and calm gale, whiles
ease, liberty and prosperity does attend upon the profession thereof, every one
will be a Gospeler, as Ester 8.17. Many of the people of the land became Jews,
when the fear of the Jews fell upon them. But trouble and persecution tries the
sound-hearted, from false and hypocritical professors. So that as Paul speaks
of heresies, 1. Cor. 11.19. There must be heresies among you, that they which
are approved among you may be known. So I may say of affliction, there must be
afflictions among you, that the truth of grace may be known in you.

Affliction says Paul, brings forth patience. Romans 5.31. which words to a
carnal ear may sound like Samsons riddle; Judges 14.14. Out of the eater came
meat. Patience to come out of affliction, it may seem a paradox, but it is a
most divine truth; not that afflictions do beget patience in the heart of a
man, but by them this gift, and grace of patience is exercised and manifested
in us; and in our afflictions we come to make experience of our patience.
Hence it is, that our Savior Christ is said Heb. 5.8. To have learned
obedience by the things which he suffered. Not that Christ was then to learn
obedience, but that in the time of his passions, himself, and others mighr see
and discern his obedience, who preferred the will of his Father, in drinking
of that cup which was given him, though it were never so bitter and unpleasing
unto him. We are all of us too prone to think better of our selves then there
is just cause; we can promise our selves great things, and build castles in
the air all the while we stretch our selves upon our beds, and drink wine in
bowls, live at ease and in fullness: but these paper buildings, these clay
walls of ours, are quickly shaken, and beaten down, if the Lord do but shoot
one arrow of affliction out of his quiver against us. Therefore the Lord in
love, and wisdom exercises his children, that the truth and strength of
grace may be tried, and seen in us, that so we may thoroughly know our selves.
The skill of the Pilot is then best discerned, when the winds blow: when the
waves and billows rise, mounting the ship as it were up to heaven, from whence
down it falls again into the deep; every gust of wind threatening to turn it
over, every wave of the sea coming over the ship, and gaping to swallow it up:
In these tempestuous times, in these great perils to keep the ship up-right,
and to save it from drowning, this does manifest, both the knowledge, and the
pains of the Pilot: whereas every skuller will be able to cross the seas in a
calm, and when there be no waves to cross him. So every one will hold up his
head, and be cheerful whiles prosperity blows upon him, and nothing to cross
him: but adversity tryes the man, and the truth and strength of grace in him.
For Prove. 24.10. If thou be faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is
small. Saint John having spoken of that war which the beast should make with
the Saints, and how they should be led into captivity, and be killed by the
sword, ads presently after, Revel. 13.9. here is the patience and faith of the
Saints: as if he should say, By these afflictions will the Lord both exercise,
and manifest the faith and patience of the Saints. Many drugs, and spices have
an excellent savor in them, which we cannot smell until such time as they be
either grated, or stamped to powder, or burnt in the fire: so when we are
grated by trouble, stamped in the mortar of affliction, or cast in the furnace,
and fire of tentation, then (more then before) the fragrant, and sweet smell of
grace is discerned in us. Arise O North (says Christ, Cant. 4.16.) and blow on
my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out. When persecution blew upon the
blessed Martyrs, in those bloody times of Popery, how sweetly did grace smell
in them? how meekly, how patiently and cheerfully did they go under their
cross, and undergo whatsoever malice and cruelty could inflict upon them? The
rage and violence of their enemies was so far from daunting, and putting out
the light of grace in them, that it more increased it.

Affliction does fit us for Gods service.
Sixthly, the Lord does sometime afflict his children to fit and prepare them
for some special work and service wherein they are to be employed. When we
see a Carpenter tumbling and rolling any piece of timber up and down, we may
conceive that he overlooks it, to see whether it will serve his turn or no: but
when he strikes his axe into it, when he falls to hewing, squaring, and sawing
of it, then we know for certain it is for some use, and service. All the while
the wheat lies still upon the mow, it serves for no use; before it can be used
it must be threshed, and fanned or winnowed, or cast up and down. Even so the
Lord deals with his children, before he imployes them in any special service.
Affliction is the axe, the saw, the chissell which heweth and pollifheth us;
the fan which winnoweth and cleanses us, making us fit for that work which he
has appointed us unto. Before Joseph can be promoted in Pharaohs Court, and
have the sway (as it were of his Kingdom) that he may store up provision for
Jacob, and his family, he must endure much hard-ship; he must be sold as a
slave unto strangers; carried (by men unknown) away from his fathers house,
into a far country; and there he must be cast into prison, Psalm. 105.17.18.
They held his feet in the stocks, and he was laid in irons. Before Moses is
sent unto Pharaoh to charge him to let the children of Israel depart out of
Egypt, before he is appointed to be the captain and commander of that great
and mighty people of Israel, he must be banished from house and home, from
kindred, and acquaintance, and as Heb. 11.25. suffer adversity with the people
of God. Before David could have the scepter of the kingdom put into his hands,
and the crown set upon his head, he must endure many a hard brunt: go through
many difficulties, and perils, be tossed up and down from post to pillar,
banished from wife and children, with a world of other troubles, wherewith it
pleased the Lord to exercise him. Yea, Christ himself was by affliction
fitted, and prepared for that great work of our redemption: For it became him,
that he should consecrate the Prince of their salvation through afflictions.
Heb. 2.10. Therefore whenever thou art exercised with any kind of
afflictions, say thus with thy self: I perceive the Lord has some work to set
me about, some service to employ me in, and therefore makes trial of me
beforehand, that so I may be the better able to do him service, in that work
he shall set me about, and call me unto.

Affliction teaches us to prize Gods benefits.
Seaventhly, the Lord does sometime withdraw from his children these outward and
earthly comforts, lest through their long, and plentiful enjoying of them,
they begin either to grow wanton in the abuse of them, or else begin to
underprize, if not contemn them. The Lord sees that we would not esteem
aright of the comforts which we reap from his love, and bounty, if sometimes
(more or less) we should not feel the smart of his displeasure for abusing
his benefits. Plenty (often times) causes satietie: as appears by those full
fed Israelites, who grew to a lothing of that food which the Lord (in
abundance) provided for them. We can see nothing but this Manna, Numb. 11.6.
The prodigal mentioned Luke 15. grew weary of his fathers house; their diet,
and fare too coorse, and homely, not fine enough for his dainty tooth: their
society, and company too plain and rude for such a gallant as he was: abroad
he must, and from his father he would, to see fashions, or to try
conclusions; so long that at length the beggar meets with him, poverty pincheth
him, and hunger biteth him; then he could look back from whence he came, and
then he could prize the privileges of his fathers family. How many hired
servants of my fathers have bread enough, and I die for hunger. Luke 15.17. He
should now think himself a happy man, if (upon any conditions) he could but
get into his fathers house again; though he were put unto any service, though
but as one of his hired servants, Luke 15.19.

Absence and intermission of any outward benefits, and desirable comforts,
add a great deal of life to the love of them, and weight to their worth and
valuation. The goodness of any thing we enjoy, is better perceived by
vicissitude of want, then continual fruition. Sleep is never so much longed
for and desired, as after the tediousness of some wakefull, and wearisom
nights of restless tossings up and down, or turning too and fro in our tedious
bed. The light (if it were always day with us) would never be so acceptable,
were it not for the usual intercourse of darkness. The Spring would never be
so welcome as it is, had we not a cold biting and frosty Winter. We never
come to know the benefit of health, until such time as the Lord cast us upon
our sick bed. We know not what our liberty is, until we be thrown into
prison, etc.

Therefore because we are so ready to underprize the good benefits of God and
to rob him of those praises we should yield unto him for them: the Lord in
wisdom afflicts us, cuts us short of them, that so we may know the price,
and worth of them, by the want of them.

Affliction weaneth us from the world.
Eighthly, the Lord does sometime afflict us to we^^ us from this world. Such is
the corruption of our vile and stinking hearts, that the things of this life
sit too cloce unno them, cooling the fervor of our first love, and by little
and little stealing away our minds from the practice and pursuit of heavenly
things. Whence it comes to pass, that too many Christians like moules, are
always rooting and scraping in the earth: yea, doting upon the world, with
immoderation, and carking, to the great disgrace of their persons, and the foul
reproach of their profession, and calling; opening the mouths of unregenerate
ones to blaspheme the ways of God, and saying; These are such as make not
godliness their gain, but rather, their gain their godliness. Nay too often the
world by its subtle insinuations lulls them so long upon her lap, that they are
cast into a deep slumber, even of carnal security: that though the Lord cry
aloud in their ears by the voice of his ministers, and speak to their
consciences by the inward motions of his holy Spirit, and entreat them to give
over their eager pursuit of the world, to let earthly things fall out of their
minds, and to mind heavenly things to better purpose; yet for all this they
will not knock off, but forge and frame many shifts, excuses, and delays, as
the Church in the Cantic. 5.3. I have put off my coat, how shall I pat it on? I
have washed my feet, etc. Whereupon her blessed Lord, so unworthily repelld,
departs for a time, and suffers her to be taken by the watchmen of the city,
who smote her, and wounded her: which she might have escaped, had she not
loved her ease too well. A thousand pitties it is, to see how fast the minds
of many are locked to outward things, as if they never knew what joy, or
delight in heavenly things meant: hence it is that the Lord afflicts them, to
beat them off from resting upon, and too much delighting in these transitory
vanities. In our prosperity we are ready to think we shall never be removed:
and with the rich fool in the Gospel, encourage our selves to ease, and
liberty, because (as we think) we have enough for many years, Luke 12.9. If
all things go well with us, we are ready to set up our rest, and (with Peter)
to say, Mark 9.5. It is good for us to be here; nay as the Laodicean said, We
be rich and increased with goods, we think we have need of nothing: we fear
no colors, for the rich man's riches are his strong city, and as an high wall
in his imagination, Prove. 18.11. whereupon lest we should lean too much upon
these outward things, and so have our hearts, our hope, and trust drawn away
from the Lord, he in wisdom, and mercy withdrawes from us these weak crutches,
and stilts of ours: We are ready to make prosperity our bulwark to shelter and
defend us from all harms: and those things which we hold of the free
goodness of God, and his good pleasure, we are ready to think we have them
in our own right, and so we make (as it were) a rent charge of all that which
the Lord affords us of his free bounty. Whereupon least we should challenge
Gods gifts as our own right, the Lord will let us know of whom we hold them,
by taking them away from us. To please, or flatter our selves with any outward
things, is to reckon without our host: those things are not ours either by
fee-tayle, or fee-simple; but as tenants at will, we must hold them of him, who
may every day take them from us, or us from them. If God should let us alone,
suffer us always to abound and swim in plenty, we should be ready to take
our selves to be some petty Gods, and we would not care for any life but this.

Therefore lest we should dote too much upon this world, and take too much
content in these outward things, as Jonas did in his gourd, the Lord will blast
them, and smite them, that so we may see the vanity of them. If the things of
this life, begin to steal away our hearts from beter things, the Lord sees it
is high time, either to trust us no longer with them, and therefore takes them
from us: as parents take a knife from their child, lest he should hurt
himself, or others withal. Or else (if the Lord suffers us still to enjoy
them) he will cast in some bitter thing amongst them (as nurses when they
would wean their children, rub their nipples with some unpleasing thing) to
wean our minds and affections from them. If the Lord send Jacob a Benjamin, he
will take away a Rachel. If there be a Ziba to meet David, 2. Sa. 16.1. with
two hundred cakes, an hundred bunches of raisins, dried figgs, and a bottle of
wine to comfort him: there will be a Shimei at his heels to cast stones at
David and curse him, and to tell him that he was taken in his wickedness,
because he was a murderer.

Certainly, if the Lord should not thus remember us with some affliction or
other, we would quickly forget both God and our selves. For being full, we be
ready to deny the Lord, as Agar said, Prove. 30.9. Man in prosperity is so
proud, that he seeks not for God. Psalm. 10.4.

Hence it is, that the Lord complained of Israel, by Hoseah, They were filled,
and their hearts were exalted; therefore, they have forgotten me, Hos. 13.6.
Prosperity and abundance does even intoxicate many, and make them like drunken
men: so besotts and befools them, that they have no thoughts of heaven, or
heavenly things: no hearts to be thankful (as they should) to God the giver of
every thing they enjoy. Such is the corruption of our wicked nature, that the
more of these temporal blessings we receive from God, the less we think,
we need him, and the seldomer we think upon him. If once, Psalm. 17.10. we
be enclosed in our own fat (twenty to one but) we shall speak proudly with our
mouth: and be ready to ask (as did proud Pharaoh) Who is the Lord, that I
should obey his voice? Exodus 5.2. Therefore to prevent the manifold mischiefs
which ease, and prosperity (as was formerly said) may bring upon us; to beat us
out of our earthly trenches, and to draw up our minds, and affections unto
better objects: that we may seek better things then this life can afford us,
and make heavenly things our chiefest treasure, and portion; the Lord will have
us to feed upon this world, as the children of Israel did eat the Passover,
not only with sour herbs, to allay the sweetness of their bread, but also
with their staves in their hands, as those that were ready to go toward
Canaan, their place of rest. For we are strangers and pilgrims on the earth,
here we have no continuing city, Hebr. 13.14. This world is but a bayting
place, as an Inn to rest our selves in for a while. Therefore God will have us
so to use it, as if we used it not, because the fashion of this world goes
away, 1. Cor. 7.31. They that set their affections on things below, do not live
as those that lay up for themselves treasures in heaven, seeking better and
more durable riches, then the world is able to afford them; but as those that
make their belly, or their Mammon their God. These may well be compared to a
swinish sot, who traveling toward the place of his inheritance is content to
become an hostler in some base or obscure Inn, to give content unto the
tapster thereof. Little do we know, how the Lord takes it (and well he may)
to heart, to see us so dote upon the things of this world, and set our hearts
so much upon them as we do. God would have his children to live by faith, to
trust in him, and to rest and bear themselves upon his promises. Remember
(says David Psalm. 119.49.) thy promise made to thy servant, wherein thou have
caused me to trust. How can we trust in the Lord, if we make outward things
our confidence? Therefore it is just with the Lord to strip us, and spoil us
of these base props, that so our hope, and confidence, our joy and delight may
be chiefly in the Lord. It is said that Zeno having suffered shipwreck,
addicted himself to the study of Philosophy, the sweetness whereof after he
had once tasted, he accounted that an happy shipwreck, which caused him to
affect such excellent knowledge. So first, or last, has, and will every
regenerate child of God say, O blessed be that affliction, whether it be
sickness, poverty, reproach, or contempt of the world, persecution,
imprisonment, etc. which weaned my wicked heart from delighting in these
transitory things, and brought my mind and affections to pitch upon heaven and
heavenly things.

Affliction stirs us up to prayer.
Ninthly, the Lord does many times afflict his children to bring them unto the
throne of grace; and to make them more ready and desirous to seek his face, and
to call upon his name, who are too seldom upon their knees before the Lord; and
to make those which do daily seek him, seek him more earnestly, with greater
ardency, and affection then formerly they have done.

Many of Gods children are too great strangers with the Lord, they visit him
not so often as he would have them, and therefore he is constrained to send
for them by affliction, a messenger, which does its errand, so well, as he
brings along with him those (for the most part) unto whom he is sent. In
trouble they have visited thee: they powered out a prayer when thy chastning was
upon them. Esaias. 26.16. The Prophet complaining of the sins of his time, and of
the senseless stupiditie of the people, who as it seems were not moved nor
affected at the first with their misery; but when troubles came thick upon
them, and the hand of God grew heavy; then they could cry out upon their
sins, and call and cry to God, Our iniquities like the wind have taken us
away: There it none that called upon thy name, neither that stirs up himself
to take hold of thee: for thou have hid thy face from us, and have consumed us
because of our iniquities. But now, O Lord, thou art our father: we are the
clay, and thou art our potter, and we are all the work of thine hands: Be not
angry O Lord above measure, neither remember iniquity for ever: lo we beseech
thee behold, we are all thy people. Ha. 6.4.7, 8, 9. Manasses, who (it may be)
had never offered up prayer to the Lord, being so gross an idolater, one that
made Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to err, and to do worse then the
heathen whom the Lord had destroyed before the children of Israel. 2. Chro.
33.9. Yet this monster of men, who brought vengeance upon Judah, and Jerusalem,
for his sin, as appears, Jere. 15.4. When he was in tribulation prayed unto
the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers.
2. Chro. 33.12. We are naturally like to those proud poor people, who are loath
to ask any alms till very need and necessity drives them out of doors, to
make their wants known, and to beg relief: but need will make the old wife
trot. Want many times brings proud stout rebels upon their knees. Psalm.
107.5.6. They were hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them, then they
cried unto the Lord in their trouble. When they were in any straights through
oppression, or in any heaviness, then they cried unto the Lord in their
trovble, Psalm. 107.12.13. When sickness has brought them low, and made them
so weak, that their soul abhors all manner of meat, and they are brought to
deaths door, then they cry unto the Lord. Psalm. 107.18, 19. When Jonah was
shipped for Tarshish, the Lord sent out a great wind into the sea, and there was
a mighty tempest in the sea, so that the ship was like to be broken, Jon.
1.4.5, 6. Then the Mariners were afraid, and cried every man unto his god. And
Jonah being asleep, they awaken him, and bid him a rise, and call upon his God,
that they perish not. It may be Jonah being conscious to himself of his
stubbornness and disobedience, did not seek to the Lord in the time of the
storm; or if he prayed, it may be it was not in faith, for none of their
prayers could aswage the storm until such time as Jonah was cast into the
sea: and of this thing was Jonah persuaded; whereupon said Jonah, Take me and
cast me into the sea, so shall the sea be calm unto you, for I know that for
my sake this great tempest it upon you. Jon. 1.12. And howsoever the Mariners
at first abhorred the fact, yet when they saw that there was no remedy, into
the sea they cast Jonah. Where the Lord prepared a Whale to swallow him up.
Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord his God out of the fishes belly, and said, I
cried in mine affliction unto the Lord, and he heard me. Ion. 2.1, 2.

Which places (with many more) do teach us how affliction drives people unto
prayer; and makes them as well as they can, to lift up hands and eyes toward
heaven, to fall upon their knees, entreat the Lord to save them, to spare them,
or to deliver them from that evil, their fear is coming toward them: in the
time of a tempest at sea, when every wave threatens to swallow up the ship; or
in the time of any terrible thunder, and lightning, how godly, how holy, will
the prophanest be? out of their beds they must, and to prayer they will (if
they be able) themselves, if not, as Pharaoh entreated Moses, Exodus 9.28. Pray
unto the Lord that there be no more mighty thunders and hail. So they will
entreat those that can, to pray for them. But what says holy Job of such
hypocrites as these are? Will God hear his cry when trouble comes upon him?
will be set his delight on the Almighty? will he call upon God at all times?
Job 27.9, 10. Is he like to speed that seldom or never goes unto the Lord,
but when want, and necessity drives him? for if affliction were not, he would
not come at God. It fares with many as with young chickins, in a fair, calm,
sunshine day; you may see them all straggling from the hen, one here and
another there: the hen desirous to have her young ones near here, clucks and
clucks again for them, as having some provision for them: but they regard not
her call, until at length the kyte draws near them, ready to catch one of them
up: then they cry and run with all speed to their dam for shelter. Even so
the Lord seeing us to straggle too far from him, calls us unto him, but we
regard not his call; whereupon he lets fly at us, he causes some affliction
or other to terrify us, and then we speed it to the Lord, then we can lay on
tongue, Help Lord, etc. So that the Lord deals with us as Absalom did with
Joab, because we deal with the Lord as Joab did with Absalom. Absalom sends for
Ioab, but he would not come to him. 2. Sam. 14.29. Absalom sends again, and
Ioab was the same man still, he stirs not a foot, he would not come. Whereupon
Absalom commands his servants to set fire on a field of barley which Ioab
had; Ioab then needs no more messengers, he can then arise, and come in haste
to Absalom without any more sending for. Thus it is with us, the Lord sends for
us by the mouth of his Ministers, he would have us come and appear continually
before him, Cant. 2.14. Show me thy sight, let me hear thy voice: but we have
little or no mind this way: he may send in haste, but we take time, and will
go at our own leisure, whereupon the Lord sets on fire something we have:
that is, spoils us of something, that is pleasing, and delightful unto us,
and then we can run with open mouth, Save us Lord, etc. So that it is mere
need drives many unto God by prayer: If they could have help elsewhere, or by
any other ways be furnished, or have their turn served, they would not come at
God. David's words may well be applied unto them, Psalm. 142.4, 5. I looked upon
my right hand, and beheld, but there was none that would know me: all refuge
failed me, and none cared for my soul: then cried I unto the Lord, and said,
Thou art my hope and my portion. When other refuge and help fails, then they
can run unto the Lord for help, and succor. These do in a manner tell the
Lord, as many rogues do answer us at our doors. Truly they never asked any
thing of us before: and if they could shift it, or if great necessity did not
compel them to beg, they would not now have troubled us. Therefore the Lord
deals with these, as many a wise, and discreet tradesman does with some
pedling chapman, whose custom he never had before, neither now should have it,
if he could elsewhere have furnished himself with wares and commodities for
his turn; If any wares be worse then other, the tradesman will put them off to
such a fellow, because he knows it is not love, but necessity that brought him
unto his shop. As for his choice and best commodities, those he will reserve
for his best chapmen: whose custom he has always had, and who will not leave
his shop to go to another. Even so will the Lord deal with the wicked, who do
not continually trade with the Lord in prayer, but now and then when they are
at some pinch. Happily the Lord, (who is good unto all, and his mercies are over
all his works. Psalm. 145.9.) may put them off with some of his refuse wares,
helping them at their need with some outward worldly commodity: but as for his
choice, and rich wares, his love, his grace, his Christ, his salvation, these
shall those have who seek him continually.

0. Affliction quickneth our devotion.
Again, affliction puts life into our devotion, and makes us more instant in
Prayer. For if Affliction, makes us not importunate, nothing will.

The Lord holds us many times at the staves end, and seems to turn away from
our prayers, that so our prayers may grow more fervent: for though God knows
our wants, and takes no delight in our sorrows, yet often times he seems not to
hear us, till our cries be loud, and strong. God sees it best to let his
penitent ones dwell for a time under their affliction, and when he sees them
sinking, he lets them alone till they be at the bottom, that out of the deep
they may fetch deep sighs, and cry louder to the Lord, and so prevail. For a
vehement suitor cannot but speed with God, whatsoever he asks. If our prayers
want success, it is because they want metal and heart, their blessing is
according to their faith and fervencie. In this behalf affliction is very
needful for the best of Gods children: for too many of them (too often) seek
the living God, with dead affections. Oh the perfunctory, cold, drowsy,
lifelesse prayers which are made by some! Many (which make conscience of the
duty, and dare no day omit it) do pray so coldly, with so little zeal, and
devotion, all the while they are full and at ease, that the Lord is even
compelled to lash them, to sharpen their fervency, and to shake off that
lythernesse, and luskishnesse wherewith they were wont to come before him. Our
God that hears prayers, knows how cold, and feeble, how slight, and
perfunctory often times we be when we are in prosperity, and the rod of God is
not upon us, so as little or no life, and power appears in them; do we not
find by our own experience, that trouble and affliction, whether it be outward
or inward, not only drives us to prayer, but causes us to set all our might,
and strength, when we are wrestling with the Lord, that so we may be the more
able to prevail with his Majesty. Affliction will fashion and form the
flowest tongue unto this holy duty; and does often times furnish us with sighs
and groans which cannot be expressed. If ever a Christian will tugge and
wrestle with the Lord; it shall be when affliction lies sore upon him. All the
while the child feels the rod, or the stick, he cries out, he lays on
tongue, he does with all eagerness, and earnestness entreat for pardon, or
no more stripes: even so when we feel the smart of Gods rod whipping of us,
there is an edge set upon our prayers, we pray not in that drowsy and sleepy
manner we did before. This appears by that which David speaks Psalm. 88.9.
Mine eye mourns by reason of affliction, Lord, I have called upon thee, I
have stretched out my hands* unto thee. In their affliction they will seek me
diligently, says the Lord. Hos. 5.15. You may observe many a dog sleeping in
the chimney corner, which will not arise, when he is spoken unto; but if you
spill but a drop or two of any scalding liquor upon him, he is up, and is gone,
he cries and lays on tongue. Thus the Lord by affliction awakens his children,
so as they call upon him in a more lively manner then formerly they have done.
If you peruse the Psalms of David, you shall find that very many (if not most)
of them were penned in the time of trial and affliction. And the sharper his
afflictions were, the more fervent, and earnest were his petitions unto the
Lord, Out of the depths have I cried. Psalm. 130.1. The lower he was brought by
affliction, the higher was he in prayer, crying out unto the Lord. Thus was it
with his forefathers in the days of the Judges, the greater their danger was,
the more instant, and earnest were they in prayer unto the Lord. To give you
one instance. The children of Israel were sore troubled, and vexed by the
Ammonites, whereupon they cried unto the Lord for help; but the Lord gave them
a cold answer, saying unto them, Ye have forsaken me and served other Gods,
wherefore I will deliver you no more. Go and cry unto the gods which ye have
chosen, let them save you in the time of your tribulation, Judges 10.13, 14.
Whereupon they confessed their sins, made have to put away their strange gods
from among them, then they will lay on tongue unto the Lord, beseeching him
that he would do unto them whatsoever he pleased: Only we pray thee deliver
us this day, Judge. 10.15.

Thus I have made it evident, that afflictions are very needful to drive us
unto the Lord in prayer, yea to make us amend our pace: to double both our
diligence, and our fervency in prayer. Therefore, If any be afflicted, let him
pray. We highly dishonor God, and wrong our selves, if we seek not unto the
Lord in our troubles, Call upon me in the day of trouble, so will I deliver
thee, and thou shall glorify me. Psalm. 50.15. We must make our afflictions
our arguments to move God to deliver us, as David did Psalm. 25.16. Turn thy
face unto me, and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate, and poor.

Affliction co^formeth us unto Christ.
Eleventhly, the Lord does thus afflict his dear children to make them
conformable unto Christ: who though he were without sin, yet was he not
without affliction. If then affliction be a means of purging out sin, and
refining of us (as formerly we have heard) then it is needful we be
afflicted, that we may be made more like unto Christ, both in sufferings, and
in righteousness.

Vita crucis, vita lucis.
The life of the cross is the life of light, Christ was the light of the world,
and his life was in a sort a continual cross. Was it thus in the green tree,
and shall it not be so in the dry? was the head thus continually exercised and
should the body go free? especially when all the sufferings of Christ were for
our sake: either suffering for us, or to teach us patience by his example, or
to sanctify our afflictions unto us.

God will have all his elect to be made like to the image of his Son, Romans
8.29. Not only in holiness and obedience, but also in sufferings. We must
know the fellowship of his afflictions, and be made conformable unto his death,
Phil. 3.10. Not any that shall reign with Christ, can be exempted or
privileged from suffering with him. If any man will follow me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross daily and follow me. Luke 9.23. Yea, the
dearer and nearer unto him we be in love, the more conformable must we expect
to be made unto him in-affliction. For the bearing of the cross is a part of
our tenure, or holding of Christ himself, as may be gathered out of that place
last quoted Luke 9. Christ himself held by this tenure, Luke 24.26. Ought not
Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory? And as any
of Gods children have obtained a more evident right, and clear title unto this
inheritance: or as any hereafter shall obtain therein a greater portion of
glory, then other, by so much the more strictly are they tied, and bound to
observe the custom of the Manor. For God has predestined us (as I said even
now) to be made like to the image of his Son, first in his sufferings, then
in his glory: for we an heirs annexed with Christ; if so be that we suffer
with him, that we may be also glorified with him, Romans 8.17. The end of the
Lord his hewing and squaring of us by affliction, is to make us lively stones
of that spiritual house. 1. Pet. 2.5. so that we may be joined with Christ the
chief corner stone, 1. Pet. 2.6. unto whom we be made conformable by
affliction. And again, 2. Tim. 2.12. If we suffer, we shall also reign with
him. Hence it is that James says chap. 1.12. Blessed is the man that endures
temptation, for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the
Lord bath promised to them that love him.

Therefore such as go without correction, whereof all the Lords people are
partakers, cannot be conformable unto Christ, for he was consecrated through
afflictions. Hebr. 2.10. He was a man full of sorrows, and had experience of
infirmities. Esa. 53.3. He was in all things tempted as we are, that so he
might both have a feeling of our infirmities, and also succor us in them, for
in that he suffered, and was tempted, he is able to succor them that are
tempted, Hebr. 2.18.

Affliction prepares us for glory.
Lastly, (not to keep you any longer in laying down of more reasons) the Lord
does afflict his children in this life, that they may not perish in another
life: When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, because we should
not be condemned with the world. 1. Corin. 11.32. Prosperity, immunity, and
freedom from afflictions, ease liberty, and fulness, is the broad way which
leads to death, and condemnation. Hence it is that our blessed Savior has
pronounced, woe, to those that are rich, woe to those that live in fullness,
woe to those that live merriy, etc. Luke 6.24, 25. Now because Gods children
do naturaly linger after these earthly delights, and comforts; the Lord in
great mercy, does hedge up our ways with thorns, Hos. 2.6. He will have us
to walk the narrow way (which, as we have heard, is the cross way, through
manifold afflictions) lest we should perish, and be damned with the world.
What had become of Manasses if he had not been afflicted? He was carried into
captivity, that so he might be freed from the bondage of sin, and Satan. He
was put into chains of iron, that so he might be preserved from chains of
eternal darkness. He was cast into prison, that so he might be kept out of
hell.

Therefore says David, Psalm. 94.12, 13. Blessed is the man whom thou
chastisest O Lord, and teach him in thy Law. That thou may give him rest
from the days of evil, whilst the pit is dug for the wicked Teaching us,
that affliction is very useful, and necessary to free us fom condemnation. And
not only so, but to help us forward in the way to heaven: for our light
affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding, and
eternal weight of glory 2. Cor. 4. The afflicted man must needs be an happy
man, because glory, because a crown, because weight of glory, be-a weighty
crown of glory is not only promised, but purchased, and prepared for him.

The trial of your faith being much more precious then gold that perishes,
shall be sound unto your praise: and honor, and glory at the appearing of
Jesus Christ, 1. Pet. 1.7. The afflictions and troubles which do befall us in
this life, are the Lords earnest which he gives us of comfort, and ease in
another life. Whereupon Paul tells the Thessalonians, that those persecutions,
and tribulations which they suffered, were a token of the righteous judgment
of God, that ye may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which ye also
suffer. 2. These. 1.4, 5. As the Israelites could not come at Canaan, but they
must first be cast into the desert; and in their journey be set upon by
Amalekites, their enemies: So before we can come to that heavenly Canaan, our
place of eternal rest, we must look to encounter with our deadly enemies, the
flesh, the world, and the devil: with tentations and afflictions: these stop
us, or (at the least) offer to stay us in our journey. But these we must
manfully resist, as Israel did Amalek. When Israel went down into Egypt, they
met with no afflictions, no rubs in the way: so the way to hell is easy, and
smooth. We read not of one block, that lay in the rich gluttons way. But when
Israel came out of Egypt, what trialls, what afflictions befell them, what
enemies to oppose them? So when the Lord calls us out of the world, when we
begin to set our faces toward heaven, the devil will muster his forces against
us; but if we fight the good fight of faith, if we endure to the end, and be
faithful unto the death, great shall be our reward and recompense; even a
crown of righteousness, which the Lord that righteous Judge shall give us at
that day, 2. Tim. 4.8. Not as if we had merited, and deserved thus much by our
sufferings: for the greatest afflictions that ever any Christian has, or can
endure, are in themselves, no way worthy of that glory which shall be bestowed
upon him. For I count that the afflictions of this present time, are not worthy
of the glory which shall be showed us, Romans 8.18. If we had a thousand lives
to sacrifice to God, if we had ten thousand rivers of oil to offer up: if we
would give our firstborn for our transgression, or the fruit of our bodies for
the sin of our souls, we are no way able to satisfy Gods justice, much less
merit heaven by all our offerings, or sufferings. Were our heads wells of
waters, and our eyes fountains of tears, and we ten thousand eyes, and would
willingly weep them out for sorrow through our sins, yet all were not able to
expiate one sin, nor deserve the least corner in heaven; yet because the Lord
would have us bear our afflictions cheerfully, and thankfully; he is pleased
to promise us, that if we sow in tears, we shall reap in joy, Psalm. 126.5.
if we suffer, we shall reign with him. 2. Tim. 2.12.

The Lord puts none into possession of eternal life and glory in heaven,
before they be made fit for it, before the dross, and corruption be purged
out of them: for there shall enter into heaven no unclean thing, neither
whatsoever works abomination, or lies, Revel. 21.27. Now the way to purge,
and refine us (as has been taught) is to be cast into the furnace of
affliction, where the dross is purged out of us, and so we fitted, and
prepared for the life of glory. Thus have I been somewhat large in laying down
the reasons, why the Lord should so correct his dear children; let us now come
to make some use of the point.

Censure not the afflicted.
Does the Lord thus deal with all his beloved ones? then are many of the world
much mistaken, who are ready to censure those that are afflicted; especially if
their trials be more, or greater then ordinary. Censoriousnes, is a lesson
quickly learned, and every one (like unto Jobs miserable comforters) can make a
wrong construction both of Gods aim in correcting his children, and of their
estate and condition, which are by God afflicted. Whereby they do add
affliction unto the afflicted, and persecute him whom God has smitten, Ps.
69.26. The rule of our Savior is, that none should judge, or be judged
according to appearance, John. 7.24. yet how ready are many to give their
verdict, and pass sentence upon those that are more then ordinarily afflicted?
They cannot believe but there must be some extraordinary sin in such a
person, more then all the world sees (but known to God) in that the hand of God
is so heavy upon him. Which error our Savior rebuked in them which showed him
of the Galileans whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices. Suppose
ye (says Christ) that these Galileans were greater sinners then all the other
Galileans, because they suffered such things? I tell you nay, etc. Or think ye
that those eighteen upon whom the tower of Siloam fell, and slew them, were
sinners above all men, that dwell in Jerusalem? I tell you nay. Yet let the
affliction of any of Gods dear children be more then ordinary, then our
foolish bolt is quickly shot and we are ready to judge of the man by the
affliction: as did David's enemies, Psalm. 71.11. God has forsaken him pursue
and take him, for there is none to deliver him. So the Barbarians when they saw
a viper hang upon Paul's hand, by and by censure him, this man surely is a
murderer etc. This fellow is some villain, some notorious beast, whom (though
he has after shipwreck got to shore) yet vengeance does now dog and pursue
him, and will not suffer him to live. Acts 28.4.

Let Christians beware of rash censuring or judging of any by their affliction;
for so we may quickly condemn those whom God has chosen and justified. And
for any to condemn those whom the Lord will acquit, is to accuse, if not
condemn the Lord himself: and not only so, but to make themselves liable unto
judgment. For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged, and with what
measure you mete, it shall be measured to you again, Mat. 7.2. Therefore,
blessed is he that judges wisely of the poor afflicted, the Lord shall
deliver him in the time of trouble, Ps. 41* 1. Because the Lord is pleased for
special ends, to lay his hand more heavily upon this man then his neighbor,
shall any dare from hence to conclude that he is the greater sinner? God
forbid: we may rather conclude, that of the twain) he is the best, the most
beloved of God: You only have I known of all the families of the earth,
therefore I will visit you, for all your iniquities, Amos 3.2. Who were they
that were tried by mockings and scourgings, by bonds, and prisonment? or those
that were stoned and hewn a sunder, and slain with the sword? or those that
wandered up and down in sheep skins and goats skins, being destitute,
afflicted, and tormented? Were they not Gods dear ones, those of whom the
world was not worthy, Heb. 11.36, 37.

Whose blood was it wherewith Manasses died the streets of Jerusalem? was it
not innocent blood? the blood of the Lords people? 2. King 21.16. Who was he
that dolefully cried out, Will the Lord absent himself for ever! and will he
show no more favor? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? shall his promise fail
for evermore? has God forgotten to be merciful? and will he shut up his
loving kindness in displeasure? Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9. Was it not the complaint of
David, a righteous and holy man, a man after Gods own heart? What was he that
cursed the time of his birth? Saying, Let the day perish wherein I was born,
and the night when it was said: there is a man child conceived. Why died I not
in the birth? or why died I not when I came out of the womb? Job 3.3.11. was
it not Job, an upright and just man, one that feared God and eschewed evil?
How then dare thou ce^sure the child of God by reason of his affliction?
Surely, this must needs proceed either out of ignorance, not knowing the
Scriptures; or from the want of charity, or else from the guilt of thine own
conscience, taking the length of thy neighbors foot by thine own last, and
measuring him by thy self. Want of judging of thy self, is the cause why thou
art so ready to judge another. But do not flatter thy self, neither esteem any
one to have the more goodness because he has the les affliction. For (I tell
thee) a man may be a Dives, clad in scarlet and fine linen, living and
wallowing in all manner of pleasure, and prosperity: faring and feeding every
day deliciously, and yet be a devil incarnate, a man odious and hateful unto
the Lord.

Neither may thou condemn any for wicked, because the Lord judges him.

A man may be a poor Lazar, not having so much as a clout to cover his
nakedness: living in want, and penury, dying through pain, and misery, and
yet be the Lords faithful servant, and dearly beloved of him.

Therefore thou go by a wrong line, when thou deemest thy self (or others)
to be good: because thou do flourish, and prosper: because thou live at
ease, and go untouched: or take others to be the worse, because their
days are days of sorrow and adversity. For neither does prosperity declare
a man to be godly, nor adversity prove that he is wicked, but rather the
contrary; for whom the Lord loloveth, him he chasteneth, and scourges every
son that he receives, Hebr. 6.8. whereas if ye be without correction, then
are ye bastards, and not sons.



fullness, and feel no want of outward necessaries, do sustain many wrongs and
injuries through reproaches, slanders and backbitings of the wicked, which are
more grievous unto them then the loss of their substance. many have great
troubles in their family, through the wickedness either of unnatural, and
disobedient children, or else of unfaithful, and graceless servants. Many
have great grief, and trouble for, or from their kindred. And many that taste
not of any outward trial and affliction, are not without some inward
temptations; either they be buffeted by satan, or allured by the world, or
solicited by their own concupiscence unto some evil: or else they be
disquieted in their minds, or troubled in their consciences. Now howsoever many
of the world, which know not what perturbation of mind means, may think these
inward troubles to be no trialls; yet in truth they are the most smarting, the
sorest afflictions of all other, for the heart knows the bitterness of his
soul. Prove. 14.10. The mind of a man may bear out with patience and fortitude,
outward and bodily evils, but who is able (unless God strengthen him) to
endure the torment and torture of a wounded conscience, and a grieved spirit? A
wounded spirit who can bear it? Prove. 18.14. So that first or last, in one kind
or other, outwardly or inwardly, in ourselves, or in some dear, or near unto
us, we have had, or shall have our troubles, and trialls.

armor of God, that we may be able to resist, and stand fast in the evil day,
Ephesians. 6.13. Let us prepare our selves for troubles: that when they come, we
may not be amazed, or over much perplexed, as though some strange thing were
come unto us, 1. Pet. 4.11. Things which we hear not of, or look not for, when
we meet with them, we think them strange, and we know not which way to carry
our selves, or what course to be undertaken of us, whereby we may either be
eased of them, or have ease with them. Hence it is that many in the day of
adversity, are ready to cry out, they know not what to do, etc. Another
says, I never looked for this trouble. I never dreamed of this trial. No did?
Why, have thou not heard what is the portion of Gods dear children? have thou
not read, that we are every day to take up our cross? Why have thou not then
prepared thy soul for tentation? Art thou now free from affliction? now barrel
up against an hard time, the winter of adversity; for the day of affliction is
a time of living upon the old store; spending, or using, not getting of
spiritual strength.

Strength to bear affliction must be provided before affliction come. Is it not
childish folly, or rather desperate security for any man that has his enemy
ready to assault, and wound him, to have his weapons to seek? Wherefore take
unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil
day. Ephesians. 6.13. This evil day, is the time of temptation, and affliction,
which that we may be the better able to encounter, we must be well
appointed, and furnished with Christian fortitude, and courage, that so
affliction although it may at the first daunt us, yet it may neither vanquish,
nor foil us. To this purpose first of all, I advise thee to be often and serious
in this meditation, Whose thou art, and whose all thou have is, Art thou not
the work of Gods hands? has he not formed and fashioned thee? and may not he
alter, and change thee at his pleasure? So the things of this life, health,
wealth, honor, liberty and the like, do they not hold all in chief? is not
the earth the Lords, and the fullness thereof? Is it not lawful for the Lord
to do with his own as seems good in his eyes: Do not we hold these outward
things with condition of the cross and with a limitation of Gods correction?

Secondly, know (as afterward you shall hear) that Gods love is immutable,
though our outward estate and condition be changeable.

Gods love never changes; he is the same God, and his love as entire and great
when we are in affliction, as when we are out of it. He may, and does (as you
have heard) for special ends change our estate, yet for his own glory sake,
and our comfort, he continues still the same. A loving father (to all that
love, and fear him) before affliction, a tender and loving father in
affliction, and so for ever after; for whom once he loves, unto the end he
loves. These things settled in our hearts, by the help and assistance of the
Lord, we shall be armed to encounter affliction, strengthened with all might
through his glorious power, unto all patience, and long-suffering with
joyfulnesse. Col. 1.11.

Which words do teach us, that the power and strength by which we stand
upright in time of trouble, and bear with patience any affliction, is not of
our selves, but from the Lord: It is God that does stablish our hearts with his
grace, he it is that works faith in us, and a feeling persuasion of his
unchangeable love, and a voluntary, and cheerful resignation of our selves,
and all we have to be ordered, and disposed of by God as seems good in his
eyes. Whereupon says Saint Paul, I can be abased, and I can abound: every
where in all things I am instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry, and to
abound, and to have want; I am able to do all things through the help of
Christ which strengthens me. Phillippians. 4.12, 13.

We say forewarned fore-armed. Be warned therefore betimes to prepare for
thy trial, that when it comes, thou may be the better armed against it.
Evils the more suddenly they come upon us, the more grievous they prove unto
us, and we are the less able to grapple with them, and encounter them. Whereas
preparation does as it were, pull out the sting, or beat out the teeth of
affliction, that either it bites us not at all, or else does not so deadly
wound, and hurt us. When Agabus. had told St. Paul what welcome, and
entertainment he should find at Jerusalem, how they would manacle him, and
deliver him over into the hands of the Gentiles, Acts 21.11. Some of his
friends besought him that he would not go up to Jerusalem: unto whom he
answered, What do ye weeping and breaking mine heart? for I am ready, not to
be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus,
verse. 13. Saint Paul being thus prepared for his trial could chearefully, and
joyfully undergo it. He is like to look his enemy in the face, and not like a
dastard to turn his back upon him, and betake himself to his legs, that arms
himself, and prepares for the encounter. The life of a Christian is a
continual warrefare, and we are soldiers. Thou therefore suffer affliction
as a good soldier, 2. Tim. 2.2. A good soldier in garrison, or in the field,
is every day armed, at all seasons ready for the assault which may suddenly
come, the enemy being at hand. Affliction is our common enemy, which as it
has foiled many for want of preparation; so has it been vanquished of many of
the Lords worthies, being evermore armed against it. For thy sake are we
killed all the day long, we are counted as sheep for the slaughter;
Nevertheless in all these things we are more then Conquerors. What be killed!
and yet be a conqueror? This may seem a paradox, a thing contrary to common
reason; but it is a divine truth. How are we said to be conquerers when
conquered
Would you know how Gods children do conquer trials and afflictions? it is thus.

First, when troubles, and afflictions cannot vanquish or overcome them: cannot
spoil them of their patience, and inward peace: cannot batter down their
comfort, but that they still rejoice in tribulation, Romans 15.3. A Christian is
then beaten when his heart, and mind is beaten. A man is then overcome when
his heart fails, when his patience, joy, and peace is vanquished and put to
flight. But if these hold it out, howsoever tribulation, persecution may
vanquish, yea destroy the outward man, yet the heart and mind being not
overcome, we are conquerers, though outwardly conquered.

extremity of their afflictions do often times utter many rash and inconsiderate
words, and show much impatience under their cross; how then may these be said
to be conquerers?

Job said, I will lay mine hand upon my mouth: once have I spoken, but I will
answer no more, yea twice, but I will proceed no farther. Job 40.4, 5. Now the
mind (in Gods account) is the man. And so long as the heart is not vanquished,
though through the sense, and smart of the affliction, the outward man, and
flesh may storm, the Lord will crown such for conquerers.

2. Again, we are said to be conquerers, when still we hold our own ground,
and cannot be beaten from the truth: not brought to deny the faith, nor forced
to forsake Christ. What is the devils aim in our afflictions? Is it not to
provoke us (not only to impatience, but also) to deny the truth, and to
blaspheme God? As he said of Job, Stretch now out thine hand, and touch his
bones and his flesh, to see if he will not blaspheme thee to thy face. Job 2.5.
But experience has proved the Devil a liar, both in Job, and other of Gods
children. For (as we have formerly heard) affliction does not only exercise
the graces of the spirit in their hearts, but puts more life and vigor into
them: as fire in an oven is the hotter, because it is restrained, and kept
under. Therefore the Devil and his instruments, vexing and troubling of Gods
faithful servants, thinking thereby to drive them out of their pious practice,
and to desist godly courses, do mistake the mark they aim at, and miss of
their mischievous purpose. It is not their subtilty or policy; their rage or
cruelty, that can make the godly to shrink from their holy profession, and grow
weary of well-doing: nay rather it does more and mere confirm them in their
courses, and makes them lay faster hold of the truth, even as a passenger, the
stronger the wind blows upon him, the closer he sets his hat to his head, the
faster he tyeth or windeth his cloak about him, lest through the rage and
violence of the wind, either of them be blown from him. So that a Christian is
then a conqueror, and gets the victory over affliction, and persecutions, when
he is cheerful, patient, and constant in the bearing of them: which we shall
hardly be, if we do not daily provide against them, and look for them. But
alas, it is a trouble unto many to hear of troubles, a punishment unto them,
to hear of affliction: but how are these like to speed when affliction comes?
even as Amycle, a Town in Italy did, the story is short, and very fit for our
purpose. News came once, and again to this Town, of the enemies approaching
toward them, but whatsoever the report was, the enemy did not as yet come,
whereupon they made a Decree amongst themselves, that none should any more
speak of the coming of the enemy against them. Not long after the enemy comes
indeed, besieges, assaults, and sacks the Town. Whereupon did arise this
byword, or proverbiall Epitaph, Amycle perished through silence. (...).
Oh be not therefore unwilling to hear of afflictions, lest (through silence)
they suddenly come upon you, and vanquish you before ye be prepared for them.

For affliction may not unaptly be likened unto the Basilisk, of whom it is
reported, that if it sees a man before it be seen of him, the man dies; and
so of the contrary. It is in some sort true of affliction; if it seize upon us
before we see it, we are in danger of being wounded by it, but if we look for
it before hand, and arm our selves against it, we shall more easily resist it,
and those afflictions which are hard unto some in suffering, will prove easy
unto us by foreseeing them, and preparing for them. Therefore in prosperity,
look for adversity. In health, prepare for sickness. In times of plenty, and
fullness, bethink your selves of a dearth and scarcity. In our best estate we
should learn to put our selves in readiness to suffer adversity: when we are
well and at ease, if we were wise, we would look for worse times, keeping such
a watch, that in plenty we may think of want; and in prosperity foresee
some misery. We must not think always to rest in our nest, always to enjoy
outward comforts, and know no cross: but think sometimes to receive frowns,
and stripes as well as smiles, and kisses from the Lord; especially when our
sins offer continual occasions to the Lord, to exercise us with some
punishments, he having rods enough in store to beat us for, and from our
sins. Therefore let us look daily to be assaulted, daily to be humbled, and
cast down, that so we may be the better prepared, and also the more willing to
suffer affliction, to partake of adversity, thereby to glorify God, then to
sleep in a whole skin, to live in ease and prosperity to our own woe and
shame. Force thy self daily to mind trials, and betake thy self to some
serious thoughts of changes, even when prosperity and ease would most divorce
thee from the remembrance thereof. If people would be thus wise, they should
quit themselves better then they do in time of affliction. Hence it is that
many of Gods children do undergo their afflictions so cheerfully above others.
They can say (I thank God) it is no other then I have waited for. I have a long
time looked for this, or some other trial. And thus they are able with more
alacrity, and cheerfulness to bear their affliction. Whereas such, as could
not endure to hear of these things, are even dismayed by them, and at their
wits end: oh what shall they do? Whither shall they go? they scarce know which
way to wind themselves: or where to fetch a thought, that may administer any
sound comfort unto them. Therefore make account sooner or later, to meet with
the cross, if thou belongest unto the Lord, or make account to come at
heaven. We must not look to go to heaven (as the saying is) in a feather-bed:
that is, to live in fullness, ease, pleasure, and worldly delights here, and
then to heaven after. No, no: through many afflictions we must enter into the
kingdom of God, Act. 14.22. God will have all those that shall partake of joy,
and glory with him; now and then here to partake of sorrow, and reproach. God
will have those that shall hereafter dwell in light; now and then to know what
it is to be in darkness, and in the shadow of death. This is the way (as we
have heard) wherein Christ went before us, and all the godly have (hitherto)
walked in the same path after him: then let not us think to make a shorter
cut, or to chalk out some easier, or smoother way, then that which the Lord
himself has laid out for us.

If the black ox has not as yet trod upon thy foot, if thou have not as yet
been entered into the school of affliction, make as full reckoning (if thou
belongest to God) to have thy share, and to bear thy part in some doleful
ditty, or other, ere thou dye, as that thou now live.

Not to care for the morrow, Mat. 6.34. The day has enough with his own
grief. I had not need (therefore) to trouble my self with thoughts of
troubles before they come.

things of this life, what we shall eat, or what we shall drink, or wherewith
we shall be clothed; for this is mere folly in us, because with all our
carking and caring we cannot better our condition: this (I say) was the scope
of Christ's words, and not to beat us off from a provident and wise fore-casting
of business, or from fitting, and preparing of our selves for afflictions;
against which we shall be the better armed, if we can weane our hearts, and
take off our affections from immoderate, and inordinate loving of the world,
and the things thereof. Whereupon says Paul, 1. Corinthians. 7.32. I would have
you without care,.i. without setting your minds and hearts upon the world, for
the fashion of this world goes away, verse. 31. and our time here is but short,
this night may our souls be fetched away from us; for which change of ours, and
all other trials that in the mean time may befall us, we shall be the better
fitted and armed, if we will prepare for them. If every morning, thou will
address thy self to meet with thy cross, and arm thy self against all
assaults, resolve ere it be night to meet with some trouble, this (I dare
boldly and confidently promise, and assure thee) will be an excellent help, yea
singular means of carrying thee a great deal more cheerfully through thy
afflictions, or else furnish thee with a great deal more strength and ability
to bear, and undergo them so long as it shall please God to lay them upon thee.

But when I speak of preparing for afflictions, and arming your selves against
them, I would have you know that there must be more then a bare minding of
affliction, or a resolution not to be dismayed or daunted with them; the soul
must lay in some spiritual provision, we must treasure up faith and a good
conscience. A stock of true holiness lying by us, will alay the heat, ease
the smart, and sweeten the bitterness of any affliction that can befall us. It
is from the want of this spiritual and heavenly provision, that many carnal
worldlings, when any crosses or troubles befall them, are struck to the very
heart with fearful amazements, fears, and terrors of mind and spirit, yea
with passionate distempers sometimes of rage and fury which puts them upon
desperate resolutions. I may instance in Ahitophel, a man of that brain and
worldly wisdom, that his counsel was esteemed as the oracle of God, 2. Sam.
16.23. This great statist, finding himself to be over-topped by the counsel of
Hushai, and fearing that the rejecting of his counsel would be the obscuring
of his glory, it is said, That he sadled his ass, arose, and went home, and
put his household in order, and hanged himself. 2. Sam. 17.23. Would this man
have laid a little disgrace so near his heart, if his heart had been sound
toward the Lord, and his anointed? Surely no. But being a traitorous
time-server, and going (as he conceived) with the strongest side, making flesh
his arm, and his outward esteem and glory his idol, he desperately plungeth
himself into a sea of horror. Whereas holy Job, having other manner of trials,
several tidings (one upon the neck of another) of the loss of all his
cattle, substance, yea, and of all his children; the least of which losses
would have struck so cold to the heart of many a carnal worldling, that it
would have dyed within him like a stone, as Nabals did. What was the cause that
Jobs heart was not crushed into pieces under the wait of so many losses, but
that still he kept within compass, and blesses God for all? Would you know
the true ground of his patience, and holy fortitude? Job was one that feared
God, one who in the time of his prosperity, and outward happiness, laid up
store of spiritual riches, and treasures. He had wisely laid in store of
faith, and holiness, and uprightness, upon which his soul did feed in the
days of his affliction: So as no afflictions which befell him could beat him
from his hold; he resolves to trust in God though he slay him, Job 13.15. The
consciousnesse of his former gracious and righteous carriage toward great and
small, especially toward the oppressed, the poor, and fatherless, did
furnish him with strength to undergo the sorest of his sufferings. Oh be then
taught by this holy example how to be fitted, and prepared against afflictions.
A godly life, the fear of the Lord, faith, and a good conscience, will lay
such a foundation for time to come, that though never so many storms do arise,
though the wind of affliction, and waves of tentation do beat upon thee, yet
shall thou stand as a tower impregnable, no affliction shall be able to
vanquish or overcome thee.

It may be thy afflictions may rise like a spring of bitter waters; yet the
salt of a good conscience will sweeten these waters, and heal them. It may be
afflictions like to overflowing Jordan, are come over thee, so as thou cryest
with David, I am come into deep waters, and the streams run over me. Psalm.
69.2. yet a good conscience like to Elias his mantle, will cut and divide this
Jordan, so as thou shall be able to pass over it. For this promise has the
Lord made to every one that is godly, Surely in the flood of great waters they
shall not come near him. Psalm. 32.6. That Panoplie, and whole armor of God,
which the Apostle exhorts us to be furnished withal, that so we may resist in
the evil day, Ephesians. 6. that is to say, A girdle of virtue, shoes of
preparation, the breast plate of righteousness, the shield of faith, an helmet
of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, are all where a good conscience is;
for this is armor of righteousness on the right hand, and on the left.
Righteousness will keep thee from being shaken with afflictions; though the
earrh be moved, and the foundations thereof totter, though all things are in
combustion about thine ears, yet if iniquity be put far away, and no
wickedness dwell in thy Tabernacle, then truly shall thou lift up thy face
without spot, and shall be stable, and shall not fear, Job 11.14, 15. For
though a just man falls (that is, into trouble, and affliction) seven times,
yet he rises again. Pro. 24.16. For the Lord puts under his hand, Psalm.
37.24.

Store thy self with comfort out of the word of God.
Thirdly, if it be thus, let us be the more exercised in the Word of God, which
will teach us, how to bear afflictions, and minister comfort unto us, even in
the heat and extremity of them.

Whiles means and liberty is afforded, be wise now to store thy self with
heavenly provision (that is to say) comfort out of Gods Word, to cheer up thy
soul, and refresh thy drooping spirits in the day of affliction. If thy law had
not been my delight, I should now have perished in mine affliction, says
David, Psalm. 119.92. My affliction would have destroyed me, and made me perish
from the right way, if it had not been lenified, and sanctified by thy Word.
The Word of God teaches us in all times of trial to rest upon the Lord:
assuring us that there is hope in Israel, that there is balm in Gilead, to
assuage all griefs, to cure all sores. The Word of God teaches us how to
construe God aright in all his dealings with us, and to wait for promised
salvation, which in due time shall come, when it shall be most for Gods glory,
and best for us. How easily would afflictions batter down our confidence, and
over-turn our faith, if it were not continually supported, and strengthened by
the Word? Satan will be ready to buzze into our ears, that God in wrath
afflicts us, that those are most beloved, which are least afflicted: but the
sheep of Christ will not know, nor follow the voice of a stranger, that is,
they will not subscribe, nor yield to any temptation which tends to the
withdrawing of their hearts, and hopes from God, but set their seal to the Word
of and so through comfort of the Scriptures rest in hope. For the more
plenteously the Word of God, in the love and evidence thereof, does dwell in
any man, and enable him to prove all things, the more steadfastly will he hold
that which is good, and stand immovable in the mids of all afflictions, and
temptations that shall assault him. Though thy bones should be vexed, and dried
like a pot-sheard, and turned into the drought of Summer; though thou were
powered out like water, all thy bones out of joint, and thy heart melted like
wax in the midst of thy bowels; though Gods arrows should stick fast in thee,
and his hand press thee sore; though there should be no soundness in thy
flesh, nothing but stinch and corruption; yea though innumerable evils should
compass thee about, and thou not able to look up; though fearfulness and
trembling should come upon thee, and horror be ready to over-whelme thee, yet
if thou will have recourse unto the Word of God, and believe what is there
promised, thou may with joy draw waters (to refresh thy soul) out of the
wells of salvation. Isa. 12.3. If thou desire sound and solid comfort, such
as will give true content to thy soul, thou must pick it out of the Scripture:
Thou shall never be truly satisfied, unless it be with the breasts of her
consolation. Isa. 66.11. Thou must suck sweetness out of the Word to uphold
thee, It is my comfort in my trouble (says David) for thy promise has
quickened me, Psalm 119.50. When affliction comes, whether will thou run for
comfort? to thy honors, thy revenews, thy possessions? thy friends? I may say
of them, in this respect, as Job speaks to his friends, Miserable comforters
are ye all, Job 16.2. Thou may as well fetch water out of thy brickwalls, as
draw sound comfort from those outward things, which are worse then vanity, for
they are vexation of spirit. Eccl. 1.14. These outward things can afford thee
no comfort, for they are nothing. Prove. 23.5. He is a very simple and silly
Arithmetician, who knows not that of nothing comes nothing. If thou placest thy
comfort, or put thy confidence in the best of earthly things, thou buildest
upon the sands, every little blast, and tempest will overthrow thy building.
The ground of all our comfort, the only anchor to stay our souls in any
spiritual tempest, the only staff we have to rest upon in the time of
afflictions, are those sweet and precious promises made known unto us in the
word.

What ever other carnal comforts men may for a while rejoice in, they will
prove but a flame of stubble, or as a blaze of thorns, which can yield no
solid, or abiding light unto the soul. A man may as soon drink up the water of
the sea with spunges, or remove mountains with one of his fingers, as be able
(by vain sports, youthful recreations and pastimes, songs and music, though
he add to these, the consideration of his honors, greatness, and riches) to
alay those sorrows and pains, which sin and affliction may bring upon him,
All these vanities will but respite them for a little time, that they may
return the fiercer. I say it again, solid and lasting comfort must be fetched
out of the word, or no where, if thou expect comfort from other things, thou will be deceived. Every toy and trifle, a babble, a thing of nothing, will cut
the throat of thy comfort, if thou joyest especially in earthly things. Haman
was second to a mighty Monarch, and wanted nothing that the world might afford
a subject. In the 5. of Ester, at the 11. you may read how he boasted of the
glory of his riches, and all the things wherein the King had promoted him, and
how he had set him above the Princes, etc. One would think that this man's
condition was far enough from vexation, or discontent. No, no, the want of a
cap, and a knee from poor Mordecai sitting at the Kings gate, did so perplexe
and vex this proud Courtier, that all he had could avail him nothing, as he
professed, verse. 13. Ahab (you know) was King of Israel, and therefore had the
world at will, yet the want of a little vineyard of Naboths, which lay full in
Ahabs eye, because Naboth would neither sell it unto him, nor yet exchange with
him for a better, it is said, 1. Kings 21.4. That Ahab came into his house
heavy, and in displeasure, because of the word which Naboth had spoken unto
him; he throws himself down upon his bed, turned his face, and would eat no
bread. Surely a poor trial for a rich man, for a King to be so much troubled
about. Yet so it is, and shall be, with all those that set more by their
outward glory, their gardens, and pleasures, then by the Word of God. If they
set their hearts upon these outward things, as they fail, (as fail they will,
being subject unto corruption) so their heart fails them, and they are all a
mort: half dead for want of comfort.

Whereas that soul that can truly say, as did Jeremiah, Chap. 15. verse. 15.
Thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart. Whatsoever
affliction can befall him, he shall be sure to have comfort by him, yea within
him. Delight thy self therefore in the Word of God. Now barrel up, whiles
these cunduits of comforts be full, and the pipes do run.

Learn Wisdom of the men of the world, to take that opportunity which the Lord
does now afford thee. Make hay whiles the Sun shines. The seasons (you know
are not always fair. After a long calm, often times there follows blustering
storms. As goodly gleams (as these of ours) are now clouded in other places.
And little do we know how soon the Sun may go down over the Prophets, when
night shall be unto us for a vision, and darkness for a divination, Mic. 3.6.
When Agabus had signified by the Spirit, that there should be a great famine
throughout the world, Then the Disciples purposed to send succor unto the
brethren which dwelt in Judea, which thing they also did, Acts. 11.29, 30. We
now (blessed be the name of our good and bountiful God) live in plenty of the
Gospel, so as we may speak of the food of our souls, as Moses does of bodily,
Lev. 26.5. Our threshing reaches unto the vintage, and the vintage unto the
sowing time, and we eat our bread in plenteousnesse. But little do we know,
how soon the Lord may send a famine of the word, as he threatened Israel: Amos
8.11, 12. When we shall wander from Sea to Sea, from North, to East, too and
fro, to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it. Churches and people
of other nations, who (not many years sithence) had as little cause of fear,
and dread as we, do now feel the smart of this famine. The Tabernacle of David
is fallen amongst them. Idolatry and superstition is in the place of the
Gospel. And why may not we fear the like judgment? especially seeing the
Gospel is so much contemned of many amongst us.

Break off thy sins by repentance.
Fourthly, does the Lord thus afflict his dear children? be we then admonished
to break off our sins by repentance: that so the Lord may either divert his
judgments, or else aswage, and alay the heat of them. For if we will sin,
God will punish. Sin is that seed, which being sown, grows up unto a harvest of
punishment. He that sows iniquity, shall reap affliction. Prove. 22.8.

Trouble waits upon sin; for affliction follows sinners. Prove. 13.21. Yea,
it so follows them, as it will be sure to catch hold of them. All these curses
shall come upon thee, and shall pursue thee, and overtake thee, till thou be
destroyed, because thou obeyedst not the voice of the Lord thy God. Deuteronomy.
28.45.. Is there any thing under the Sun that is able to make a separation
between sin and punishment? If the one be welcomed and entertained, the other
will not be shut out.

Paradise could not shelter nor privilege our first parents from punishment,
after they had once sinned. How then shall those be able to escape the wrath
and vengeance of the Lord, who make it their pastime to do evil, into whose
hearts and affections wickedness has warped and woven it self? these must
(if speedily they repent not) look to have the judgments of God to light upon
them. For what says Job, Is not destruction to the wicked and strange
punishment to the workers of iniquity? Job 31.3. Notorious offenders have (often
times) notable judgments. Wicked ones may revell and be joviall, and go on in
their own ways, and pleasures, but which of them can say, I will continue my
game, my sport, my lusts unto the end, without fear or danger? little do they
know how near at hand some judgment or other is to arrest them (as it did
Balshazzar) to interrupt and turn their jollitie into woe and misery. Shut
sin out of doors, if thou would have that punishment either sanctified, or
taken away, which does now lie upon thee.

To complain of troubles, or to seek to be eased of them, and not to mourn and
be sorry for those sins which have procured them, is folly, and madness. Do
not our children when we are correcting them, confess their faults, and
promise to do no more so? by these words hoping to have their correction
lessened, and ended: We shall show our selves to have less understanding, and
wisdom then young children, if we take not the same course, when the rod of
God is laid upon us: Repentance will make us gainers by our afflictions. What
wise man will not be willing to take that course (albeit painful) which may be
beneficial and profitable unto him? Repentance so sanctifies our affliction,
or removes it, that a blessing comes with it, or follows in the room of it. If
when our heavenly father corrects us, we do unfainedly promise and purpose
to cast away our sins from us, the Lord will speedily, either lay aside his
rod, or else bestow upon us some blessing, which shall make it evident that he
is pleased with our humiliation, and will love us the better after it. So well
is the Lord pleased to see his children stoop under his hand, that he will be
so much the more gracious, and merciful unto them, by how much the more he
has afflicted them, so as they shall see the curse turned into a blessing unto
them. Repent thee of thy transgressions, and the Lord will repent him of his
corrections. For that which the Lord promises unto a Kingdom or Nation, Iere.
18.8. shall also be made good unto every person, If we will turn from our
wickedness, the Lord will repent of the judgment, which he thought to bring
upon us: I will cast them into great affliction, except they repent them of
their works, Revel. 2.22.

As our impenitencie hastens judgments threatened, and continues them being
inflicted; so our repentance diverts them being threatened, and removes them
being inflicted. The Ninivites repentance wrought repentance in God. God saw
their works, that they turned from their evil ways, and God repented of the
evil that he said he would do unto them, and he did it not. Ion. 3.10. Thus by
their repentance, the sentence pronounced was reversed. Is not this a strange
thing, that the repentance of condemned malefactors should repeal the Judges
sentences. It were strange to see this in the Courts of men, but with God it is
not so strange as true: our repentance not only frustrates Gods condemning
sentence, but turns it into an acquitting sentence; it turns away the evil,
and (as I said even now) brings good in the stead of it. David's murtherous and
adulterous marriage with Bathsheba, brought many direful curses, but yet
unfeigned repentance turned all those curses into blessings unto them, and us;
for of this marriage came Christ the worlds Savior. Therefore (as Daniel said
unto the King. Dan. 4.24.) Let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break
off thy sins by righteousness, for man suffers for his sin, Lam. 3.39. If
we will forsake Gods law, and not walk in his judgments, if we break his
statutes, and keep not his commandments, then will the Lord visit our
transgressions with a rod, and our iniquity with strokes, Psalm. 89.31, 32. The
more liberty that any of Gods children shall take to sin, the more liable
are they to punishment. The more care the Lord takes of them, the more love he
bears unto them, the readier will he be to chastise them offending. Is not the
whole history of the Jews, (a people once as dear unto the Lord, as ever any
were, even as the signet on his right hand, and as the apple of his eye, Zach.
2.8.) a pattern and example of an ungratious child continually exercised under
the rod of his loving father, evermore laboring (as he trespassed, so) to
correct him for his sin? The Scripture does plentifully tell us, how the Lord
nurtured his people with severe discipline, sending them one judgment upon the
neck of another, and all by reason of their sins, Iere. 30.15. Why criest
thou for thine affliction? because thy sins were increased, I have done these
things unto thee. Thus visiting even the best of his children, with the rods of
men, yea, and sometimes scourging their transgressions with whips of scorpions;
which has made them roar through anguish, and to cry night and day, through
extremity of gtiefe. For if a man will sin, God will, yea, must punish,
unless he should let us perish, for he that spares the rod hates his
son, but he that loves him, chasteneth him betimes, Prove. 13.24. Be not
therefore ventrous in sinning, Though Israel transgress, yet let not Judah
sin, Hos. 4.15. The Lord hates sin, wheresoever he sees it, and will
sooner punish it in his dear children, then in the wicked, although he will
not do it with that rigor, wrath, and severitie, wherewith he plagues the
wicked. They are the people, by whom his name is called upon, of his household,
his servants, friends, sons, yea, his beloved spouse: and therefore do not
only shame themselves by sinning, but highly dishonor God, their Lord, their
father. The lewd prankes, which rogues commit in streets, or vagrant persons by
highway sides, do not redound to the reproach of the householder: but if any of
his family, especially son, or daughter, do grow outrageous, he thinks his
credit is nearly touched and it is a matter which much concerns him to look
unto. Even so the profane and licentious lives of open and notorious sinners
do not so much dishonor God, therefore many times he lets them have their
swinge, and take their course: but if such as make profession of piety and
truth, will be bold with sin whereby the mouths of the wicked are opened,
and the name of God blasphemed, the Lord (if he love such, and purpose to save
them) will not suffer them to go unpunished. For as the Lord is zealous of
maintaining his own glory, and will have it known to men and Angels, that he is
no patron of sin, or sinners: but will punish the wicked, sinning, be they
never so great: neither will he give alowance unto iniquity in the godly, be
they never so good: so also is he tender of the good of his children, and
therefore must not suffer them to go on in sin, which they would do, if the
Lord should nor restrain them; being so ready to cast themselves into perils,
if they be but a while exempted from affliction. Therefore let none of Gods
children say, I am safe, and far enough from correction, because sure of
salvation. If thou be bold with sin, thou may fall into sore affliction
in this life, though thou be in a state of happiness for the life to come.
As appears by old Eli, whose sons wickedness (which he connived at when
as he should have sharply punished it) was in the eye and mouth of all Israel;
so that Gods glory should have been much wronged, and his name as much
blasphemed, as his offerings were abhorred: if they had escaped unpunished. No
doubt, but Eli repented him of his sin, but this might not quit him from
temporal judgment. The chastisements of the Almighty are (many times)
deadly, though the sin be remitted, by which the Lord was provoked; God had
said, that the wickedness of Elies house should not be purged with sacrifice
for ever. 1. Sam. 3.14. Repentance does not always free us from outward
afflictions. Freedom from damnation does not free a man from affliction. What
punishment unless it be eternal torments in hell fire, can any of Gods
children think to escape, unless he will forbear such sins, as provoke the
Lord to wrath against him? David was as far from damnation (if we consider
Gods purpose and decree) as the devil is from salvation, yet you have heard
how his afflictions made him roar and roar again.

every sin the Lord is thus ready to afflict his children, may be demanded
what privilege the godly have, more then the wicked; or what difference there
is betwixt them; seeing the one must be corrected, and punished as well, if not
before, or more then the wicked, if they do sin?

Afflictions of the godly and wicked differ.
Surely the child of God, has no more (rather less) liberty, and privilege
to sin then the wicked. Yet there is a great deal of difference in their
afflictions. For though all things fall alike to both in respect of the evils
themselves, as the child of God may perish through famine, fall by the sword,
die of the pestilence, etc. Yet in respect of the effects and ends of these
outward evils, there is great difference betwixt them. For their nature is
much altered, and there is as much difference betwixt the afflictions of the
Godly, and the wicked, as is betwixt poison corrected, and rectified by the
art and skill of the Physician, that so it may be medicinable and wholesome,
and that poison which remains in its natural temper. The Lord in afflicting
his children, does it with a father-like heart, and hand, in mildness and
mercy to amend, and better them: Whereas he corrects the wicked with the rod
of his wtath in justice, and severity, to plague and torment them. The wicked
shall be cast away for bis malice, but the righteous has hope in his death,
Pro. 14.32. In respect of the wicked, the Prophet Nahum, 1.2. speaks thus, God
is jealous, and the Lord revengeth, even the Lord of anger, the Lord will take
vengeance on his adversaries, and he reserveth wrath for his enemies. Lo here
is anger, wrath, and vengeance belonging to the wicked. Whereas in respect of
the godly, Mica. 7.18, 19. speaks thus, He takes away iniquity, and passes
by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage. He retains not his
wrath for ever, because mercy pleases him, He will turn again, and have
compassion upon us: he will subdue our iniquities, and cast all our sins
into the bottom of the sea. By which places it appears, that afflictions are
nothing but the messengers of Gods wrath; the rods of his indignation; the
arrows of his vengeance to plague, and punish the wicked for their sins, and
to give them an earnest, and taste of those endless torments which they have
purchased by their wickedness. Whence arises in them fear, and terror, horror
of conscience, rage and desperation. Whereas to his children, afflictions are
tokens of the tender, and father-like care the Lord has of them: they are
cords of his love to draw them nearer unto him: Yea, they be badges of their
adoption, For whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every son
that he receives, Hebr. 12.6. And this brings forth the quiet fruit of
righteousness to them that are thereby exercised.

Again, the Lord takes pleasure in avenging the wickedness of the wicked upon
their own pates. I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine
enemies, Esaias. 1.24. And not only so, but I will laugh at their destruction,
and mock when their fear comes, Prove. 1.26. Whereas it is a grief unto him to
afflict his people: His soul was grieved for the misery of Israel, Judge. 10.16.
So concerning Ephraim, the Lord said, his bowels were troubled for him. Jere.
31.20.

There is a conflict betwixt Justice and Mercy, when he goes to correct his
children as appears, Hos. 11.8, 9. How shall I give thee up O Ephraim? How
shall I deliver thee, Israel? Mine heart is turned within me: my repentings are
rouled together, I will not execute the fierceness of my wrath: I will not
destroy Ephraim. When he punishes the wicked he does it in the fircenesse of
his wrath, as appears, Psalm. 78.49. He cast upon them the fierceness of his
anger, indignation and wrath. And to conclude; The godly have liberty, yea a
command to come unto the Lord, to call upon him, and cry unto him in the day of
trouble. Ps. 50.15. and he will hear their cry, and will save them. Ps. 145.19.
Whereas, the wicked shall cry unto the Lord, but he will not hear them: he
will even hide his face from them at that time, because they have done
wickedly. Micah. 3.4. For the Lord may justly answer them as Iphtah did the
Elders of Gilead, Judge. 11.7. Did ye not hate me? How then come ye unto me
now in the time of your tribulation? Wicked persons are haters of God;
therefore these seeking to God in their need, are like to have cold comfort
from him. What answer did the Lord make to Israel, when in their distress
they sought unto him? Ye have forsaken me, and served other gods, Go and cry
unto the gods which you have chosen, let them save you in the time of your
tribulation. Judge. 10.13, 14. So will he answer all those that make either
their lusts, or their belly, or their Mammon, their god; you have devoted your
selves unto the world, and your lusts, why then seek you not help and comfort
from them? You have hitherto observed, and served these, let them now help and
save you. What hope have the wicked? Will God hear his cry, when trouble comes
upon him? says Job 27.9. By all which it appears that there is a great
difference betwixt the afflictions which the Lord does exercise his withal,
and those judgments which he lays upon the wicked.

Seek to the Lord by prayer.
Fifthly, Is it so,that the best of Gods children go not without affliction?
then let all that desire to have a good use of their affliction, or a good
issue out of them, be earnest suitors at the throne of grace, and humbled
before the Lord in prayer. Is any among you afflicted, let him pray. James.
5.13: Of all other helps which we can use, we may say as David of Goliahs
sword, There is none to that, 1. Sam. 21.13. so none to prayer. As the
Lodestone draws Iron unto it, so our prayers, if they be made in faith, and
proceed from a broken heart, do draw God unto us. Thou drewest near in the day
that I called upon thee. Lam. 3.57. As the Lord gives us power to ask (for it
is his spirit which helps our infirmities) so sometimes he gives us benefits
without asking, that we may be the more bound unto him; and his benefits may
be the more welcome unto us, by how much less they are deserved or expected.
When God bids us to call upon him, and pray unto him, it is not for that he
needs to be entreated; but that he may make us more capable of blessings by
desiring them: It being his own ordinance, that if we ask, we shall have, etc.
And therefore he that often gives ere we ask, will not fail us when we seek
aright unto him.

The Lord is ready to hear, as we are to pray, and if we send up our requests
unto him, he is ready to send down comfort and help unto us. Call upon me in
the day of trouble, so will I deliver thee. Psalm. 50.15. But to whom (think
you) is this sweet and comfortable promise made? even to such as have a desire
to glorify God. Therefore (as follows in the next verse) Unto the wicked
said God, What have thou to do to take my covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou
hate to be reformed, and have cast my words behind thee. Psalm. 50.16, 17.
Although the Lord be a God hearing prayers; yet he is a God that hears not
sinners. Job 9.31. Let every one that calls upon the Name of the Lord, depart
from iniquity. 2. Tim. 2.19.

It is not obedience, but impudency for such as in their health and
prosperity have not harkned unto God speaking unto them in his Word and Works,
to press upon him in their need, and affliction, for help and comfort; if
their hearts be not more rent and broken by repentance and godly sorrow for
their sin then their estate or bodies are hurt or wounded by their
punishment. The Lord has protested against such. When affliction and anguish
shall come upon you: Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer:
they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me. Prove. 1.27, 28.

If he that stops his ear at the crying of the poor, shall also cry, and
not be heard? Prove. 21.13. How much less he that stops his ears against the
Lord, calling and crying unto him in his holy Word? His prayers shall be
abominable. Pro. 28.9. O how miserable and lamentable must his case needs be,
unto whom that exercise becomes sin, by which the godly, and penitent obtain
remedy against sin, and comfort in affliction? Therefore let us be humbled
under the hand of God, in the sight and sense of our sins, and then as our
troubles will be a motive to stir us up to prayer, so will they be a motive
to procure ease and comfort from the Lord. O Lord turn unto me according to
the multitude of thy tender mercies, hide not thy face from thy servant, for I
am in trouble. Psalm. 69.16, 17 Such is the goodness of God toward sinners,
that all that seek unto him by prayer, shall fare the better for it. Whosoever
returned in his affliction to the Lord God of Israel, and sought him, he was
found of him, 2. Chron. 15.4. Jonah did behave himself stubbornly against the
Lord, and the Lord was even with him for his stoutnesse, he was thrown into the
sea, and swallowed up of a Whale, Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord his God out
of the fishes belly, and he heard him. Jon. 2.1, 2. We have heard what a vile
and wicked man Manasses was, He had done evil in the sight of the Lord, like
the abominations of the heathen: he built the high places, which Hezekiah his
father had broken down; he set up Altars for Baalim, and worshipped all the
host of Heaven, and served them. And he caused his sons to pass through the
fire: he gave himself to witchcraft, to charming, and to sorcery: he did
very much evil in the sight of the Lord to anger him, shedding exceeding much
innocent blood. Yet for all these abominations, when he was in tribulation,
he prayed unto the Lord, and God was entreated of him, and heard his prayer,
2. Chron. 33.13. For God is near unto all that call upon him in truth, he will
fulfill the desire of them that fear him: he also will hear their cry, and
will save them, Psalm. 145.18, 19.



Though it be impossible in thine eyes, should it therefore be impossible in
my sight, says the Lord of hosts, Zach. 8.6. Is there any thing too hard for
the Lord? Jerem. 32.27. Is thy condition worse then Manasses was? Is thy case
more desperate then Jonahs was? yet he prayed out of the deep, and was
helped. Therefore be not dismayed, but draw near with a true heart in
assurance of faith. Hebr. 10.22. It is a hard task, I confess to believe,
that God will deliver us out of al our troubles; but as hard as it is, faith
makes it easy, by apprehending Gods power, and truth in all his promises. Thy
troubles thou say are great. But faith tells thee that God is greater, and
mightier to help thee out of them, then the devil and all his instruments are
able to keep thee in them.



never look that God should hear thee in mercy, Your iniquities have separated
between you and your God: and your sins have hid his face from you, that he
will not hear, Esaias, 59.2. Therefore, Let every one that calls upon the Name
of the Lord, depart from iniquity, 2. Tim. 2.19. For God hears not sinnrrs.
John. 9.31.

It was a curse laid upon Moab, That he shall come into the Temple to pray,
but he shall not prevail. Hab. 16.12. It was a token of Gods heavy
displeasure, and judgment upon Saul, That he sought unto the Lord, but he
would no way answer him, neither by dreams, nor by Vrim, nor yet by Prophets.
1. Samv. 28.6. Thus will the Lord deal with all ungodly persons. When you shall
stretch out your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you: and though you make
many prayers, I will not hear: for your hands are full of blood. Isay. 1.5.
Mine eye shall not spare them, neither will I have pity, and though they cry
in mine ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear them. Eze, 8.18.



The prayer of a righteous man avails much if it be fervent. Jam. 5.16. God
is a living God, and therefore will not be sought unto with dead, and drowsy
affections. Thou must cry and be instant with the Lord, if thou would have
him to hear thee.





He that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder
of them that seek him. Hebr. 11.6. True it is, that the strength of our
wrestling, and prevailing with God, lies in our prayers; but how? not as they
be a form, and sound of words, but as they are the work or fruit of faith.
Let our prayers be never so many, never so loud, never so long, yet if faith be
wanting, they want their virtue, they will be as weak as Sampson was, when he
wanted his hair. The stronger thy faith is, the freer is thy access with
boldness, and confidence to the throne of grace, and the better success shall
thy prayers find with God, though he do not by and by answer thee: for the
Lord (peradventure) intends to exercise thy faith, and make trial of thy
patience, to see whether thou will grow weary or no. For he loves to be
importuned, as appears by that parable. Luke 11.8,

Let us therefore use this excellent help of Prayer, seeing it is so prevalent
with the Lord, as the Scripture does plentifully witness unto us: Prayer being
a service so acceptable, and well pleasing unto God, he cannot but hear the
cries, and satisfy the requests of his children, if they faithfully, holily,
and uncessantly do seek unto him.



answered not Paul in that particular he desired, but in bestowing his Grace
upon him, which was sufficient for him. 2. Cor. 12.9.

Comfort for the afflicted.
Sixthly, is it thus? Here then is a ground of admirable comfort unto the
children of God in the midst of all those afflictions which shall befall them:
This may strengthen the weak hands, and comfort the feeble knees, Esaias, 35.3.
of all such as are by God afflicted, when they consider, that he intends our
great good in afflicting of us. For our afflictions are as eye-salves to clear
our dim sight, that our sins may more evidently appear: they serve for sour
sauce, to bring us out of love with our sweet sins; and as sand to scour off
the dross and corruption of our nature. They are occasions of preventing many
evils, which (if they were not) we should be ready to run into. They are as
a Schoolmaster to teach and instruct us in the way of godliness. They serve
to manifest unto the world, but especially unto our selves, the truth and
soundness of our faith, obedience, patience, and the rest of Gods graces, to
the honor of him that has bestowed them upon us, and to the comfort of our own
souls, who have received them. They are instruments of fitting us for that
service, wherein the Lord is pleased to use us. They teach us how to prize the
benefits of God, and to make more account of them, then formerly we have done.
They are as wormwood, to wean us from the love of this world: Whose pleasing
delights, and bewitching pleasures, we should linger after, and be ever and
anon sucking of them, if our mouths were not imbittered, and so distasted with
some afflictions. They are as cords, to draw us unto the Lord in prayer, and to
seek him more often and more diligently at the Throne of grace; then formerly
we have done. They bring us into some conformity with Christ. We cannot deny,
but that the cross is something an uncomfortable companion to consort with
flesh and blood. But blessed be that affliction which so far estrangeth us
from the world, that it changes us into the similitude of Christ, unto whom
we must be conformed in sufferings: that so we may (as has been formerly
delivered) be like him in glory; unto which glory we are furthered by
affliction, it being a means of driving us out of the broad way of the world,
which leads unto destruction: and bringing us into the narrow, and cross way
which leads to salvation.

If thus much good comes by afflictions, then it is good for a man to bear the
yoke in his youth, Lam. 3.27. The sooner we be afflicted the better for us. If
these be the ends of Gods afflicting us, are we not shrewdly hurt when the
Lord corrects us? is there any cause of mourning? Unless it be for our
rebellion, and stubbornness, which puts the Lord as it were out of his course,
besides himself (if we may so say, with reverence to his Majesty) to do his
work, his strange work, his act, his strange act, Esaias. 28.21. Have we then
any cause to be angry: or do we well to be angry? as the Lord asked Jonah,
4.9. When as the Lord has more cause to be angry with us, for putting him to
that trouble, and grieving him with out sins. No, no; let us rather be angry
with our sins, which provoke the Lord to afflict us, and let us be comforted
in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any
affliction, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God, 2.
Cor. 1.4. Be cheerful therefore in thine affliction, say as David, Psalm.
42.11. Why art thou cast down O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me?
Think not the worse, but the better of thy self for the Lords correcting of
thee; Thy case is no other then the case of Gods dear children; yea of Christ
himself. There has no tentation taken hold of thee, but such as appertains
to man. 1. Cor. 10.13.

Affliction is the beaten path of all the Lords people. Which of the godly, and
faithful before us have not drunk of this cup, and been baptized with this
baptism?

This being a common case, me thinks it should be a common comfort. Why should
any man that loves, or fears God, or is any way desirous to honor God in that
condition the Lord has set him, seek, and with a privilege above all the
children of God that ever were? yea above Christ Jesus the son of God
himself. Is it not a favor, is it not a mercy, nay, is it not an honor to be
used and to be dealt withal as Christ and all the godly have been before us?
And should not the consideration of this comfort us? It may be the Lord has
taken away thy goods, thy plenty from thee, and brought thee to a morsel of
bread. It may be he has taken away thy health, and welfare, and does afflict
thee with deseases, and sores, and aches, so as thou have no rest, day nor
night. Was not this Jobs condition, who lost more goods and substance in one
day, then thou have in all thy life? besides he had painful days, and long
nights of sorrow. And art thou better then he was? It may be, the Lord has
cast thee into prison, and spoiled thee of thy liberty. Was not faithful
Joseph, (unjustly) kept diverse years in prison, where they held his feet in
the stocks; and he was laid in Iron, until his appointed time came, and the
counsel of the Lotd had tried him, Psalm. 105.18, 19.

It may be thou have many great and malicious enemies, which without any just
cause of thine, who do backbite thee, slander thee, speak all manner of evil
of thee, and with (more then Vatinian) hatred do persecute thee. Was not this
the case of Christ? and did not he tell his Apostles, John 15.18, 19. that they
should meet with the same entertainment in the world that he had found amongst
them? It may be the Lord does exercise thee with graceless, stubborn and
rebellious children. This cannot be but a great grief to the heart of a
parent, especially if he be one fearing God; but have not Gods dear children
been thus tried? Had nor Noah that just and upright man, a wretched Cham, that
discovered and scoffed at his fathers infirmities, Genesis 9. Had not good Isaac
a profane Esau, as he is termed, Heb. 12.16. who of set purpose to vex his
parents, took unto him wives of other nations, which was a grief of mind
unto Isaac and Reb^ckah; Genesis 26.35. What wicked children had Ely the Priest
and judge of Israel? such as abused the women that assembled at the door of
the Tabernacle of the Congregation, that men abhorred the offering of the Lord,
1 Samuel 2.17, 22.
the sin of the sons of Ely was so great before the Lord. It may be the Lord
has taken unto himself some of thy children, which were as deer and near unto
thee as thine own soul. But what if the Lord had taken them away by the sword
of the enemies? as he did Fly his sons, 1. Sam. 4.11. Or by fire from heaven?
as he did the sons of Aaron, Lev. 10.2. Nay, what if the Lord should have
taken away ten of thy children, all of thy children at one blow by overwhelming
the house upon them where they were eating and drinking? as he did Jobs
children, Job. 2.19. And to conclude, what if the Lord should raise up evil in
thy family; suffering one child to defloure and to devour each other; yea, to
seek thy life? as David's children did? Were thy case and condition in any of
all these ^o^e afflictions, worse then those of Gods deer and faithful
servants of the Lord, who have been thus exercised and afflicted? yea and now
are? Knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in your breth^en that
are in the world. 1 Pet. 5.9

Let us therefore learn to judge wisely of our selves conflicting with
afflictions. Afflictions, though they be judgments upon us for our sin, yet
are they not judgments upon us unto condemnation.

We shall then add unto our affliction and sorrow, and needlessly increase our
grief, if we condemn our estate because the Lord corrects us for our
transgressions. If we cast off our hope of happiness in heaven because we be
recompensed with judgments on earth; we shall both wrong God and our selves:
Therefore he will have us to rejoice in tribulation, Romans 5.3. Though he visit
our iniquities with rods, Psalm. 89.32, 33. Yet his loving kindness will he not
utterly take away from us, nor suffer his faithfulness to fail. Therefore
beware of charging the Lord with any hardness or unreasonable dealing with us;
as if he marred his gold by casting it into the furnace to refine it. But let
us rather look into our own hearts, and mourn for our own stubbornnes and
rebellion, which has moved the Lord thus to shackle and hamper us, that he
might take down our proud hearts (O proud hearts of ours) subdue our stubborn
and rebellious wills and make us vile and nothing in our own eyes. And be we
thankful unto our good God and loving Father, that he will be at these pains
to refine and purge us: that so he may make choice of us for his glory before
others. Behold (says the Lord Esaias 48.10. I have fined thee, but not as
silver; I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction. When God does cast
thee into the furnace to refine thee, take heed thou do not say or think, I
am cast out of his eyes; the Lord has rejected and forsaken me; for this were
to bring an evil report upon the ways of God, and to turn his truth into a
ly. Ezekiel. 20.37. I will cause you to pass under the rod, and will bring you
into the bond of the covenant. Yet such is the peevishness of our nature: such
is our unbelief, that if any extraordinary affliction does befall us,
especially if it be such as tarrieth and sticks by us, we are ready to mutter
and murmur: yea ready to fear that God has forsaken us. Whereas we should
rather gather arguments of comfort to our selves; that the more he afflicts
us, the better he loves us; in that he carries such a strait hand and
vigilant eye over us, that we shall no sooner step aside, but he will be ready
to fetch us in again. The Lord might give us over to our own hearts lust, even
unto hardness of heart, to a reprobate mind: giving us leave to eat of the
fruit of our own way, and be filled with our own devices, Pro. 1.31. But his
love compels him to take another course with us, to chasten us, That we should
not be condemned with the World. 1. Cor. 11.32. Whereupon one of the ancient
Fathers prayed Lord, sear me here, that thou may save me hereafter: cut and
wound me here, that thou may for ever heal and spare me. Consider what the
wiseman says, Pro. 3.11, 12. My son, refuse not the chastening of the Lord;
neither be grieved with his correrection; for the Lord corcteth him whom he
loves, even as a father does the child in whom he delights. Children will
hardly be brought to believe thus much: and therefore they are ready to measure
their parents affection, by their correction: and to think there is most love,
where there is least correction. But this is their error, for wisdom tells
us Pr. 13.24. that He which spares the rod, hates his son, but he that
loves him, chasteneth him betimes. Least if he let him alone with out
correction (as too many foolish indulgent parents do) he go to Hell in the end.
Therefore thou shall smite him with the rod, and shall deliver his soul from
Hell. Pro. 23.14.

So we are ready to think we might do well without affliction: but the Lord
knows us better then we know our selves: and he sees we would to hell
hereafter, if he should not afflict us here. I am sure it had been woe with
some of us, if the Lord had not afflicted us. Nay some of us can say (blessed
be God for his unspeakable mercy) that there never did befall us any
affliction which we could have spared, either for the nature and kind, or for
the measure and quantity thereof.

And may we not all say, that, we are then in the best temper, when we are
afflicted? Even the wicked will be somewhat good in affliction Pharaohs proud
heart will stoop and yield a little: then the Israelites shall go and
sacrifice to their God, Exodus 10.14. But their goodness lasts no longer then
their troubles last. When afflictions end, their goodness ends: And they
return with the dog to their old vomit, 2. Pet. 2.22.

Their hard heart will be a little softened, whiles they are in the fire; as
iron bends, as the Smith would have it, all the while the fire is in it. But
as their affliction abateth, so their hardness and wickedness returns: as
iron growing cold, grows as hard as it was before, nay often times harder: as
water waxes colder after heating, then it was at first.

Therefore we have more cause to be thankful to God for afflictions, then for
meat and drink; seeing the Lord does us more good by them, then by these.

Which good, though at the first thou see not, because thy physic is now but
in working; yet, if thou belong to God, thou shall hereafter both see it and
feel it too. And thou will justify the goodness of God in every particular,
and say, I could not have spared any of Gods rods: I would not have been
without this or that affliction for all the world: None could have been
invented to do me more good, so to hit me in the right vein: I had been
undone, I had perished for ever, if the Lord had not thus and thus afflicted
me. Happy art thou who can thus say. But this is a lesson which flesh and
blood can hardly be brought to learn, and some are more dull then others; that
is, more proud, more stubborn, more carnal, more earthly minded then others;
and therefore the Lord keeps those longer in the school of affliction then
those his children that are more tractable and teachable. But (as I said) it is
a hard task for the best; and therefore, if we might be choosers we would be no
sufferers: if we could shift it, we would not be afflicted. How hardly are we
brought to believe, that the Lord intends or will do us good by this evil of
affliction? What? meat to come out of the eater? sweet out of the sour? this
is a very riddle unto us. But faith makes it plain and easy to be understood:
for faith will show us one contrary in another: good in evil: health in
sickness: ease in pain: glory in shame, and life in death.

Without this eye of faith, thou can not possibly see the Lords goodness
toward thee in afflicting thee: nor yet reap that good by thine afflictions,
M. Culverwell of faith.
which otherwise thou may by believing. And for proof herefore, I wish the
to peruse such treatises as do tend to this purpose. In the mean time, let
this which I have spoken serve to comfort thee in thine afflictions. Howsoever
they may be tart and sharp for the present: bitter and grievous unto nature: as
if the print of every stroke did pierce thy flesh, and fetch blood from thee;
yet God is where he was; yet God loves thee as much as ever he did, if not
more; and loving thee will lay no more upon thee, nor suffer thee to be tempted
above that which thou shall be able to bear 1. Cor. 10.13. Some the Lord does
chastise with rods: othersome he does whip with scorpions (as it were;) laying
on greatest load, where he has given greatest strength to bear: as a father
will lay those burdens upon the shoulders of his elder, and stronger sons,
which will go near to break the backs of his little ones. Or as a wise
Physician, who tempereth and prescribes Physic answerable to the constitution
and strength of his sick patient. How should this comfort us in our trials:
when we know they be no other then our good God will make us able to bear? And
not only so, but he will give issue with the tentation, 1. Cor. 10.13. We say
all is well that ends well: then must it needs go well with the afflicted
children of God; because all their trials end in peace and glory. Mark the
upright man, and behold the just: for the end of that man is peace, Psalm.
37.37. And if we suffer, we shall also reign, and be glorified with Christ,
2. Tim. 2.12. By which, and and many more places it appears, that, howsoever
afflictions be painful and grievous to our nature, in the bearing of them,
yet the issue and end of them, will be the most happy and comfortable. The
consideration whereof has caused some to suffer with joy the spoil of their
goods; knowing that in heaven, they have a better, and more enduring substance.
Heb. 10.34. This was that which put a song of praise and thanks giving in the
mouths of the blessed Mrrtyrs: that the Lord would honor them so highly as to
bring them to suffer for him. And though they might have escaped, yet would
they not be delivered: that they might receive a better Resurrection, Heb.
11.35. Seeing then such a cloud of witnesses have gone before us, whose trials
and afflictions have been as smart, and tart, as ours can be: let us become
followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the promises, Heb.
6.12. be not too much taken up with the sense and smart of thy present
affliction. But let thy thoughts be occupied about the good which thereby is
like to accrue unto thee. And assure thy self that all shall work together for
thy weal. Romans 8.28. Yea that the Lord takes much delight in thee, in that he
is ever, and anon pruning of thee. That man, or woman, which takes content in
their orchard and garden, will ever be plucking up of those weeds that grow in
them: cutting, and pruning all superfluous branches or slips. Whereas if it be
a place he takes no content in he cares not what rubbige, or baggage do
overgrow it. If the Lord takes delight in thee, there shall not a weed spring
up in thee, but with the pruning knife of affliction he will cut it off;
whereas if he regarded thee not, he would lay the reins upon thy neck, and let
thee have thine own swinge, to fill up the measure of thy sin, that so in
justice he may mete unto thee a full cup of his wrath and vengeance.

Desire to be with Christ.
Seventhly, if we be subject to so many afflictions in this life, me thinks we
should then be willing (if the Lord see it good) to remove out of this place of
sorrow and trouble, to lay down these our earthly Tabernacles, and to be with
the Lord: that so there may be an end put to all our evils, both sin and
punishment; and the contrary good enjoyed of us. For, blessed are the dead
which die in the Lord; for they rest from their labors, and their works follow
them, Revel. 14.13. Desire we then to be dissolved and to be with Christ, which
is best of all. Phil. 1.23.



Jonah his fault, who in an impatient mood would needs be gone, being weary of
his life. Besides, as we must be willing to abide the Lords pleasure, so also
to tarry his leisure; which if we be, we may desire death for these causes.

Death how it may be desired.
First, to be freed from those evils which here we are pestered with. And
secondly, to enjoy that good which can no where be had but in Heaven. The evils
which death will free us from, are bodily and spiritual.

The bodily evils are diverse, to wit, sicknesses, diseases, pains and aches;
of all which, death will heal and cure us at once. Death will also set us free
from the rage and malice of all our enemies If death have once seized upon us,
we shall be out of their reach. They shall be able to do us no more mischief
nor harm. The righteous is taken away from the evil to come. Peace shall
come, they shall rest in their beds, Esa. 57.1, 2. Last of all, death will free
us from all troubles and afflictions; for when sin and corruption cease,
then correction and affliction ends.

But we should desire death especially, that we may be freed from spiritual
evils. First, that sin and corruption may cease, and be no more in us. O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death, Romans
7.24? Sin is that which works us all woe, Jerem. 30.15. Sin is the
makebate betwixt the Lord and us, Esa. 64.5. Behold thou art angry, for we
have sinned. Yet we are not to desire death, that we may be rid of sin in
these respects, only because it works our woe, but rather because God is
dishonored by it: and it is displeasing unto his Majesty. For the glory of God
should be more dear unto us, then our own lives. Sin is that which clouds the
glory of God. And death is that which freeth us from sin, Romans 6.7.

Secondly, that we may be freed from the temptations and malice of the Devil.
Whiles we abide in the flesh, he will never leave soliciting of us unto evil.
He goes up and down like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour 1. Pet.
5.8. And the longer we live, the more will his rage and malice against us
increase, because of the shortness of his and our time. The nearer the child
of God is to heaven, the more Satan and his accursed instruments will rage: and
the fiercer will their assaults be; as it was with the children of Israel, the
nearer the time was, that they should be delivered out of Egypt and go to
Canaan: the more cruel did their taskmasters grow, and the heavier burdens
were laid upon them.

And last of all, we shall by death be freed from all inward vexations and
griefs of mind and spirit. So many sorrows and fears do compass about many
of Gods children, that it makes them weary of their life, at Rebekah said to
Isaac, Genes. 27.46.

But our desire of death must not be so much for the avoiding of evil, as for
the enjoying of good. For there we shall have a crown of glory and immortality,
1. Pet. 5.4.

There we shall be like unto Christ. Colos. 3.4. There we shall have joy
unspeakable, 1. Pet. 1.8. Yea such joy as if we could but conceive the
sweetness, the greatness thereof, we would despise the joys and pleasures of
the world, in hope of assurance to enjoy them. Yea there we shall for ever be
with the Lord Christ. 1. These. 4.17. In whose presence is fulness of joy, at
whose right hand, there are pleasures for evermore. Psalm. 16.11. And which is
the sum of all, we shall have everlasting communion with the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, and with all the quyre of heaven, all those blessed Saints and
Angels singing and praising the name of the Lord for evermore.

Woe to those that are not afflicted.
Eighthly and lastly, Is it so that Gods dearest children go not without
affliction? then woe to those whom God afflicts not: Which live at ease and in
fullness: Wallowing in their sports and pleasures, And are not in trouble like
other men, neither plagued like other men, Psalm. 73.5.

These carry a black brand, being marked for wicked ones. Lo, these are the
wicked, they always prosper, and increase in riches, verse. 12.

The houses of the wicked, says Job, are peaceable without fear, and the rod
of God is upon them, Job 21.9.

Which shows that they are but as Oxen fatted against the day of slaughter.

For if judgment begin at the house of God, what shall the end be of them,
which obey not the Gospel of God, 1. Pet. 4.17. If Gods dear children, if his
faithful servants, who are zealous for the Lord, whose souls do mourn in
secret for their own sins, and the abominations of the time and place where
they live: Who labor to walk before the Lord in truth, and with a perfect
heart: who desire and endeavor to do the will of God in all things, and to
yield a cheerful obedience unto his Commandments, be so often, so many ways,
so sharply (many times) corrected and afflicted: what will become of profane
foul-mouthed blasphemers, of scoffers and scorners of piety and godliness; of
proud and voluptuous persons: of covetous earth-wormes, of gluttons, drunkards,
fornicators, unclean persons; such as take no other thought but to fulfill the
lusts of the flesh? certainly if the Scripture be true, and God be just, these
shall one day have the full viols of Gods heavy wrath, and eternal vengeance
powered out upon them. If Gods own dear children must drink of that bitter cup
of his displeasure, Surely all the wicked of the earth shall wring out, and
drink the dregs thereof, Psalm. 75.8. Behold the righteous shall be
recompensed in the earth, how much more the wicked and the sinner? Pro. 11.31.
If it be true that God chastises every son whom he received: What will
become of those whose bones are full of the marrow of sin? who sing to the
viol; who drink wine in bowls: unto whom wickedness is as sugar in their
mouths, and wantonness, like oil, does make them look with a merry
countenance: whose life is spun with such an even thread, both warpe and woofe,
as scarce a knot to be seen: No breach in their estate: No crosses, no losses,
but all things go as they would have them? surely these are in a pitiful, in a
fearful condition. For howsoever they put far away the evil day, and
approach to the seat of iniquity, Amos 6.3. Howsoever they may vaunt it, and
flatter themselves, as Babel does Revel. 18.7. saying, I shall see no mourning,
yet when they say peace, and safety, that is, think themselves to be most
secure and farthest off from evil, then shall come upon them sudden
destruction, as the travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not
escape, 1. Thessal. 5.3. For God uses slow, but sure punishment: it is long in
coming, but when he strikes the wicked, he will pay them home for all their
wickedness: and he will make good the slownesse of his revenge, by the
greatness of their punishment when it lights upon them. The higher the Lord
lifts up his hand to strike, the longer it is ere it falls: but when it falls,
it falls more heavily. The longer it is that Gods justice is boiling upon the
fire of his wrath, the more scalding hot it shall be powered upon the pates of
the wicked. For though the Lord be slow to anger, yet is he great in power, and
will not surely clear the wicked, Nahum. 1.3. They have not vengeance
presently executed, but the Lord reserveth wrath for them, as in the verse
before.

If the Lord be pleased to continue his heavy hand, and that a long time upon
his dear children, how heavy, how long and continual shall those tortures,
and torments be, which are prepared for stubborn, rebellious, and impenitent
sinners?

If humble, meek-hearted, dutiful and obedient children lie (many times) in
lingering and languishing afflions, how smarting, I, intolerable shall those
judgments be, which one day the wicked and ungodly shall endure? If the Lord
seems many times not to regard the tears, nor cries of his children; that they
seem as it were to welter in their sorrows; how are impenitent, stiff-necked,
and hardhearted sinners like to speed, when they shall cry, and roar again?
Surely he will laugh at their destruction, and mock them when fear and trouble
comes upon them. Prove. 1.26. Then shall that wrath which they have treasured up
unto themselves, come upon them to the uttermost.

Woe be unto thee whosoever thou art that fear not the Lord.

Woe be to those that revell and Jove it, as if they feared neither God nor
Devil: as if they regarded neither Heaven nor Hell. The Lord is tempering of
some bitter potion for them, which one day they shall drink down to their
eternal woe.

If God humble his dear ones under his hand, he will trample his enemies
underneath his feet. If the Israelites must be baptized in the red sea, the
Egyptians shall be overwhelmed and drowned in it. If Lot must lose all his
goods and substance in Sodom, the Sodomites shall lose both goods and lives
too. If Gods finger lie heavy upon his children here on earth, with the weight
of his loins, he will press down the wicked into Hell hereafter.



I have seen the wicked strong and spreading himself like a green bay tree;
but his glory lasted not long, he passed away, and lo, he was gone. Psalm.
37.35, 36.



though his excellency mount up unto the Heaven, and his head reach up unto
the clouds, yet shall he perish for ever like his dung, and they which have
seen him, shall say, Where is he? Job. 20.6.7.



neither their silver, nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the day
of the Lords wrath, Zep. 1.18.



though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not go unpunished, Pro. 11.21.

themselves together, and consult how to escape from the power of evil.

though they take counsel together, yet it shall be brought to naught, though
they pronounce a decree, yet shall it not stand, Esaias, 9.10. There is no
wisdom, neither understanding, nor counsel against the Lord, Pro. 21.30.

Thus we see how the stays and props of the wicked are but like reeds, or
Egyptian staves which cannot help them. Neither Heaven, nor Earth, can save
or privilege those whom the Lord will punish. Then there is little cause, why
we should grieve at the prosperity, or impunity of godless persons: they are
sorer plagued then the world takes notice of, though no apparent judgment be
seen upon them. For does not the Lord give them up to a reprobate mind, even to
fill and glut themselves with sin? and can there be a greater punishment, an
heavier judgment then this, not to be restrained from evil courses? Desperate
is the case of that patient, whom the Physician gives over to his own appetite,
to eat and drink what likes him best. When a father begins to cast off the
care of his son, suffering him to take his swinge, sink, or swim, he will
not look after him: does it not appear that he intends to disinherit such a
child? Even so (as the water, where it is stillest, is deepest, Note.
and most dangerous to drown) when God is most silent in threatening, and
patient in sparing, there is he most inflamed with anger, and purpose of
revenge. For the fewer judgments are powered upon the wicked in this life, the
more are reserved for them in the life to come. Therefore, fret not thy self
because of the wicked men, neither be envious for the evil doers, for they
shall soon be cut down like the grass, and shall wither as the green herb,
Psalm. 37.1, 2. Peruse the whole Psalm, and it will teach thee, that how
prosperously soever the wicked do live for a time, yet their happiness is but
transitory, because they are not in the favor of God, for in the end they shall
be destroyed as his enemies.

Again, in that the Lord says not, they which I love, shall be rebuked and
chastened, but whom I love, I rebuke, Doct. 2. All our afflictions come from
God.
I chasten, we may in the next place observe this doctrine, that, All our
trialls, and afflictions, come from the Lord. Of what nature, and condition
soever the affliction be wherewith we are exercised, it is Physic of the
Lords preparing, he has his hand in it: and therefore by a kind of propriety
afflictions be termed his judgments. We have waited for thee, O Lord, in the
way of thy judgments, Esaias, 26.8. And in the next verse. Thy judgments are in
the earth, etc.

That which Naomi spoke to the people of Bethlehem, makes much for the proof of
the point in hand. Call me not Naomi, but call me Mara, for the Almighty has
given me much bitterness. I went out full, and the Lord has caused me to
return empty: why call ye me Naomi seeing the Lord bath humbled me, and the
Almighty has brought me unto adversity. Ruth. 1.20, 21. All her crosses, and
losses, of what nature soever they were; all her sorrows and bitterness she
fathers upon the Lord. As personal so national evils come from the Lord, as
appears 2. Cron. 15.6. Nation was destroyed of Nation, and city of city:
For the Lord did trouble them with all adversity. To the same purpose speaks
the Prophet Isaiah, Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? Did
not the Lord, because we have sinned against him. Isa. 42.24.

Whatsoever the outward means, or instruments be, Gods hand has a principal
strok in all those afflictions which befall either the church in general, or
any particular member thereof, whether it be pestilence, or sword, or famine,
or captivity. It is not the heedlesnesse and wilfulness of people which will
adventure into places infected, or upon goods that are contagious, which
begins, or continues the plague amongst us. It is not alone the malice and
cruelty of the enemy, which brings the sword, or causes any to fall by it.
It is not unseasonable winter, or summer, which causes and brings the famine
amongst us: these are but secondary causes, the prime and supreme cause is,
that all disposing wisdom, and providence of God, which causes and orders
both the one and the other. Such as he has appointed to death, shall go unto
death; and such as are for the sword, to the sword; and such as are for the
famine, to the famine; and such as are for captivity, to the captivity.
Jerem. 15.2. So likewise for particular judgments, whether in our body, or
estate, all comes from the Lord. Who has made the dumb, or the deaf, or the
blind? have not I, says the Lord? Exodus 4.11.

From whom come consumptions, burning agues, and other bodily diseases? Does
not the Lord apoint them? Lev. 26.16. Hence the Church professes, Hos. 6.1.
The Lord has spoiled us, and he will heal us; he has wounded us, and he
will bind us up. If we peruse that bedroul of curses, Devt. 28. It will
appear, that neither poverty, sickness, nor any cross, or loss does befall
us, but that which God does send us. Is there any evil in the city, and I
have not done it? Amos 3.6. I the Lord do all these things, Esaias, 45.7. Here I
might quickly lead you into a Labyrinth, by propounding ambiguous and
unnecessary questions, how far God has his hand in every evil; but such
questions will breed strife, rather than godly edifying, 1. Tim. 1.4. Know
therefore, that something the Lord effects in, and by himself, without the
help, or assistance of inferior causes: such are the works of creation and
some miracles. Some things the Lord causes to be effected by means, as
castigations and deliverances. And some things the Lord suffers to be done by
his permissive will, yet so as (if he pleased) he could easily prevent and
hinder, or alter the doing of them; thus the Lord may be said to have a finger
in every sin, not as it is a breach of his revealed will, but that it may be
an occasion of the manifestation of his power, and justice in punishing and
revenging of it. These truths the heathen which either knew not God, or else
did not glorify him as God, were utterly ignorant of, and therefore turned the
glory of the incorruptible God, into the similitude of the image of a
corruptible man, and of birds, and four footed beasts, and of creeping things,
Romans 1.23. And hence it came to pass that they forged unto themselves so many
Gods: one of the sun; another of the moon; one of the sea, another of the
winds, etc. By whose wisdom, providence and power (as they conceived) the
whole world, with all occasions and occurences therein were ordered and swayed.
Whereas there is but one only true God, Who by wisdom has laid the
foundation of the earth, and has stablished the heavens through understanding;
by his knowledge the depths are broken up, and the clouds drop down the dew.
Prove. 3.19, 20. See Jerem. 10.12.13. of him, and by him, and for him are all
things. Romans 11.36. The Pelagians of old were much puzzled about the divine
Providence, thinking it an unseemly thing to make God the author of an evil;
and therefore affirmed that there were two gods. The one was the Father of
mercies, and author of all good that does betyde man. The other was an evil
god, the enemy of mankind, the actor of such evils as do befall man. But we
acknowledge only one God: the wise and just dispenser of good and evil: for
out of the mouth of the most High proceeds both evil and good, Lam. 3.38.
Plato, and other Heathens would say, That God was the cause of all good things
in Nature; believing and acknowledging a Divine Providence in prosperity; but
when adversity, came, they were of another mind. It is reported of Cato, that
he stoutly held and defended a Divine Providence all the while that Pompey
prospered, and the city flourished: but when he did see Pompey to be
overthrown by Caesar in so just a cause, when he beheld the body of Pompey
cast upon the shore, without any honor of burial, and himself exposed to
danger by Caesar's army: he then changed his opinion, denying that there was
any Divine Providence, but that all things fell out by chance.

It were well with many Christians (which know, or at least should know more of
Gods mind then Coto knew) if they were not sometimes sick of Cato his disease;
for they can trust God, and acknowledge^ his Providence, all the while they
live at ease, and in prosperity; but let the Lord change their estate, and
then they change their mind, or an the least they begin to demurre about the
truth of this doctrine.

Have thou not procured this unto thy self, in that thou have forsaken the
Lord thy God? Jerem. 2.17. Again it is said, Hos. 13.9. O Israel, thou have
destroyed thy self. And ordinary experience tells us how many mischiefs many
bring upon themselves through surfets, riot, etc.



Therefore it is undoubted truth, that God has his hand in our afflictions,
and it may be confirmed by these reasons.

God fills both heaven and earth.
First, in regard of the infiniteness of his being, filling both Heaven and
Earth with his presence. Am I a God at hand, says the Lord, and not a God
afar off? Can any hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see him,
says the Lord? Do not I fill Heaven and Earth. Jerem. 23.23, 24. Whither
shall we go from his spirit? or whither shall we flee from his presence?
Psalm. 139.7. If we be in hell, there shall the Lords hand take us, yea, though
we more hid in the bottom of the sea, the Lord can thence command the serpent
to bite us, Amos 9.2, 3. So that the Lord is every where. The Heaven, and the
Heaven of Heavens is not able to contain him: 1. King. 8.27. He is above us,
beneath us, he is before us, and behind us; he is without us, and within us;
he is not only all eye to observe all, for his eyes behold all nations, Psalm.
66.7. But he is also all hand to order and dispose of all particulars. If any
thing were out of Gods reach, or did fall out beyond his presence and privity,
then were not the Lord infinite, and then were he not God. But the Lord being
every where, and filling every place, must needs have the ordering and
disposing of all things which are done in Heaven, or in the earth; for as it
pleases the Lord, so all things come to pass.

Again, it must needs be,God works all things as he will.
that the Lords hand should be in every affliction, which befalls us, because,
He works all things after the counsel of his will, Ephe. 1.11. Man may
devise and plot what he please: he may take others into confederacy with him,
but the Lord laughes them to scorn, Psalm. 37.13. Their counsel shall be
brought to naught, their decree shall not stand. Esaias. 8.10. But the counsel
of the Lord shall stand, and the thoughts of his heart throughout all ages,
Psalm. 33.11. So Esaias. 46.10. My counsel shall stand, and I will do whatsoever
I will. If the Lord has a will to any thing, that thing must needs follow: for
his willing of it, is the doing of it, I have purposed it, and I will do it,
Esaias 46.11. Therefore they blasphem the omnipotency, and power of God, who
say, That Gods will attends and follows man's; and works in many things, as
our will inclines: which is to set the cart before the horse; to make the
supreme governesse come after the handmaid.



the will of God. We may not say, we will go to the next town, But if God
will, Jam. 4.15.

The heart of man purposes a way, but the Lord directs his steps, Prove. 16.9.

Howsoever the wicked may bandy themselves against the Lord and his anointed,
they can do no more, nor other, but whatsoever his hand, and counsel has
appointed to be done, Act. 4.28.

All creatures are subject unto the Lord.
Thrdly, because all the creatures both of Heaven and Earth, and under the
Earth, are ready pressed as so many servants, and soldiers to be sent forth, and
commanded at the will of God, their Sovereign Lord and chieftaine. If the Lord
will lead any of his hosts against Pharaoh and his people, for the rescue and
deliverance of Israel his chosen, they shall march in battle array, and they
shall follow in ten several troops, and at the heels of one another. The
least, the meanest, and the vilest of these hosts, though of Lice, or
Grasshoppers, under the conduct of the Lord, shall be able to make head against
this great Monarch Pharaoh: and bring down the spirit, and stomach of this
proud King, who a little before asked, Who is the Lord, that I should hear his
voice, and let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go,
Exodus 5.2.

All which considered, namely, That the Lord is every where, fulfilling all
places; and that all things are effected as he will: and that all creatures
are at his bay, we may safely conclude, That no affliction can befall us, but
that which the Lord appoints unto us, as 1. These. 3.3. No man should be
moved with afflictions: for ye your selves know that we are appointed
thereunto.

Away with Fortune and luck.
Is it so, that all our afflictions come from God? Away then with that
heathenish conceit, or dream of Fortune, Luck, or Chance; words too frequent
in the mouths of Christians. If any thing befall our neighbor better then
ordinary, and beyond our expectation, we are ready to congratulate his good
fortune,

If any thing succeeed evil, contrary to his desire, or if any affliction does
befall him, we are ready to bemone or condole his ill luck, and his bad
chance. Would you know from whence Fortune did first spring? One tells us from
nature. (...).
I rather think from ignorance of nature. Nature is nothing else but that order
and course which the Lord has set and established in all his creatures. Why
does bread strengthen us rather then stones? You will say it is the nature of
bread, to nourish and strengthen us; and why so? even because God has said it,
and appointed it to be so. This order and course of nature the Heathen being
ignorant of, as also of the Divine Providence guiding and disposing of all
particulars, they ascribed the event of things to a power of their own
devising, which they called Fortune. Now for Christians, who have the light of
truth so clearly shining amongst us, that we should take up the language, and
terms of blind Pagans; what a shame is it to our profession, and reproach to
our God?

Luke 10.31. By chance there came down a certain Priest that same way.

but all things past, present and future are present with the Lord. And that
all things in appearance casual are ordered and governed by God, may be
gathered by that Vision of Ezechiel, 1.18. Who beheld all things in the World,
in appearance to run upon wheels, the ring of which wheels he observed to
be full of eyes: implying hereby the universal and intentive Providence of
the Lord, overseeing all things.

Neither may we ascribe any thing to that unluckie, and (as many call it)
unfortunate or fortunate Planet, under which any may be said to be borne, as
the starre-gazer does fondly hold, and maintain; or that some days be good,
and some bad, is a heathenish conceit. For the Lord God Almighty, that Most
High and Incomprehensible JEHOVAH, that Everlasting Alpha and Omega, He that
was, that is, and is to come, He is the former, framer and governor of all
things; Who made Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades, those famous stars, and
placed them in the firmament of heaven? Who limited the North, and South
climats? Has not the Lord formed them, and does not He govern them? Has not
He appointed them their several spheres, and motions? Have they not their
influences from him? and does not He withdraw from them at His pleasure? Do
they not remain, and continue as servants for the behoof of man: as other
creatures do? and are not as gods, or governors of man's nature: neither can
they dispose of our inclinations, constitutions, and affections, or make us
happy, or unhappy at their pleasure; but are ruled and commanded by God, to
stand or move at His will and pleasure: Did not the Sun stand still in
Gibeon, and the Moon in the valley of Ajalou a whole day. Josh. 10.12. By
which, and many other places it is evident, that Sun and Moon, and so all other
creatures are subject to the will of the superior Governor, who needs not the
help of such weak instruments to draw out, or to shorten the life, and
welfare, the happiness, or the misery of man; to make our portion the more
fat or lean, to further or hinder us, either in our spiritual, or bodily
welfare. Think not therefore that either thy good, or bad success in thy
proceedings, the prosperous or adverse issues of thine endeavors, thy riches,
or thy poverty proceeds from the influence, domination, or power of the
creatures, but that all are ordered, and disposed of by a higher cause, the
wise, and righteous Providence of Almighty God.

Let us not therefore so much as name Fortune, seeing all things in the World
(though many of them seem casual and contingent to our weak and shallow
apprehension) are notwithstanding regulated by Divine Providence. Some will say
that Jonah being cast into the sea, had good fortune, that a fish should be
ready at hand to swallow him up, and so carry him a shore again: but this
fortune was no other then Gods providence, For the Lord had prepared a great
fish to swallow up Jonah 1.17.

The selling of Joseph unto the Ishmaelitish Merchants, in appearance seems
to be no other then the cruel act of his unnatural brethren, disputing and
debating with themselves, what they were best to do with him: Yet Joseph
tells his brethren, You sent me not hither, but God, Gene. 45.8. Can any
thing appear more casual then the drawing of a lot? yet it is the Lord that
directs my hand to this lot rather then unto another. The lot is cast into
the lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord, Prove. 16.33.

Gods Providence extends it self, even to the smallest things, the falling
of every sparrow on the ground, Matt. 10.29. The numbering of the hairs of oun
heads, the feeding of the birds of the air; and what not?

Hold we it therefore as an undoubted truth, that there is no fortune: and
that nothing comes to pass without the decree of God: no, not any of our
afflictions, nor any judgments, which at any time befall any wicked person.
When the Drunkard has besotted himself with excessive drinking, and even
transformed himself into a swine, he takes his horse, homeward goes the beast,
but the man (more senseless then the beast) is carried he knows not whither;
down at last he tumbles from his horse, and breaks his neck: or being on foot,
falls into the ditch, and there is drowned; you will say, This man has hard
fortune. And so when two roaring ruffians, shall fall to word it upon some
indignity or wrong received, or conceived: and from words proceed either to
blows or stabbing each other: their companions will say, the wounded party had
a hard mischance befalne him, very ill luck. No, no; these had the just and
righteous hand of God against them, the Lord in justice and wrath appointing
these heavy judgments unto them. Hence it is that Jude speaks of some, which
were before of old ordained to this condemnation, Jude, (...).
4. The word ordained is very emphatical in the original, and signifies as
much as if they were enrolled or set down upon record, or registered, and set
down by the handwriting of God to this condemnation. Fortune befits the mouth
of a heathen, but Gods Providence the heart and tongue of a Christian.

God disposes of all tempests.
Again, this doctrine meets with another error too rife, and rank amongst us.
In the time of any great tempests, especially if they be such as cause any
spoil, or havoc at sea, or upon land; by and by, many mouths are opened, and
this they suppose to be the work of some conjurer. As if the Lord (as Eliah
ironically said to the Priests of Baal, of their god) were all this while
asleep, or sat still, and did nothing. If there be any great wind blowing
hard at sea, The Lord sends that great wind into the sea, and he raises every
mighty tempest, Jonah, 1.4. If there be any winds or storms upon the land, the
Lord raises them: For the Lord has his way in the whirlewind and in the
storm, Nah. 1.3.

God alone is the Lord both of sea and land, and by his overruling hand, and
power he orders and disposes of all particulars, whither in the seas, or
upon the earth. For he commands and raises the stormy wind, and it lifts
up the waves thereof. Psalm. 107.25. They cry unto the Lord in their trouble,
and then he brings them out of their distress. But how does he this? It
follows in the 29. verse. He turns the storm to calm, so that the waves
thereof are still, for he rules the raging of the seas. Psalm. 89.9. So that if
there be storm or tempest) it is evident God causes and cease all.



and devils under the rule and command of the Almighty? It is true, that the
devil has a large walk, even the whole earth, which he compasses, Job 2.2.
Yet has he his bounds and limits set him, which he cannot exceed. Although he
be full of malice, and spite, and takes pleasure in doing evil, and working
of mischief: and therefore he is called the evil spirit, Act. 19.16. Yet can
he not hurt so much as one swine, until the Lord give him commission, Mat.
8.31. He and his wicked instruments may vaunt it, as Pilate did, Have I not
power etc. but we may say of them, as Christ answered Pilate. Thou could
have no power against me, except it were given thee from above. John. 19.11.
Consider what Satan said to the Lord, Job. 2.5. Stretch now out thine hand, and
touch his bones, and his flesh: by which words it is evident, that whatsoever
power, and liberty Satan had over Job, was no other then Gods hand.

Patient in afflictions.
Is it so, that God has his hand in all our afflictions? let us then be
patient in time of affliction, because we are then under Gods hand, who
intends not our hurt but our good in afflicting us. He that has any
dangerous wound, or sore upon him, will patiently endure the surgeon to cut and
search his wound unto the quick: though strong eating plasters or powders, or
any sharp corrasives he applied, he bears it out with a manlike courage,
because he believes that otherwise he cannot be cured. Though it be more
then ordinary torment to be cut, for the taking out of the stone, yet a man
will suffer himself to be bound hand and foot: the searching instrument to be
put into his body, that so he may prolong his life. Shall these exquisite
pains, and grievous tortures, which man does often put us unto, be endured of us
for the good and welfare of our bodies: and shall we not as willingly and
patiently lie under the hand of God, and bear that affliction which he lays
upon us, for the good of our souls? Be we therefore patient, first in respect
of God, and secondly in respect of any of those instrument^ to which God shall
use in afflicting us.

We must be patient in all our afflictions; first, because they be messengers
sent unto us from God our Father, our pitiful Father. Shall I not drink of
that cup which my Father has given me, John 18.11. We have had the Fathers of
our bodies, which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: should we not
much rather be in subjection unto the father of spirits, that we may live,
Heb. 12.9. Do we not daily pray, that the will of our father might be done?
then be we patient in our afflictions, because it is our fathers will, by
these to exercise us. This was the ground of David's patience, Psalm. 39.9. I
was dumb, and have not opened my mouth, because thou did it. It was
dreadful news, which Samuel told Eli, How that the Lord would visit his house
for ever for the iniquity of his sons, and he stayed them not: now therefore
the iniquity of Elies house shall not be purged with sacrifice nor offering
for ever, 1. Sam. 3.13, 14. At the hearing whereof, Eli answers verse 18. It is
the Lord, let him do what seems him good Oh admirable patience and
obedience! well beseeming the ancient judge, and aged president of Shiloh, who
had sacrificed his heart to that God, whose justice had refused to expiat his
sin by sacrifice. Although Eli showed himself to be an ill father unto his
sons* yet he proves a dutiful and obedient son to God, being willing to
kiss the rod he shall smart withal. It is the Lord, whom I have always found
most holy and just and gracious, and he cannot but be himself; let him do
what seems him good; for, whatsoever seems good to him must needs be good,
howsoever it seems to me. Thus patiently did Eli expose himself to Gods
afflicting hand, and kneels to him that severely scourges him: So good king
Hezekiah, Esaias 38.15. What shall I say? for he has said it unto me, and he
has done it.

Again, we should be patient in our afflictions, because they come from the
hand of a pitiful father. In bodily deseases, we are the more content to
endure that pain, which our Surgeon shall put us unto, if we believe and know
him to be a pitiful and tender hearted man. How much more ought we to be
patient under the hand of our heavenly Father: for the Lord is very pitiful
and merciful, or of tender mercy; as the new translation has it, Jam. 5.11.
The Prophet David having abundantly made experience of the Lords goodness,
tells us in very many places; that the Lord is a pitiful God, slow to anger
and great in kindness and truth, Psalm 86.15. And Psalm 131.4. The Lord is
merciful and full of compassion. So full that howsoever for a moment he may
hide away his face from us in a little wrath, yet with everlasting mercy he
will have compassion upon us, Esaias, 54.8. Hence it is that speaking of his
people it is said, Esaias 63.9. In all their affliction he was afflicted; in his
love and in his pity he redeemed them.



to the bone, will not easily be had out of the flesh. Hard knubbs and knurles,
must have great and long wedges driven in to them, many hard and great strokes
given them before they will yield.

Many hard and stony hearts will not be broken with little and short
afflictions; some kind of mettles must be kept a great while longer in the
furnace then others, or else they will never be dissolved, even so it fares
with some natures; little and short afflictions work not upon them, no whit at
all molifie nor soften their hard and stony hearts; therefore the Lord is forced
to keep them down the longer. Many men, when any trouble befalls them, think to
outgrowe it, or to bear it off by head and shoulders, and to make as good a
shift as they can, never looking up to God whom they have offended and provoked
by their sins: but let these know that God will bow them, or else he will
break them. The Lord is the Lord of hosts, he can send crosses thick and
threefold upon us to abate our lofty and proud spirits, to break our rocky and
stony hearts. Gods wrath is answerable to his power, as this is infinite, so he
can make the other insupportable. Many are stiff and stubborn, as the Lord
complains, They obeyed not, neither inclined their ears, but made their necks
stiff, and would not hear, nor receive correction, Ier. 17.23. Little and
short afflictions will not serve to reclaim such as these are; therefore the
Lord keeps them longer under his hand.

Again, the Lord does thus deal with many of his children to work their
hearts to a greater dislike of their sin as that which has brought upon them
all those troubles which now lie upon them; therefore in the time of our
affliction we should fall upon our sin, upbraiding it, and charging it with
all our crosses. Ah thou vile and loathsome sin, I may thank thee for this
expense, for this reproach and shame; Ah cursed sin, how have thou heretofore
domaniered over me? Thou have hitherto been too strong for me, but God by this
affliction (I trow) will tame and hamper thee. Is this the fruit I reap by
entertaining thee? Oh cursed be the time that ever I knew thee, that ever I was
ruled by thee. The more grievous our affliction is, the greater hatred we
should bear our sins, the causes of them; and the more fearful should we be
for time to come of meddling any more with them. We say, The burnt child dreads
the fire. Ephraim had been a long time polluted with idolatry: The Lord stops
her way with thorns, and makes a wall, that she may not find her paths, Hos.
2.6. exercises her with long affliction, until she come to say, What have I
any more to do with Idols, Hos. 14.9. If I must buy my sin at so dear a
rate; if thus long I must be afflicted for my sin; away with all, I will no
more of it.

Theirdly, the Lord does oft-times keep the rod long upon his children for
their greater and deeper humiliation.

Great sins, must be greatly repented of. Great transgressions require great
and long humiliation. David's sins of adultry and murder, killing the husband
with the sword, that he might enjoy his wife, were great sins, and those
which caused the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme: therefore the Lord threatened
him with long affliction, The sword shall never depart from thine house. 2. Sa.
12.10. Neither will the Lord give us over, or cease to afflict us one way, or
other, until he has brought us upon our knees, broken our hard hearts, and
sufficiently humbled us under his hand. For if we walk stubbornly against him
he will walk stubbornly against us: then their uncircumcised heart shall be
humbled, and they shall willingly bear the punishment of their iniquity, Lev.
26.41. Remembering mine affliction, and my mourning, the wormwood and the gall,
my soul has them in remembrance, and is humbled in me, Lament. 3.19, 20.

Fourthly, the Lord by continuing his hand of affliction long upon his children
does hereby make known the strength of his Grace, which is sufficient to
support his children under long and tedious afflictions, A wise builder will
lay the heaviest burden upon that piece of timber which is most heart, and most
able to bear it: Greatest pieces are put to greatest stresse, because little
pieces would warpe and yield, if not break asunder. Even so, where there is
most strength of Grace, there the Lord often times lays on the greatest load of
affliction; which, as it makes for the praise and glory of his Grace so does it
serve much for example unto all that are near unto them; that they may live by
faith, and hope that (if ever they come into the like trial) the Lord, as he is
able to support and strengthen them, so he will do it, and graciously stand by
them even in long and sharp afflictions, as he has upheld others in the like
case.

Fifthly and lastly, the Lord does this, that so he may afterward replenish the
hearts of his children with abundance of inward and spiritual joy. After they
have tasted of more gall then others, they shall eat of more honey then others.
Heavines has some long time sojourned in their hearts; but joy and gladness
follows after to inhabit in them for ever. The spirit of the Lord is upon me
(says Esaias) to comfort all that mourn, appoint unto them that mourn in Sion,
and to give unto them beauty for ashes, the garment of gladness for the spirit
of heaviness that they may be called trees of righteousness, the planting of
the Lord; that he might be glorified, Esaias, 61.2, 3. Ye shall sorrow (says
Christ) but your sarrow shall be turned into joy, John 16.20. If thy sorrows
and afflictions have been longer then ordinary, they shall make way for more
then ordinary joy, and thankfulness for issue and deliverance; according to that
which the Church uttered, Lam. 3.21, 22. I consider this in mine heart,
therefore have I hope. It is the Lords mercy that we are not consumed, because
his compassions fail not. Have we not then good cause to be patient in
afflictions although they be sharp and tedious, seeing they proceed from the
hand of our pitiful and merciful father?

To help forward and further your patience do but consider of these 4. things.

First, 1 Helps to the patient bearing of affliction.
how exceedingly we have a long time provoked the Lord by our sins, amongst
which our unbelief is that which has most offended him. If the Lord should
deal unto us our weight and measure: that is, punish us according to our
deserts, what would become of us? If the Lord should dispute with us, we could
not answer him one thing of a thousand, When he visits, what shall I answer
him, said Job, 31.14. Whereupon David says, Psalm. 130.3. If thou, Lord,
should mark iniquities: O Lord, who shall stand?

The least sin we commit, makes us liable to the vengeance of eternal
torments. How grear a measure of punishment do we then deserve, for our many,
for our grievous sins? our sins being like unto the sand by the sea shore
which is innumerable. What ever our afflictions are, or may be, they come short
of our sins; they fall short of that which we have deserved: and that which
the Lord may justly (without any wrong to us) lay upon us. Amongst many other,
one maine cause why we are so troubled and vexed with affliction is, because we
are so little galled with our sins; a true sense of these would make our
afflictions to be more easy, and us less sensible of them then many times we
are. Do we not see it by experience that when the stone and the gout, or some
other bodily malady meet together, the pain of the stone being the more
grievous, alaies, if not takes away, the sense and pain of the gout; even so
would it be here, when sin and affliction are both upon us at once, the
consideration of our sins (deserving far greater punishment then we bear)
should so grieve us, that the punishment it self should not move us, much
less stir us up to impatience. Is there not then great cause that we should
willingly and patiently bear Gods chastisements? as the Church resolved, Mica.
7.9. I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned against him. And
confess with the good thief in the Gospel, We indeed are justly here, for we
receive the due reward of our deeds, Luke 23.41 And thus did that Emperor
Mauritius, who beholding his wife and children murdered before his face, cried
out. just art thou o Lord, and just are thy judgments. And thus David
confessed, I know O Lord that thy judgments are right, and that thou have
afflicted me justly, Ps. 119.75.

Secondly, compare thine afflictions with the sufferings of many of the Lords
Worthies, and thou have great cause to be patient. Look but into the 11. Chap.
to the Heb. ver. 35, 36, 37. and tell me if thine afflictions be answerable,
or suitable to their fiery trials. Look into the sufferings of Christ. Consider
him, that endured such speaking against of sinners, lest you should be wearied
and faint in your minds: ye have not yet resisted unto blood, Heb. 12.3, 4. If
the Lord deal so sharply with many of his dear children, and with thee so
mildly, so gently, wonder at Gods clemency and lenity; lay thy hand upon thy
mouth, and be patient.

Thirdly, consider how short thine affliction will be in comparison of that
eternal torment, the Lord might lay upon thee. our afflictions are but light
and moment any, as Paul calls them, 2. Cor. 4.17. The Lord himself says, Esaias
54.8. For a moment, in mine anger, I hid my face from thee for a little season,
but with everlasting love have I had compassion on thee. Who would not be
content with a course of physic, for a few days, though the physic be
untoothsome, and very bitter, in hope of health for ever after? What if thou
have endured months of sorrow, and painful nights have been appointed unto
thee? as they were to Job, 7.3. What are they in comparison of those eternal
torments the Lord might throw thee into, in which there will be no ease, out of
which there shall be no release?

A great cause of impatience and storming at afflictions, is the ignorance of
our selves, and of the desert of our sins, which if we knew aright, we would
confess with Ezra, let our miseries and troubles be what they will, that the
Lord has punished us less then our iniquities have deserved, Ezra 9.13. I
will bear the wrath of the Lord, says the Church, Mic. 7.9. I will not repine
at his dealing with me; I will not open my mouth by way of complaint or
murmuring; but from what does this holy resolution and patience proceed? It
follows in the same verse, because I have sinned against him. I have carried
my self proudly, stoutly and rebelliously against him; I have provoked the
eyes of his glory, I have many ways, many times broken his holy laws, I have
deserved far more far greater judgments then he has laid upon me, it is
his mercy that I am not confounded, that I am of this side hell.

Fourthly and lastly, the consideration of the blessed end that God for the
most part makes of the afflictions of his servants, will further our patience.
After they have endured any great fight in affliction, he does usually bestow
some special favor or other upon them, yea proportionable to the measure of
the affliction has the recompense and the blessing been; such as have had the
bitterest crosses, have received the sweetest comforts, Ye have heard of the
patience of Job, and what end the Lord made Jam. 5.11. What this end was is
recorded Job. 42. where it is said that the Lord turned a way the captivity of
Job; and gave him twice as much as he had before. So the Lord blessed the last
days of Job more then the first Job 42.12. This hope of future mercy kept
David from fainting in his affliction. Psalm. 71.20, 21. Thou have showed we
great troubles and adversities, but thou will return and revive me, and wilt
come again and take me from the depth of the earth. Thou will increase mine
honor and receive and comfort me: if not with temporal, assuredly with
spiritual comfort here, for they bring forth the quiet fruit of righteousness
unto them, that are thereby exercised Heb. 12.11.

They are occasions (as has been formerly proved) of purging our corruption,
and bringing of us nearer God, and into more conformity with Christ: and should
not this comfort us?

Besides they make way for glory, and endless comfort, They that sow in tears
shall reap in joy, Psalm. 126.5. Afflictions cause unto us a far more
excellent and eternal weight of glory, 2. Cor. 4.17.

Art thou in any affliction? thou art but under a short cloud, it will quickly
blow over, and thou shall have a fair season, a most comfortable, and glorious
sunshine, when all tears shall be wiped away from thine eyes, Rev. 7.17.
After two days he will revive us, and in the third day he will raise us up,
and we shall live in his sight, Hos. 6.2. Art thou in affliction? be patient,
the third day is coming, wherein the Lord will deliver thee.

There must be a time for thee to sow thy prayers in, and a time for thee to
water them with the tears of true repentance, and then presently comes the
joyful harvest, in due season thou shall reap, if thou thou be patient, if
thou faint not, Gal. 6.10. What made Steven in his martyrdom to be so patient
and cheerful, but the sight of Heaven? What was it that carried those blessed
Martyrs so joyfully through flames of fire, but hope of glory? After their sharp
breakfast, they were assured of a sweet and Royal supper.

Again, Our enemies are but the Lords rods to whip us.
we are to be patient, in respect of our enemies, whom the Lord is pleased to
use as his instruments, to afflict and scourge us. Whosoever they be that
trouble us, they are but the Lords instruments, whom he sets on work for the
execution of his will and purpose. If we consider Jobs afflictions, we shall
find three Agents in them, God; Satan, and the Sabeans: and all these three had
their several end in afflicting holy Job. The Devil stirs up the Sabeans,
and God permits both. The Sabeans spoil Job of his substance that so they
might enrich themselves. The Devil sets upon Job to provoke him to impatience,
and to stir him up to blaspheme the Lord. And God permits all; first, for the
punishment of the Sabeans, wronging, and robbing his servants; secondly, to
prove the devil a malicious lier; thirdly, to justify the innocence and
patience of his servant Job; and last of all, to crown his patience, and
constancy with greater honor and glory, both in this life and in the world to
come. But of all these three Agents, whose hand was Jobs eye upon? did he curse
the Sabeans? did he rail upon the Devil? no such matter. As the byword is,
he set the saddle upon the right horse. He looks up to the hand of God. The
Lord has given, and the Lord has taken it: blessed by the name of the Lord,
Job 1.21.

So in that most bloody and nefarious fact which ever was under the sun
committed, I mean the murdering of the Lord of life and glory? there
co^curred, the Jews malice, Judas his treason, and Pilate in his injustice.
And yet all these were ordered by a superior power, the Lord using these as his
instruments for the execution of his purpose, Acts 4. To do whatsoever thine
hand, and thy counsel had determined before to be done. Now then if the Lord
intends to afflict thee, who shall let him from using what instruments he
pleases? Look not then upon secondary causes, lest thou swell against them,
and grow impatient. Look up to the hand of God, that thou may be quiet,
whatsoever, or whosoever the instruments be.

As David asked the woman of Tekoa, Is not the hand of Joab, in all this? 2.
Sam. 14.19. So be thou assured the hand of the Lord is in all thine
afflictions. And yet alas, in trouble and affliction, we can see any thing
before, and more then the hand of God that smites us, and our sins which
have drawn forth the hand of God against us. The want of which spiritual eye
to behold Gods hand, is the ground of that impatience, which is too often seen
in our afflictions, and bewrayes it self in our uncharitable speeches; I may
thank such a villain for this trouble: I am beholden to such a neighbor for
this cross: such a one has done me thus much wrong, these injuries: I will
therefore be revenged of him, etc.

Many there be which set down by that affliction which comes immediately from
God, but can not be so still and quiet in those wrongs and injuries which come
from man. They know there is no striving against the stream, a vain thing for
man to contend with his maker; and therefore fret not, lost there impatience
should open a new gappe, or make the old breach wider, to let in more, if not,
greater afflictions. But why they should be thus dealt withal by man, it may
be their inferior, one that they can shift withal, one that (it may be) they
think they can crush; to put up such a wrong, this goes against the hair,
they can not bear it, no wise man (they say) would put it up at his hands.
These words argue too much self, too much pride, and too little grace, too
little patience. It will be our glory to pass by offenses, from whomsoever
they come. The greater the injury is, or the more able thou art to avenge thy
self of thine enemy, the greater will be thy glory to pass it by. No wise
man will fight against an enemy with his own weapon: Christian wisdom
teaches us, not to render evil for evil, and rebuke for rebuke. If thine
enemy provoke thee either by his words, or by his deeds, and thou through
impatience be stirred up to revenge, what difference is there in both your
faults, and folly? Only this: He sins first, and thou art second in evil.
He sins by provoking of thee, and thou by being provoked by him. He sins
in offering the wrong, and thou by revengeing it.

Are thou angry with thine enemy for troubling thee? He may answer thee as
David did his brethren, when they were angry with him, 1. Sam. 17.28, 29. What
have I now done? Is there not a cause? What has thine enemy done unto thee
which the Lord did not see cause to set him about? Know therefore that how
malicious, and potent soever thine enemies are, they can do no more unto thee,
or against thee, nay they shall do no less, then the Lord has appointed them
to do. There is not so much as one poisoned arrow shot at thee, but the hand of
the Lord does nock it: not one bitter, taunting or reproachful word uttered
against thee, but the Lord wills it: Suffer him to curse (says David to
Shimei) for the Lord has bidden him, 2. Sam. 16.11. And yet how soon is our
blood up? How ready are our hearts to rise against any of the Lords
instruments? like dogs running after the stone, which was cast at them, never
looking to the hand that threw it. Common humanity teaches us, not to fly in
the face, or fall about the ears of that man's servant, which does only bring
us a message from his master.

The enemies of Gods Church and people, are but the Lords servants. The Lord
calls Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babell, his servant, Jere. 27.6. Our enemies
do but bring us a message from the Lord, as Ehad said unto Eglon, Judge. 3.20.
I have a message unto thee from God. If they do but their errand, why should
we be offended with them? Were it not folly, if not madness, for him that is
beatten with a wand, to rent and tear it; The wicked of the World are but Gods
wands or rods, to beat and lash his children withal.

Ashur, the rod of my wrath: and the staff in their hands, is my indignation,
Esaias, 10.5. A rod (you know) can do nothing of it self, any further then that
hand which holds it does put force unto it: it falls heavier, or lighter,
according to the strength of the hand that uses it.

Be patient then, and fret not, swell not against thine enemies. It may be
they revile thee, rail upon thee: they backbite and slander thee; be patient,
for the Lord has bidden them, as David said, 2. Sam. 16.11. It may be they
hinder thee in thine estate, they offer violence to thy person: in all these,
or any other wrong they can do unto thee, they are but the Lords rods to whip
thee withal. Seek not revenge against them, but leave them to the Lord, and
he will one day recompense them for their malice and cruelty against thee.

Implacable is the malice and rage of the wicked against the godly; so furious,
that if the Lord should not curb and restrain them, as Jezebel vowed to take
away the life of Eliah, 1. King. 19.2. So they would not suffer a soul to
breath amongst them, which fears God, and walks not after the course of the
World. But blessed be our good God, that gives not up his children as a prey
into their teeth, Psalm 124.6. but avengeth the afflicted, Psalm 140.12. And
will recompense the wicked according to their deeds, Psalm. 28.4. For it is a
righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you,
and to you (which are troubled) rest. 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7.

Lord has set them about?



The Lord commanded Jehu, to root out the posterity of Ahab, which Jehu
according to the Word of the Lord fulfilled: Yet the Lord by the Prophet
Hoseah, 1.4. says, I will visit the blood of Israel upon the house of Jehu.

For though Jehu was Gods instrument and servant, and did that work which the
Lord employed him about: and the Lord was well pleased with the doing of it,
yet the manner and the end of his doing it, caused God to be offended with him.
For Iehu did it not in conscience and obedience to the will of God: he did it
not with an upright heart, but with an ambitious and wicked mind.

He did it not in zeal of Gods glory, as he boasted, but he did it to advance
himself, and to settle the crown more surely upon the head of his posterity.

He threw down Baal Ahabs Idol, to set up Jeroboams calfe. He did it not in
detestation of Ahabs sin, but in the hatred of his person, and love unto
himself: and therefore the Lord threatened and afterward punished him. So many,
that trouble and vex the Lords people, do that which the Lord would have them,
but not to that end, or in that manner; as the Lord speaks by the Prophet
Zachariah, I was angry but a little and they helped forward the affliction,
Zach. 1.15.

Therefore when our enemies have done their worst: spit out all their malice,
and spewed out all their venom against us; which they can disgorge, then will
the Lord take them to task, then will he recompense and reward them for their
malice and mischief. Behold thus says the Lord, (unto the Ammonites) because
thou have clapped thy hands, and stamped with thy feet, and rejoiced in heart
with all thy despite against the land of Israel. Behold, therefore I will
stretch out mine hand upon thee, etc. Ezekiel. 25.6.7. This shall they have for
their pride, because they have reproached, and magnified themselves against the
Lords people, Zepha. 2.10. The more our enemies do insult over us, and we
patient, the sooner will the Lord help and deliver us, Jere. 30.17. If we did
but seriously consider of these things, much matter of patience would be
administered unto us. Men would not swell with the desire of revenge, if these
truths could enter into them. Did we believe that whatsoever wrongs and
injuries either by word, or deed, any of our enemies offer unto us, the Lord
sets them on work, the Lord wills them to do it, for the exercising of our
faith, the trial of our patience, and other ends; would we, durst we fret
and fume and chafe (as we do) at our enemies? Were we but persuaded of this
truth: That if we patiently sat down by our wrongs, seek not revenge, but
commit and commend our causes and our enemies to our God, hoping that the Lord
will do us good for that evil they have done unto us, as David said, It may be
the Lord will look upon mine affliction, and do me good for his cursing, 2.
Sam. 16.12. We would be more patient, and there would be less heartburnings,
and fewer quarrels and suits at law amongst us, then be.

Before I pass from this use of the doctrine in hand, it will not be amiss to
lay down some helps how a Christian may attain to this gift of patience which
is so needful to the carrying of him on cheerfully, and peaceably in his race,
for we must run with patience the race that is set before us. Hebr. 12.1.

How may we come to be furnished with patience?

First by our profitable, and fruitful entertaining, and welcoming the Word of
God: for this being effectual in us, will still the heart in all storms, and
cause us quietly to sit down by all wrongs done unto us; by all afflictions
that befall us. Hence it is that the Lord calls the Word, The Word of his
patience. Revel. 3.10. And so it is called, either because it teaches and
instructs us unto patience. For whatsoever things are written aforetime, are
written for our learning, that we through patience, and comfort of the
Seriptures might have hope. Romans 15.4.

Or else because it is an instrument and means of working patience in us,
promising unto us peace with God through Christ, and not only so, but also a
sanctified use of all our afflictions here, and salvation hereafter to all
that keep this Word: which does much pacify the heart, and cause us to be
patient in our afflictions.

Or else it may be called a word of patience, because without patience, the
Word cannot be rightly professed, nor we hold out in a holy profession unto
the end, whence we may safely conclude; that it is either through ignorance of
the Word, or neglect of the Word, or want of the power of the Word, that we
are impatient.

Knowing that the trying of your faith brings forth patience. James, 1.3.

Paul say, Romans 5.3. That tribulation brings forth patience.

faith, nor tribulation do beget and procreate patience, for patience is a
fruit of the Spirit. Gal. 5.22. Tribulation does not naturally, and of it self
beget and bring forth patience, but originally, and by accident: for to speak
properly, it is the work of the Spirit to still and pacify the troubled mind
of man; but tribulation is a means, and instrument by which patience is brought
forth, that is, is exercised, and manifested. Neither does faith bring forth
patience, as the mother brings forth the daughter, but as a tradesman
brings forth his wares, and shows them to others, what they are; or rather
as the Sun in the spring brings forth herbs, and fruits, by its working
influence. For first of all faith persuades the heart that the cause of all
evil that befalls us, lies in our own bosoms; our sins (as you have heard)
are the ground of all, and therefore if we will be angry with any body, it
should be with our sins.

Secondly faith persuades us, as you shall hear anon, that God in afflicting
of us loves us, and deals with us, as a father with that child in whom he
delights. Nay a father may sometime be transported with passion, and correct
his child above measure, laying on that in his heat, which in his cool blood
he does heartily wish were off again; Whereas our heavenly Father is so wise
as he puts not in one dram of any ingredient more then shall serve the turn,
and need requires.

A third and last help unto patience, is Heavenly-mindednesse, or the setting
our affection on things that are above, and not on things which are on the
earth, Col. 3.2. For he that immoderately, and inordinately loves the world and
earthly things, will be impatient at the loss of them. How waspish and
impatient was Jonah for the withering of his Gourd? even so much, that he
durst tell the Lord to his face, that he did well to be angry unto the death.
Ion. 4.9. Our blind judgments making a false report unto our affections of
these outward things, we come to set them at too high a rate, and so grow
impatient at the loss of them; Whereas, if we did esteem them, as the wise
man reports them to be, and as they are in truth, that is nothing, Pro. 23.5.
we would be less moved with the loss of them. There is a kind of venom in
worldly things, to puff up, and swell the heart of a man. By thy wisdom, and
by thine occupying have thou increased thy riches, and thy heart is lifted up
because of thy riches. Ezekiel. 28.5. Now when trouble and affliction comes to
encounter with a proud heart, every vein swells, and the heart rebels, and
breaks out into impatience, and they can not bear it. And the greater their
trials are, the more do they fret, and fume, as a running water, the greater
the flood, and stream is, the more does it foame and roar, where there be any
arches to withstand it.

And now that we may be willing to take the more pains to be furnished with
patience; I will lay down a few privileges which we shall partake of through
patience; every one of them a strong motive to stir us up to labor for
patience.

By our patience we possess our souls. Luke 21.19. We enjoy and command our
selves; for impatience puts a man out, and makes to be beside himself. By
faith we possess Christ, by love we possess our neighbor, yea our enemy,
and by patience we possess our selves. He has but a weak hold of Christ, or
of his neighbor, that has no hold, or command of himself. An impatient person
is as one out of the way, or as a bone dislocated, and out of joint. What
stabilitie can be, where Patience sits not at the stern to direct and govern? A
ship that rides at sea well balanced, is steady, and so proves comfortable
unto the Passengers that be abord her: whereas an unballanced vessel reels
(like a drunken man) and tumbles too and fro with every little gale, and blast
of wind, and so make those weary, if not sick, that be in her.

How sick must that soul needs be, whom troubles, and afflictions (the waves,
and billows of this world, a raging, and tempestuous sea) through the want of
patience the stearsman, do tumble up and down, and are disquiet? Where patience
is, there is quietness; because patience brings a Christians mind unto his
estate, when his estate and condition cannot suite with his mind.

Let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect, and entire,
lacking nothing. Jam. 1.4. That soul which wants no patience, wants nothing;
for patience is able to supply all wants, and make up all defects. A patient,
and contented mind is rich; and he that is rich cannot want, unless he will.

the honest and good heart brings forth fruit with patience. Luke 8.15.

So many evils there be to encounter goodness, so many oppositions and
reproaches to nip, if not blas^ good beginnings, so many troubles to attend
Piety and godliness, so many principalities and powers, and spiritual
wickedness in high places, to stop our course, and to interrupt us in our holy
profession, that without patience, little or no fruit will appear in our lives
and conversations.

any hurt by them. Let thy afflictions be never so mischievous, and noxious in
themselves, they shall not prove so to thee, If patience possess thy soul, so
many afflictions as befall thee, will fall out to be so many arguments of Gods
love, so many consolations unto thee; especially if they be such as we
undergo for Christ. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us: so our
consolation abounds through Christ. 2. Cor. 1.5. Misery it self shall not be
able to make thee miserable, for patience is a most sovereign antidote and
preservative against the venom of any affliction which can betide thee.

Comfort for the afflicted.
Fourthly, is it so, that all our afflictions come from God, then here is a
ground of comfort, and matter of rejoicing in affliction; not that we have
ministered matter, and occasion unto the Lord to chastise us, but in that
(having sinned against the Lord) he will take the rod into his hand, and have
the ordering of that affliction which befalls us. For nothing (as has been
said) can be, in which our heavenly Father has not a chief stroke, before it
can be brought to pass. The consideration whereof, as it should settle and
quiet us, so should it minister much comfort unto us, because our safety and
security lies in it. As God loves a cheerful doer, so he loves a cheerful
sufferer. A child that is willing to kiss the rod, wherewith it was beaten,
gives great content unto the parent which corrected it, and makes half amends,
for the fault it has committed. Christ will have every one of his to take up
his Cross daily. Luke 9.23. the taking up of our cross implies willingness,
and cheerfulness in the bearing of it. Many a child of God is content to
bear his cross when the Lord has laid it upon his shoulders, as the Prophet
Jeremiah speakeath, Woe is me for my destruction, and my grievous plague: But I
thought, yet it is my sorrow, and I will bear it, Jerem. 10.19. He dares not
mutter, or repine at the Lords doing: but here was no rejoicing in tribulation:
Whereas James tells us, that we must count it exceeding joy, when we fall
into diverse afflictions, Jam. 1.2. When the Lord comes (as it were) in open
hostility against us, mustering his forces toward us; when one affliction
comes upon the neck of another, when we fall into diverse afflictions, even
then we have cause of rejoicing. For our afflictions coming from the hand of
our loving Father, cannot be hurtful, but profitable unto us. He chasteneth
us for our profit, that we might he partakers of his holiness, Hebr, 12.10.
Indeed if our afflictions brought God out of love with us; or us more in love
with sin, which God hates, and is hurtful unto us: if our afflictions were
sent unto us as curses, we had cause to mourn in them; But when the Word of
truth so often pronounces us blessed in them, as Psalm 94.12. Blessed is the
man whom thou chastisest, O Lord. Have we not then great cause of rejoicing in
them? especially seeing our Heavenly Father has the ordering, and disposing of
all our afflictions, both in respect of their kind, and nature, and also in
respect of their measure, either of quantity or continuance.

First, in regard of their kind. God does order our affliction.
If you would know why this affliction befalls thee rather then another, it is
because the Lord (the only wise and sovereign Physician) knows how to strike
thee in the right vein: he knows thy heart, and the nature of thy
corruption, and therefore applies such medecines unto thee, as will be most
available for thy cure. Which thing Job teaches us, Behold, he will break
down, and it cannot be built, he shuts a man up, and he cannot be loosed.
Behold he withholdeth the waters, and they dry up, but when he sends them
out, they destroy the earth, with him is strength and wisdom, Job 12.14, 15,
16. Yea he is mighty in strength and wisdom, Job 36.5. Which he could not be
said to be, if any other course were better for us, then that which he takes
with us. The Lord is perfect wisdom, and therefore will not, cannot but go the
best, the safest and wisest way to work for the good of his children. Some
peradventure may think, that some other kind of affliction might have been
better for them, then the present; some other they think, would have done them
more good, then this can do. But they speak they know not what. And I may say
unto them, as Christ to his Disciples, Luke 9.55. Ye know not of what spirit
ye are. The choosing of the rod belongs unto him, that is to give the
correction, not to him that takes it. Indeed the Lord did once put David to
his choice, 2. Sam. 24.12. I offer unto thee three things, choose thee which of
them I shall do unto thee. But this was an extraordinary favor, showed unto
David, first to make trial of his Faith, whether he had rather fall into the
hand of the Lord, then into the hand of man; and secondly, to let him know that
the Lord would correct him in mercy, in that he gave him liberty to make
choice of the punishment. The Lord knew that either of those rods would be
sufficient to scourge David withal. And none knows so well as the Lord, how to
meet with our corruptions, or what afflictions are meet for us. If thou can
not profit by that affliction which the Lord appoints unto thee, thou will
profit by none. Note.
To say some other kind were better for thee, were to control the judgment of
the wise God, as if he knew not better then our selves to order and dispose of
us. Is it fit the patient should prescribe his Physician, what course to take
with him? will thou teach him what he shall administer unto thee? this were to
dishonor the Physician: therefore thou submittest to his judgment, and take
what he prescribes thee, resting upon his skill: And will thou dare so highly
to dishonor God, as to question his wisdom and knowledge: as if some other
affliction were better for thee then this which he is pleased to administer
unto thee? No, no; say as Ely did, 1. Sam. 3.18. It is the Lord, let him do
what seems him good.

Secondly, the Lord has the disposing of our afflictions for quantity: for
he does order all things in their measure, number and weight; but especially
the afflictions of his children, Jerem. 30.11. I will not utterly destroy thee,
but correct thee in judgment; or, in measure: as the new translation has it.
God therefore metes out unto his children, not according to their merit, but in
mercy according to their strength, looking more what they are able to undergo,
then what they do deserve to be laid upon them. He corrects in judgment,
that is, wisely proportioning our affliction to our strength, and not in anger,
least he bring us to nothing, Jere. 10.24. Fear not, therefore O Jacob my
servant, says the Lord, for I am with thee, I will not utterly destroy thee,
but correct thee by judgment, and not utterly cut thee off, Jerem. 46.28.
Comfort thy self therefore in this, that God is faithful, who will not suffer
thee to be tempted above that thou art able to bear, but will with the
tentation make a way to escape, that thou may be able to bear it, as was
formerly spoken.

Thirdly and lastly, the Lord disposes of all our afflictions in respect of
their time and continuance, which he has promised shall be but short? For the
rod of the wicked shall not rest on the lot of the righteous, Psalm. 105.3. He
indureth but a while in his anger. Weeping may abide at the evening, but joy
comes in the morning, Psalm. 30.5. Who is a God like unto thee (says Micah)
that takes away iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of
his heritage. He retains not his wrath for ever, because mercy pleases him,
Mic. 7.18. Therefore wait patiently upon the Lord for issue out of thine
affliction, which in due time thou shall be sure of. For the Lord deals not
with his children, as the Devil does with his servants, bringing them into the
briars, and there leave them to scratch and rent, and tear themselves: but the
Lord, as he brings afflictions upon us, so will he also in due season bring
us out of them. Great and many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord
delivers him out of them all. Psalm. 34.19.

Lord, in all our troubles, both for strength and comfort in them, and also for
issue and deliverance out of them. The Prophet complained of the way wardnesse,
and stubbornness of the people in his days, Esaias 9.13. The people turns not
unto him that smites them, neither do they seek the Lord of hosts. This was
Asa his folly, who though his disease was extreme, yet he sought not the Lord
in his disease, but to the Physicians, 2. Chron. 16.12. Such is the folly, and
madness of some people, that they will seek to any body, yea to the Devil;
running to his cunning (rather couzening) man, or that woman, in their
afflictions, before they seek unto the Lord. As if any hand could take off that
affliction which the Lord lays upon us. Deliverance out of trouble is a
prerogative royal, and belongs wholly unto the Lord: For he (says Moses)
will take away from thee all infirmities. Deuteronomy. 7.15. Call upon me in the day
of trouble, says the Lord, so will I deliver thee, and thou shall glorify
me. Psalm. 50.15. Whereupon the Prophet Jeremiah set his eyes toward the
Lord, Thou art my force and strength, O Lord, and my refuge in the day of
affliction, Jerem. 16.19.

Such as seek unto others, and not unto the Lord in affliction, do wait upon
lying vanities, and forsake their own mercy, Ion. 2.8. They have inherited lies
and vanity, wherein there was no profit, Jere. 16.19. Therefore if thou
desire ability and strength to bear thine afflictions, go unto the Lord for
it, Power belongs unto God, Psalm. 62.11. The God of Israel is he that
gives strength and power unto his people. Psalm. 68.35. And so the Prophet
Esaias speaks; He gives strength unto him that faints, and unto him that
has no strength, he increases power, Esaias 40.29. Say not therefore in time
of trouble, mine affliction is greater then I can bear: for though thou be
weak and ready to sink under thy burden, yet the Lord has made thee a
promise, that he will uphold thee with his hand. So that though thou can do
little of thy self, thou may be able to do all things through the help of
Christ which strengthens thee, Phil. 4.13. Go therefore boldly to the throne
of grace, that so thou may receive mercy, and find favor to help thee in the
time of thy need. Trust in the Lord, and he will help, and save thee; for who
ever hoped in God and was ashamed? Commit thy self, and thy condition to God,
and he will stand by thee, and help thee, he will not be absent from thee over
long. Fall down at his footstool, make him thy hope, and fortress, in whom
thou will always trust, and he will embrace thee in love, he will lay thee
upon the shoulders of his gracious Providence, and protection, he will bind up
all thy wounds, he will heal and cure all thy diseases, he will refresh thy
feebleness, he will comfort thine afflicted spirits, he will put under his
hand, so as thou shall not faint under thy burden, and in his good time will
put away all pensiveness, and mourning from thee. Therefore if thou be able
to hold up thy head in any storm, if thou faintest not in the day of
adversity, if thou stand fast, and quit thee like a man; say not, my power,
or my strength has carried me through this affliction, or made me able to
stand under this burden: but as Moses speaks to the Israelites, concerning
their outward substance, Remember the Lord thy God, for it is be that gives
thee power, Deuteronomy. 8.18. So must thou say, I have no ability to undergo any
affliction, but that which the Lord is pleased to help me withal.



What, is the Lords hand shortened? Numb. 11.23. Is the Lords power weakened,
that he cannot help thee for time to come, as well as he has hitherto
supported thee; Is the Lords staff so weak that thou durest not trust unto it?

Or is the Lord unfaithful, to leave thee and forsake thee? No, no; the Lord
is where he was, as ready at hand, as willing and as able to help thee, and
stand by thee, as ever he was, if thou by thine unbeleef do not put his
strength from thee: for if ye believe not, surely ye shall not he established,
Esaias 7.9. Whereas if ye put your trust in the Lord your God, ye shall be
assured, 2. Chron. 20.20. For I am the Lord, I change not; and ye sons of
Jacob are not consumed, Malac. 3.6. Therefore though thy flesh fails, and
thine heart also, as David's did, yet God is the strength of thine heart, and
thy portion for ever, Psalm. 73.26. Trust therefore in the Lord, and still wait
upon him, for they that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength, they
shall lift up their wings as the Eagles: they shall run and not be weary,
and they shall walk and not faint, Esaias, 40.31.

Again, Go to God for issue and deliverance.
if all our afflictions come from God, it will be our wisdom to go unto him
for issue, and deliverance out of them: Call upon me in the day of trouble, so
will I deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Psalm. 50.15. Mine eyes are
ever toward the Lord, for he will bring my feet out of the net, Psalm. 25.15.
Joseph was unjustly cast into prison by his too credulous and unrighteous
master, but God was with him, and delivered him out of all his afflictions.
Act. 7.9.10. If ever thou hopest to be healed, or helped out of, or in any
affliction, it must be by the Lord his hand. Refuse not the chastening of the
Almighty (says Eliphaz) for he makes the wound, and binds it up: he
smites; and his hands make whole. He shall deliver thee in six troubles, and
in the seventh, the evil shall not touch thee. Job 5.17, 18, 19.

Hereupon they call one to another. Hos. 6.1. Come, let us return to the Lord,
for he has spoiled us, and he will heal us: he has wounded, and he will
bind us up.

As the Lord took his time to bring thee into trouble, so has he his time set
for thy deliverance. To all things there is an appointed time, and a time to
every purpose under heaven, Eccles. 3.1. Gods Providence has set and limited
the time how long his children shall suffer, and be afflicted. Revel. 2.10.
Ye shall suffer tribulation ten days.

This time thou can not shorten, but lengthen it thou may, through thy
impatience. As an earthly father correcting his child for some fault, does
resolve with himself to give him but a lash, or two; to keep him but a while
under the rod, if he take his correction patiently; but if he kick or
murmurre, he resolves to hold him down the longer, and give him the more
stripes. Even so our heavenly Father deals with his children: the more
patiently we take our affliction, the sooner we are like to come out of it,
The patient abiding of the righteous shall be gladness, Prove. 10.28. Trust in
the Lord and thou shall be safe. He that believes makes not haste, Esaias
28.16. But is content to tarry the Lords leisure. Many are ready to compound
and indent with God; thus long they will wait, thus long they will pray, and if
by that time no help, nor deliverance come, they will give over in their
impatient mood, as the messenger of the King of Israel said, Behold this evil
comes of the Lord, should I attend the Lord any longer? 2. Kings 6.33. O
beware of such thoughts, but let thy heart be in the fear of the Lord
continually: for surely there is an end, and thy hope shall not be cut off,
Prove. 23, 17, 18. We cannot deny but, The hope that is deferred is the
fainting of the heart, but when the desire comes, it is a tree of life, Prove.
13.12. The longer the Lord delays our deliverance, the sweeter will it be
when it comes. Wait therefore with patience, seeing the Lord by his writing,
seal, and oath, has promised to deliver us out of all our troubles. And what
he has promised, he will most certainly perform; for though God may be
angry with us for our sins, yet he cannot be unfaithful, though he may, like
Joseph, conceal his affection for a time, yet impossible it is that he should
shut up his compassions, and renounce the protection of such as depend upon
him, or deny deliverance to such as do seek aright unto him. Therefore, Who is
there amongst you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his servant
that walks in darkness, and has no light, let him trust in the Name of the
Lord, and stay upon his God. Esa. 50.10. By darkness is here understood
affliction, out of which the Lord will assuredly bring all such as seek unto
him, and rest upon him. Beware of making more haste then good speed to procure
freedom from our deliverance out of troubles by unlawful and sinful courses.

We rob the Lord of a great deal of honor, and our selves of a great deal of
comfort, which we should reap by waiting upon the Lord. Too many are ready to
think, that if they have some little time besought the Lord, that he
(forsooth) is bound presently to answer them. As those hypocrites, Esaias 58.3.
expostulated the matter with the Lord saying, Wherefore have we fasted, and
thou see it not? we have punished our selves, and thou regardest it not.
Some are ready to cry with David, How long, how long Lord, will thou forget me
for ever? how long will thou hide thy face from me? Psalm. 13.1. Again, Have
mercy upon me O Lord, for I am weak, O Lord heal me, for my bones are vexed.
My soul is also sore troubled, but Lord how long will thou delay? Psalm. 6.2, 3.

Beware of measuring the Lord by thine own line and plummet; let not thy
carnal reason, or fleshly wisdom seem to direct or limit Gods Providence, thou
may not join thine own fantasies to Gods will, but what thou seek at his
hands, thou must commend it to his good pleasure, without saying to thy self,
Let it be thus, or so. God does many times delay his children, and not by and
by afford them that help, and comfort which he intends them: yea, sometimes
he suffers them to be ready to sink, before he saves them. As he dealt with his
Disciples, who were tossed up and down of the waves, the ship reeling too and
fro, and ready to be overwhelmed before he would awake, and bid the tempest be
still: yet when he saw time, he rebuked the wind, and seas, and delivered his
Disciples from their danger, and fear: Know and believe that the measure, and
issue of any tentation belongs unto God. Therefore howsoever the case
stands with thee, expostulate not with God, entertain no hard conceits of
him. The Lord in wisdom may delay our deliverance out of affliction, because
happily he sees that it has not as yet thoroughly wrought upon us, nor done us
that good he intends us. Do Goldsmiths use to take their metal out of the
furnace before it be fined from the dross? There be some kind of plasters
applied to the bellies of children, which will stick fast so long as the
worms be alive, but if the bed of them be broken, and they killed, the
plaster will fall off: and so of many sores. If affliction still cleave unto
thee, it is because sin is not yet killed in thee. This plaster lies on us
no longer then till the sore be whole, and the disease be cured in us. It may
be the Lord sees we are not fit for deliverance, we would too quickly forget
the rod, and return to our own byas, if he should by and by ease us, as soon
as we cry unto him. It may be the Lord sees we would not be thankful enough
for deliverance, if it should be granted upon the first request.

Things lightly attained unto, are often times slightly regarded. Whereas those
things which we get through the pikes, we prize at a high rate. Therefore thou
forgettest thy self, and the Word of truth, in saying, God has forgotten to
be merciful and gracious, because he does not by and by answer thee. Can a
woman forget her child, and not have compassion on the son of her womb?
Peradventure there may be some such unnatural monsters, that cast off all
natural affection, and lay violent hands upon their children; but though they
forget, yet will I not forget thee, says the Lord, and for assurance hereof,
Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands, Esaias. 49.15, 16. When
we are afraid, we shall forget a thing, we tie a thread about our finger, for
our better remembering thereof; but when we tie threads upon both hands, we
then make sure we will not forget it; thus does the Lord set down his
children, in the palms of both hands, that they may not be forgotten.
Therefore still wait, and deliverance will come, when thou do least think of
it.



Gods thoughts are not your thoughts, Esaias, 55.8. You know your own thoughts,
you know not Gods, Jerem. 29.11. I know the thoughts that I think toward you,
says the Lord, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected
end.



Gods ways are not your ways, Esaias, 55.8. The Lord has his ways many times
in the deep, many times in the dark and secret. Happily deliverance shall come
some other way then thou can imagine, or think of. When thou think
comfort and deliverance is farthest off, it may be near at hand; yea, when
thou see least likelihood of it: for, In the mount will the Lord be seen,
Genesis 22.14. It may be thou see no means, but the Lord can work without
means; yea, by contrary means, that his wisdom and power may appear the
more in thy deliverance. What means had Daniel to save him from the fury of
those hungry and devouring Lions? yet you know the Lord did deliver him.

Therefore, Commit thy way unto the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall bring
it to pass, Psalm. 37.5. So that all things considered, we have little cause
to be disquieted in our afflictions, seeing our heavenly Father sends them
in love for our great good? and less cause we have to fret, or be disheartened
if they tarry by us longer then we would have them; for when we are fit for
deliverance we shall be sure of it; In the mean time, if dangers, or fears
do increase upon thee, say to the Lord as good King Jehosaphat, 2. Chron.
20.12. We know not what to do, but our eyes are toward thee. Consider into
what great distress and strait the Lord brought the people of Israel when they
came out of Egypt; the sea before them, their enemies behind them, death (as it
were) round about them, yet how miraculously did the Lord make way for them?

So assure thy self whatsoever thy trouble, or danger be, the Lord will one
way or other give issue to his glory and thy good, although thou see not how;
because he is the same God, no changeling in his goodness toward his
children.

It is a sweet motto which one has; I suffer, I hope. Fero, spero.
Though sorrows and afflictions increase upon thee, yet give not over thy
confidence, but resolve with holy Job, Lo though he slay me, yet will I trust
in him, Job 13.15. The motion of a thing, the nearer it comes to the center,
the swifter it is. Does thy sorrow, thy pain, thy trouble increase upon thee?
hope it is near at an end. The children of Israel, the nearer they were unto
comfort and deliverance, the sorer grew their afflictions, and the greater were
the burdens which their cruel taske-masters laid upon them; and so does the
Lord often deal in other kinds, with his children. Therefore wait with
patience, seeing the Lord many times does (suddenly) turn tragedies into
comedies, sorrow into joy, as he dealt with his people in Esters days, to day
in heaviness, through fear of being swallowed up, and made a prey unto their
enemies, to morrow triumphing over their enemies, and treading them underneath
their feet, Ester, 8.15, 16. For what thing can there be under Heaven so
heavy upon the heart of his children, Note.
which the Lord cannot remove, and put joy in the place of it before the day be
light? Therefore hope in the Lord, and be strong, and he shall comfort thine
heart, Psalm. 27.14. Be cheerful therefore in thy affliction.



Vncheerfulnesse does much hurt.
First, they wrong the Lord by their uncheerfulnesse, not only in going, and
doing against his word, which wills us to be joyful in the Lord, as Psalm.
32.11. Be glad ye righteous, and rejoice in the Lord: and be joyful all ye
that are upright in heart: but they do also wrong the Lord, in robbing him of
that honor and praise which they might bring unto him by their rejoicing in
affliction.

Secondly, they wrong if not hurt their brethren, being occasions of
discouragement and disheartning them, making them to fear, and doubt of Gods
goodness, and their own ability, to bear any burden which the Lord shall lay
upon them, seeing others or longer standing in Christ his school, and of
greater knowledge, to shrink and buckle under their affliction.

Thirdly, they wrong their profession, by opening the mouths of those that are
without, or by putting a stumbling-blocke before them, causing them to abhor
the way and practice of godliness, when they see so great troubles to attend
upon it, and so little courage and cheerfulness in those that profess it.

Fourthly and lastly, they wrong and hurt themselves not only by disinabling
and indisposing themselves to the general, and particular duties of their
callings ( for a joyful heart causes good health: but a sorrowful spirit
dries up the bones, Prove. 17.22. that is, makes the body weak, and feeble: for
a man is said to be in his full strength, when his bones run full of marrow,
Job, 21.23, 24.) but also in spoiling themselves of that peace, and comfort
which they might enjoy by their cheerful undergoing of afflictions; and
loosing that holy vigor, and strength they might partake of by rejoicing in the
Lord, for the joy of the Lord is your strength, Nehe. 8.10.

Besides, by their lumpishnesse they make themselves unfit for holy duties;
they cannot serve God as they should, being oppressed with sadness. For we are
to serve the Lord with gladness of heart. Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice
before him, Psalm. 2.11.

How can any serve God joyfully, or praise him heartily, when the heart is
laden with grief, and the mind oppressed with sorrow? If no joy in the sweet
promises of God, what delight can be had in his worship and service?

And last of all, they expose themselves unto Satan's tentations: when they are
dejected with worldly sorrow, then are they baits for Satan to catch at, and
fit subjects for him to work upon.

How many have been brought to a shameful and miserable end, through Satan's
subtlety and malice, working upon them, and taking them at advantage in the
time of their sorrow, and heaviness? So that it is evident that such by their
sadness, often times do wrong both others, and themselves.

But admit it were so (as you see it is false) that we hurt no body but our
selves by our sadness, is this a sufficient warrant to bear us out in our
lumpishnesse?

In what court was that commission sealed unto us, which gives us liberty to
harm, or wrong our selves? Are we not delinquents against Gods law, and the
law of nature, in offering wrong unto our selves? Therefore seeing thy
afflictions are but for a season, hold fast the Confidence, and the rejoicing
of thy hope unto the end, Heb. 3.6. Live by faith, and (as the Prophet
exhorts) enter into thy chambers, and shut thy doors after thee: hide thy
self for a little while until the indignation pass over, Esaias 26.20. By
chambers, the Prophet means a quiet and peaceable conscience, into the which
he would have us sequester our selves all the while the storm of affliction
blows, that so with patience we may wait for the event of them.

And whereas he exhorts us to shut the door after us, hereby he persuades us
unto courage and constancy; or else to keep our selves close from Satan's
temptations, that he may find no chink nor crevis open, whereby he may enter
into us, to disturb us; for, if our hearts lie but a little open, so as he may
have but the least advantage, he is at hand to disquiet and perplex us. And
whereas he bids us to hide our selves, he would have us to enjoy a secure
freedom under Gods promise and pretection; in faith and humility we should
shroud our selves under Gods wings that so he may keep us from inordinate fears
and terrors, until the affliction be past, which is but as a cloud or storm,
that will not last always, but will blow over ere it be long, and be at an
end. Therefore be cheerful in thine afflictions. Again, in that it is said,
As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten; not barely I rebuke and chasten you,
but I rebuke and chasten as many as are dear unto me, or beloved of me; this
manner of speech is used for the confirmation of our faith in time of trouble,
and to keep us from sinking through grief or despair. For what argument can
be more forcible to persuade us to the quiet and patient bearing of our
afflictions then to believe they be Gods love tokens sent us for our good:
Doctr. 3. Persuasion of Gods love will help us to bear our affliction.
Whence me may learn this Instruction, that A great help to keep us from
sinking, and to enable us to bear up our heads with patience and
cheerfullnesse in the time of affliction, is to be persuaded of Gods love, in
afflicting of us. This has been in part touched before, therefore I shall be
the briefer in the point. How fearful our nature is of troubles, how
unwilling the flesh is to taste of the cup of affliction; yea how we labor to
shift and avoyde it with a kind of abhorring it, common experience teaches
us. And the mistrust of Gods providence and love wherewith naturally the best
are infected, makes us to shun and avoid afflictions as much as possibly we
can, lest we should not be able to grappie, and encounter with them. Wherein
as we bewray much weakness, so do we express great incredulity: for hereby
we do manifestly show that we think that God in afflicting does not love us,
and that therefore he cannot or will not help us to bear them, that he
cannot or will not bring us fairly off them. Therefore let us not give way to
carnal reason, nor hear what flesh and blood shall suggest unto us, but what
is delivered from the Word of truth, which tells us, that the Lord corrects
him whom he loves, even as the father does the child in whom he delights,
Prove. 3.12. If we give ear to carnal wisdom it will tell us, surely if God
loved us, he would not thus afflict us. As if our afflictions were a wall of
separation twixt Gods love and us. But what says Paul, To. 8.38, 39. I am
persuaded that neither death nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height nor depth, nor any
other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus. This strong persuasion of Gods love; carried Paul on cheerfully
in his troublesome pilgrimage, and made him joyful in all his sorrows and
afflictions. Thus strongly should we be persuaded of Gods love; for has not
the Lord said, Esaias 54.10. The mountains shall remove and the hills shall fall
down, but my mercy, and love shall not depart from thee, neither shall the
covenant of my peace fall away: as if he should have said, though the whole
world be turned topsy turvy, and heaven, and earth do meet together, yet
stands still my love and affection firm to theewards. The change and
alteration of our outward estate and condition causes no change of Gods love;
for he is still the same unto us and with us, though the face and fashion of
the world goes away 1. Cor. 7.31. The things of this life are mutable, and our
condition is subject to daily change and alteration. Times have their
vicissitudes, to day it is well with us, to morrow ill; to day at ease, to
morrow in pain: to day we have something, to morrow less, it may be nothing;
to day in honor, to morrow in disgrace, seldom continuing in one stay. In which
variable condition of ours, and amids all changes and chances of this life,
here is comfort to the child of God, that God is the same and changes not, but
as he now loves him so he will for ever continue loving and gracious to him,
John 13.1. And hosoever we cannot tell what shall be to morrow, James 4.14.
we know our beginning (as the old saying is) but we know not what our end
shall be; as Paul went up to Jerusalem but knew not what things should come
unto him there, Acts 20.22. Yet such is our happiness and comfort; that come
what will come, no event whatsoever can keep back, or turn away Gods love
from us: and though our state be changed, yet Gods love to us is not changed,
but still the same, as true, and as intyre as over it was. My enemies may take
away my liberty, my goods, my good name, my dear friends, and that which of
all other things is most dear unto me, even my life; but I have one Jewwell,
all the devils in hell, all the powers of darkness, all the rage and malice of
the world can never spoil me of, they cannot rob me of the love of my God.
This confidence and persuasion of Gods love and favor bears up the godly from
sinking under the burden of their affliction, and makes them cheerful, when as
the wicked wanting this assurance are either senseless, or else faithless and
impatient under the cross. The faithful making God and his favor their
portion and happiness, enjoy this privilege in time of adversity, as well as
in the day of prosperity, and therefore their hearts (or their desire is to)
be as joyful when they are in trouble and afflictions as if they were most
free from them: Whereas the wicked placing their whole felicity in these earthly
things their profits, pleasures, etc. When their wealth, and worldly things
fail, their joy, their hope and comfort ends with them: These have nothing but
nature to help them bear their burdens: Whence it comes to pass that
infidelity and impatience do make them more grievous and burdensome; whereas
the faithful having the persuasion of Gods love, and the presence of his
Spirit to support them, take comfort in their troubles during the time of their
trial, and wait for a seasonable and cumfortable issue and deliverance out of
them. So that it is a truth not to be questioned, that the persuasion of Gods
love in afflicting of us, is a great help to keep us from sinking under
afflictions, and to enable us with patience, and cheerfullnesse to undergo
them: this persuasion will carry us on comfortably in our pilgrimage, it will
make us willing to bear whatsoever the Lord shall be pleased to lay upon us,
and to want that which we see, he is not willing we should enjoy. We
rejoice in tribulations, says Paul, Romans 5.3. because the love of God is shed
abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given us, verse, 5.

Because God will help our cross.
And that first of all, because he that is persuaded of Gods love, cannot but
believe that God will help him to bear his cross, and to undergo his
affliction, be it what it will. For God is faithful and will not suffer his
to be tempted above that they are able to bear, 1. Cor. 10.13.



his power is made perfect through weakness, 2. Cor. 12.9. He loves thee and
therefore will not overloade thee. His grace shall be sufficient for thee.
Therefore say as did Jeremy, O Lord thou art my force and my strength, and my
refuge in the day of affliction, Jer. 16.19.

God intends our good in afflicting us.
Secondly, the persuasion of Gods love will be helpful unto us to the
cheerful bearing of affliction, because if we believe that God loves us, we
know that he intends our good in afflicting of us, yea, will do us good by our
affliction, For he chasteneth all his children for their profit, Heb. 12.10.
It is good for me (says David) that I have been afflicted, Psalm. 119.71.

Happily we can see no good that is like to come unto us, out of this
affliction, or that trouble, but rather evil or hurt; yet through the
goodness and wisdom of the Lord, good shall be extracted out of this evil,
as the best treacle is made of deadly poison. When we are in a course of
Physic, at the first we see not, we feel not any good it does us, but it
makes us rather worse then we were before: and causes many a sick qualme,
many a fainting fit, and we wish the Physic had never been prescribed unto us,
or not taken of us: but when we consider of whom we took it, even from him
whose judgment and knowledge we approve of, whose care and love we doubt not
of, then we are the more quieted and pluck up our spirits in expectation, and
hope of ease, ere it be long. It may be thou find no good thine affliction
has yet done thee, it being now working upon thee; Yet if thou can but rest
a while and be persuaded of the wisdom, and love of God, who has administered
this physic unto thee, thou will be contented, and look for good to follow
it: When the sons of Zerviah, would feign have been doing with that dead
dog Shimei, for cursing their Lord and Master no, no, says David, suffer him
to curse, it may be the Lord will look upon mine affliction, and do me good
for his cursing this day. 2. Sam. 16.11, 12. But the Apostle Paul being more
full of faith, putting the question past peradventure, he puts it out of
question, resolves and builds upon it, we know that all things work together
for the best to those that love God, Romans 8.28. Now we know that every one
that loves God, is beloved of God, for we love him because he loved us first,
Job 4.19. How cheerfully do we use to welcome those that bring us but tidings
of good? but if any one brings us any great benefit, we think we cannot bid
him too welcome; Is affliction come unto thee? Welcome it, for certainly (if
thou be the Lords) I dare boldly (as David said of Abimaaz the son of
Zadock, He is a good man and comes with good tidings, 2. Sam. 18.27.) say of
affliction, it is a good thing and brings not only tidings of good, but good
it self unto thee. For no sooner comes affliction to Gods children, but, if it
be welcomed, good will be at the heels thereof to follow after it.

No misery can make Gods people miserable.
Thirdly, it cannot be but the persuasion of Gods love, will make us cheerful
in affliction, because being beloved of God, no misery can make us miserable.
Art thou in Gods favor, then thou art ever in his eye, he looks after thee,
and is careful that no evil shall befall thee? Nay thou art unto him, as the
apple of his eye, Zach. 2.8. tender, and dear unto him, and therefore
whatsoever danger does beset thee, the Lord will be at thy right hand to
uphold and comfort thee. Being in Gods favor, thou art sure of his protection,
for thou Lord wilt bless the righteous, and with favor wilt compass him, as
with a shield Psa. 5.12. Noah was safe enough in that great and deadly deluge,
because the Lord prepared an arc for him, and shut him up. Daniel was safe
enough amongst the Lions, because God sent his Angel shut the Lions mouths,
that they could not hurt him, Dan. 6.22. The Lord has made a gracious promise,
that When thou passest through the waters he will be with thee, and through the
floods, that they do not overflow thee. When thou walk through the fire, etc.
Esaias 43.2. from whence is this? it follows in the 4. verse because thou wast
precious in my sight and thou wast honorable, and I loved thee.

Therefore if God love thee, thou art happy, thou can not be miserable, Nay,
shall I speak boldly unto thee? I tell thee, if thou were (if possible) in
Hell, in the deepest gulf of calamity that can be, yet for all this being
beloved of God, thy estate and condition is happy, he will gain glory and
thou shall get good by all that evil which has or shall befall thee.

Nothing can separate us from God.
Fourthly and lastly, the assurance of Gods love will make us willing to bear
our affliction, because we know that nothing can separate us as was said
before) from this love of God, but being once beloved of him, we shall so
continue for ever. It is not all the wit, or will, the cunning or subtilty, the
power, or policy of all the creatures on the face of the earth or underneath
the earth, let there be a confederacy amongst them, yea let them all cast in
their lot and make one common purse, Prove. 1.14 to do thee mischief; let them
all plod, plot, combine, and bandy themselves against thee, they shall never
be able to wind thee out of Gods love or favor, if once beloved of him. It is
possible that thou may lose the love and favor of the World, and the more,
because thou art beloved of God; for the World loves none but her own brats,
Joh. 15.19. It is a very stepdame or rather beldame to all that are beloved of
God. It is possible that thy friends may become thy foes, and their former love
may be turned into future hatred. It is possible that those that are nearest
and dearest unto thee, may reject thee, Yet though thy father and thy mother
should forsake thee, the Lord will not, he will take the care of thee, Psalm.
27.10. If God has once chosen thee for his own, and set his love upon thee,
whether thou be in health or in sickness, in ease or in pain, in
prosperity or adversity, in life or in death all is one, God loves thee
nevertheless. Before he showed thee his love, he knew what would befall thee;
yea nothing (as we have heatd) can betide thee but that which he intended and
provided in love for the; so that whether you live or die, you are the Lords,
Romans 14.8.

The Lord for special ends may give thee over unto afflictions, he may give
thee up into the hands of those that hate thee (yea even unto the death) and
therefore will take away thy life from thee, As it is written, for thy sake are
we killed all the day long, we are counted as sheep for the slaughter, Romans
8.36. Yet none of these, nay, not all these put together can any whit diminish
or abate the love of God toward thee, much less spoil thee wholly of it, and
take it clean away from thee, when they have done the worst they can against
thee or unto thee. When thou art plunged into the deepest distress that might,
or malice can bring thee into, thou art still as dear and precious in the
Lords eye as ever thou were: nay (if it were possible) deerer now then ever
thou were before, if those troubles and afflictions which thine enemies have
devised and brought upon thee, be for righteousness sake.

One friend may love another dearly, yet when the one shall expose himself to
danger or trouble for the others sake; when I see my friend has not regarded
his life for my good, but adventured and hazarded his own life in my defense
and safety; how does this increase mine affection toward him? as it was said
of Jonathan, his soul was knit with the soul of David, and Jonathan loved him
as his own soul, 1 Samuel 18.1. So this will knit my heart and love unto him,
and I shall love him as mine own soul. How much more then may we be assured,
that if our afflictions be for Gods cause, in his defense, he will abundantly
recompense, and more dearly love us? Then let no man say that he is less
beloved of God then others, because he is more afflicted then others be; God
still loves his and will own them for his people whatsoever outward sorrows or
miseries may befall them, I have surely seen the trouble of my people and have
heard their cry and I know their sorrows, Exodus 3.7. Though we be in
trouble, yea and such trouble as makes us cry out for grief and sorrow yet
still we be the Lords people. Outward miseries and troubles cannot make God to
respect any of his any thing the less. God is not like some proud people of
the world, who will acknowledge their friends no longer then they are in
prosperity, and be able to requite their kindness with kindness again. Some
such beasts there be, that if they be either advanced into high places above
their parents; or their parents, their brethren, sisters and friends fallen
into decay and poverty, will scarce own them, but grow to be ashamed of them.
It is far otherwise betwixt the Lord and his people; when they are up to the
knees in dirt, when they are cruelly oppressed, when in a poor, and base
condition, it may be not having clothes to cover their nakedness, when their
cheeks look pale, and their faces lean, and wan through hunger, sorrow, or
sickness, when they be grown out of favor through bodily diseases, they are
(even then) as lovely in the Lords eyes as ever, and he will then acknowledge
us for his people as well, nay better, then in our great prosperity. If a child
be sick in the family, how are the thoughts and mind of the parents; taken up
about that child? how do they tend it, and pity it? O my poor sick child,
etc. thus does the Lord pity his children, and tender them in their affliction.

We learn from hence why we be so troubled with our affliction.
Now to make some application of the point.

Is it so, that the persuasion of Gods love is a great help to carry us
cheerfully through afflictions? here hence then we may be instructed, what the
cause is that we are so much troubled and perplexed with afflictions, as if
they were the means of our undoing, that the very thought, or expectation of
them is most grievous and irksome unto us, certainly here is the ground of all
our fears, and doubts, the want of a sound persuasion, and assurance of Gods
love, in correcting us. Did we believe that when we are afflicted we are in
the hands of our holy, righteous, everliving, and everloving God, who never did
us any wrong who never intended us any harm, but always goes the best, the
wisest, and the most loving way to work with his children, would we not be
less afraid of afflictions then we be? more willing to undergo them then we
are? Little do we know how highly we dishonor God, how much we gratify and
please the Devil, when we repine against the hand of God, when we be
impatient in afflictions, and question his love for correcting us. The Devil
desired that Job might be sorely afflicted that so he might be brought to
curse God, Stretch now out thine hand and touch his bones and his flesh to see
if he will not blaspheme thee to thy face, Job, 2.5. It is a pastime unto the
Devil to set God, and his children at variance; and therefore he desires to
vex, and perplex us, that so we may open our mouths against the Lord, and
quarrel with him; for when we are discontented with the Lords dealing; when
we mutter, and murmur against the Lord, what do we less then rebel against
him? Hence it is that Moses called the murmuring Israelites, Rebels, Numb. 20,
10. Hear now ye rebels, shall we bring you watter out of this rock?
Therefore murmr not against the Lord, for then thou rebellest against him,
and robbest him, as much as in thee lies, of his most glorious attributes, his
power, his goodness, his love, his truth. When we deal with that man which
makes conscience of his word, we question not the truth of his promise, but
rest upon the performance and making good of that which he has said. If a
father promises unto his child any thing, the child makes as sure reckoning
of the thing promised as if he had it already in possession. Shall we dare to
give less credit to God, then to man? when he tells us, he corrects us
in love, and intends our good in afflicting of us shall we dare to question
the truth of his word, especially when he has seconded his Word by oath, yea
and sealed both with the blood of his dear Son? Is any man so mindful and
careful of keeping covenant and promise as the Lord? Is any so able to make
good his word, as God?

Tricks of Law and the wily subtilties of man's brain are often occasions of
frustrating promises made betwixt man and man, but there is no wisdom, neither
understanding nor council against the Lord, Prove. 21.30. God is not as man,
that he should lie, neither as the son of man, that he should repent: has
he said, and shall he not do it? has he spoken, and shall he not accomplish
it? Numb. 23.19. God is so faithful of his Word that nothing is able to make
him go back, or to falsify his promise: Gods Word shall stand when Heaven and
Earth shall fall. To mistrust Gods promise is to question whether there be a
God or no. For either to deny or doubt of his truth and fidelity, is to deny,
or doubt him to be God. Every honest man scandeth upon his credit, for his
credits sake he dares not eat his word, he keeps promise though it be to
his own loss, and hindrance. How much more will the Lord, who is jealous of
his glory, be careful to make good whatsoever he has said?

What greater indignity can be offered to an honest and godly man, then to
question the truth of his word? What greater dishonor can be unto the Lord,
then to call into question his truth? which we do when we either say or
think he loves us not in afflicting of us. Howsoever crosses and afflictions
do often times present themselves to the apprehension of carnal men with much
terorr, and horror, yet even in the very bitterness, and extremity of them,
thou (by the help of faith) may draw a great deal of joy and comfort from
them; if thou would fix thy mind upon such places, and promises as these are
Isa. 43.2. and 63.8. Romans 8.28. 2. Cor. 4.17. Heb. 12.6. A patient submission
to Gods will, and a persuasion of his love in correcting of us, is an
infallible evidence that thou art a son, and not a bastard. Is there not more
sweetness in those afflictions which are evidences of Gods love, and tokens
that thou art in the right way to Heaven; then in outward ease, worldy
pleasures, and carnal liberty which clearly demonstrate to thy conscience that
thou art in the broad way to Hell? hence it was that the Apostls rejoiced, when
they were beaten. That they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for the name
of Christ, Act. 5.41.

Nay, all the scorn and contempt, all the contumelious reproaches which the
world shall spit out at thee, do crown thy head (and therefore should fill thy
heart) with abundance of glory, blessedness, and joy. If ye be reproched for
the name of Christ, happy are ye, for the spirit of glory, and of God rests
upon you. 1. Pet. 4.14.

Schoffes, spiteful and taunting speeches, odious nicknames, and lying
imputations cast upon thee by those, whose tongues cut like sharp raisors, are
but so many honorable badges of thy profession, and Christian resolution of
standing for Christ, and his truth; and shall pull down a blessing upon thee.
Blessed are ye when men revile you, and persecute you, and say all evil
against you for my sake, rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in
Heaven. Mat. 5.11, 12.

I define to beat this mile home to the head; and therefore I tarry the longer
upon this use; for if we could but be thorowlie persuaded of this truth, that
God loves us in that he corrects us, all differences betwixt the Lord and us
about affliction, would be at an end, and our sorrow would be turned into joy,
and rejoicing in tribulation, Romans 5.3. our unquietness would be turned into
patience, our lumpishnesse into cheerfulness, and our murmurring into
thankfulness. Therefore I would have you know that the Devil our adversary
has not a more forcible engine, or any more cunning stratageme to batter our
peace, and patience, and so to draw away our hearts from resting upon God in
the time of our affliction, then to make us to question Gods love, and so to
mistrust his truth.

Who did ever trust in the Lord and was deceived? Our Fathers (says David)
trusted in thee, they trusted and thou did deliver them, they called upon
thee, and were delivered, they trusted in thee, and were not confounded Psalm.
22.4, 5. Whereupon David prays, My God I trust in thee, let me not be
confounded, so all that hope in thee shall not be ashamed, Psalm, 25.2, 3.
And was the Lord the God of David only? Is he not also their God that do put
their trust in his goodness and mercy? Is Gods love and kindness, his mercy
and goodness less unto his people, now then it was to those of old? Or is the
Lord more feeble and less able to help, and do good to us, then to our
fathers before us? No, no, he is the Ancient of days, Dan. 7.22. the same God
now that ever he was; as able, and as willing now to do good to those that
believe in him, as he has been of old. Therefore in all thine afflictions
learn to judge of, and to measure Gods love, by his word, not by thy present
feeling and comfort. Let thine eye be upon that love which will one day change
thy estate, and give thee a plentiful croppe of good, out of this sorrowful
seed time of affliction. Should any husbandman measure his estate, and wealth
by his seed time, there were poor comfort to be found; for does he not weary
his body through painful toil and labor? does he not empty his store and
cast away his corn out of his hand? but when he does consider that without a
seed time, there is no possibility of an harvest, and withal, that, He that
sows liberally shall reap liberally, 2. Cor. 9.6. He is then contented both
with his pains, and expenses. Even so, if our eyes be so fixed upon our
present afflictions, that we see not the future good, which (through the love
of God unto us) they will bring us, we shall very hardly be upheld in the time
of our affliction; but if we look off the affliction, and fasten our eye upon
the love of God, and that good he will do us for that evil which we patiently
and thankfully sustain, how joyfully, how contentedly, how sweetly may we sit
down and bless God for afflicting of us?

it may be this is but one of Satan's wiles and enterprises to rob thee of that
good he sees thine affliction is like to do thee: and that thou art not so
distrustfulll of Gods love, nor so unbeleeving as the Devil does bear thee in
hand thou art. But admit it be so, and that thou art as thou speak of thy
self: will thou judge of the good effect of thy bodily physic, or the skill
and love of thy Physician by the sick and painful working of the Physic? What
wise man would so do? This were all one, as if a man should judge of his future
strength, or a woman of her beauty by their present condition of sickness.
Therefore howsoever no good by affliction may appear at first, but the
contrary, rather there being much impatience, infidelity, etc. Yet know thou
that no man's grace is to be judged of in the time of temptation: for certainly
many even of the Lords dear children, when the hand of God is upon them
(especially if it lie more heavily and longer then ordinary) do doubt of Gods
love and favor, and do bewray much corruption by their unadvised and
inconsiderate words, by their sour and lumpish carriage in the time of their
afflictions.

The Scripture commends Moses for faith and obedience, yet being perplexed,
and vexed with the dogednesse, and rebellion of the Israelites, he so offended
the Lord by his unbelief, that the Lord did cut him short of Canaan, and would
not suffer him to set foot on that promised land. Because ye believed me not
to sanctify me in the presence of the children of Israel, therefore ye shall
not bring this people into the land that I have given them. Numb. 20.12.

Admirable and invincible was the patience of Job: Yet when the hand of God was
first upon him, how did he curse the day of his birth, wishing that he had
died as soon as he was born? Let that day perish wherein I was born, etc. Job.
3.3. And afterward again, Oh that God would destroy me, that he would let his
hand go and cut me off, Job. 6.9.

Was not David beloved of God, and a man after his own heart? yet he was so
overwhelmed with the cloud of afflictions, and so battered with the storm of
adversity, that he could not discern the love of God toward him, but he
cries out, Will the Lord absent himself for ever? and will he show no more
love, or favor, Psalm. 77.7. And again, Lord, why do thou reject my soul, and
hidest thy face from me? Thine indignations go over me, and thy fear has
cut me off, Psalm. 88.15, 16.

I allege not these examples for the fostering of any in their impatience and
unbelief; nor that any should take liberty from hence, for the like behavior
in the time of affliction; but I speak this the rather, partly to uphold and
comfort weak believers; that they listen not to Satan's temptations, who will be
ready to bu^e it into their ears, that none of Gods children do question his
love in the time of trial, or show any impatience under the rod: and partly to
stop the mouths of the wicked, and to stay their uncharitable censure from
going too far; they being so ready to measure the child of God either by his
afflictions, or by his behavior in them.



Peter say, now for a season (if need require) ye are in heaviness through
manifold tentations, 1. Pet. 1.6. but in our heaviness, these cautions must be
observed.

First, our sorrow must be greater for our sin, which brought the affliction,
then for the affliction it self.

Secondly, we must not be excessive, but moderate in our heaviness.





Secondly, if our sorrow for affliction hurt us not, that is, dries not up our
bones, impaireth not our strength, or make us unfit for public employment.

Thirdly and lastly, if it withdrawes not the heart from God, and the duties
of his worship and service.

I then be persuaded either or Gods love, or that my case is good, or that good
is intended me by this affliction?

for the spirit of a man may sustain his (bodily) infirmities, but a wounded
spirit, who can bear? Prove. 18.14. Yet I would have thee know, that even these
inward and sad afflictions, are no other then are incident unto the best of
Gods children, and wherewith the Lord in love does afflict them.

For the Lord sees) as we have spoken before) what his children stand in most
need of; out of his deep and unsearchable wisdom, he singles out, and makes
choice of those trials which shall make most for our spiritual good: the Lord
ever pitcheth upon that affliction which shall work best upon us, and serve
most punctually to humble and awe us. Some he afflicts with variety of worldly
crosses, as in their children, or outward estate. Some he does extraordinarily
exercise with spiritual conflicts, and troubles of conscience: thus sorting
out unto his children those several crosses, and corrections, which out of his
unsearchable wisdom, and their spiritual necessity he sees most expedient
for them. Therefore of what nature soever thy cross be, do thou take it up,
seeing it pleases our wise God to exercise thee with it, as thy portion. It
may be thou think that no outward, and worldly cross could go so near
thee, as does this inward tentation; but who knows what thou would be, if
this trial were removed? It may be, the Lord sees that (without it) thou
would grow worldly, or waspish, or secure, or proud; now high spirits must
be abased low; Note.
and the Lord sees that these inward and spiritual conflicts are the best, and
surest way to humble us, and to bring us out of love with sin, and our
selves, and more in love with his majesty. He breaks up, he rents, and tears
the heart and conscience with fears, and terrors, that so it may be made more
pliable, and gentle, more fit to receive, and to retain that seed of grace
which the Lord is now casting into them. Therefore assure thy self that it is
not for any want of love that the Lord does lay so heavy a load upon thine
heart, and conscience, or keeps thee (it may be) upon the rack; it is not
because thou should think or say, he has cast thee off from being his
child, but that thou may be the better fitted for that good he intends
thee, and that thou may make more account of his love, when it is shed
abroad in thine heart. God will have those which shall hereafter partake of his
light, now and then to know what it is to fit in darkness, and to be in the
shadow of death. Now, because of all other tentations and trials incident unto
us, there are none so grievous and unsupportable as are inward and spiritual
afflictions; let it not be accounted lost time, if (before I proceed any
further) I make here some little stand, both to take a view of some inward
afflictions, and also to prescribe some remedies for the easing (if not the
curing) of such malladies as are most obvious, and often times prove most
dangerous, for want of applying, or improving of those helps, and means which
may be used: Almighty God our most wise Physician, who sees us inwardly, and is
better acquainted with our constitution, and temper then we our selves are,
knows how to strike every one in the right vein: and because people full
fed, are often full of gross humors, and bad blood; and those that live idly,
live (often times) unprofitably; the Lord) in great wisdom) does exercise some
of his dear ones with fightings within, that so the inward man may be the
better able to withstand outward evils: as soldiers in many places are
trained, that so they may be the more skillful, and better able to resist a
foreign enemy.

Sometimes the Lord is pleased to withdraw the sweet comforts of his spirit,
from the hearts of his dear children, and to strike them with inward terrors,
and fears of his wrath, and vengeance; which condition of theirs, although it
be uncomfortable for the present, yet it proves profitable in the end. Of all
afflictions incident to the soul of man, there is none so grievous, and
intolerable, as a wounded conscience; this transcends all other malladies, and
miseries whatsoever; and therefore Solomon asks, Who can be are it? Prove.
18.14. An accusing conscience tortures the soul with hellish horror here, and
(as it were) plungeth a poor sinner into hell whiles he lives. When that
gnawing, and biting worm begins to fasten its teeth upon a poor soul, his
anguish and vexation becomes unspeakable, and unconceivable of any, but those
that have felt it.

No favor of man, no love of friends, no preferment of the world, no outward
honors, nor abundance of riches, will be able to quench the fire, or alay the
heat of a tormented conscience. As may apeare by that memorable story of
Francis Spira, who being upon the rack of a guilty and accusing conscience, often
wished himself (as is reported) in Cains case, and in Judas his place, and
that his soul might exchange with theirs; wishing, and desiring rather to be in
hell torments, then to be racked and rent with such hellish horrors, and raging
fears, as did continually affright his poor soul. And being by one demanded,
If he feared not greater tortures, and torments after this life, then he now
sustained; he answered, Yes; but yet he wished he were in hell, that so his
torturing fears might be at an end. This man's condition (no boubt) was
terrible, and dreadful; yet who can say, that he perished everlastingly? What
warrant have any (as some have done) to judge him to be a desperate castaway?
They will say, that God might condemn him out of his own mouth. But is this
sufficient evidence for any, peremptorily to pass sentence upon him? The words
of a distempered person are of no validity in any civil court whatsoever. Is
it not an usual thing for brainsick and distempered persons to belie
themselves, and others too.

Spira despaired of mercy.

years together? Did any thing befall him in the time of his desperation, but
that which is incident unto the child of God? has not our age afforded us
examples, as deep in despair (in outward appearance) as ever Spira was;
whether we consider the matter of his tentation, which was Apostacy, or the
deepnesse of his desperation; and yet through the goodness, and mercy of God,
they received comfort in the end. He that will avouch Spira to be a castaway,
must prove, that he despaired both totally and finally; which (as I conceive)
they can hardly do; seeing it is said, That in the midst of his desperation,
he complained of the hardness of his heart, which (as he said) locked up his
mouth, and tied up his tongue from prayer. He felt the hardness of his heart,
complained of it, and lamented it: the Word of God may discover corruption in
us; but is it not grace that makes any to be wail corruption? Who knows what
case, and comfort he might find, and feel within, before his soul went out of
his body, albeit he never made any expression of it, nor any near him could
perceive it?



the rack of unquietness and torture, so far from apprehending, or hoping
for any comfort or mercy, that he may receive the sentence of death against
himself, and subscribe to his own damnation; yea, he may confidently avouch
himself to have no grace, no faith, to be a very castaway. And yet (we see)
these blustering storms have (in good time) blown over? and God upon unfeigned
humiliation has pacified their accusing conscience, stilled, and quieted their
troubled mind, by the apprehension of his love in the pardon of their sins.

For after the soul is once kindly soaked in godly sorrow, and the heart
sufficiently humbled in the sight of our unworthiness; the Lord (at length)
shows us his loving countenance, tells us by his Spirit, that he is reconciled
unto us, and that through Christ we are freed from the guilt, and so from the
punishment of all our sins. For though we have been polluted, and stained
with all manner of iniquity, and impiety, even from top to toe; though our
sins have been of a crimson and skarlet hue, as great and grievous as may be,
so as peradventure, in our conceit there is no possibillity of being cleansed
from them, yet God is able to make them as white as snow, and wool. Isa. 1.18.

There is no sinner so abominable, and loathsome, whom true and sound
repentance will not make as holy, and as righteous as Adam was before his fall.
Mistake me not; not that any penitent (if his heart strings should break with
sighing, and sobbing, or his eyes fall out of his head with weeping and
mourning) can of himself be personally holy, and pure, free from all fault,
without any blot, or blemish of iniquity; but he is holy, and unblamable in
regard of Gods gracious acceptance of him through Christ, as if he had never
sinned. For you must know, that where sin is pardoned, it is purged. If thou
can truly mourn for thy sin, thou art forthwith disburdened of the guilt,
and freed from the eternal punishment of all thy former wickedness. Repentance
if it be true, does cast sin out of the heart, and where this is done, God
lays down all quarrels against such a person.

Therefore nourish no sin, abandon it, banish it from thee; break off thy
course of sin betimes, even whiles it is called to day, and then Gods
countenance will appear friendly, and comfortable unto thee, and thy conscience
will be quiet, and speak peace unto thee.



and unbelief. The glad tidings of the Gospel (some say) are too good to be
true, or if true, too good for them to share in. And why for them? because
(they say) they are such sinners? And came not Christ into the World to call
sinners? yea, the greatest sinners, such as Manasses, and Paul was, who
acknowledged himself to be the chief of sinners. 1. Tim. 1.15. The greater
thy sins have been, the more thine unworthiness is, the more will the grace
of God shine in receiving of thee into grace and mercy.

question but God would be good unto me.

Ho every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and ye that have no
silver: come buy wine and milk without silver, and without money. Isa. 55.1. In
which words all condition of merit (on our part) is utterly excluded. Christ in
the Gospel is offered freely unto sinners, and there is no more required at our
hands, but to receive and welcome him being offered freely unto us. The water
of life is tendered freely to all that desire it. I will give to him that is
athirst of the well of the water of life freely. Revel. 21.6.

The Spirit, and the Bride say, Come, and let him that is athirst come. Revel.
22.17.



and let whosoever will, take of the water of life freely. Revel. 22.17. O
sweet words, O comfortable words. Thou say thou would feign have mercy,
feign have Christ; what hinders thee from receiving him, from believing? Here
is a word: here is thy warrant to take Christ. Nay, thou art peremptorily
commanded to believe. 1. John 3.23. This is then his Commandment, that we
believe in the namt of his Son, Jesus Christ. Thou have as good warrant to
believe the promises, and to receive Christ, as to love thy neighbor, or to
abstain from theft, murder, etc.

Dare thou kill, commit adultrey, or steal? No. And why so? Because these
are breaches of Gods Commandment. And do thou not also break Gods Commandment
when thou doubtest of his goodness, when thou beleevest not?

God commands thee to receive Christ for thy salvation; therefore, if thou hang
back through doubting, if thou question Gods truth, thou committest a greater
sin then if thou did break the whole morral law; therefore stand not on rhine
own terms with God. The Lord knew how base and unworthy the best of us were
when he tendered his Christ unto us. The Gospel was to be preached unto every
creature, and Christ tendered unto every sinner, for of what kind soever our
sins have been, the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 Jo.
1.7 If thou will accept of Christ he will aceept of thee; thou have his word
and promise Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you.
Mat. 11.28. Christ requires no more of thee but to come unto him, no more but
thy hearts consent to receive him before any other, If thou can but come, and
desire, and take Christ to be thine, it is enough for thy happiness and
salvation. If thou have but so much humiliation, as may cause thee to abhor
thy self, and to disclaim thine own worth as dung and dogs meat, if thou
have but so much sorrow and heart breaking as may divorce thee from thy sins
and make thee willing to accept of Christ, thou art a happy person. How dare
thou then stand a loofe, upon terms of thine own unworthiness? Is it any
other then ungrateful rudeness to prescribe the Lord upon what terms we
shall have his wine and milk, when as he bids us come and take it for nothing?
If any master should call one of his servants unto him, and he should draw back
and go away, saying I am not fine enough to come before thee, would this
frivolous excuse be sufficient to bear him out in his unmanner like
disobedience? So when the Lord calls thee to partake of his mercy, if thou
hangest back, because thou art not good enough as thou supposest; what do
thou else but slight, yea scorn the free grace, and undeserved kindness of
the Lord. Therefore be persuaded to make choice of Christ to be thine; which if
thou do, I dare assure thee thou art a justified person, although thou do
not by and by feel the sweet influence of his grace nor the presence of his
spirit, persuading thy heart that heaven and salvation are questionless thine.



an everlasting covenant Jer. 32.40. The best of Gods children do daily fail
in one part of the covenant or other: yet if there be not a revolting, a
turning back, a falling away from God, a betaking of thy self unto an other
husband, another love, thou art no breaker of the covenant: tho there be
failings. All this is come upon us, yet do we not forget thee, neither deal we
falsely concerning thy covenant Psalm. 44.17. As the Lords love toward us did
not begin in us, so does it not so much depend upon us, but upon the mercy
goodness and truth of him, with whom there is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning Jam. 1.17. For I am the Lord, I change not, and ye sons of
Jaakob are not consumed. Mat. 3.6. If Gods grace and mercy should depend upon
our deservings, the Devil would always pick some hole or other in our coat,
we should never have inward rest nor assurance, either of Gods love, or of our
own salvation: For, Satan is subtle and deceiptfull, and he will not fail to
tell us that we have broken covenant, and therefore God has cashiered us and
cast us off; therefore whenever Satan comes to parlie with thee, it must be
thy wisdom, and it will be thy safety not to hold him chat, but to break off
reasoning and dispute with him.



David set upon Golia in the name of the Lord, have recourse unto the promises,
which being well, and wisely managed by faith, will be able to foil the
Devil, and send him packing from thee. A greater and a surer sign of victory
we cannot have then this, viz. To renounce our own confidence, not to stand
upon our own bottom, but to cast our selves upon the Lord; and so we shall be
strong, in the power of his might. Ephesians, 6.10. Therefore give no way to
Satan, howsoever for the present he may bang thee, and cause thee to bauke, yet
be steadfast in the faith, and thou shall be able to resist him, because the
Lord takes thy part; For the exceeding greatness of his power is toward us
which believe. Ephesians. 1.19. Assure thy self, Satan shall be foiled, if the power
of God does underprop thee: which power, if thou will call for, and beleeven
thou art sure to partake of: and then, if thou chance to be foiled, thou
stand as one undefiled in Gods account. In the old Law, if any woman's
chastity was assaulted by any varlet, if she cried out for help, she was
blameless. Deutr. 22.27. Even so when satanicall tentations do assault us, if
we (in the assault) cry unto the Lord for help, the Lord will not require
the tentation at our hands, but of Satan, whose work it was. The ravished
woman was chaste in Gods account, because her heart and mind was so, though her
body was defiled: So if Satan draw not consent from us, his tentations may
prevail with us, but shall not be laid unto our charge. Therefore sly to God
for help, cry unto him, and he will either weaken Satan, and stren^^hen thee,
or else not lay the tentation to thy charge. And take heed that thou be not
over much disquieted, or unsettled by any of Satan's tentations, for this may
give Satan some advantage, if he sees thee to be dejected, he will be the
more insolent, and double his forces against thee. Therefore be strong in the
faith, fear not, be not disheartened, the Lord will be thy defense, and under
the shadow of his wings shall thou have shelter. Think never the worse, but
the better of thy self, because Satan assaults thee; it is a sign thou go
not the way that he would have thee. When any man drives his cattle to
pasture, if they go the way that he would have them, he is well pleased with
them, but if they hap to straggle out of the way, he throws a stone at one,
and his staff at another: even so, when we go the way Satan would have us,
he lets us alone, as implied by those words of our Savior, Luke 11.21. When a
strong man armed keeps his palace, the things that he possesses are in
peace: but if we disquiet him, he will not fail to disquiet us, so far as he
may or can; for satan can not tempt thee longer then the Lord will permit him;
and he that suffers Satan to tempt thee, will not suffer thee to be tempted by
him, above that which thou shall be able to bear, but will even give issue
with the tentation. 1. Cor. 10.13.

But I am feeble, and weak, and am not able to hold out against such fiery
darts, such furious oppositions as I am assaulted withal.





He gives strength to him that sainteth, and to him that has no strength,
he increases power. Isa. 40.29.



But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall run,
and not be weary, they shall walk, and not faint. Isa. 40.31. If thou had
strength of thine own* it were not to be trusted unto: and though thine be
gone, the Lord remains, his arm is not shortened, his power is not lessened.
Therefore cheer up thy drooping, and fainting heart, let the tentation be
never so smart, or tart, yet it is no other then that, out of which God intends
to fetch some glory, and thou in the end shall receive some good. And know it
for truth, that the more restlesly Satan does follow thee with variety of
tentations, the more sweetly, and securely thou may repose thy perplexed
soul upon this comfortable persuasion, and assurance that thou art the Lords.

life in them, my mind is full of wanderings, and idle vagaries, as soon as I
have begun to seek the Lord: whereupon I am often times at a stand, not knowing
whether I were best proceed, or recede, and leave off. And which does most of
all perplexe me, Satan spares not to cast in often times Atheistical, and
blasphemous thoughts, which makes me to fear, that when I have ended my
prayer, God may justly begin my punishment, seeing I have more offended him (I
fear) in my prayers, then I should have done with my silence.

thou not ever tremble at the thought of them? Then fear not; they shall not
be laid to thy charge. Assure thy self those sighs, and groans which proceed
from thy perplexed soul, shall find so much grace, and favor with God, as they
shall be able to prevail with him for that blessing thou have begd, and
standst in need of. And although thou can not pray as thou would, yet sigh,
and groan as thou should, and he which knows the secrets of all hearts,
will be able to understand the meaning of thy sighs, and groans of the spirit
within thee, which does plead and speak to God for thee.

may cast it as dung in my face, and lay some judgment upon me for offering
up such a strange sacrifice unto him.

Psalm. 51.17. And would God accept of thy sacrifice, if he had rejected thee?
No, no: assure thy self that God has accepted of thy person, if he accepts
of thy sacrifice. The Lord had (...), and to his offering. G^^e. 4.4. The
melting of thy soul, and the kindly mourning over him whom thou have pierced
with thy sin, is a most infallible evidence of Gods love toward thee, and of
the saving presence of his holy Spirit, abiding in thee. Therefore let thy
spirit rejoice, in that thou art able to mourn for sin. Those tears which
proceed from a grieved soul, and wounded spirit, may be compared unto April
showers, which bring on Mayflowers; although these showers wet where they fall;
Yet (through the heat of the Sun working with them) they produce a great
deal of sweetness in those plants, and herbs which they fall upon.

There is abundance of joy in all godly sorrow.

As the harvest is potentially in the seed: so the harvest of true and sound
joy grows out of this seed of sorrow, Psalm. 126.5. They that sow in tears,
shall reap in joy. Why is thy soul then so troubled within thee? why art thou
still so sad, so heavy, and dejected?



persons, which spend their time in scraping, and raking together these outward
things, pinch their bodies, and are ever and anon whining, and complaining that
they have nothing, when as their chests are full of good linen, their houses
stored, and stuffed full of utensills, and their purse full of money; but being
blinded with the love of the world, think they have nothing, because they have
not so much as their covetous eye would look over? and therefore do neither
thankfully acknowledge what they have received, nor profitably improve any
thing they do enjoy, either to Gods glory, their own comfort, or others good.
Even so many afflicted souls being overladen with anguish of mind, and deluded
by Satan, often times complain of the want of grace in the midst of plenty, not
seeing, as the saying is, wood for trees, and thus do belly both God, and
themselves. And it is just with the Lord sometimes to hold his children down
with fears, and doubtings, because they have not been sufficiently thankful
to God for that rich grace they have received from him. Our unthankfulness is
not only as a great fogg, and mist, which does exceedingly obscure, and darken
the grace of God in his children; but is also as a worm or canker which eats
into the sap, and heart of grace, so as it thrives not, nor fructifies as
otherwise it would do.

But such as are planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the courts
of our God. Psalm. 92.13. Does not the Prophet Jeremiah also tell us, that
those that trust in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is, shall be as a tree
planted by the water, which spreads out her roots, shall not care for the
year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit. Jere. 17.8.

asleep, makes no use of many good things he has: a hand benumbed with cold,
feels not that which it holds fast. It may so fall out that grace may be
something chilled in thee, does it therefore follow, that it is quite killed in
thee? Thou must learn to put a difference betwixt no grace, and grace some way
infeebled for the present. It fares with grace in the hearts of many of Gods
children, as it does with the Moon, sometimes in the full, and sometimes in the
wain, or as with the Sea, which sometimes flows, and sometimes ebbs: even so
through Satan's malice, and our own frailty, grace may seem sometime to ebb in
us, and then no wonder, if the heart be deaded, and out inward peace disturbed
through fears and doubtings. Assure thy self, this off and on, this up and
down, this heat and cold, arises from those principles of grace, and
corruption abiding in all the Lords people. Corruption sometimes prevails, and
this royles, and troubles these living waters within us, and makes them thick,
and muddy, so as little good appears in us; but anon, when the wind of the
spirit blows again, with its holy blast it cleanses, and refineth these
troubled waters, whose cleernesse may again be seen, and whose goodness may be
tasted.

and cleansing, yea, covenanting with God for ever to renounce, and abandon my
former sins, I have with the swine wallowed in the old mire of filthiness,
and therefore I cannot think that ever grace was in truth begun in me.

Abraham sin the matter of Sarah his wife? hazarding her chastity by a poor
plot, yea a sinful policy, exposing his wife to adultrey for his own outward
peace and safety? Who can say that Abraham's heart (at the first) smote him not
for this evil? Yet it is evident, that he fell into the same sin again.
He that peruseth the book of the Judges, shall find Israel fallen into
idolatry, and upon correction, humbled and penitent; and yet afterward again,
and again fallen into the same wickedness they had formerly repented of. Was
not Jonas (think you) thorrowly humbled for his sin of stubbornness, and
disobedience, when he felt the smart of it, in the Whales belly? yet for all
this, when he saw the Lord so merciful as to spare Ninivie upon her
humiliation and repentance, how angry was he with God, justifying his former
sin; which in effect, and before God, was all one to have committed the same
sin again? yet the Lord forgave these, and received them again to mercy.
Does not the Lord enjoyne us to forgive our brother offending us daily, even
unto Seventy times seven times, if he repent? Matthew. 18.22. And will the Lord
enjoin us that act of mercy, and compassion wherein himself will not be
exemplar unto us? Is there any drop of pity, or kindness in us, which comes
not out of that bottomless sea of love, and mercy in the Lord? if we must
forgive our brother so many times in the day, no doubt but the Lord (in whom is
the fullness of goodness and compassion) will receive humbled sinners, as
often as they return unto him.

There is no sin, but blasphemy against the holy Ghost, which upon
repentance shall not be pardoned. If residnation, and relapsing into the same
sin may be repented of, questionless it may, it shall be pardoned at Gods
hand. And whereas some may think that true grace will preserve any from falling
into the same sin again, whereof he has formerly repented, it is a fond
error: for if the Lord leave any unto themselves, they will be as ready, nay
more ready, to fall into the old sin, then into a new; the disposition, and
natural temper being more inclinable to that evil then any other; and Satan
knowing which way the poor sinner has been most foiled, will that way most
strongly again assault him. It is therefore a binding of the Lords hands, a
confining, and limiting of his boundless mercy, and compassion, yea, an
undervalewing of the all-sufficiencie of Christ, his merit and passion, to say
that relapsing into former sins is a thing unpardonable; or that a person so
offending was never in the state of grace, or can be a true member of the Lord
Christ. The covenant of grace excludes none, but impenitent and unbeleeving
persons. Truth it is, that the burnt child dreads the fire; and it is not an
ordinary thing for the child of God, in the state of grace, to fall back
again to his old byas; but that it is not possible for him (it God leave him)
so to fall, or that true grace will not admit of any such falls, is more then
can be warranted, or proved by the Word of God. I speak not this (God knows)
to countenance, or bolster any in their sin; but partly to magnify the
boundless and unlimited patience, and mercy of our good God, and partly to
underlay and comfort that poor afflicted soul, and wounded conscience, who
through his own pride, self confidence, or security, and Satan's policy,
has been again entangled in that snare, out of which, by former repentance,
he has been delivered. This is the childrens bread, it belongs not unto dogs.
Impudent, and impenitent sinners can claim no interest in this comfort: it is
baulme to heal only wounded consciences; whom I would not have to be so
strongly deluded by satan, as to be beat off from repentance, and the throne of
grace, or to think that they never had any true grace, or that their former
repentance was ever sound, because old sores are again broke out in them, they
have relapsed into old sins. The work of grace does not wholly take away all
sin, nor free us from it, but only weakens it, and works the heart to a
hatred and detestation of it. And know, that if thy sin, when thou were Gods
enemy, could not prevent his love, much less shall it now thou art reconciled.



of his goodness, and compassion, entreat him to look upon thee a poor
confounded wretch, beseech him to behold thee in the face of Christ; tell him
here lies a miserable caitiffe a forlorn creature, a wounded and forsaken
sinner, one that resolves to lie, and dye at his feet, one that will set down
at the threshold of his tender mercyes, and never depart without some alms,
some crumbs of mercy to revive, and refresh thy languishing soul withal; and
(my life for thine) in due time the Lord will satiate thy heart with
comfortable tidings (from Heaven) of his reconciliation and of the pardon, and
forgiveness of all thy sins.

I had not gone on so long in my sin, as I have done: there was a time (I am
persuaded) when I was capable of mercy, but that time (I fear) is gone and
past, Gods mercy is out of date with me, and therefore I am undone for ever.

Lord waits that he may have mercy upon thee and therefore will he be exalted,
that he may have compassion upon you Isa. 30.18. The Lord has proclaimed
himself to be abundant in goodness, reserving mercy for thousands, Exodus 34.6,
7. He has mercy in store for thee as well as for others, if thou can truly
repent thee of thy former wickedness. The Lord forgiveth iniquity,
transgression and sin, Ez. 34.7. It would highly derogate from the Lords
power, from his all-sufficiencie, and boundless goodness and mercy it he
should not forgive capital and foul sins, as well as petty and small sins.

Consider what the Lord has promised, Ezekiel. 18.21, 22. None of all his
transgressions shall be mentioned. And again verse 23. Has the Lord any
desire thou should perish, or shall thou not live if thou return from thine
own ways? It is not any sin, but the love of sin and the going on in
sin, that seperates betwixt God, and a poor sinner. Now then cheer up thy
drooping spirits, stand it out no longer against the Lord, and his goodness:
lay down, not only thy weapons of disobedience, but also all carnal
reasonings: captivate thy will unto Gods will, and then whatsoever thy sins
have been, whatsoever thy tentations, distractions, fears, or doubtings be, if
thou will believe, the Lord will graciously accept of thee for his sonns sake.
The Lord stands not upon thy sins, nor thy unworthiness (as I have formerly
said) he bids thee believe: therefore tho thou be unworthy of Gods favor,
and mercy, yea believe because God commands thee, and he is worthy to be
obeyed. By believing, Christ and his righteousness become thine: and having
Christ, neither sin, nor the law shall be able to hurt thee, for faith reprives
us from the law, and puts us under grace. Therefore believe, else never look
to have any sound joy, or true peace to thy soul, the heart is filled with joy,
and peace in believing. Romans 15.13* Where there is doubting of Gods love, or
our own salvation, there can be neither joy, nor peace, but anxiety, trouble,
vexation, and grief. Faith pacifies and quiets all. For being justified by
faith we have peace toward God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, and rejoice
under the bope of the glory of God, neither do we so only but also we rejoice
in tribulations. Romans 5.1, 2, 3. True faith tho never so little is able to
keep thy soul from sinking under any affliction, be it never so great, or
grievous; When Peter was strong in faith he could cast himself into the Sea,
but his heart and faith failing, he began to sink: little and weak faith will
be able to keep us from drowning, but not from beginning to sink. When Peter's
faith was weakest, Christ was nearest at hand to help him, Christ, who never
did, nor will reject the weakest believer, put forth his hand, and saved Peter,
but yet withal reproved him for doubting. O thou of little faith wherefore
did thou doubt. Mat. 14.31. Doubt not therefore but believe: And be persuaded
that if the Lord intended not to show mercy unto thee; he would never have
given thee an eye to see thy sins, a heart to grieve, and mourn for them, or
a tongue to desire the pardon and forgiveness of them. Therefore assure thy
self, that a grieved spirit, a sorrowful heart, a wounded conscience is no
sure argument of a forlorn condition, or of the want of the love of God.

Be persuaded of Gods Love.
Again, is it so? is this the best way for us, to be patient and cheerful in
affliction, to be persuaded of Gods love? Labor we then to get our hearts
settled in this persuasion and thou shall find the anguish of thy affliction
much alaied, thou shall feel the smart of it much abated. Holy Job was brought
to a low, and pittyfull condition, when he desired to he let alone whiles he
might swallow his spittle. Job 7.19. Yet even then Job wondered at the goodness
and favor of God that he would think him worthy the melting and trying. What is
man that thou do magnify him, and that thou set thine heart upon him?
And do visit him every morning, and triest him every moment. Job 7.17, 18.

Being then undoubtedly persuaded, that when God comes near thee with
affliction, he is near thee in affection, that when he corrects thee, he loves
thee, for until the heart of man be thoroughly persuaded hereof, he shall never
take comfort in, nor pick any good out of his affliction. Imagine with me a man
who has every day his full feed of the best and what outward comfort he will
call for; what true content can he take in these things when he knows that
he is under the displeasure of his Prince, and so in danger every day of being
cast into prison? whereas if (through the rage and malice of some of his
enemies) he were cast into prison, if he were persuaded of the Kings love, he
would rest contented, knowing and believing that the King will honor him for
his reproach, and ere it be long set him free again. Even so it is with every
one that is persuaded of Gods love in his affliction.

Therefore as at all times, so especially in the time of affliction, Gods
children should live by faith. Affliction is like to do us little good, if it
be not tempered with faith. As that meat which we take into our stomach
concocteth not if the native heat be defective and wanting; even so that
affliction which is administered unto us will profit us little if faith be
wanting unto us. Faith stilleth the heart even in our sorest, and greatest
afflictions, persuading us of Gods love in correcting us, and that the Lord
intends our great good by this affliction which lies upon us, the love and
care which parents have of their childrens good and welfare, does not wholly
consist in providing of meat, drink and apparel for them, but partly in
correcting of them for their good, and partly in providing of physic for them
when they are any way distempered. Even so almighty God our merciful and
loving father, does no less love us when he corrects and afflicts us, which
(as you have heard) is the physicking of our souls then when he provideth
outward necessaries for us; and this faith does persuade the heart of. For
faith judges not of things by sense or outward appearance, but as the truth is
in Jesus Christ, justifying the Lord in all his ways, always magnifying the
wise and holy proceedings of our good God, as the only best, and most
profitable for us. It is only the apprehension of some loss, the fear of some
evil, or the sense of Gods wrath, and displeasure in our affliction, which
makes the heart so sad, and the spirits so lumpish in the time of affliction:
then set thy faith on work, and it will blow over all these clouds, it will
answer all carnal doubts and reasonings and so settle the heart in a constant
persuasion of Gods love, that we shall rejoice, and be thankful for our
afflictions, because we know and believe that God in afflicting of us, loves
us. And to put the matter out of all doubting, I will lay down a few (but sure
and certain) evidences of Gods love in correcting of us

Do thou desire to know whether God in afflicting of thee loves thee? Tokens
of Gods afflicting of us in love.
whether his stripes be the blows of an enemy, or the chastisement of a
loving father? thou may know it by these tokens.

First, when God gives thee a heart to be contented; and a mind to be willing
to bear whatsoever he shall lay upon thee, and to want whatsoever thou see
the Lord is not willing thou should enjoy. He that does not rest content
with the love and favor of God in the want of outward, yea the best of outward
things, does not rightly prize the love of God; in that the want of other
things does more affect him and take up his mind, then the consideration of
Gods love, and he more discontented in the missing of the one, then contented
with the possession of the other. He that cannot be content to part with any
earthly benefit when God shall call for it, it is to be feared, that man never
felt the sweetness of Gods love in the assurance of the pardon and forgiveness
of his sins. Skin for skin, and all that ever a man has will he give for his
life, Job. 2.4. Then much more will he part with all that he has, so be it
he may have his part in Gods love, for thy loving kindness is better then
life, Psalm. 63.3. for what is life but death, if it be not upheld by the love
of God? Art thou then heartily content with the Lords handling of thee? Do
thou with all cheerfulness take up thy cross and bear thine affliction?
Can thou truly say, Behold here am I, let him do to me, as seems good in
his eyes. 2. Sam. 15.26. I dare be bold to say, thou art an happy man, God in
afflicting thee, loves thee.

Secondly, if God loves thee, he will fetch thee nearer unto him by thy
affliction. See what the Church professed, Esaias. 26.8, 9. Also we, O Lord,
have waited for thee in the way of thy judgments, the desire of our soul is to
thy name, and to the remembrance of thee. With my soul have I desired thee in
the night, and with my spirit within me will I seek thee in the morning. By
which words it appears that Gods people, those that are beloved of him, are so
far from being driven from God by affliction, that they are brought thereby
nearer unto him. Afflictions are so far from extinguishing grace in Gods
people, that they increase it rather; as water cast upon the smiths fire does
not put it out, but increases the flame thereof. Afflictions drive us unto the
Lord in prayer, Esaias, 26.16. In trouble have they visited thee, they powered out
a prayer when thy chastning was upon them. Affliction will send us to the
Sanctuary, and make us more diligent in hearing the Word, more conscionable in
the practice of good duties. So that as judgments lighting upon the wicked do
come from Gods avenging wrath and justice, and so are as pikes and clubs, to
beat them further off from God, even so those afflictions which befall his
people, proceeding from his love, are as cords to draw them nearer unto him.

Thirdly, thou may assure thy self of Gods love in afflicting of thee, if
thine afflictions do raise up godly sorrow in thy heart, causing thee to
grieve, and be disquieted that thou should by thy wickedness thus provoke
the Lord, and put him as it were out of his course, forcing him to do that
which he goes unwillingly about, for He does not punish willingly, nor
afflict the children of men, Lam. 3.33. This was that which did break the heart
of David, to consider how he had offended the Lord, who had been so gracious,
and bountiful unto him. Against thee, against thee only have I sinned, and
done evil in thy sight, that thou may be just when thou speak, and pure
when thou judge, Psalm, 51.4.

A good heart grieves more that by his sins he has grieved God, Note.
then that God has grieved him by some affliction. And therefore had rather
the Lord would take away his sin then his affliction. And therefore when the
Lord had so severely threatened David, by the mouth of his Prophet Nathan, David
cries not out through fear of Gods judgments) as some would have done upon so
hard tidings, Alas, I am undone, how shall I ever be able to hold up my head,
if Gods judgments come so thick upon me, etc. No, no, the sword which pierced
David's heart, was his sin against God, and therefore he prays, Wash me
thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin, Psalm. 51.2. He
that in the time of affliction can find his sin the greatest cause of his
humiliation, may assure himself of a sanctified use of his affliction, and of
Gods love in so dealing with him. We shall find little fruit, and less
comfort to grow out of our grief, sorrow, and humiliation, if it be for
outward things, and not for sin. Grieve we never so much, never so long for
our outward afflictions and crosses, our griefs can neither abate them, nor
remove them: whereas godly sorrow, sorrow for sin, if it does not batter our
cross, it weakens it, and in the mean time, procures much ease to the mind,
and peace to the conscience.

Assure thy self, that sorrow is no where so well bestowed, as upon sin:
Godly sorrow is the salve appointed to heal, and cure sin; now to apply this
salve to a wrong sore (to affliction) is lost labor. Learn therefore to turn
thy sorrow against thy sin, and then thou will say as David speaks, Psalm.
119.75. I know O Lord, that thy judgments are right, and that thou have
afflicted me justly, as the old translation has it. And so saying, thou may
boldly proceed with David, and pray, Let thy mercy comfort me according to thy
promise unto thy servant, Let thy tender mercies come unto me that I may live,
verse. 76.77. Therefore whenever the Lord enters into judgment with thee,
fall thou to judging of thy self. Accuse thy self, that God may be justified.
And let thine own heart speak unto thee in the words of the Prophet, Have thou
not procured this unto thy self, because thou have forsaken the Lord thy God?
Jere. 2.17. This is a good sign that God will do thee good by thine
affliction, which he would not, if he did not love thee.

Fourthly, and lastly, thou may be assured that God afflicts thee in
love, if he gives thee a heart to be thankful to him for thine affliction.
Can thou bless God, taking from thee as well as giving unto thee? I dare
then confidently avouch that thine afflictions are sanctified unto thee, and
that in love he has afflicted thee. Thus did Job, The Lord has given, and the
Lord has taken it, blessed be the name of the Lord. Job 1.21. For prosperity,
and good things many wicked men will (in their manner) be thankful to God; but
for adversity, and such things as are in appearance evil, to be thankful,
this is the property only of good men. We can easily be brought to praise
the Lord when he pleases us, but when he crosses us, when he cuts us short,
and keeps us to hard meat, then to bless and praise his name, this is clean
against our nature; it is only the work of grace in us, for grace will make
those things easy which are very hard and difficult unto nature. And therefore
there cannot be a better evidence of a gracious and sanctified heart, then to
praise and glorify God for afflictions. For in so doing, a man does justify
the Lord in his dealing; yea by our thankfulness for afflictions, we magnify
the glorious attributes of God, we acknowledge his justice, Psalm. 119.75. I
know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right, and that thou have afflicted me
justly. We acknowledge his truth, Psalm. 19.9. The judgments of the Lord are
true, and righteous altogether. We acknowledge his mercy, Psalm. 25.10. All
the paths of the Lord, are mercy and truth. Therefore most true it is, that
whosoever in affliction, offers praise, does glorify God, Psalm. 5.23. Men
may be thankful for peace, plenty, seasonable times, deliverances, and the
like, in self-love: but for troubles, and afflictions, crosses, and losses to
be thankful, this manifests our love to God, which none can show until he
be beloved of God.

Thankfulness in affliction is a notable soul of faith, for faith will tell
as, that nothing can befall us, which shall either lessen Gods love, or
increase our hurt; yea faith persuades us that God in afflicting of us, loves
us, though the affliction be unto death, and hence it comes, that we are
thankful for afflictions, and patient in the bearing of them.

Now lay all these together. Art thou willing to kiss that rod wherewith thou
art beaten? Can thou cheerfully say, as it is, Mic. 7.9. I will hear the
wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned against him? Art thou taken off from
thine old courses, thine old consorts, thine old comforts, and brought nearer
unto God? Is thy heart dissolved into tears of contrition for thy sins and
transgressions?

Do thou cordially, unfainedly bless God that ever he took thee to do, that
ever he laid his hand upon thee? then is it as evident as the Sun at noon day,
that God in afflicting of thee, loves thee; because he has taught thee to
make so good and holy use of thy affliction. For afflictions of themselves, and
in their own nature, are fruits of the curse, and such as (being unsanctified)
will make us storm and rage, and beat us further off from God; but when we
feel, and find them to work contrary to themselves, their nature altered, and
changed, this is a most evident and infallible sign of Gods love and mercy,
extracting Treacle out of this rank poison, and good out of this evil. Thou
may hold it as a certain truth, that God in afflicting of thee loves thee.

Now I come to the latter part of the verse, the drift and end of Gods
afflicting us; in these words, Be zealous therefore, and amend. I purpose not
to make any discourse upon Zeal, or Repentance, for then I should go out or my
intended course, which tends wholly to the setting forth of the necessity, and
utilitie of Afflictions. The Lord having said, As many as I love, I rebuke, and
chasten, adds by way of exhortation, these words, Be zealous therefore, and
amend, from which words we may gather this conclusion.

Doct. 4. The chief end of Gods afflicting us, is the bettering of us.
The chief, and special end of Gods afflicting us, is the bettering and
amending of us. The Lord knows that grace is beter for us then great
possessions, and a healthful soul is more to be desired then a strong and
lusty body, and therefore for the good of the soul does many ways afflict the
body. That ground from which we expect and desire good, we dig, or plough,
and harrow; but that ground which we regard not, we meddle not with it, we
take no pains about it, but let it lie waste. Even so deals the Lord with
man. He lets the wicked alone, he looks for no good from them: but he
ploweth over his children, and harroweth them with affliction, that so they may
be fruitful; that in their lives they may bring forth a rich and plentiful
crop of grace, and godliness. Why do we beat our wall-nut trees? Why do we
prune, and cut our vines, is it not to make them more fruitful? So deals the
Lord with his children, he breaks, and cuts off many superfluous evils with
the pruning knife of Affliction, that so they may grow more fruitful in well
doing. The end of Gods correcting of us, is not (as some may think) to avenge
himself upon us, for those evils which we have committed against him; nor yet
to please himself in our smart, as if he took delight in our punnishment and
sorrow: but it is for the bettering of us.

Moses tells the Israelites, that the Lord was their guide in the great and
terrible wilderness, to humble them, and to prove them, that he might do them
good at their latter end. Deuteronomy. 8.16. He chasteneth us for our profit, that
we might be partakers of his holiness. Heb. 12.10. He wounds us, that he
may heal us. A leg that is crooked, and grows awrye, must be broken
before it can be made right and straight. If the Lord should not break those
crooked and perverse wills of ours, they would never be rectified. The Lord
uses to beat out one evil with another, the evil of sin, with the evil of
punishment. There is a great deal of folly in the hearts of his wisest
children; they are slow of heart to believe, and practice that which will make
for their good; this folly, the Lord (in wisdom) drives away from them by the
rod of correction. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is
all the fruit, the taking away of his sin. Esa. 27.9.

Naturally we sport with sin, and make it a pastime to do evil. Prove.
10.23. Many drink iniquity like water. Job, 15.16. Wickedness is sweet in our
mouths, and we are loath to part with it until the Lord (in love) does
administer unto us some affliction or other, which (like unto Stibium) shall
make us to vomit up these sweet morsells, and make us out of love with our
former evil ways and courses, as things, not only unpleasing, and distasteful
unto the Lord, but such as are noxious, and hurtful unto us.

Therefore for the preventing of that evil which sin may bring upon us, and
for the bestowing upon us that good which the love and practice of sin would
hinder us of, the Lord does afflict and chastise us. How did his people Israel
go a whoring from him? they were set upon gadding, yea madding after sin; and
therefore the Lord was constrained to fetch them back again by his judgments.
We are as ready to wander out of the way, as sheep going astray, so that the
Lord must send some affliction or other after us to call us back again, as
David, Psalm. 119.67. Before I was afflicted I went astray. The prodigal in the
Gospel turns his back upon his father, and takes his journey into a far
country, where he consumed and wasted his goods with riotous living: but
having spent all, and being pinched with penury, he could then mind home, and
return again unto his father with grief, and shame; which had not affliction
been (no doubt) he would never have done. The like may be said of many more,
who (for ought we know to the contrary) had perished if they had not been
afflicted. So that few or none of Gods children but can say, It had been wrong
with them, if they had not been afflicted, for by afflictions they have been
much bettered.

By affliction we come to know our selves.
And that first of all, because by affliction they have been brought to know
themselves, and to see and acknowledge the damnable estate whereinto they were
by sin plunged. Hence is it said, That the prodigal (of whom I spoke even
now) being brought to that extreme want, that he would feign have filled his
belly with the husks that the swine did eat, but no man gave him them, then
he came to himself, Luke 15, 16, 17. Being before as it were out of his right
wits, that is, ignorant of that miserable and wicked condition, into which
(through sin) he had brought himself. How many of Gods people have forgotten
the Lord, and themselves, until such time as the Lord has remembered them with
some affliction? Note.
we never come to a through understanding and knowledge of our own hearts,
until affliction has gaged, and sounded them. In prosperity we can carry
our selves moderately, and cheerfully toward God and man; for the corruption
that is within us lies still, and is not stirred, and therefore not seen, or
discerned; as the stinking smell, and savor of some dunghill, or bumby is kept
in, and not smelled, until it be stirred; but if once you meddle with it, then
it casts up those stinking vapors that are in it: even so, let God lay
affliction upon us, then that corruption which before lay hid, is now
manifested. We never come to make experience (as was said before) of our
impatience, testiness, rebellion, infidelity, love of the world, and the like,
until affliction come unto us. We are so blinded with self-conceit and
privy pride, that when we hear of, or see others distempered with
affliction, we can be ready to condemn them, and (in our own breasts)
justify our selves, and think that we would bear out the affliction more
manfully then so, if the same, or the like should befall us. Whereupon the Lord
to humble us, and take us down, sends us some affliction or other, that so
we may think no better of our selves then there is just cause; for when
affliction comes, we can doubt of Gods promise, we can question his
Providence, we can murmurre and repine, or at the least, hang down the head in
a discontented, and su^len manner, as if we had neither faith, nor hope, nor
any dram of grace in us.

By affliction we come to judge aright of sin.
Secondly, by affliction we come to judge aright of sin, as well as of our
selves. It is that which will make sin as heinous, and odious in our own
view, as it is in its own nature. Did not the God of this world cast a mist
before our eyes, or else show us our sins in false glasses, we would be so
far from pleasing our selves with any sin, that upon the committing of it,
we would cry out with the leper in the law, I am unclean, I am unclean. Lev.
13.45. We would abhor our selves in dust and ashes, if we saw how loathsome
sin has made us in Gods eye; and this we seldom see, but when affliction
opens our eyes. Indeed afflictions of themselves can not do this; it is the
Word of God which inlightens us, and brings us to the knowledge of our estates.
But we seldom find instructions to enter home, until afflictions have
sharpened them. Those that live in prosperity, ease and fullness, are ready to
pass by rebukes, and to slight reproof as unseasonable, and as that which
belongs not unto them, but when the chastisements of God have seized upon them,
awakened their consciences, and mollified and humbled their hearts, then
rebukes have a keener edge, and pierce more deeply. Instructions are the light
that guides us in the way, but corrections joined with them, do make our
eyesight more clear, and cause us more heedfully to follow the directions of
the Word. Affliction makes us to heed that which before we regarded not. As
our ears are opened by correction, which were formerly sealed, Job 33.16. so
also our eyes are enlightened, which were formerly darkened. After the Lord had
smitten down Paul to the ground as he was journeying toward Damascus, it is
said; that there sell from his eyes as it had been scales, and suddenly he
received sight, and arose, and was baptized, Acts 9.18. until affliction had
seized upon Paul, he could never be brought to see the oudiousnesse of his
sins. If the Lord should always sit still, and never come forth to judge us
for our sins, many would not only flatter themselves in their evil ways,
not only justify themselves, but condemn the Lord, in being ready to think
that the Lord himself were well enough pleased with them, and their practice.
These things thou have done, and I held my tongue: therefore thou thoughtest
that I was like thee, but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before
thee. Psalm. 50.21. Impunity, and prosperity makes many think, that sin is not
so dangerous a thing, nor so foul an evil, as many Preachers would bear them
in hand it is, whereupon they take heart, and are emboldned to the committing
of sin, and continuing in it, as the Preacher says, Eccle. 8.11. Because
sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart
of the children of men is fully set in them to do evil. Whereupon to beat us
out of these wicked conceits, the Lord sends some affliction or other home
unto us, to be an eye salve to anoint our eyes, that we may see both the
nature, and the danger of our sins, how odious and hateful they are unto the
Lord: How noxious and hurtful they will one day prove unto us, if by speedy
repentance we do not turn away from them, especially from those sins for
which chiefly the Lord does afflict us.

Naturally we are all children of darkness, so blind and blockish, that many
know not (like blindfolded people) who smote them, nor yet wherefore they are
smitten. In afflictions (for the most part) we are like blind men, or those
that grope up and down in the dark, to feel the door, but cannot find the
way out. It is a masterpiece of Satan's policy to delude our understandings
and judgments with carnal reasonings, that so when God afflicts us, to bring
us unto the sight of our sin, we should either hold on our old course, or
else do more wickedly by not seeing, and so not amending that sin for which
we are punished, that by sin we might be plunged into punishment, and for
want of repentance, our punishment continued, and increased.

I am corrected of the Lord?

Adonibezek had cut of the thumbs of the hands, and feet of diverse Kings, and
therefore God rewarded him as he had done to others. Judges 1.7. If David will
kill Vriah with the sword, the sword shall never depart from his house. 1.
Samu. 12.9, 10. Thus we see how the Lord often times meets with sinners in the
same kind wherein they have sinned: what (may we say) is the cause of this
sore and baiting famine, which thus rages amongst us? Surely our great
unthankfulness, and our horrible abuse of Gods good creatures. Does the Lord
punish thee with losses, or with poverty? Consider whether these outward
things did not make thee proud, or else were occasions of imboldening thee to
the committing of some sin or other. Are thy children stubborn, and
disobedient? Twenty to one, but it is to punish thy disobedient, and undutifull
carriage (formerly) toward thy parents. Thus might I instance in diverse
particulars, by which it is evident, that the Lord does often times proportionate
punishments to our sins; so as by our affliction, we may easily guess at what
sin the Lord aims, and of which he would have us most heartily repent us.

Secondly, look into the book of God, whither thou can there find any that
have formerly drunk of thy cup, have been exercised, and chastised with the
same rod that thou art: if thou do not find any such example there, ask and
enquire of thy friends whether they have known any to be punished as thou art;
now if thou find any upon record in Gods book, or by report from others can
hear of any that have been in thy condition, then seek and enquire what their
sins have been, what manner of persons they have been, and think with thy
self thus; surely I am sick of their disease, in that my Physician takes the
same course with me, which he did with them; I have committed their sins, in
that I partake of their punishment.

Thirdly, if thou would feign find out that sin for which especially thou
art afflicted, consider (when thou art under the rod) what sin lies heaviest
upon thy conscience; very probable it is, that, that sin which now cries
loudest in thine ears from the voice of thy conscience, cried loudest in the
ears of God for punishment. Too many commit sin with delight, thinking they
shall never hear more, or worse of it. But when affliction comes, the
consciencc begins to tell tales, and lay open things done in secret. Do thou
not remember how at such a time, in such a place thou did commit such a
villainy? Do thou not know how once in such a kind thou did highly dishonor
God? Have thou forgot how thou did once wrong thy neighbor in such a thing?
Thus (in affliction) the conscience many times brings to mind that sin of
ours which we had buried in forgetfulness (as appears by Joseph his
brethren) and so should never have repented of it, if the Lord (by affliction)
had not made our conscience to discover it unto us.

Fourthly, if the Lord does not meet with thy sin in its kind, or if thy
conscience, do not reveal unto thee all thy wickedness, or that sin for
which thou art punished; then be earnest with the Lord in prayer, that he
would be pleased to inlighten thine understanding, and help thee to make a
narrow search, and trial of thy ways, or else that he would discover unto
thee that or those sins for which his hand does now lie so heavily upon thee.

Thus did Job, I will say unto God condemn me not; show me wherefore thou
contendest with me. Job 10.2. Before Ezekiel could behold the wicked
abominations of Israel, the Lord taught him to dig in the wall. Ezekiel. 8.8, 9.
So before we shall be able to discern that sin (or any other of our sins)
for which we are afflicted, the Lord by his spirit must demolish that wall of
hardness of heart, which hinders us from seeing our sins; or else he must
give us of his eye salve, wherewith anointing our eyes, those scales of
ignorance, and spiritual blindness may fall from our eyes, that so we may the
better see our sins. Entreat the Lord to shine into thy dark understanding by
the light of his Word; that it may enter through, even to the dividing asunder
of thy soul, and spirit of thy joints, and marrow, that it may be a discerner
of thy thoughts and the intents of thy heart as the Apostle speaks. Heb. 4.12.
And be thou well assured of this for thy comfort that he that is truly
desirous, and withal scedulous and deligent to find out his special sins,
he shall have them in the end discovered and laid open unto him; because (as
you have formerly heard) this is one end why the Lord does correct us, that so
we may search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord. Lam. 3.40.
That we may be brought to a true sight and sense of our sins, and so be
thoroughly humled for them. Affliction serves to ransack the bottom of the
heart, to launch our festred consciences, and o let out (by confession) the
festred and corrupted matter there engendered, Joseph's brethren never came to
see the odiousnes of their sin, until affliction enlightened them, and then
they could say, We have verily sinned against our brother, in that we saw the
anguish of his soul when he besought us and we would not hear him, Genesis 41,
21. Now if once we come to see sin in its proper colors, and to be persuaded
of the nature and danger of it, then we are in the broad way to repentance: and
this will work our hearts not only to a loathing, but to the leaving, and
forsaking of our former evils. For what man, but he that is desperately
careless of his own welfare and happiness will dare to put on a garment
infected with the Plague? What man that is in his right mind will take a snake
into his bosom? Who is so foole-hardy as to pull a Lion by the beard, or take a
mad Dog by the ear? He that wilfully and wittingly lives in sin, does a
great deal more endanger the safety and good of his soul, then any man by the
Plague or any other means does the welfare of his body. Lighten mine eyes
(says David Psalm. 13.3.) that I sleep not in death. Prosperity thickens these
eyes of ours or else does cast such a mist before them, that we cannot see
sin in its colors: yea the worse and more wicked any man is, the less does
he see his evil, the less is he persuaded of the danger of sin. All the
ways of a man are clean in his own eyes, Prove. 16.2. Through Satan's subtilty,
and man's infidelity, it comes to pass that those which commit the grossest
sins, and greatest offenses, imagine that their faults be the smallest: and
those that are plunged into deepest dangers do dream of greatest safety and
security: as many who have their hands deepest in the troubles and
persecutions, yea in the blood of Gods servants, will think that they do God
best service, Ioh. 16.2. Of this mind was S. Paul all the the while he
breathed out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, Acts
9* 1. Therefore least such as belong to God should sleep in death by their
blindness, flying from repentance, shunning reformation, and running into
destruction, the Lord in great love opens their eyes by affliction, as he did
the eyes of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.31. At the end of those days I
Nebuchadnezzar lift up mine eyes unto heaven, and mine understanding was
restored unto me: being a blind beast before afflictions came.



example, for prevention, and not for punishment. The Lord will have the truth
and strength of thy grace tried: God will have thee to be a pattern unto
others of obedience, and patience; or else by this affliction (as has been
said) he intends to prevent some sin which (if thou were let alone) thou
would fall into.

Affliction makes us to fear God.
Thirdly, it must needs be, that God by afflicting of us intends the
bettering of us; because by afflictions he works our hearts to a holy fear
of his Majesty. The judgments of the Lord make the very wicked often to
tremble, as it is evident in diverse places of the Scripture. Egypt shall be
like unto a woman, for it shall be afraid and fear because of the moving hand
of the Lord of hosts, which he shakes over it. Esaias 19.16. The shaking of
Gods rod makes many often to tremble, That all Israel may hear and fear, and do
no more any such wickedness among you, Deutr. 13.11. God whips his own to keep
them in awe, that the fear of God may ever be in our hearts; not such a fear
as is in the wicked, who dread him only because of his power, and will, to
punish them for sin, and is therefore called a servile, or slavish fear,
because it has not the love of God, or the hatred of sin annexed unto it:
but a holy, and a pious fear of God; such a fear as is joined with the hatred
of evil. Prove. 8.13. and so causes an eschewing of evil, as it is said of
Job, he was one that feared God, and eschewed evil, Job 1.1. This is that
fear the Lord wishes might take up the hearts of his people, Deuteronomy. 5.29. Oh
that there were such an heart in them, to fear me, and to keep all
commandments always. Which fear the Lord increases in the hearts of his
children by afflicting them, 1. Sam. 12.18. The Lord sent the Israelites
thunder and rain in harvest, and the people feared the Lord.

Prosperity, and immunity from affliction, makes many people secure, careless
fearelesse. Because they have no changes, therefore they fear not God. Psalm.
55.19. Implying by these words, that the want of the fear of God grows from
the want of affliction* So Psalm. 73. the prosperity of the wicked is made the
ground of their iniquity, There are no bands in their death, they are lusty,
and strong, They are not in trouble as other men, neither plagued with other
men. Therefore pride is as a chain unto them, They are licentious, they speak
wickedly, they talk presumptuously, etc. These are the wicked, who although
they be long spared, shall in the end be destroyed, perish, and horribly
consumed, because they did not choose the fear of the Lord. Prove. 1.29. If then
affliction is the means of working this fear in us, it must needs be, that God
in-intendeth our great good, by afflicting of us, for no good thing shall be
wanting to those that fear him, Psalm. 34.9. The fear of God may be compared
unto the needle, which makes way for the thread, and draws it after it; even so
the fear of the Lord makes way for much good, and as it were draws it along
withal.

The fear of Gods is very profitable.
First, it is a means of our humiliation, it will take down our high thoughts,
and abate, and abase our lofty spirits. Jacobs fear of Esau, made him to bow
seven times unto his brother Esau. High-mindednesse and fear are opposite one
to the other, hence Paul exhorts us, Romans 11.20. Be not high-minded, but
fear.

Secondly, the fear of God is, as a bridle unto our unruly wills, and as a
curb unto our disordered affections, to repress sin. This kept the
mid-wives from murdering the infants of the Hebrew women, Exodus 1.21. This kept
Joseph from yielding to the lust of his adulterous Mistress, How can I do this
great wickedness, and so sin against God? Genes. 39.9.

Thirdly, the fear of the Lord will make us courageous in Gods cause; so as
we shall not fear the face of man. Say not a confederacy, neither fear you
their fear, nor be afraid of them, sanctify the Lord of hosts, and let him be
your fear, and your dread, Esa. 8.12, 13. There be amongst us too many
face-fearers, who had rather sin against the Lord, then displease sinful
men; these I may compare unto little children, which are afraid often times to
touch toys, and bables, yet will be bold to put their finger into the fire.
But those that fear man more, or before the Lord, (...) look to meet with the
Judgment of God, Jere. 1.17. Therefore let us fear the Lord, and this will
swallow up all needless fear of men, as Aarons rod devoured the rod of the
inchanters; for the fear of the Lord procures a good conscience, and where a
good conscience is, there is holy courage and boldness, the righteous are bold
as a Lion. Prove. 28.1.

Fourthly, the fear of God, keeps the heart and conscience waking and
watchful; it leaves no place for security. Hence the Apostle exhorts the
Philipians, to work out their salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12.
Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice in trembllng, Psalm. 2.11. He that fears
the Lord, considers that Gods eyes do always behold him, that whatsoever he
goes about, though in secret or in darkness, yet all things are open, and
manifest unto the Lord; Yea that he understands the thoughts and secrets of
every heart, Psalm. 139.2. and that nothing is hid from him. The consideration
whereof will make us to watch over our very thoughts, seeing we are liable to
Gods Judgments, for evil thoughts, as well as for evil words and works,
Romans 2.16.

Fifthly and lastly, the fear of God, will make us happy: for wonderful are
the benefits, both temporal and spiritual, which the fear of God procures
to us and ours. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, his generation shall
be blessed, riches and treasure shall be in his house, Psalm. 112.1, 2, 3. Such
as fear the Lord, have a promise of great prosperity, Deuteronomy. 5.29. How great is
thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee, Psalm. 31.19.
Not only temporal good things, but spiritual also, for the secrets of the
Lord are with them that fear him, Psalm. 25.14. Yea the Angels of the Lord do
pitch, and tent about those that fear him, Psalm. 34.7. Great are the
privileges of such as fear God, which in this life they partake of, but the
privileges and mercies of another life, are so great, as we are no way able
to conceive of them. May we not then safely conclude, That the end of Gods
afflicting of us, is the bettering of us? When as by affliction he brings us
to a through knowledge, and understanding of our selves: to judge aright of the
nature of sin, and so to come to abhor, and detest it, and last of all, by
affliction we are brought to fear the Lord. Not that afflictions of
themselves do work this good in any, for they only make the wound, they do not
heal: they only cast us down, but cannot raise us up again: they are as a
Schoolmaster, to bring us unto Christ, they bring not Christ into the heart of
a sinner. It prepares the heart, and makes a way for good, it is only the
spirit of God, working with the Word, and helping us to apply the same aright
unto our selves, which is the efficient cause of all good that betideth us: yet
because the Lord does work good by affliction, that thing is figuratively
applied unto affliction, which is the proper work of Gods Spirit in the hearts
of his children.

We do not make satisfaction by our afflictions.
Is it so that the chief end of the Lords afflicting of us, is the bettering
of us? Then are the Romanists grossly mistaken, who say that God has another
end in correcting of us, and that is (say the Papists) for the punishment of
our sins, and the satisfying of Gods Justice. All sin does deserve a double
punishment, both temporal and eternal. This latter (say they) Christ has
undergone for all his members, but the former, the temporal punishment lies
upon our necks, and must be undergone by us, as a satisfaction to be made (of
our parts) to the Justice of God. And for proof hereof, they allege the
example of David, who howsoever he was received into mercy, upon his
humiliation, and contrition, and so freed from eternal punishment; yet was he
not quit of that satisfaction, which he was in his own person to make unto God
for his offenses; therefore did he (say they) endure temporal punishments. A
foul and a gross error, and that which does not only derogate from the
all-sufficiencie of Christ his merit and satisfaction, for with one offering
has he consecrated for ever them that are sanctified, Hebrews 10.24. But it
also takes much from the goodness of God; his love and mercy is wonderfully
clouded and eclipsed by their doctrine. For whereas the Lord tells us, that
he does afflict us in great love, for the bettering of us, for the beating of
sin down in us, and driving it away from us, they say that God corrects us
for the punishment of sin in us, and the satisfying of his justice.

Away therefore, with their blasphemous doctrine, and believe we the Word of
truth, and be we assured that our afflictions are rather furtherances of
sanctification, then any helps or means of satisfaction: administered unto us,
rather as medicines, and preservatives to help us, then as swords to wound, or
hurt us. For the Lord in afflicting of us, seeks us, not himself alone, and
rather the bettering of us, then the satisfying of his own mind, for he goes
unwillingly to punish, Lam. 3.33. And yet how ready are we to turn the truth
of God into a lie? we are ready to think that the Lord does punish us, to ease
his mind of us, and that we suffer to satisfy. Truth it is that the Lord does
punish the wicked his enemies to ease himself, and to be avenged of them, Esaias
1.24. But he has other ends (as we have heard) in afflicting his children;
therefore we may not say, by our temporal punishments we are any way able
fully to satisfy the justice of God for one sin. If this debt had not been
discharged by Christ our surety, we should be cast into prison, we should
perish everlastingly.

Our stubbornness provokes God to afflict us.
Therefore hold we this as an undoubted truth, that God may forgive us our
sins, yet here punish our persons; not to exact any satisfaction of us, as if
Christ his satisfaction were insufficient, and we reconciled unto God by
halves;but to make us better for time to come.

Secondly, if the end of Gods correcting us be the bettering of us, we may
take notice of our perverse and crooked nature and temper, with whom gentle and
fair means (that is, the Word of God, and benefits bestowed upon us) cannot
prevail, but that the Lord must be forced to take this tart, and unpleasing
course with us (namely correcting us) for our amendment. The Lord (as he
proclames himself) is a father of mercies, slow to anger, and of great
patience, long in his long-suffering, one that delights not in our griefs, but
is rather grieved for our miseries, Judges 10.16. and his bowels are troubled
for us, Jeremie, 31.20.

their sorrow, and misery, as the Scripture tells us, why does he not
(which if it please him he might) spare himself that labor, and us those
pains he puts us unto?

Would thou not tell him: O child, I may not let thee alone, for then thou will be lame for ever, yet still thy child renews his cries, good father, if
you love me let me alone. Would thou not reply again, O child because I
love thee, I cannot let she alone, for then thou were spoiled for ever. Even
thus deals the Lord with us, it is for our good, and in love that he does
any way chasten us, this course he must take with us, unless he should
suffer us to perish, which thing his love will not give him leave to do. He
smites us with the rod, that we die not, and that our souls may be delivered
from hell, Proverbes 23.13.14.

Oh the wickedness of our hearts, and the rebellion of our wills, that we must
be thus hampered, and handled before we can be bettered. We may see and
confess (if we were not blind and hardened) that corruption is deeply settled
in us, in that such sharp physic, such bitter, and unpleasing potions must be
administered (and that again and again) unto us, before we can be cleansed from
that filthiness of the flesh and spirit, which is innated and settled in us.

Amend by little, else greater affliction will come.
In the third place, we are to be admonished from hence to profit by those
light, and gentle afflictions wherewith it shall please the Lord to exercise
us. For if little ones will not serve the turn to reclaim us, greater shall
bruise if not break us. If we shall dare to walk stubbornly against the Lord,
Then will he walk stubbornly againist us, and he will also chastise us seven
times more accordng to our sins, Lev. 26.28. If lighter afflictions will not
serve the turn greater shall. The Lord came to Ephraim first like a moth Hos.
5.18. you know that a moth though it be a noxious and hurtful creature, yet
(if it be looked unto betimes) the harm is little which it does, and the
breach, or hole which it makes, may easily be darned up again. Thus dealt the
Lord at first with Ephraim; he did favorably and gently afflict them: but this
salve was not strong enough, to take down their proud flesh, yet would not
Ephraim be healed, nor cured of her wound. Therefore says the Lord, I will be
unto Ephraim as a Lion. Hos. 5.13, 14 A Lion we know rents and tears where he
comes; so the Lord (when gentle means will not serve the turn) comes like a
Lion, with tearing and devouring judgments God (when he see good to exercise
his power) will make the proudest Pharaoh, the stoutest sinner to stoop, and
yield, else he will not spare to follow them, with one judgment, upon the neck
of another. All these curses shall come upon thee, and shall pursue thee, and
overtak^ thee till thou be destroyed, Deu. 28.45. Consider what is spoken by
the Prophet Nahum 1.9. What do ye imagine against the Lord? he will make an
utter destruction; affliction shall not rise up the second time. The Lord
tarrieth long before he comes to smite his enemies: he forbeareth much: but
when his patience is abused, then he (often times) gives a deady blow: The spirit
of the Lord did a long time strive with man in the days of Noah, but when
their sins began to be multiplied against the patience, and long suffering
of the Lord, When the Lord savv that the wickedness of man was great in the
earth, and that all the imagination of the thoughts of his heart, were only
evil continually Gens. 6.5. Then the Lord could bear with them no longer,
then the Lord comes with his sweeping judgment, destroying from the earth, the
man whom he had created, from man to beast, to the creeping thing, and to the
soul of the heaven, verse. 7. The Lord suffered Sodom and Gomorrah so long that
the cry of their sins did ring up to heaven; but at length the Lord was even
with them, and paid them home for all their wickedness; destroying them with
fire and brimston from heaven. Many other such like examples might be brought
to show how the Lord comes out against sinners at last, with sweeping, and
devouring judgments, if they will not take warning by lesser ones. The history
of the Jews (a people sometime as dear unto God, as the apple of his eye, and
as near unto him as the signet on his right hand) does plainly teach us, how
severely the Lord at last deals with stiff, obstinate, and impenitent
sinners. The favors, the benefits which God bestowed upon them, the privileges
which they enjoyed were above all the nations of the world; yet for all this
did they (above all other people) provoke the Lord to anger against them. They
mocked the messenger, of God, they despised his Word, and misused his Prophets
until the wrath of the Lord rose against them, and there was no remedy, 2.
Chron. 16.26. They did not only kill the Prophets and stone those that were
sent unto them, but they crucified the Lord of life Acts 3.15. Yea and
preferred a murderer before him; provoking the Lord so long, as he could
endure them no more; and therefore he sends against them Titus the son of
Vespatian the Roman Emperor, who besiged and sacked the City of Jerusalem, and
made such havoc of the people, as is most lamentable to hear of. It is
reported that they were besiged so long as many thousands of them perished
through the famine, and many of them isuing forth in hope either to escape, or
to find mercy with their enemies, were most cruelly hanged upon crosses and
gibbets set up before their walls: 500. of them sometimes hanged in one day; so
long until there was no more space left unto them for execution. The number of
dead carcases carried out of the City, for want of burial, to be cast into
the ditches (if we will credit histories) was numberless; for at one of their
gates, the keeper thereof took the the tale of one hundred and fifty thousand
dead bodies. Nay, through the exttemity of famine, they were driven to eat
their old shoes, the dung of their stables, and the fruit of their own loins.
And after all this, thousands of them murdered by the sword, and many more
thousands carried into captivity, to be a spectacle to all succeeding ages of
Gods indignation, and wrath against them. And these things are recorded for our
good, that we may not dare to stand it our against the Lord, but speedily to
amend upon the first warning, and blow given us; else the Lord will not give
over, but come with seven times more, and greater judgemenes against us. Note.
If we belong unto the Lord, he will never leave afflicting, till we cease
provoking him. If we be beloved of God, he will still follow us with
correction, till we fall to unfeigned and sound humiliation and repentance. For
we shall never be able to overcome the Lord, and make him give over by our
stubbornness, and resisting his blow, but by falling down, and yielding unto
him. The sturdy oak is rent and torn in pieces by the tempest, when poor and
weak reeds stand still, by yielding and bowing. There is no standing out
against the Lord; no resisting by force of arms; what is a silly sheep to
grapple with a Lion? The sooner we yield, and turn from our evil ways; the
readier will the Lord be to repent him of that evil which otherwise he will
surely bring upon us. Thou that by the Word of God, and by loving, and gentle
correction can not be persuaded to leave thy sin, must know that (if thou
belongest to God) he will never leave following of thee with one affliction
upon the neck of another, until he has his will of thee. What may we then
think of those that are little, or nothing at all amended and bettered by any
judgments that have befallen them? assuredly, if they be such as belong to the
Lord, he is preparing of sharper Physic for them; if they be none of his, it
may be he will give them over to their own hearts lust, and reserve them unto
those eternal, and unavoydable torments of the second death.

Add not affliction to the afflicted, but pity them.
Fourthly, is it so, does God correct his children for their great good? let us
then beware of doing them hurt by persecuting those whom the Lord does smite,
lest we add afflict on unto the afflicted; and this we do, when we shall
either uncharitably censure, or deride and scoff at those that are afflicted,
or else in our minds contemn, and scorn them, because it pleases the Lord in
love (for their great good) to humble them. Such is the unmercifulness, and
cruelty of many, that they are ready to set their feet upon the necks of those
whom the Lord has cast down. Indeed it is an easy thing to go over, where the
style is low; he that is cast down to the ground, may easily be crowed over;
as the Chaldeans would make themselves merry with the poor captived Jews,
They that led us away captive, required of us songs, and mirth when we had
hanged up our harps. Psalm. 127.3. To require a song from those, whose cheeks
were bedewed with tears, and whose heart within them was as heavy as lead,
yea even ready to break with sighs, and sobs, was a thing unreasonable, even
adding of sorrow to their misery. Whereupon says the Lord unto those
Babylonians, Esaias 47.9. I was wroth with my people, I have polluted mine
inheritance, and given them into thine hand, thou did show them no mercy, but
thou did lay thy very heavy yoke upon the ancient, therefore now shall
destruction come upon thee. Though God does afflict his children for their
good, yet he will not give their enemies leave to trample them underneath
their feet, or unmercifully to triumph, and insult over them, because he has
brought them under. When Jobs miserable comforters began to crow over him, and
to censure him for his great afflictions, Job tells them, that he that is in
misery, ought to be comforted of his neighbor, but men have forsaken the
fear of God, Job. 9.14. What do thou know to the contrary, but that the Lord
has brought thy neighbor into misery, to be the object of thy mercy? that
thou should exercise thy charity upon him, releeve and comfort him; which
if thou do not, it is an argument that thou want the true fear of the
Lord, for the Lord has commanded us to relieve the oppressed, Esa. 1.17. It is
a service most acceptable unto God, to relieve and refresh our brethren when
they are in any trouble, or distress, and such a service as seldom or never
goes without a blessing. Blessed is he that considers the poor, the Lord
will deliver him in the time of trouble. Psalm. 41.1.

Therefore as thou desire that God should bless thee, be thou as willing, as
thou art able to succor and comfort those that are in adversity. If thou
want outward means of helping and relieving of them, let them have a word of
comfort from thee to support them; advise, counsel and direct them as thou art
able: if not, yet pity them, pray for them, that God would sanctify their
crosses, give them faith and patience to bear their crosses, and to give them
(in good time) a good issue out of them: and in the mean time, do thou
entertain a charitable opinion of them, do not say, or think that they are
greater sinners then others, because (peradventure) their afflictions and
crosses are greater, but that the Lord is pleased to prove them more then
others, for their greater good. This wise judging, and merciful considering of
the poor afflicted, even when some heavy and strange calamities do befall
them, is a thing which God much respects, yea, and will certainly recompense
with some blessing or other. But if thou be censorious, or regardlesse of
others woe, and misery, it is a sign that thou want bowels of pity, and
compassion, thou want true charity; for this would teach thee to remember
them that are in affliction, as if ye were also afflicted in the body. Hebr.
13.3.

Thus it is with Christ the head of the body, he is touched and affected with
all their afflictions, he has a feeling of every evil that befalls them, as
if it did befall himself. They may be brought unto a low ebb, and pitiful
plight by reason of afflictions, yet does not Christ esteem them the worse,
neither is he then ashamed to call them, and take them for his brethren; yea
he esteems of poor afflicted Christians, as a part of himself; though they
be vile and contemptible in the e^es of the world, yet are they honorable and
precious in his sight; though they be hated of the world, yet are they beloved
of him. Thus should it be with all true and sound members of the body of
Christ: we must have a fellow-feeling of the afflictions of our brethren: to
weep with them that weep, and to be of like affection one toward another, Romans
12.15, 16. So full of pity and charity was Paul, that he was touched with the
misery of all his brethren. Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended,
and I burn not? 2. Cor. 11.26. Nehemiah was a man in favor, and credit with
King Artaxerxes, he enjoyed the pleasures of the Court, and felt no want, yet
when he understood of the affliction of his brethren, and in what contempt, and
misery the people of God were; it is said, that he fell down and wept, and
mourned certain days. Nehe. 1.4.

The Prophet Jeremiah wished that his head were full of water, and his eyes a
fountain of tears, that he might weep day and night, for the miseries of the
people, Jerem. 9.1. But alas! how few are they that do lay to heart the
afflictions of their neighbors? They sing to the sound of the violl, they drink
wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointment, but no man is
sorry for the afflictions of Joseph, Amos, 9.5, 6. Thus too many Christians
show themselves to be Stoics, or rather stocks, without any charitable
affection, without any bowels of compassion. Many will be kind unto their
friends, all the while they are able to requite their love with kindness
again, but in the day of adversity (as was touched before) they are ready to
turn their backs upon their neighbors: whereas a true friend loves it all
times, and a brother is borne for adversity, Pro. 17.17. These are
hollow-hearted, and false friends, who like many a dog, will fawn upon a man,
and follow him all the while he has something to give him, but when all is
gone, he is gone also. So that it is true, which the Wise man speaks, Wealth
makes many friends, but the poor is separated from his neighbor, Prove, 16.4.
Take we heed therefore, that we be not so taken up with our own fullness, and
prosperity, that we forget the wants and miseries of others, so as there is
left no place in our hearts to grieve for them: for if we be without
compassion, God will one day smite these incompassionate hearts of ours, that
we shall stand in need of, and be glad to have pity from others, but it
shall be denied us. For there shall be judgment merciless, to him that
shows no mercy, Jam. 2.13. Therefore let us bear one another burden, and
so fulfill the law of Christ, Gal. 6.2. Thou helpest to bear thy neighbors
burden, when thou labourest to comfort him in the time of affliction; for it
is a great ease and comfort unto him, that is in any distress to have others
to condole with him* to have companions of our sorrow, to have those that
fellow-feele with us, cannot but be a comfort to any that are in misery.

Little do you think what refreshing (if not ease) it is to one in affliction,
to hear, or see another to pity his case: to weep with those that weep, and
mourn with those that mourn, does excedingly abate, though not remove and take
away the smart of their affliction. We shall be the more ready and willing to
put forth our hand of comfort, to lift our neighbor out of the ditch, if we
consider how soon his case may be ours, and our selves (before it be long) may
stand in as much need of pity and comfort as our neighbor now does. What
measure you meat, it shall be measured to you again. Matt. 7.2. Therefore
deny not unto the afflicted any comfort which thou art able to afford him. But
above all, beware (as I said before) of insulting over those that are
afflicted. This was the sin of the Edomites, which the Lord reproves, and
threatens by the Prophet Obadiah, Thou should not have rejoiced over the
children of Judah, in the day of their destruction, neither should thou have
spoken proudly in the day of their affliction. As thou have done, it shall be
done to thee, thy reward shall return upon thine head. Obadiah, verse. 15. The
Lord will not have any to solace themselves with others sorrow; nor make
themselves merry at others misery; though he were our enemy. Be not thou
glad when thine enemy falls, and let not thine heart rejoice when he
stumbleth, least the Lord see it, and it displeases him, and he turn his
wrath from him, toward thee, Prove. 24.17, 18. But rather pity those that are
afflicted, and then no doubt, but the Lord will stir up the hearts of others
to extend mercy, and bowels of compassion toward thee, when thou art in
affliction. And if there be no man to pity thee here, the Lord himself will
most certainly remember and recompense thy kindness hereafter, in that day,
wherein he will reward every one according to his works, and will say unto
the merciful, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared
for you from the foundation of the World; for I was an hungry and ye gave me
meat; I thirsted, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye lodged me; I
was naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in
prison, and ye came unto me; for as much as we have done these things to the
least believer (yea, if we do them to a bad liver for Christ's sake, we have
done them unto Christ, who will abundantly recompense us.

Live by faith in affliction.
Fifthly, is this the end of God afflicting of us, that he may better us? Then
let faith persuade thy heart, and wait in hope of a blessed and happy issue,
and end of thy affliction. Though thou have not wisdom enough to make good
use of thy chastisments, yet thy God who is perfect wisdom will make good his
promise, and perfect his own handy-wotke, so as (if thou believe) thou shall
find thy self one day much bettered by thy affliction. If thou believe, thou will patiently wait for the fulfilling of Gods promise, a believing patient had
rather be held to a long and continual course of physic in hope of future
health, then to be in danger of his life, by interrupting his course of
Physic. And for as much as our understandings are exceedingly blinded through
ignorance and self love, and much darkened with fleshly lusts (as you shall see
a looking glass to be sometime covered with dust) that we can neither see what
is amiss in our selves, nor yet amend on the suden what we find amiss in us, we
had need to exercise our faith in prayer and in patience to wait for the
accomplishing of that good the Lord intends us by afflicting us. For as God
prescribes the physic, so he must cause it to work, and bless it unto us: we
of our selves are like children who being taken in some fault and feeling the
smart of the rod, are ready to promise amendment, but presently forget both the
fault, the punishment, and our promise. Faith will teach us, not only to beg
grace from God to amend our lives, but also help and strength from him to walk
more closly with him. For as no force of the hammer can work the Iron unto any
form unless it be softened by the fire, even so afflictions will beat in vain
upon us, until God by his spirit molifie, and soften these hard hearts of ours,
and teach us to profit by our afflictions.

And although thou do not presently find or feel that good to be wrought in
thee which the Lord intends, yet live by faith, and wait with patience, and
in the end thou shall confess, that God has showed thee his love, made good
his promise; and much bettered thee by afflicting thee.

Be thankful for affliction.
Lastly, if the end of Gods afflicting of us be the bettering of us; be we
then both thankful to the Lord for our afflictions and joyful in them.
Suppose thou were fallen into some dangerous pit, or quagmyre in danger of
perishing, would thou not be glad to see any coming near to help thee?
would not be thankful to that person that should be a means of thy
deliverance, though it were by putting some hook into thy flesh which may for
the present hurt, and wound thee? Sin is a dangerous pit, and gulf, wherein
many souls do perish; When the Lord afflicts thee he does cast a cord unto
thee to lay hold of, or it may be he strikes some hook into thy flesh, some
sore affliction, by which he desires to pull thee out of thy sin; have thou
not then great cause of thanks, and rejoicing offered unto thee when the Lord
afflicts thee? If we had wisdom and understanding to consider aright of
Gods goodness and love toward us, there would be more thanks for, and
cheerfulness in affliction, and less repining and mourning amongst us, then
there is. If we were not poisoned with infidelity and distrust, it could not
be, but we should be more joyful in afflictions, and thankful for them, then
we many times seem to be. Some (when the hand of God is upon them) are like
to a man cast into a deep lethergie, which is a drousie, and forgetful
sickness, when the use of memory and reason is almost, or altogether taken
from us; so they are like stocks, and stones, insensible of their afflictions,
they have neither hearts, nor eyes to consider of, or see their sins which
have pulled this judgment upon them, nor yet the end which God aims at in
smiting them. And there be other some of a contrary temper, and these are like
to a man in a frenzy; he rages, and storms, if not blasphems the hand of
God upon him, kicking, and spurning against the Lord, unwilling to bear that
burden the Lord is willing should lie upon him: of both these sorts of people
the Prophet Jeremiah speaks, Thou have consumed them, but they have refused
to receive correction, they have made their faces harder then a stone, and have
refused to return, Jerem. 5.3. They were unwilling either to bear their
correction, or to be bettered by it. But let it not be so with any that love
the Lord, or their own good: let both these extremities be avoided of us, and
let us exercise the golden mean, to be sensible of the hand of God, and to be
cheerful and thankful for our affliction, seeing (as has been proved) so
much good comes unto us by them.



God they may have a good issue, and work together for the best to those that
love God: yet may we not lawfully pray for such evils to light upon our
selves or others, upon presumption of Gods goodness to turn them to the best.

The disasters, and miserable calamities which for many years together have
rent and torn the Church, have stirred us up to seek, and cry mightily unto ^he
Lord, and to be humbled with fasting before him; may we therefore pray that
the rod of God may still lie upon the backs of his people, that ruins and the
breaches of Sion may not be repaired? Surely no: for we are to pray for the
peace of Jerusalem, That peace may be within her walls, and prosperity within
her palaces. Psalm. 122.6, 7.

Death in it self is an evil thing, for it is the wages of sin. Romans 6.23.
Yet by the infinite power and mercy of God, who delights to bring good out of
evil, it is made the period of all our labors, and an entrance into Gods own
presence, may we therefore (being wearle of our lives) desire death sooner then
the Lord will? Albeit afflictions, when the Lord sends them unto us, shall
bring good unto his children, yet ought we not either to pray for them, or
wilfully to cast and plunge our selves into them. Therefore Agar prays unto
the Lord, Give me not poverty nor riches; feed me with food convenient for me,
Prove. 30.8.

We are to pray for such a condition in which the Lord sees we shall be best
able to honor and glorify him, and procure most good to our selves and others.
Now whether this will be by prosperity, or adversity, we must leave it to
the wisdom of the Lord, who knows better then our selves what is expedient
and needful for us.



are to be willing, nay desirous that the Lord would not take off his plaster,
until the sore be healed, lest it ranckle, and grow worse, and so we cause
the Lord to apply some sharper medicine, to lay upon us some greater
affliction. Therefore in thine affliction, call upon the Lord, and say, Smite
Lord, correct me still, until thou have done me good by thy rod, let me have
this affliction sanctified, else let me not be eased; let it not be taken off
me. Are there not many delivered often times out of sickness, for whom it had
been better in respect of their souls, they had still continued upon their
sick bed? The like may be said of many other kind of afflictions, and that
it had been better for some they had never come out of them.

Therefore when we are in affliction, let us not pray for freedom, and
deliverance, but conditionally, if it be the will of God to enlarge us, and if
he sees that deliverance will be better for us. Otherwise, to desire the Lord
to keep us still under, and to give us patience and faith to bear his rod, and
to profit by it. But if any shall unwillingly bear the Lords yoke, using all
means he can to cast it off, and to pull his head out of the collar, this
shows, that such a person does not desire that the Lord should do him good,
neither does he acknowledge the Lords wisdom and righteousness, but seems
to tell the Lord what he thinks were better for him. And let him know, that
the Lord will either keep him in affliction longer, then otherwise he would,
or else, that this affliction shall be but a forerunner of some greater
judgment. Therefore let us not vex, or disquiet our selves in our
afflictions, and so make them more grievous unto us then the Lord would have
them. Lee us cast our selves upon the Lord, and resolve to abide his pleasure;
and assure we our selves, that the longer we are under his hand, the more
good he will do us, Note.
and the better able we shall be to bear his hand. You shall hear a new cart
in the street which will squeak and make a noise, if the least load that can
be, lie upon it, whereas an old seasoned cart will go under a great weight, and
make no noise; even so many a Christian (not used to bear affliction) will
squeak, and cry out upon every little trouble, whereas he that has been
seasoned long, and exercised with afflictions, undergoes many great and
grievous ones cheerfully, and contentedly. Were thou never in affliction untiil
now? then look up to the promises of God, acquaint thy self with them, and
they will make thee cheerful and thankful for thy affliction. Dan. 3.17.
It is my comfort in my trouble, for thy promise has quickened me, Psalm.
119.50. Say as Sydrac, Meshac and Abednego said, our God whom we serve is able
to deliver us, and he will deliver us. Have thou been formerly afflicted, and
delivered, let former deliverances confirm and strengthen thy faith in this
present, or future afflictions, as it did Paul, we should not trust in our
selves, but in God, Who delivered us from so great a death, in whom we trust
that yet hereafter he will deliver us, 2. Cor. 1.10. In the mean time resolve
to tarry the Lords leisure, consider not what now thou feel, but what good
hereafter thou art like to find by thine afflictions. Bless God that he will
take this course with thee, as Job said, What is man, that thou do magnify
him, and thou set thine heart upon him, And do visit him every morning,
and triest him every moment? We would take it as a great grace and honor, if
the King should every day send to know how we do: but if he should daily come
in person to visit us, how highly should we think our selves honored? It is
thy case that art afflicted. The King of Kings has sent his servant, nay comes
with his servant to visit thee, when he sends affliction unto thee. Assure
thy self he minds thee, nay, sets his heart upon thee: if he regarded not thy
good and welfare, he would suffer thee to take thy swinge in sin; but because
he loves thee he corrects thee. It is a truth, the Lord has spoken it; As
many as I love, I rebuke and chasten; be zealous therefore and amend. So be it.

FINIS.

