An Astrologicall Addition, or supplement to be annexed to the late Discourse
upon the great Conjunction of Saturn, and Jupiter.

Wherein are particularly declared certain especial points before omitted, as
well touching the elevation of one Plannet above another, with their several
significations: as touching Oeconomical and household provision: with some other
Judicials, no less profitable.

Made and written this last March, by John Haruey* Student in Physic.

Whereunto is adjoined his translation of the learned work, of Hermes
Trismegistus, entitled, I^tromathematica: A book of especial great use for
all Students in Astrology, and Phisike.

LONDON Imprinted by Richard Watkins. 1583.

Angliae diurnum, nocturnumque Votum* Ioannis Harueij Hexasticho breuiter
expressum.
ELisabeta diu viuat: sic Anglica terrae
Foelix, infoelix si moriatur erit.
O quantum fas est mortali morte carere,
Tantum immortalis viuat Eliza pre^or.
Viuat Io, and regnet, vigeatque, ac floreat vsque
Vsque vt ter foelix Anglia duret: Amen.
Apostrophe ad operis Patronum: altero Auctoris Hexasticho succinct^
comprehensa.
Quin tu Maede, aequique, bonique bone, aequeque I^dex,
Sic affecti animi consule sensa boni.
Vatis opus perago; Astrologamque retexo Figur^^.
Sed nullum illicitae molior Artis opus.
In communem vsum nonnulla arcana reuel^,
Sed nostra Vranie non nimis alta sapit.
Ad diem XXI. Martij* sola e Musis Vranie cum Erato, benignius aspirante.

To the Right worshipful Master Justice Meade, returning from his Honorable
circuit, JOHN HARVEY wishes long health, and continual increase of all
prosperity.
MAy it please you Right worshipful Sir, after some respite from so great
business, as your Honorable circuit carries with it, to accept favorably of
the affectionate mind of a young scholar, I will presume in stead of the best
well-come-home, that my poor study can presently afoord, to present your good
woorship with a brief Astrologicall exercise, which I lately undertook upon
this occasion. Having sundry times perused the Astrologicall discourse touching
the great Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, published the last January by my
brother Richard, and therein noting by the way some want of certain
necessary (...) profitable Judicials, which seemed con^^nient to be added for
the more expres and particular discussing of some points* generally, and that
diligently too, by him considered, but not so narrowly, and precisely examined,
as they might have been, (which was not my opinion only, but the judgment of
some his learned welwillers, and great commenders otherwise) I resolved in the
end to ease him of that labor, knowing himself to be otherwise busied upon
more special and necessary occasion. Which I was the more willing to
enterprise, for these four causes. First, to satisfy the demands and desires
of those his learned friends: then, to stop the mouths of his envious and
carping enemies: thirdly, to benefit such of our Country generally, as by
providence are desirous to work their own commodity and safety: and last of
all, to practice my self particularly in such an exercise, as was so
profitable for an University man, so convenient for a Student in Philosophy,
and the Mathematics, and finally, so agreeable to that study and profession,
whereunto partly by my natural disposition I was inclyned, and partly upon
farther advise of my friends, and some private consultation of mine own, I
had wholly betaken, and as it were betroathed my self. Besides which causes,
the very worthiness and dignity of the Art it self, not only in respect of
the high and heavenly matter, or object thereof, according to the divine verses
of Doctor Antony Myzaldus.

Semine caelesti satamens, caelestia quaerit
Semina. And so forth;
But also, even for the other three Logike causes, the efficient, the form,
and the end or final cause; might as well commend this exercise unto me, as it
has done many the like, nay many for all excellency both of quality and
quantity, far unlike unto other manner of men, then I either presently am,
or am ever like to be. For the first author and principal efficient, what
enemy to Astrology can deny, but God him self, posuit duo magna luminaria,
and stellas in firmamento caeli, as Moses writes in the beginning of Genesis:
Why? vt diuiderent diem, ac noctem, and essent in signa, and tempora, and dies,
and annos. In quae signa? nimirum in signa naturalium euentuum, vt futurae
pestilentiae, belli, and pacis, penuriae, and abundantiae, caeterorumque
similium physicorum effectuum, as a learned writer very well in my simple
judgment expounds that place of Moses. Besides, who knows not that all
good gifts, and all good arts descend from above, and had their original
from the father of light? Whereupon Melancthon in his preface to Purbachius,
his Astrologicae Theoricae, not only concludes generally of all liberal
Arts, Cum Arts Dei munus sint, non defuturus est Deus his, qui ipsius dona
tuentur, and conseruare student: with this comfortable addition: Erunt and
fatae ipsa aliquando Artibus aequiora: but also particularly inueigheth
against all such Epicures, and contemners, as set them selves against the most
heavenly and divine knowledge of Astrology. In which Inuectiue, he is so
earnestly bent against them, that he breaks forth into these vehement
speeches. Epicureos illos, qui neque pulcherrimos motus caelestium corporum
admirantur, neque cognitionem eorum vtilem esse contendunt, ne hominum quidem
appellatione dignos esse iudico. His reason is. Etenim non solum bellum gerunt
cum humana natura, quae praecipue ad has diuinas res aspiciendas condita est,
sed etiam (...) sunt. Voluit enim Deus horum mirabilium Cursuum, ac caelestium
virium notitiam, ducem nobis esse ad diuinitatis cognitionem. And again
shortly after he adds: Haec si quis arroganter conteninit, naturae suae
immanitatem prodit, non aliter atque Cyclops apud Homerum, qui negat se vllos
vereri Deos. So that Melancthon, is not afraid to condemn them even for
Epicures, and Atheistes, that condemn this most goodly and godly Science. And
as for our secundarie Authors and founders, what two more famous Princes
amongst the ancient Egyptians, and Romans, then Hermes Trismegistus, and
Numa Pompilius? Or what two more excellent kings amongst the later Egyptians
and Aragonians, then Ptolomey, and Alphonsus? The rest for brevity I
ouerpasse, saving that I must not omit the poets honorable testimony, as
well of them, as of the forenamed: Faelices animae, quibus haec cognoscere
primum,
Inque domos superas scandere cura fuit.
Credibile est illos pariter vitijsque, iocisque
Altius humanis exeruisse Caput.


And so forward, till at last, he gives them this marvelous commendation,
taken from their marvelous effects: Admouere oculis distantia sydera nostris,
Aetheraque ingenio supposuere suo.


Now if we consider either the internal form of the Art it self, or the
external form of our cheifest Artificers: can it be gainesaide, but the one
is heavenly, like the matter: the other, especially, in the Greek and Latin
toungs, as distinct and Methodicall, as was to be found in any Philosopher, or
Mathematician of the same ages? And now of late Adolphus Scribonius of
Marpurgh in Germany, in his small Tractate, entitled Isagoge Sphaerica, has
somewhat reformed the Artificial manner and order of our more ancient
Astrologers, according to the exact and exquisite rules of Ramus method,
howbeit he does not so far go beyond them in manner, but he comes as far
behind them in matter: as every learned Astrologer must needs confess. Last
of all, touching the end, or final cause of Astrology, he can do very little,
God wot, that is not able to maintain the end thereof to be partly divine,
and common with other Arts, partly humane, and proper unto it self. The
divine or common end, is the glory of God; the humane, or proper end, to do
good in the world, by such predictions, and diuinations, as the principles and
rules of this Art truly delivered, and rightly understood, do afford: first,
in forewarning what evils and mischiefs are like to ensue: and then in
foretelling, what goods and commodities may be reaped by timely provision: for
the better avoiding of the one by prevention, and the more certain enjoying of
the other by forecast: according to those notable verses of the learned Poet:
Illic Astra, polos, caelum, septemque planetas
Consulit Astrologus: terrisque reportat eorum
Concilium, hinc armans illas, firmansque caducae
Contra caelestes Iras, Superumque furorem.
Which final end, together with the other three reasonable, and logike causes,
being reasonably and logikelie considered, I can not see how the worthiness
or dignity of this Art, can any way be impeached, without great indignity
offered thereunto. Upon indifferent examination of which causes, whereby he
principally measures the worthiness or unworthiness of every good or bad thing,
my brother Gabriel, was much the better content, as he has him self
confessed, that both my brother Richard and I should take these pains in
Iudiciarie Astrology, which otherwise he had rather we should have bestowed
upon the more popular and ordinary studies of the right moral and natural
Philosophy, Arithmetike, Geometry, and Cosmographie, with the first
principles, and most necessary precepts of Astronomy, so far as fetting
their grounds from infallible experience, they extend but to the observation
of the place, magnitude, and motion of every star, with their whole number,
as partly by Geometrical mensuration, and partly by Arithmeticall supputation,
both severally and jointly they have been descried, to the altitude or
depression of each of them, whose farnesse and neerenes either unto us, or
amongst them selves, is so exactly determinable by the use of the Astrolabe,
either Quadrant, as Ptolomeis was, or orbicular, as ours now uses to be: to
the description, and determination of times, which avails so much, as well to
the exercise of Husbandry, as to diverse other expedient and necessary uses: to
the situation of places, in declaring the longitude, latitude, and distance of
every place, which is so great an help in Cosmographie, and so specially
needful for direction in Hydographie or Navigations, being otherwise destitute
of all certentie in the midst of so many and huge ieopardies: or finally to
the intimation of any such mere Astronomicall experiments, without mixture of
any Judicials, either Arabian, or other, pretending any prediction of things to
come, or discovery of hidden and secret matters. So that considering the
premises, and thereunto referring that most notable judgment of Melancton,
upon Ptolomeis Magna Syntaxis, where he says: Explodenda est illa Epicurea
Philosophia, quae tollit finales stellarum caussas, and affirmat earum omnes
naturas (...): and si sint finales caussae caeterarum rerum, cur non dicemus
etiam esse pulcherrimorum corporum, and perpetuarum Motuum? Certitudo in motu,
artem opisicis indicat; Ars consilium, ac causam finalem necessario
complectitur: vnde and stellae haud dubie suos habent tum effectus, tum
significationes in elementis, and in ijs, quae inde gignuntur: vt manifesta
experientia, and omnibus saeculis consentiens, testatur congressus siccorum
syderum magnas siccitates, humidorum, humidas tempestates efficere: and so
forth, till he proceeds thus far: At caelestes hae significationes non
modo magnas mutationes tempestatum, sed etiam ciuilium rerum denunciant; vt
ostendunt euentus, qui comitantur Eclypses, and magnas Planetarum
coniunctiones: nec illa signa vllo modo pugnant cum religione, cum Deus ea and
proposuerit, and gubernet. For these (I say) and the like effectual
considerations, my brother Gabriel, being of him self otherwise affected,
has not disliked either of my brother Richards, or of my exercise in this
kind. Whereupon as he at the length was the boulder to dedicate his
Astrologicall Discourse unto my Lord the Bishop of London, who accepted most
favorably and courteously thereof; so am I also the rather encouraged to
direct this my small Treatise following, being a supplement of the said
Discourse, unto your good worship, who I hope will likewise vouchsafe it either
the same, or the like favorable acceptance. Neither durst he then, or I now,
have presumed upon any such dedication unto such personages, but after good
advice and deliberation, as well touching the premises specially, as generally
touching the more ample auouchment of the whole Art, being skilfully handled,
discreetly ordered, and lawfully practiced, as it ought to be: which being more
fully and perswasiblie prosequuted by my brother Richard in his second
Discourse, entreating of February News, and by the way defending both the
right Judicials of Astrology, in genere, and his own particular Judicials
concerning the effects of this great April conjunction, in specie: I hope there
shall not here need any farther Apology either of his fact, or mine:
Considering withal, what good and effectual causes moved us, as well to the
undertaking of the private exercise, as to the aduenturing of the public
Dedication under the names of so grave, and so well reputed personages, for
their calling and wisdom. For my self, I am to add, that not only the right
worshipful estimation and account of your name, and honorable Commonwelth
virtues (which notwithstanding are of so great reputation here in Essex, where
my most abode since Michaesmas last, upon some occasion has been) has caused
me to present this Astrological Treatise, together with my Translation of
Hermes most famous Iatromathematica unto your good worship, but also certain
other respects, no less effectual. If I had been ignorant before, yet since
my late continuance here, I could not but learn how singular account you
make of all good learning, what especial great favor you extend toward the
studious and learned; and lastly, how ready and desirous you are to defend and
maintain both the one and the other, either by private, or public patronage.
Which very affection of yours, so evidently declared by so many actual
significations thereof, might of it self, without farther reason, sufficiently
encourage me unto this dedication. But I cannot forgette my Brother Gabriels
report of the bountiful and courteous entertainment which it pleased you above
three years since to give unto him, and the Oxforde Preacher, his Companion at
that time, being both but strangers unto you. Which entertainment I heard him
both then, and since, much commend, as well for your worshipful and rare
courtesy, extended toward them, partly by familiar discourse upon some
chief points of learning, and partly by manifest declaration of your good
liking, and welwishing otherwise, as for the greatness of the cheer, choice of
the company, manner of welcome, and such like. Which he said could not choose
but proceed of a liberal, and worshipful mind, of the wiser, and learneder
sort: as no doubt it did. Beside this, I have lately heard it credibly reported
here in Walden, that your good worship should like very well, and commend of
my brother Richards Astrologicall Discourse, with farther mention, not only of
my brother Gabriel, to his especial commendation and credit, but even of my
poor self too. All which causes, and reasons concurring, as they do, how
much were I to be blamed, if I should make any other choice for this my first
Dedication, then of your good worship? To whom my only suite, and humble
request is, that it may please you to accept favorably of so small a
testimony of my duetifull good will, and hearty affection, until God shall
enhable me to make some reasonable amends with some other of greater show, and
more importance. Which I trust will not be long, if my study in the
Mathematikes and Physike, may have that success, which I hope in God it shall.
In the mean time, presuming in some part, of your wonted goodness, and
favor, and craving pardon in the rest, I most humbly commend your worship
to almighty God. This first of April. 1583.

Your good worshippes always at commandment, John Haruey.

AN ASTROLOGICAL ADdition, or supplement, to be annexed to the late Discourse,
upon the great Conjunction, of Saturn and Jupiter: Newly sent by John Haruey,
to his worshipful, and beloved Brother, M. Gabriell Haruey.
GOod Brother, understanding here in Walden, how desirous some have been both
in London and Cambridge, to epsy a hole in my brother Richards cote, and
knowing his own business otherwise at this present, I have adventured to add
unto his Astrological Disconrse, what I (upon some conference) thought, might
reasonably be demanded, as therein requisite. My meaning is not to perfect
Apelles picture, or to teach him, of whom I may learn: but to do as much for
him in his want of leisure (so far as my reading will extend) as I would
wish him to do for me upon like occasion. Whereunto I was the readier, in
respect of that use and fruit that I might privately reap of so schollarlie
and philosophical an exercise. Which agreeing, as it does with that final
profession, which I have already after some deliberation, made choice of,
cannot (I conceive) but be a very profitable and auailable exercise for me. It
is no great matter that my years can yet affoorde: I easily grant,
(notwithstanding more reading in the Mathematics, and especially in
Astrology, then every one knows of, that as the Poet says, Adhuc mea messis
in herba est. But as my spring begins now with the Spring, so I hope by Gods
grace, to see the harvest, that shall yeald and bring forth my harvest. If I
procead not, the fault is only mine own: if I succead, I must be thankful
first unto God, and then unto those, whom it has pleased him to make my
founders, and chiefly your self. But that I may the better proceed, and
succeed, as well in this brief Treatise now, as hereafter in my other larger
exercises, I am taught of our great Arabian Astrologers, to begin, go forward,
and end, with God: assuring my self of the undoubted certainty of the ancient
Greek verse: (...).

Which being my principal and final ground, I doubt not but I may as safely,
and lawfully exercise my self in the practice of this study, as of any other
liberal Art. Howsoever some through ignorance, and some through other
sinister causes conceive amiss thereof: contrary to Saint Ambrose,
Theodoretus, the famous ancient bishop Thomas Aquinas, Ioannes Hispalensis,
sometime a reverend bishopp in Spain, Lucas Gauricus, a learned Italian
bishop, Ioannes Ganiuetus, Michael a Petra sancta, and Franciscus Iunctinus,
Doctors of divinity, with diverse other of like gravity and reputation, who
have been great favorers, and practisers of the same, well and orderly used. I
would to God I were but worthy to carrye the books of some, that have
travailed this way: and namely of those, whom my brother Richard namely
commends for their singular skill, and pains taking in this faculty. Unto
whom I may truly add, Septimius Seuerus, Vespasianus, Hadrianus, Athelstane,
a noble king of England, whose Astrological work, as you do best remember, is
mentioned by Ramus in his Scholae Mathematicae; Leopoldus Austriacus,
Laurentius de Medicis, and certain other most worthy Emperors, Kings, and
Princes; to let pass Hermes Trismegistus, Numa Pompilius, Bladud, one of our
first British Kings, and such other of greatest auncientie. Neither can I muse
and marvel enough, that any learned Divines should band against the right use
of Astrology: considering what my brother has alleged, specially out of
Melancthon. Whereunto may be adjoined that notable judgment and authority of
David Chitraeus, delivered by him in a Treatise of his, entitled, De studio
Theologiae recte inchoando: where Chitraeus words are verbatim these:
Arithmaticae, and Astronomiae cognitio, in Ecclesia, ad doctrinae de Anno, and
Calendarii conseruationem, necessaria est. Non enim initio mundi, non Exordia,
and propagatio Ecclesiae, non series diuinarum patefactionum, non or do
Imperioru^, non tempora aduentus Christi in carnem, and ad iudicium, non
tempora quibus praecipui doctores Ecclesiae vixerunt, and maximae res in
Ecclesia gestae sunt, non ratio celebrandi Paschatis Iudaici, non magnitudo
miraculi, quo Sol patiente Christo obscuratus est, non talia multa cogitari and
intelligi, sine numeratione Annorum, and initijs doctrinae Astronomicae
possunt. A sufficient reason, a man would think: which nevertheless he also
confirms, and ratifyeth, first diuino, and then, humano testimonio, after
this manner: Ideo Deus ipse in prima statim sacrae Scripturae pagina, iubet nos
spacia motuum Solis, and Lunae, qui dierum, mensium, and annorum metas
constituunt, and maxim omnium illustria Dei, and prouidentiae diuinae signa
sunt, obseruare. Vere enim, vt Plato ait, gratissima, and omnium dulcissima de
Deo fama, in astris, and doctrina astrorum sparsa est. In consideration of
which respects, the forenamed Johannes Hispalensis in his prologe to Albumazar
the Arabian, interprets him self and other Astrologers thus. Cum dicimus
Planetam aliquem, malum futurum praesignare, nihil aliud sentimus, nisi quod
sui Creatoris mandato vt creaturae inseruientes, eius praescientiam imitando
hominem ipsum malum nobis ostendunt. To which effect also, the foresaid Ioannes
Ganiuetus, in the seventh chapter of his fourth Difference, determines in
these words: Culpando planetarum significata, etiam pro certo diuinam statim
culpamus prouidentiam. Nihil enim aliud planetae, quam quod Deus praeuiderit,
aut praedestinauerit, significant. Which is likewise confirmed by Ioannes Picus
Mirandula, in the first book and second chapter of his Heptaplus, in following
these two autenticall* Maxims: Nihil agunt causae naturales, quod non diuinae
Artis ordo praeceperit. And, Omne opus Naturae, est opus intelligentiae.
Whereof the first he alleges as a sound principle of the divine Platonistes;
the second, as a common Rule of the Perepatecians, both thereon grounding a
distinction of causes, the one exemplaris in God him self, the other organica,
in his Instruments and creatures. Which considerations being presupposed as
they ought, and laid down for our very first and principal foundations, let me
see, I say not what Diume, but what divinity makes against us? especially if
withal the authority of Gemma Frisius may be taken, who in his Preface to
Stadius Ephemerides, avouches this Art to be so certainly true, and
infallible, that he is not afeard to attribute even, vera^ and necessariam
(...) thereunto. To which purpose I could likewise apply diverse other as
credible testimonies, and namely of the forenamed Michael a Petra sancta,
Iouianus Pontanus, Iacobus Goho^hemes Ostofrancus, and Lucius Bellantius
Senensis. But the legitimation of liberal sciences, and as well of this, as of
any other, is to be auowed rather by the general practice of all ages, then by
any such particular proof: and therefore having as well herein, as in the whole
course of the Tractate following, added something to my brothers discourse, I
will forthwith proceed to the like Supplement of the entire matter it self:
requesting therein the same favorable patience, which you extended to his
larger Discourse. I must crave pardon for the form and style, wherewith I am
not yet sufficiently acquainted. If the matter only be answerable to your
expectation, I shall think my labor well bestowed. But howsoever it falls
out, I hope, In rebus magnis sit voluisse satis, will reasonably serve for my
purgation. Better a common excuse then none at all. Thus presuming the best, I
am bold to offer you the Astrologicall Treatise following: not pleasing my
self therein, but desirous to please you, and pleasure other therewith.

An Astrologicall Supplement.

Anno. 1583. Mense. April. Die. 28. Hora. 16.

Maestlinus. Pol. 51.

Suum cuique integrum esto iudicium.



^^^^iall scheme or Figure setting forth in most ample manner the true (...)
state of the heavens, at the time of the great Conjunction of the two ^^r and
most waightye Planets, Saturn and Jupiter, in the end of the Trigonisme,
namely in the third and last face of Pisces, and the 21. de^^^ the same sign.
Anno 1583. the 28. day of April, a little before high (...).

Latitud. 51.34. Longitud. 19.52.
43.31.



Dominus diei Dominus horae vel

Stadius.

Masculina 10 Quarta caeli

Faeminina 7 Quarta caeli

Masculina 4 Quarta caeli



* Crus Equi alati, sieve Pegasi. Barbaris, Scheat. 23. o.. Mag. 2. Naturae.

A note of such Astrologicall parts, touching dearth and plenty, as are to be
annexed to the present figure. A piece of Thales Milesius his Oeconomicall
Astrology: and of very great use for such, as by their trades, are to deal
in any of the particulars following.
Pars oliuarum. 11. 2. Pars hordei 13. 26. Pars tritici 14. 42. Pars fabarum
10. 10. Pars saccari 8. 7. Pars mellis 9. 4. Pars ciborum dulcium 12. 39. Pars
ciborum acrium 10. 30. Pars ciborum saporis. apij, vel herbarum huiusmodi
saporem habentium. 14. 18. Pars medicaminum salsorum 28. 16. Pars medicaminum
acrium. 27. 24. Pars medicaminum venenatorum 10. 56. Pars vuarum. 8. 27. Pars
dactylorum 12. 39. Pars caeparum 10. 30. Pars nucum. 10. 10. Pars melonum 27.
4. Pars ciceris 12. 9. Pars croci 24. 42. Pars lentis 14. 18. Pars sisami 27.
4. Pars milij 10. 30. Pars Bombicis. 8. 7. Pars ris. 27. 24.
A Note or Table of the several Fortitudes and Debilities of the Planets,
according to their situation and placing in the former Figure.
Saturns Fortitudes by reason of his Freedom from Combustion. 5 18 Direct
motion. 4 Orientalitie. 2 With Jupiter. 5 Swift motion. 2 Debilities by reason
of his Peregrinitie. 5 9 Situation in the 8. house. 4 Jupiters Fortitudes by
reason of his Own Mansion place 5 18 Swift motion. 2 Freedom from Combustion.
5 Direct motion, 4 Orientalitie. 2 Debilities by reason of his Situation in the
8. house. 5 9 with Saturn. 4 Mars his Fortitudes by reason of his Freedom
from Combustion. 5 9 Direct motion. 4 Debilities by reason of his Peregrinitie.
5 14 Occidentalitie. 2 Situation in the 12. house. 5 Slow motion. 2 Sol his
Fortitudes by reason of his Situation in the 10. house. 5 Debilities by reason
of his Peregrinitie. 5 11 Slow motion. 2 with Caput Algol. 4 Venus her
Fortitudes by reason of her. Fredome from Combustion. 5 18 Direct motion. 4
Occidentalitie. 2 placing in the 10. house. 5 swift motion. 2 Debilities by
reason of her Peregrinitie. 5 with Oculus Tauri Mercury his Fortitudes by
reason of his Fredome from Combustion 5 11 direct motion 4 placing in the 9.
house 2 Debilities by reason of his Peregrinitie. 5 9 Orientalitie. 2 Slow
motion. 2 Iuna her Fortitudes by reason of her Placing in the 4. house. 4 9
Freedom from Combustion 5 Debilities by reason of her Slow motion 2 9
Peregrinitie 5 Duninution in light 2 with Cor Scorpij. Pars Fortunae has
Fortitudes by reason it is Placed in Pisces 5 10 Free from Combustion 5 in the
7. house. 4 in the Terms of 2 Debilities -- 0

The order of the Planets, as they are either strong, or weak; more familiarly
expressed for the common capacity of the vnskilfuller sort.
BY this distribution, or Table may easily be gathered what Planets are
strongly situated in the prefixed figure of the Heavens: as also what Planets
are feeble and weak in the same. Now it follows that we likewise confer
them amongst themselves, according to the true and exact number of their
Fortitudes and Debilities, that it may yet more manifestly and sensibly appear
which of them are most strong and fortunate, and which again most weak and
unfortunate, and how one as it were lineally succeeds another in strength and
power.

First the amiable Planet Venus amongst all the other Planets is simply most
strong and fortunate in the former celestial scheme: For if the number of her
debilities be subtrated from the sum of her fortitudes, there till remain
13. testimonies of strength, which no other Planet obtayneth in this Figure.
Notwithstanding she is somewhat weakened by certain other accidental
Debilities, then are yet named: for she is associated with the Dragons tail,
which as Guido Bonatus well testifies, Cum bonis mala est, and boni bonitatem
minuit. Also not passing two hours before she was opposite to the Moon, ex
Diametro, being situated in quarta coeli masculina, super terram in die.
Beside that, in signo masculino, contrary to her own proper nature. And
lastly, Septentrionalis Ascendens, which do all somewhat assuage and abate her
courage: wherefore her significations can not be altogether so fortunate and
effectual, as otherwise they might, and would have been.

2 Then the two superior Planets conjoined Saturn and Jupiter succeeds, which
are both very strong and valerous in comparison of their debilities, because
their fortitudes are not only equivalent: but even as many mo in number as
their debilities. For Saturns testimonies of strength are 18. his debilities
but 9. So likewise are the fortitudes of Jupiter 18. his debilities but 9.
Wherefore Saturn and Jupiter seem equally matched in power and strength: but
in respect of Circumstances, I take Jupiter to be the stronger of both, which
being generally taken, is a good and laudable token, but particularly
discussed, not so good; as shall more plainly be declared hereafter.

3 Mercury is next in strength, although in very deed his strength be rather
weakness, then strength, and little or nothing at all to speak of. For albeit
his virtues are more in number by two, then his debilities, yet he is not so
much exalted by those two testimonies, as he is depressed by his Ascension in
Meridiem, by being, in signo mali planetae, and in cadenti loco caeli, which
on the contrary side, do much increase his evil influence, and make him more
unfortunate. Nam sicut signum turbat Domum, ita Domus turbat signum, and signum
Planetam. An approved rule.

4 Now as concerning Mars, Sol, and Luna, they are very weak and unfortunate
in the prefixed scheme, but especially Sol: For whereas the debilities of Luna
are but a sewe more, and the debilities of Mars scarce half so many mo as his
fortitudes: the detrimentes of the Sun are in number full as many mo as his
increme^ts, which proportion must needs greatly increase and augment the
strange events threatened by this corporal conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter
in the eighte house.

5 Finally, Pars Fortunae, that is, the place of Heaven, wherein the rays of
the Sun and Moon do concur or meet, is fortunately appointed in this
Figure, being fortified with no less then 16. virtues Nevertheless, Jupiter
Dominus Domus Partis Fortunae, being placed in domo magn^ infortunij, and etiam
mortis, and there accompanied with Infortunium Maius, dot^ somewhat decrease
the good Fortune of Pars Fortunae; And so much the rather, because Pars
Fortunae it self is situated in the 8. sign although notwithstanding it be
residente it the 7. house, yea and it is very nigh the cuspis of the 8. house
too, for it wants but only too Degrees of the same.

And thus much generally touching the true constitution of the Planets, at that
Moment.
Now to descend more particularly unto the present matter; The Dignities and
Debilities of Saturn and Jupiter, according to their situation in the
celestial figure at the time of their Conjunction, being already set down;
that the true effects and operations of their meeting may the more manifestly
appear, it follows that we consider which of them is elevated and exalted
above the other, at that instant. For Ptolomey in his 63. verbo Centiloquij,
delivers this Maxim. Oportet aspicere in Coniunctione Saturni and Iouis in
eodem Minuto ad eleuationem vnius eorum super alterum, and iudica cum
fortitudine eius, scilicet eleuati in hoc mundo, and similiter fac in 20.
residuis Co^iu^ctionibus. Upon which notable place of Ptolomey, his Interpreter
Albohazen Haly commenteth thus: Eleuatio planetae super planetam est, vt sit
remotio ab Auge Circuli sui breuis, minor remotione alterius ab Auge Circuli
sui breuis, and ille dicitur eleuatus super alterum. Where I gather that per
remotione^ ab Auge, he understands their distance from that point of their
exce^trick, which is fardest distant from the Center of the earth. And when he
says, parui circuli, he means, as I suppose, their several Epicicle,
affirming ye he which is nearest the summitie of his Epicicle, is elevated
above the other, which is farther removed from ye summity of his Epicicle. Marry
this must be found out and known, per vtriusque Argumentu^ aequatu^, which
Argument will soon evidently declare, and certainly demonstrate the same.
Wherefore to omit now for breuities sake, Minuta differentiaru^ cu^ partibus
proportionalibus, and so forth, for so much as they make no sensible difference,
I will directly and compendiously, by Arithmetical, and Astronomical
supputation, set down the true Argument of each of them, as I have purposely
calculated the same for that very time: and briefly collected them in the two
short Notes, or tables following.

Argumentu^ aequatu^ Saturni. S. G. M. ii. iii. iiii Medius motus. ex quo
subtraho 11 6 42 8 58 28 Augem, and prosiliet 8 1 8 39 50 36 Centrum aequatum.
3 5 33 29 7 52 Medius motus, ex quo subtraho 9 5 3 9 16 8 Medium motum. and
prosiliet 11 6 42 8 58 28 Argumentu^ medium 10 29 21 10 18 40 Cui addo Centrum,
3 5 33 29 7 52 Quae inuicem addita e^ficiunt Argumentum aequatum. 2 4 54 39 26
32 Argumentu^ aequatu^ Iouis. S. G. M. ii. iii. iiii Medius motus. ex quo
subtraho 11 16 10 46 20 52 Augem, and profiliet 5 8 41 43 8 43 Centrum
aequatum. 6 7 29 3 19 9 Medius motus, ex quo subtraho 9 5 3 9 16 8 Medium
motum. and profiliet 11 16 10 46 20 52 Argumentu^ medium. 10 21 13 45 37 0 Cui
addo Centrum, 6 7 29 3 12 9 Quae inuicem addito efficient Argumentum aequatu^.
4 28 42 48 49 9

By which calculation I gather first, that Saturn is descending in his
Eccentrike, or Deferent; because his Centrum aequatum ^s, ab vno gradu in sex
signa; and that Jupiter on the other side is Ascending in his Eccentrike or
Deferent, because his Centrum ^equatum, is above six signs. But for so much as
Argumentum aequatum Saturni is nigher 0. grade, 0. minut, then Argumentu^
equatu^ Iouis, (for when the Argumentum equatu^ of a planet is 0. G. 0. M. he
is, in summitate Epicicli) I take Saturn to be nigher he summity of his
Circle, and consequently to the elevated above Jupiter, secundum Auge^, by
reason of his proximitie to his Aux. Which elevation, according to the ancient
principles of Judiciary Astrology, premonstrateth the violent depression, and
grievous oppresson of the Ecclesiastical Iouials by the force of temporal
^otentats: yea and that some of them shall not only be afflicted and tormented,
but also cruelly ^recuted, and utterly extinguished by their ^ight. For
Saturn elevated above Jupiter, ^n domo mortis, called (...) threateth unto
the^ not only much fear and dread, with the loss of such goods as their
predeces^^rs enjoyed before them, but also extreme ^ersecution and execution by
death. Marry in re^ect of circumstances, and certain credible ^idicials, I
suppose that ye Iouials shall in the end have the better day, and triumph over
the Saturnmes, worthily by the judgment of the learned. But I define nothing
morallie, being only to survey the natural causes and signs of natural
effects. Now for so much as some Astrologians observing and regarding only the
latitudes of the Planets at the time of their Conjunction, make him to be
elevated above the other, whose latitude is either more Ascentent in
Septentrionem, or less Descendent versus Meridiem, (as namely Ioannes
Ganiuerus, who in his book entitled, Amicus Medicorum, the first chapter, and
third Difference, making mention of the great Conjunction of Saturn and
Jupiter in the 13. grade of Scorpius, which happened, Anno, 1425. affirms that
Saturn was then elevated above Jupiter) Why? because, as he there alleges,
Mayor fuit illius latitudo versus Septentrione^, thereby gathering and
concluding, that much unwonted trouble and sorrow should follow to the
clergy, and so soorth. Now I say, for the discussing of that interpretation,
I will here in like manner set down she latitudes of the Planets from the
Eclyptike line toward the Poles of the Zodiaque at the time of this
Conjunction, that it may thereby likewise appear, whether Saturn be then also
elevated above Jupiter according to his latitude.

Grad. Minut. Saturn 1. 20. Merid. Descend. Jupiter 0. 54. Merid. Descend.
Mars 1. 23. Septent. Descen. Venus 0. 22. Septent. Ascend. Mercury 2. 29.
Merid. Ascend. Luna 0. 46. Merid. Descend.

Saturn therefore is descending from the Eclyptike line toward the Antartike
pole of the Zodiake 1. grade, 20. Min. whereas Jupiter is descending from the
Eclyptike line toward the Antartike pole of the Zodiake, o. grade, 54. Min.
Wherefore Jupiter on the other side is elevated above Saturn, secundum
latitudinem, because his latitude is lesser than Saturns is. For as when they
are both Septentrional Ascendent, he is exalted above the other, whose latitude
is greatest toward the North, (as Ioannes Saxonius testifies in the end of
his Commentary upon the fourth difference of Alcabitius his Isagoge, ad
Magisterium Iudiciorum Astrorum) so on the contrary part, when they are both
Meridional Descendent (as now they are) he must needs be elevated above the
other, whose latitude is lesser toward ye south. So that according to this
kind of elevation, secundum Latitudinem, the ecclesiastical or spiritual
power should flourish and increase more and more, and their estate become more
prosperous and fortunate, which is clean contrary unto the Astrologicall
judgment before gathered, and drawn from the elevation of Saturn above
Jupiter, secundum Augem. More therefore now lies the point of the doubt,
whether the elevation of one Planet above another, according to his Aux, or
according to his latitude, be most effectual. For the true conclusion, and
determination of the premises, must be drawn from hence. A matter of no small
difficulty to decide. For mine own part, touching the credit of Ioannes
Ganiuetus, although I should liberally grant that he was, in sacra Theologia,
and in ipsa Astrologia suo aeuo facile princeps, and ob eandem Astrologiam ab
omnibus fere Christianitatis, and Regibus, and Principibus, nec non ab ipso
Pontifice Maximo, haud paruis annuis stipendijs donatus; (as Gondisaluus
Toledo, serenissimae Francorum Reginae Medicus, Lugdunensisque pro Rege
electus, commends him to his son Antonius Toledo) yet am I rather to
subscribe unto the sovereign judgment and authority of Ptolomey in these
Astrologicall points, especially now in this, for two or three notable
considerations, and amongst the rest, because some other probable Arguments,
which may Astrologically be gathered from the Figure erected for the time of
this Conjunction, seem also to verify the same. For Mars, Lord of the ninth
house, called ab adiuncto, (...), placed in Domo cadenti ab Angulo Medij Caeli,
to wit, in the 12. house, termed, Cacodaemon, a significatione tristium
euentuum (est enim Domus, seu locus tristitiae, aerumnarum, maeroris, laborum,
paupertatis, carceris, occultorum inimicorum, impostorum, meretricum, and such
like) signifies the imprisonment of some great Ecclesiastical personage, of
the nature of Mars, or Mercury, but because the royal Planet Sol, resident in
Cord Caeli, sieve Regali Cuspide, called (...) is separated from Mars by a
quartil radiation, it seems that there should some mercy be favorably
pretended, but not effectually performed. For Mercury, Lord of the Horoscope
the house of life, and also of the second house the house of substance, being
withal infortunatelie seated, in Domo cadenti ab Angulo, to wit, in the
ninth house (for he is there peregrine, and deuoyde of all his essential
dignities) does argue not only the utter loss of his goods and substance, but
the deprivation of his life too, which is also more manifestly signified by the
Quartil of Mercury with the Dragons head, in violent signs, namely in
Capricorn, and Aries, nam hoc etiam capitis paenam minatur. Wherefore great
debate and much dissension is like to arise touching matters of Ecclesiastical
government, and religious controversies: whereby many shall be forciblie
dispossessed: some utterly undone; not a few unmercifully slain and murdered:
specially in those Regions and Cities, which are under the regiment of the
third Quadrangle. Wherwithall I am to observe, that Mars is in Leone, and that
the city Mora is subject to the government of this sign, considering that it
was Ascendent in the East angle at the laying of the first stone toward the
foundation thereof, as is generally avouched, and sufficiently confirmed by
the best Astrologers. Ergo, Nunc caveat sibi Mora, vel saltem alij ab ea
caueant, ne haec mora illis tandem trahat periculum.

Moreover, Sol is in Tauro, the night house of Venus, Venus is Lady of the
tenth Cuspis, and soiourning in the 10. house, but placed in the 11. sign,
namely in Geminis, the house of Mercury, there accompanied with the Dragons
tail: Mercury him self is infortunately appointed in the ninth house in
Ariete, and Mars Lord of Mercuries Mansio^ place is afflicted in the 12. house
in Leone, as is aforesaid. All which circumstances being equally wayed, and
diligently considered, this conclusion I suppose may probably be inferred: that
the effects of Saturns elevation above Jupiter, secundu^ augem, are like to be
more effectual at this instant, then the effects of Jupiters elevation above
Saturn, secundum latitudinem. Vincunt enim semper plura testimonia, sieve boni
venturi, sieve mali illa fuerint, in praedictionibus Astrologicis. The Judgment
needs no man's countenance to give it authority.

Wherefore if I may freely utter, that which I Astrologically conceive, I
imagine that some profane helhound, some fierce and cruel Antichrist, some
outrageous and irreligious Mahomet, some Turkish Martial Tyrant shall arise,
who will play the second Athi^a, or Totilas, by scourging the zealous people of
God, who will furiously assault the holy city of Jerusalem, who will violently
oppress and horribly torment the Inhabitaunts of that blessed City. And shall
not then Iniquity have the upper hand? Shall not then the abomination of
desolation stand in the sacred place? Shall not then sorrows by sensible
Addition and Multiplication, amount to huge sums. But he that keeps Israel,
shall neither slumber nor sleep: Neither dout I, but the almighty and
almerciful Adonay, through his infinite power, and exceading goodness, will
confound this mischievous Helhound, in his devilish Imaginations, and utterly
destroy him in his spritish attempts, and hellish practices, to his own small
overthrow and confusion: and to the singular comfort, and unspeakable
consolation of true Christians, the only elect children and heirs of God.
Marry first pers^quution is like grievously to assault and invade many Nations,
and kingdoms, before this general peace and quietness may be hoped, or
looked for. Wherefore if happily such troubles and tribulations happen in our
days, (as no doubt by all Astrologicall and prophetical prodictions they will)
let us patiently possess our souls and bodies, and even in the midst of them,
lift up our eyes, and hands, and hearts to heaven, the only sanctuary and
Castle of our succor, for even then is our redemption nigh at hand; even then
is the time that the Lord shall deliver Israel out of all her afflictions; even
then shall we enjoy perfect felicity: and who so endures to the end, the same
shall be blessed without end. Finally, a great new Monarchy is like to be
established, and shall not the true Gospel of the kingdom be universally
preached thorowout all the world, for a witness unto al nations? shall not al
people under heaven be governed according to the right meaning of that ancient
prophecy, Vnus pastor, vnum ou^le? About the necessary, or contingent verity
whereof, much here might be added, but I hasten to go forward with the rest,
beginning where my brother Richard left, and for supplye of his wants, adding
those judgments, which I have collected since the 2. edition of his
Astrological discourse, which could not be so exactly and perfectly finished by
himself, as otherwise it might have been, by reason of certain other
impediments, which even in the midst of that treatise, forcibly called him from
those Mathematical and Philosophical studies. It remains therefore, to note,
that Saturn Lord of ye 6. house, in Greek, (...) so called, quod tristia and
aduersa portendat, (est enim domus aegritudinum, and vitiorum corporis)
premo^strateth the dangerous, and grievous assaults of many Saturnine and
Melancholic diseases; who because in man's body he rules and governs the
right ear, the stomach, the spleen, the bladder, the bones, and teeth: he
presignifieth many cold diseases proceeding of ye defluxio^ of humors to those
parts: as namely the flux, ye dropsy, ye ptisick, the colic, ye stone in the
raines and bladder, ye vehement gnawing, or pain of the belly, inge^dred in the
small guts, called Ilia, ye palsy, ye gout in ye feet, ye ta^ker, ye black
iau^des, stiches in ye sides like plurisies, black morphew, quartane agues; as
also continual ache in ye ioints, pernicious catars, roughs, rewmes, pooses,
hoarcenesse, wheles, and blisters, ringwormes, running with dry scabbes, and
ytchings, byles, and vlcerations, passions of the spleen, the leaprie
proceeding of melancholy exceedingly, adust, called commonly Elephantiasis,
beside some shrewde, and fore pains in the legs and feet: together with some
other mortal and peremptory diseases, proceading partly of corrupt blud, riot,
drunkenness, and surset, partly of superfluous, rotten, and putrified humors, so
long continuing and enduring, that they engender Hecticke fevers, and
consumptions. For Saturn, Dominus domus Infirmitatum, resident in domo mortis,
does plainly and manifestly foreshew the violence of some incurable and deadly
sicknesses, which shall grievously afflict, and vehemently oppress many even
unto death. Wherefore I would wish those, that feel themselves diseased, if so
be they desire to be restored again to their wonted health, to seek in due
time for helps and remedy at the hands of the learned and expert Physician,
before the infirmity be fully grown, and thoroughly rooted. It is too late
they say, to spare when all is spent and consumed, too late to shut the cage,
when the bird is flowen out, too late to bar the stable door, when the Steed
is stolen away: And is it not to too late to require remedy for a disease
already confirmed? what learned Chirurgian an will take in hand to cure a
mortal and incurable ulcer? or what wise Phisician will undertake to restore
that Patient to health, which is depryued of his senses, speech, respiration,
and moving, through the violence and importunity of the strong and vehement
Apoplexy? which cannot possibly be resisted, as Hippocrates witnesses in the
42. Aphorism of his second book. Also the Leapry, called Elephantiasis, if it
be established and confirmed, is by nature, an immedicable, and deadly disease,
which notwithstanding, if it be looked to in time, may be cured by Phlebotomy,
annuary purgations, or the like means, as Galen himself affirms in his sixth
Commentary upon the 47. Aphorism of Hipocrates, where he reports, that he
had cured, inchoatam Elephantiasin, by those remedies. Now therefore let every
discreet Patient remember the common saying out of the witty Lattin Poet:
Principijs obsta. Stop the beginninges: together with that also which
follows.

Sero medicina paratur.

Cum mala per longas inualuere moras.

To which effect the vulgar Hexameter, prouerbially used, might likewise be
fitly applied: Maximus e minima scintilla nascitur ignis.

And yet I grant the Physician may even in this extremity give the patient
good council, he may wish him well, and so forth, and peradventure ease the
importunity of his malady some little deal: Sed hoc aliquid, paene nihil est,
and the verses are famously known. Vtile non est,
Consiliu^ post facta dari, quod oportuit ante;
Consilium post facta, Imber post tempora frugu^.
Wherefore if possibly it may be, the first hour of the disease approaching, is
diligently to be observed, and truly signified unto the Physician, as Hermes
Trismegistus advises in his Iathromathematica: that a figure for that time
being erected, and the Position or constitution of the heavens not slightly,
but thoroughly considered, the cunning Physician may thereby iudicially gather,
whether the disease be curable and suppliable by medicine, or whether yt
patient be destitute of hope, and past recovery. But they yt desire to know
more concerning this point, may have recourse to the said Iatromathematica,
translated not long since into our english tongue, by my self, at the request
of M. Charles P. a very special friend of mine. Which translation, I have here
also purposely annexed at the end of this small Treatise, for the general
benefit, and commodity of those, which are desirous thereof, that they may
with so much the more ease, and les labor, attain to some reasonable
knowledge of those most necessary secrets, which Hernes Aegyptius, the first
and most ancient Astrologer, that has committed any thing to writing, (who
lived before the incarnation of our Savior, 1488. years,) left behinds him
for the perpetual good, and use of al such, as were to succeade him in the
heavenly practice of Astrology, and physical Philosophy. But reserving mine
opinion of this famous Mercury, and his profound works, to some other time, I
am to return again to that Astrologicall judgment before drawn from the
Lordly dominion of cruel Saturn over the 6. house, and his situacion in the
8. place from the Horoscope. Where I furthermore observe, that this unfortunate
Constellation, does not only presignifie and prognosticate many contagious,
and peremptory infirmities amongst men, (as is already according to the rules
of Art probably declared) but also a great destruction, and mortality amongst
all kind of small beasts, and cattle: as Dorotheus one of the 9. Judges, does
in the very like case conclude. But forasmuch as the two great Lumynaries, are
amongst the rest of the planets, the principal and most effectual workers in all natural and terrestrial bodies, tam animatis, quam inanimatis, as Ptolomy
proves more at large in the 1. book, and 2. chap. of his Quadripartite
construction. by whose influence specially; fit incrementu^ and destruction
omnis Indiuidui Animalis, as Haly also very well commenteth upon this 86.
Aphorism of Ptolomyes Centiloquia: Sol est origo virtutis vitalis, quae est
Cordis: Luna est origo virtutis naturalis, quae est Epatis: particularly in
private natiuities considered, but generally in all public, and not only
Astrologicall predictions, but also Physical and Philosophical discourses,
maintained and observed: we are necessarily constrained at all times to have
especial respect unto their motions, but chiefly to the course and motion of
the Moon, who as the ancient Astrologers affirm, is: Delatrix omnium
impressionum and influentiarum aliorum planetarum, quae per globum ipsius ad
nos vltimo decendunt. Wherefore I will here also discipher their several
inclinations, and effects: with the proper and natural significations of each
of them, according to their situation, and constitution in the celestial
figure, at the time of this great Conjunction: but so that I will avoid to
repeat any judgment already set down by my brother in his Astrologicall
discourse. The virtues and debilities of the princely Plannets, Sol, and Luna,
are at the beginning of this Treatise, set down by way of partition: Wherefore
(to cut off al such Tantologies) I not be so tedious, or forgetful of all good
Method, as to rehearse the same again in this place. But for so much as their
debilities are mo in number the^ their dignities, I am by the way to conclude
(as I did before) that they are very unfortunately appointed in the present
scheme: and consequently, that many mischiefs, with much unwonted sorrow, are
presaged thereby. Marry this amongst the rest, is specially worthy the noting,
that the Sun is then within 3. degrees, 50. minutes of the most violent and
most mortal fixed star in the whole firmament, amongst 1022. called commonly,
Gorgonium, sieve caput Medusae, barbarously of the Arabians, Caput Algol, whose
Longitude is in the 20. grade, 38. mi. of Taurus: Latitude from the Ecliptike
line. 23. grades, 0. min. A star of the second magnitude, that is, 90. times
so big as the earth: of the nature of Saturn and Jupiter, but of Complexion
somewhat temperate being Septentrional. Which Star, considering it is so nigh
the Cuspis of Caeli Culmen, the Sun being then also therein situated, but
peregriue, and almost conjoined therewith; it should by all Astrologicall
Judicials seem, that some suddayn mischief, and violent oppression, is
prognesticated and portended to some great personage, or mighty magistrate,
placed in high seat, and supreme authority: as by the sequel is most like to
appear, where it shall happen.

Luna is likewise in the prefixed figure extraordinarily afflicted, and
oppressed by the presence and company of another most cruel and mischievous
fixed star, called of the Graecians (...), barbarously, Cor Scorpij, whose
Longitude is in the 3. grade, 40. minute of Sagittary, Latitude 4. degrees, 0,
minute. A star of the second Magnitude also, but of the nature of Mars, with
a little spice of Jupiter; Complexionis magis humectantis, quam Comburentis,
quia Meridionalis. Which Conjunction, signifies as I conjecture, the furious
audacity, and outrageous impudency of those which shall seditiously arise, and
priutly conspire against their Magistrates, presaged by the late opposition of
Luna with Venus, Lady of the tenth house, who is also conjoined with a violent
Martial fixed star, of ye first honor or Magnitude, yt is, 107. times so big as
ye earth, called of the Grecians, (...): of the Romans, Pallilicium: of the
Arabians, Aldebaram, and most commonly of our late Astrologers, Oculus Tauri
Australis, sieve sinister: But because my brother Richard in his discourse has
more at large described the same opposition of Venus, and Luna, according to
their celestial situation at that time, purposing not, as I said, to reiterate
anything hear, that is there sufficiently expressed, I will go forward with ye
rest, remitting the studious reader to ye page in his book: but not omitting
to consider this by the way, yt the effects and operatio^s of the great
Conjunction, are like to be the more fearful and terrible, by reason of this
unfortunate constitution of the Sun and Moon at that instant.

Item, Jupiter, Lord of the West Angle, placed in the 8. house from the
Ascendent, and there infortunately afflicted by the present Conjunction of
frowning Saturn, who is governor of ye 5. house (...) signifies extreme
sorrow, with much perrill and danger unto women laboring with child: or else,
that many women shall take great care, and be sore grieved for their children,
because they are not. The same constellation threatens likewise, much shrewde
dissension and hatred betwixt man and wife. Moreover, Mars, Lord of Imu^ Caeli,
placed in domo 12. will help to increase the trouble and anguish of parents for
their childrens causes, before mentioned.

Item, Venus, Domina domus dominij, being there also reside^t, but situated in
the 11. sign, accompanied with Catabibazon, in casu suo, id est, in oppositione
exaltationis suae: signifies exceeding much quarrelling, strife and
contention, touching matters of the 10. house, in some country subject to the
government of the sign Gemini: A sign of the partition of the third
Quadrangle.

Also, Venus, Domina domus Fratrum, Sororum, Consanguineorum etc. being
appointed as is before rehearsed, does furthermore prognosticate very much
false dilsimulation, and tretcherie even amongst brethren and kinsfolk, who
shall hinder, indammage, and hurt one another by some cusoning menes, and by
diverse unfaithful, wily, and deceitful dealings. One notable token amongst
many other of the worlds small continuance, as by the holy Scripture might
easily be proved.

Item, Mercury peregrine in the nienth house, there placed in Ariete,
foretells, as I suppose, the coming of certain strange Ambassadors, into
this Realm of England, about some matters touching Religion, for this Island is
subject to the dominion, and regiment of that sign. Whereunto I add, that
Mercury, Lord of the second house, vnluckely seated in the ninth house,
portendeth much los of goods to trauailers, messengers, merchants, and
generally to all Mercuristes, as well on the land by thieves, and robbers, as
on the seas, by shipwracks and Pirates. Which is also more plainly presignified
by the opposition of Pars Fortunae to the second house, in the Cuspis of the
eight house, which opposition seems to threaten, not only loss of
substance, but of life too. And therefore the foresaid persons are to provide
for themselves accordingly.

Hitherto I have orderly by Astrologicall Analysis, proceaded in disciphering
the state of the heavens, at the time of the foresaid notable Conjunction, by
interlacing those ^udgements, which being by him pretermit^ed, I have since the
second Impression of my brothers book, gathered out of as good, and
autenticall Doctors, as any we have. Now, that nothing may seem to be wanting
in this present Tractate, being joined to his former Discourse, which might
Astrologically be observed touching the same great Conjunction: I think it not
only not inconvenient, but also requisite to note briefly some Judicials,
concerning the dearth and plenty of those Astrologicall parts mentioned at
the beginning of this Treatise: which parts although commonly they are only
considered of the best Astrologers, either generally at ye Sunsen^ance into the
point Equinoctial Vernal, for ^he whole year immediately following, if a ^^ed
sign, (as either Taurus, Leo, Scorpius, ^ Aquarius) be then Ascendent in the
East ^ngle, or else particularly at the beginning or ^ery Astronomicall
Revolution, for the ^uarter next ensuing, yet notwithstanding, ^somuch as the
virtuall influence of any great Conjunction of the superior Planets, is more
notable, yea and more forcible too. then the influence of the Suns circular
return, to that indivisible point of the Zodiac from which he first
digressed, as some of the most approved Astrologers affirm. I suppose, that
as great and as certain a testimony, either of dearth, or of plentifulnesse
ensuing, may Astrologically be drawn from the situation and constitution of
the Planets in the celestial scheme, at the time of this rare and strange
Conjunction, as otherwise from the position of the superior bodies in the
heavenly figure at the Suns annuary recourse, A puncto ad punctum signiferi.
For as this famous and memorable meeting of the two supreme and most mighty
Planets in the last face of Pisces, happens very seldom, to wit, but once in
the space and continuance of 800. years, so when it chances, it commonly
causes some sudden changes, and violent alterations, either by means of
sedition and wars, or consequently by famine and penury, proceeding of the
barrenness and sterility of the earth, thereby presaged and prognosticated
which my brother Richard has already in my opinion sufficiently confirmed in
his Discourse. Wherefore, I will here now compendiously, but distinctly, set
down the significations of those parts, drawn partly from the signs wherein
they are placed, but especially from the Lords of the signs, those I mean,
that have most essential dignities in ye same, concluding according to their
situation and constitution in the prefixed Figure, sieve in Angulo, sieve
succedenti illi fuerint, seu cadenti Domo. Withal, regarding their several
aspectes, and mutual radiatious, as also whether Dominus domus be come ad
locum Descentionis suae, and so forth. But I imagine it shall suffyce for the
present, to declare the bare judgments only, that is, the effects signified,
by noting in a word, which parts shall be Cari precii, which medii, or
indifferentis precii, and finally, which humilis, or vilis precii. The causes
and reasons of every Judicial, every one that is but meanly travailed in the
Principles of Astrology, may of him self soon gather, and easily discern:
neither do I love to be verbally tedious, when few words may as well, or
rather better serve the turn. Frustra enim longius fit per plura, quod breuius
fieri potuit per pauciora. Wherefore to proceed roundly to the expected
Distinction, the foresaid parts, Concerning the dearth or cheapnesse thereof,
are by my Astrologicall judgments like to be either Of a high, or dear
price, as namely these. Pars oliuarum: whereof Thales Milesius took so notable
advantage, for the enrichment of himself. Pars hordei: Pars ciborum amarorum.
Pars ciborum saporis apij, and herbarum eiusmodi saporem habentium Pars salis.
Pars Medicaminum salsorum. Pars medicaminum acrium. Pars sisami. Pars nucum.
Pars lentis. Pars Ris. Pars Nucum. Pars Melonum.
Of an indifferent and more reasonable price. as Pars tritici. Pars Ciceris.
Pars sacchari. Pars Mellis. Pars ciborum dulcium. Pars croci. Pars medicaminum
venenatorum. Pars Bombicis. Pars Milij.
Of a low price, or good cheap, as Pars fabarum. Pars Vuarum. Pars
dactylorum. Pars Caeparum. Pars ciborum acrium.




Every one that understands any Latin may sufficiently play the Interpreter.

Which short partition may generally suffice for a competent knowledge of the
forenamed parts, until they shall be more diligently considered, and more
particularly discussed by me, in every several year, as upon semblable
occasion, I shall then more specially observe the same at the Suns annuary
recourse into the first Second of Aries. I have here summarily inserted this
little, as a brief testimony either of dearth or plentifulnesse ensuing,
drawn only, as I said, from the situation of the Planets, at the time whereof
I now speak, but in my yearly Almanacke I purpose, by Gods good leave, more
exactlie, and so far as I may possibly attain thereunto, more perfectly to
examine the same according to the infallible Rules of this Art, at the several
reuolutions of every several year, so continuing till the effects and
operations of this Conjunction shall fully be accomplished and ended.

Now touching the Constitution of the air, whereof I have as yet added
nothing, forsomuche as this famous Conjunction happens in Pisces, a sign of
the partition of the watery Trigonisme, I conceive thereby, that great store
and abundance of rain shall ensue, which will cause many huge inundations, and
ouerflowings in sundry places, and that many fierce and boisterous winds shall
estfoones break forth, the rather also, because both Saturn and Jupiter are
then likewise oriental from the Sun. Nam Phaenon orientalis est frigidae
complexionis, and humidae item Phae^ton: wherefore much troublous and
tempesteous weather is like to be looked for, which is like so long to
continue, how long the one shall be within the Semidiameter of the other, that
is, within nine degrees of the other, for the several Semidiameter of each of
them is 4. degrees, 30. minutes, so that concerning the disposition of the
Air, the watery effects of their meeting began the 5. day of February last
past, this present year 1583. and shall endure until the 14. day of February
next ensuing, Anno 1584.

Immediately after the term or end of these effects, Mercury shall receive both
Saturn and Jupiter: and be corporally conjoined with them, first with Saturn,
then with Jupiter: which porte^deth small good to some of the clergy: for
Mercury being at the time of this Conjunction infortunately seated in the 9.
house, and now in Conjunction with Saturn and Jupiter, signifies the loss
of their accustomed tiths, yea and the displeasure of some noble personages, or
great magistrates, through whose procurement they are like to be shrewdly
hindered and endamaged. It should seem also that they shall be xppressed by
means of some Martial garboyles, and wars, because their meeting is in
Aries, the diurnall Mansion place of Mars.

But as touching the whole continuance of all these, or such other terrible
Accidents, and fearful events, threatened by this grand Copulation of Saturn
and Jupiter, first prognostically entreated of by my brother Richard in his
Discourse, and now enlarged by my self in thie Tractate, I am persuaded that
they shall forcibly begin to take place (...) in this present year 1583. For
no doubt much secret villainy shall be committed, much false packing used, much
privy sedition fostered, and great Martial furniture, and preparance for
wars shall be heard of, to some men's cost, even within the compass of this
very year. Which accords with that Maxim of the noble Prince Leopoldus
Austriacus, in these very words: Annus ipse erit peior in quo Saturnus and
Jupiter coniunguntur. But shall still violently continue, and cruelly invade
the inhabitaunts of the earth, until such time as the one shall oppose
himself against the other by a diametrall irradiatio^, which according to the
true and daily sphericall motions of these Planets exactly calculated by the
excellent Mathematitian Ioannes Stadius, in his Ephemerides; shall fall out
just, Anno Domini 1593. the 21. day of March, about 30. Minutes after three of
the clock in the after noone. Saturn being then placed in Cancer, and
Jupiter in Capricorn, the one in the 11. house, the other in the 5. house, as
appears by the Figure, which I have here calculated for the very time of
their Opposition, at which time the distance from the one to the other shall be
180. Degrees.

The Caelestiall scheme, calculated for the future opposition of Saturn and
Jupiter.

Latitude 51. 34. Longitude 19. 52.

1593. Die 21. Martij. Hora 3. Mi. 31. post Meridiem.

Dominus. diei. Dominus. horae.



So that the perilous effects of this grand Conjunction shall continue and
still increase on, until the accomplishment almost of ten whole years
hereafter ensuing, which then surceasing, the operations of their opposition
shall begin to work, being in like manner forcibly to take place and perdure
till their next Conjunction, which shall not happen until the year 1603. the
21 day of December about high noon: at which time they shall be conjoined again
in the 10. grade, 26. minute of Sagittary, a sign of the partition of the
fiery Triangularity, and then the Mathematical circuit being fully finished,
the effects of this Conjunction, and opposition, shall together end, and not
before. Etenim effectus durant vsque ad reditum, quia nihil datur inane in
natura, as is well noted by Cardane. But I am of opinion, that the effects of
their opposition, shall be more violent and speedy, than of this very
Conjunction. Nam diametrae radiationes, quemadmodum and Tetragonismi, mortes
repentinas, and violentas mutationes faciunt, Co^gressus vero generalia
Accidentia, as one very learnedly judges. And Haly the Arabian in the 8. part,
and 6. chapter of his Astrologicall Judicials, seems to affirm, that,
Diametralis co^figuratio, est fortior and maioris vigoris, quam vllus alius
aspectus; in writing thus: Scito quod oppositio Saturni and Martis est deterior
eorum Coniunctione, and deteriores, ac maligniores significationes demonstrat.
Beside these, Guido Bonatus in the 13. chapter of his second Treatise,
confirms the very same, where he determines flatly, that Oppositio est
aspectus vltimatae inimicitiae, vltimatae maliciae, and vltimatae discordiae;
his reason is, Quia trahitur a Saturno, and a Luminaribus; nam domus Saturni
aspiciunt domos Luminarium ab oppositione: ideoque dicitur iste aspectus
perfectae inimicitiae, quo niam Saturnus est infortunium maius, and fortior
caeteris alijs infortunijs. But as concerning this present opposition, it
seems extraordinarily malicious, and extremly pernicious, in that they are
most unhappily affected, and afflicted, in casibus, and detrimentis suis: Quae
quidem constellatio Religioni maximum periculum minatur. A judgment over true.
But because I purpose hereafter, if God spare me life, to discourse more at
large of these particulars, I will here only add this one resolute and
peremptory judgment of the great Astrologer, Cyprian de Bohemia;
Coniunctiones, oppositiones, vel eclypses, in Virg. and Capr. quod in his
signis Jupiter religionis Iudex magnopere debilitetur, mutationes in religione,
sacroque ordine denunciant. Wherefore I will now return again to the present
Conjunction, from which I have a little digressed. The continuance of whese
effects being expreslie declared, it follows, that we likewise expressly
determine, de subiectis locis, in what Countries and Cities they shall
especially work, and most effectually show them selves. For Ptolomey says,
Vnusquisque locus habet suum signum and Planetam proprium. And that in respect
of some other Astrologicall circumstances is the reason, as Ganiuetus
affirms, that the plague, or any other noisome and notorious calamity
happens in some one particular town or city, rather then in another, they
being both situated in one and the self same Region. Wherefore concerning the
present Conjunction, I suppose that those Realms and Cities shall chiefly be
vexed and afflicted with the evil influence thereof, which are under the
partition of the third Quadrangle, that is, under these four signs, Gemini,
Virgo, Sagittary, Pisces. Unto which signs such Regions and Cities are
subject, as are particularly allotted to each of them, and here severally
described as follows.

Under the 3. Quadra^gle are contained the foresaid signs. Gemini, whose
government extends, to Regions, Hircania, Armenia, Martiana, Cyrene,
Marmarica, the lower Egypt, Sardinia, a part of Lombardy, Flaunders, Brabant,
Wittemberge, England.
Cities, Corduba, Cesena, Viterbium, Versels, Louaine, Bryges, Magu^tia;
Hafford, Kitzingium, Rhegiu^, Turinum, Bamberga, Norimberge, Villacum, London.

Virgo, which has in subjection Regions. Mesopotamia, Babylon, Assyria,
Achaia, Greece, Crete, Croacia, Carinthia, Athesina, the dukedom of Athens, a
part of Gallia Comata, a part of Rhene, the lower Sylesia.
Cities. Jerusalem, Corinth, Rhodes Papia, Signia, Brundusiu^, Aretium,
Nouaria, Tolose, Lions, Paris, Basil, Heilderberge, Epphord, Wratislauia.

Sagittary, which has, Regions. Spain, Arabla the happy* Tyrrhenia, Celtica,
Dalmatia, Slauonia, Vngary, Morauia, Sylesia, Misnia.
Cities. Tolet, Volaterrae, Mutina, Narbona, Aucnionis, Cullein, Agrippina,
Stutgardia, Rotenburge, Buda, Tuberinum, Caschouia.

Pices, which has Regions. Lidia, Pamphilia, Scicilie, Calabria, Portugal,
Normandy, Phazania, Nazomontilis, Garamantes.
Cities. Alexandria, Hispalis, Co^postel, Ratisbone, Parentium, Worms,
Rothomagus.



Whereunto also the fine City of Florence, seems to be lately added by
Franciscus Iunctinus, a Doctor of Divinity in the same City, notwithstanding
that Lucas Gauricus, Ioannes Schonerus, Cyprianus Leouitius, and some other
approved Astrologers, do place it under another sign: and namely most under
Aries. For in his introduction, ad Astrorum Iudicia, Iunctinus lets down
the nativity thereof, with the 2. degree. 28. minut of Pisces in the Horoscope,
as underneath follows. Which Figure I have here purposely inserted, for that
I think that city to be very subject to the foresaid great Conjunction, not
only because the sign Ascending in the Horoscope, is the sign wherein this
Conjunction happens, but also because certain other judgments, which the
learned in this faculty may thereby easily gather, touching the state of the
said City, do import as much. In which respects I took it not amiss to
impart the Figure it self to the more particular consideration of such, as
can, and will take the pains to examine the same Astrologically.

Inclitae vrbis Florentiae natalis, Horoscopice delineatus.
254.31.

Anno 1298. Mense Nouembri, Die 29. Hora Meridiana.

Altitudo Poli. 42.45.



Hither I suppose may those Regions and Cities be also added which are subject
to the dominion of Saturn, that is, those which are under the regiment of
Capricorn, a sign of the partition of the first Quadrangle, and Aquary, a
sign of the partition of the second Quadrangle. For these two signs are
Saturns own proper and essential mansion places. Wherefore I will here in like
manner write down, such Realms and Towns, as are comprehended within their
several Gouernements: for so much as they are very like also to feel the
grievous and miserable effects threatened by this Conjunction.

Capricorn has Regions. India, Arriana, Macedonia, Thracia, Gedrosia,
Bossina, Albania, Bulgaria, Greece, Lituania Saxony, Hessia, Orcheney. Islands,
Masouia, Turingia, Marchia Styriae.
Cities. Machlinia, Iuliacum, Cleuonia, Berga, Gandamon, Vitua. Bra^denburge,
Augusta Vindelicorum, Constantia, Derthona, Fauentia, Oxford.

Aquary has Regions. Araby desert, Oxiana, Sogdiana* great Tartary, Denmark,
Sarmatia, the South part of Suetia, a part of Bauaria, Paedemontium, Westphalia.
Cities. Hamburge, Breame, Inglostadium, Tridentum, Salisburge Mons Ferratus.


But even amongst these very nations, countries, Islands, territories, cities,
and towns named and distinguished here by me, according to the instructions of
the best Astrologers, and Cosmographers, there is also a great difference. For
those persons shall especially be vexed, and oppressed by this unfortunate
position of the celestial bodies, in whose Radix, or otherwise in the annuary
profection of the nativity, the 21. grade, either of Pisces, Sagittary, Virgo,
Gemini, Capricorn, or Aquary, is by progression Ascendent in the Horoscope, or
in whose nativity, the Sun, the Moon, or (...) Geniturae, is resident in
the same grade of any of those signs, or within five degrees of that grade:
for they are most like to be sore tormented, and vehemenly disquieted with the
troublous affections, and perturbations of the mind, yea and greeuouslie
afflicted with diverse noisome and woeful infirmities of the body, which shall
become mortal and peremptory unto those, which have Saturn thus ill affected
upon the 8. Cuspis, or whose Hylech or Alchocoden, is ill affected in any of
the said places of the Zodiake.

But they, which in their Radix have Culmen Medij Coeli, or Pars Fortunae
appointed in the same parts of the Signifier, shall suffer in honor, worship,
substance, and riches, and be vyolently wronged by some cruel and
extraordinary mischaunces to befall them.

And they moreover, which have any of the other sieve erraticall stars, as
either Mars, Venus, or Mercury, situated in the same degree of those Signs,
shall by some mischievous means or other, be in like manner hindered and
indammaged according to the natural signification, quality, and inclination
of each of them so disposed.

All and singular which foresaid events shall be multiplied and increased, if
any hurtful direction of the natiuine shall then happen, which does consent,
or any ways accord with this Conjunction. But if any favorable, and friendly
direction shall come in place, the less harm is to be feared, nay in this
case, directions are always to be preferred before the great Conjunctions, or
Oppositions of the superior planets, as also before the Eclypses of the Sun,
and Moon, for that their effects are more forcible and effectual then the
operations of any such Copulations, or obscurations, which work only as
general causes, and do therefore hurt those men chiefly, whose natiuities
accord with the first beginninges or foundations of any such Regions, or
Cities, as are most like to feel and suffer the cruel influence and terrible
operations of any such heavenly Accidents.

Here therefore I am to leave every man to the consideration of his own private
nativity, howbeit I could my self rehearse some of good calling, whose
Horoscopes are thus appointed, but that I intend not to become odious, or
tedious by this kind of commemoration, to any particular person, either now
in this Treatise, or hereafter in any other more learned and painful
Discourse touching these or the like points, where notwithstanding they might
happily serve to a greater purpose, and farther use, then now presently they
may, for proof and trial of the foresaid euentes, as they shall afterward
fall out more effectually. But I am grown somewhat longer, then I purposed in
the beginning, and therefore will here draw toward an end, most heartily
committing every man, to the serious care and regard of his own safety, and
consequently to the tuition of the omnipotent Adonay, who of his infinite and
singular mercies and goodness, grant, that we which now live for a time, may
in time so live to the true and sincere worship of him that lives for ever
and ever, that by so living we may learn to dye, and by so dying live with
him for evermore. Sub Lunae secundo Gabriele, variae hominibus impositae sunt
leges, very Dei cultus negligitur, falsorum Deorum religio nimis propagatur, as
Ioannes Tritemius writes of that age in his book de septem Secundeis, And
does it not behoue us to take careful heed, and beware in time, lest a new
Ioannes Tritemius, or some other of greater credit hereafter arise, to
discredit this our lost age, sub lunae tertio Gabricle, with the like report,
for neglecting the sacred and ioysul tidings of the gospel, which being never
so plentifully taught, was never more scantly learned, and being never so
truly preached, was never more falsely followed, or more lightly regarded, then
now generally it is. The more present shame, the more future punishment. What
marvel therefore though such plagues hang over our heads? What marvel though
Gods vengeance be at hand, nay even now ready to fall down upon us, to
oppress, and consume us? What marvel though the ordinary course, as well of
all natural, as of moral things be quite turned topsie turuie?

Dum pedibus teritur probitas, astutia summae
Laudis opus, faelix nullum violentia, vt olim,
Crimen habet, plausus sequitur te faeda voluptas,
Turpe nihil quod lucra ferat, nil rursus bonestum,
Quod fructu praesente caret, Dum talia fiunt
Quid miri si bella furant? si pestilis Aeer,
Conditus officio vitae, neois arbiter extet?
Si frumenta Ceres, si Bacchus must a negarit?
Si empestatum ratio peruersa, nouatis
Legibus, aestates hiberno frigore turbet.
Ver hiemis subeat munus? si veris honorem
Vendicet Autumnus pro fructu floribut ornans,
Si rari Soles vix languida spicula promant,
Atque frequens Imber vexet, niuiaeque procellae
Et tristes nebulae Scythici contagia caeli
Portent? si mores imitentur tempora nostros?
Tempora dura quidem, nondum durissima; vates
O vt inam falsus time am grauiora. Sed Astra
Nescio quid crudele minantur, and horrida coeli
Obscuri facies; plares repetita per annos.
In which Prognostical Epigrame, Hieronimus Wolfius, whom our Master Aschame in
his discourse of German affairs, calls his very friend, and whose
excellent learning partly by his Translations, and explications of Demosthenes,
and Ipocrates, partly by his other as well Astrologicall, as Philosophical,
and humanity writings, is famously known over all Europe. In which
Prophetical Epigrame, I say, this learned man has truly described, and as it
were lively painted out the wicked peruersity and perverse wickedness of this
age: with a necessary inuectiue against the abuses, and enormities now
reigning: by conferring and comparing the same with the manifold tokens and
miracles Astrologically prognosticated, touching the future most miserable
estate, and condition of the world, which shall shortly no doubt more sensibly
appear, to the terror and astonishment of all reasonable Creatures then
living. I mean not here to recapitulate the horrors of the marvelous year,
1588. or to unfold other ancient predictions, and prophecies, in which,
Conclusio, as we say in Logic, Semper sequitur deteriorem partem, I would to
God, the shadow of the earth, and earthly things, did not take away the clear
light of the Sun from us, and cause an horrible Eclypse in us. Lord, that
every man would privately contend to amend one, and both privately and
publicly pray for the amendment of all. How soon would God be moved to deal
with us, as he did by the Ninevites, whose punishment, upon their unfeigned
repentance was differred long beyond the compass of the 40. days,
prophetically forethreatened by Jonas? And did it not please God to prolong the
life of king Ezechias for the space of 15. years, notwithstanding that the
Prophet Isaias had prognosticated his death, as at hand within one day? Other
examples might be alleged, to show that punishments decreed from above, are in
some part alterable, upon humble signification of a contrite and reformed
heart: Which God grant to all his elect, and namely to us in England, whom he
has so graciously endued with so many, and so long enduring felicities. For
the prosperous continuance, and perfection whereof, my final wish, and prayer
is, as I have comprysed the same, in these four rude, but hearty verses:
Elizabeta diu, atque diu cum Principe Regnu^
Floreat: o operis summa fit ista mei.
Hinc Alpha vt caepit; sic Omega desinet istine:
Scilicet haec Anglis Omega, and Alpha suis.


The Conclusion.
Now good Brother, as in the beginning of this treatise, I addressed my
preface unto you, so having thus supplied such Additions, as I thought
requisite to be annexed to my brother Richards Astrologicall Discourse, I am
here in the end to commit, or rather submit the same, as well to your
judgment for reformation, as to the Censure of our learned Astrologers, for
allowance or disalowance. The only favor I require at their hands, is this,
that they would judge as they find, without any spice of parciality, which
oftentimes corrupts, eue^ the soundest judgments otherwise. I would be loath
to attribute, or arrogate too much unto myself: let other determine for me, or
against me, as with indifferency, grounded upon reasonable skill, they shall
see occasion.

I was here purposed to have taken my leave; But seeing it has been my good
hap, (for so I interpret it) since my supplement of the former additions, to
light upon two new books, specially concerning these matters, the one a French
Almanacke, or rather discourse of certain Astrologicall Accidents, either
lately happened, or shortly to happen: the other a prognosticall judgment of one
Robert Tanner, touching the foresaid Conjunction, I am bold to trouble you a
ittle longer, with a note or two, concerning them. As for the French discourse,
I can say the less for my small skill in French, yet thus far dare I presume
upon the very Title, or Inscription, thereof, that Docteur Francois Liberati de
Rome, is none of the perfectest Astrologers, either in Italy, or in France. For
in naming le 2, Iour de May, for the time of the Grand Conjunction, he shows
him self overmuch addicted to his master Cyprian de Boemme, who contenteth him
self with Alphonsus Calculation, whereas according to Stadius, a more exact
and absolute Mathematitian, following the most perfect Rules of Prolomy, and
Copernicus, it is certainly to happen upon the 28. of April, which my brother
Richard and I have therefore resolutely set down, notwithstanding our knowledge
of Leouitius and Mestlinus difference. Marry he promises to make an amends, in
his Ephemerides, and discourse of the reformation of the year, and of the
Pasque: which I may hap expect a good while yet, if he hold the right vein of
some Italians. In the mean while, see how his last judgment iumpeth with
ours, for the course and state of the year present, Et finablement ^ An. 1583.
sera pluuieux, and dangereux pour lee biens de la terre, et anssi repentini
tumultus et apparatus belli. And therefore we are heartily to wish, and pray
with him, Dieu par sa misericorde nous delieure du mal et du danger que par les
Astres, nous sommes menazes, and nous enuoye la paix, and lasainct grace. Which
is all that I am presently to note touching the contents of that French
discourse. Now as for old Tanners Prognostical judgment, who intituleth
himself a student in Astrology, and Cosmography, he were the rather to be
borne withal, if his ignorance and simplicity, sauoured not so much of self
lyking. I cannot but marvel, that having seen the other Discourse, he was
not ashamed to put forth his: wherein his only labor in a manner is, to set
down his schemes in letters, being before descrybed in Figures. For what is
all the rest, but a mingle mangle of stealths, and patcheries out of Leouitius,
Rogers second coming of Christ, the French Almanac, and my Brothers
Discourse, out of which, he has more then once, or twice culled out whole
sides verbatim, without any mention of him, together with certain judgments
of Stadius, applied without all judgment, in referring the same to no other
Meridian, then that, which the said Stadius respected in his calculation for
the latitude of Anwerpe. And alas, what other judgments are in that sily
Pamphlet, whereof it should bear the name of A Prognosticall judgment? Truly
were it not, that his pretended desire and zeal to do good, may seem some
way to excuse him, the simple old student in Astrology, and Cosmography, were
otherwise to be handled for his simple young labor, then I will here speak
of. Which nevertheless I write not so much to disgrace him, or to credit my
self, as to advise the discret Reader not to suffer him self to be abused by
any such gloses of good intention, but to suspend his judgment upon trial,
before he resolve upon trust. The old fellow may perhaps bear him self upon
his experience, as it is said he chiefly does: but as reading can do little
without reasonable good experience, so experience cannot do very much without
reasonable good reading: which to say troth, seems to be far from this
woeful Prognosticall Judge. And that which is most of all, he concealeth their
names, to whom he is most beholding: and publishes that for his own, which
God wot he has little right or title unto. You know who affirms, Ingenui
Animi est, profiteri per quos profeceris: and may not my brother say to this
old Cosmographer, as Tully does in one place? Tu, qui a Naeuio vel sumpsisti
multa, si fateris: vel, si negas, surripuisti. But God, and the world forgive
him, as we do: and let both him and all other account of us no otherwise, then
they find us in very deed: which I am sure is your chief desire. I might
easily enlarge this Epiloge with interlacing of other matters: and namely
touching Hermes most learned Iatromathematica, and my Translation thereof,
annexed to the present Treatise, for certain good considerations: but to
avoid tediousnes, as well unto you, as unto every other courteous Reader, I
will here cease from interrupting your weightier studies, and most heartily
commit them, and your self unto God: with like commendations from all our
friends in Walden, Stansted, and Mayners.

From my fathers, this 29. of March. 1583.
Soli sapienti Deo sola gloria.
Your loving brother to command, John Haruey.


