A DISCOVERY OF THE FRAVDVlent practices of JOHN DARREL Bacheler of Arts, in
his proceedings CONCERNING THE PRETENDED POSSESSION and dispossession of
William Summers at Nottingham: of Thomas Darling, the boy of Burton at Caldwall:
and of Katherine Wright at Mansfield, and Whittington: and of his dealings with
one Mary Couper at Nottingham, detecting in some sort the deceitful trade in
these latter days of casting out Devils.

We may not do evil that good may come of it. Romans 3. Dum per mendacium
tenditur vt doceatur fides, id demum agitur, vt nulli habenda fides, Aug. ad
Consentium. Cap. 4. IN DOMINO CONFIDO.

I W.



LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf. 1599.

The Epistle to the Reader.
THe feate of iugling and deluding the people by counterfeyt miracles, has
been as ancient, as it has been too-currant in all nations of the world,
wherein the Egyptians were grown so expert, that their sect of inchanters
durst challenge God his ambassador in working of wonders, until they were
shamefully foiled at making of Lyce. As these were mated by a silly vermin, so
the rabble of Bell his priests took as foul a fall, whose grosser wits could
devise no better way to purchase an opinion of deity to their God of flies,
then by fayning, that his omnipotency lay in infinite eating, pretending that
his Godhead was able to consume as much in a night, as two hundred men. These
had a public aim, the countenancing of false religion, by a face of deity,
falsely drawn upon stocks and stones, for a private end of a private person.
We have a notable president in the Arch-iugler Simon Magus: the drift of whose
feyned miracles in bewitching the people, was to be reputed (...) a wonderful
man, and to be pointed at with this Euge, (...); this man is the power of
Almighty God. Add unto these, Numa Pompilius his feyned Nymph, Socrates his
Genius, Sertorius his Hynde, Mahomets false conceyted Dove, we shall find the
tract of all miracle-mongers to bend to one of these two ends: either gracing
of false religion by this graceles feate, or the raising of their own greatness
in the opinion of the people. The great Impostor of Rome, master of this
faculty, has so led the world in a string, by this Legerdemaine: bewitching
by his counterfeyte miracles, the minds of the ignorant, given to adore al,
that they do not apprehend in the weakness of their sense, as he does now
proclaim by one of his Herauldes with open mouth. Nemo vnquam haereticorum
miraculum edidit: none but he and his scholars can cogge a miracle kindly,
and he and his Priests can dispatch a miracle as easily as a squirrell can
crack a nutte: a miracle in the bread, a miracle in the wine, a miracle in
holy water, a miracle in holy oil, a miracle in our Ladies milk, a miracle in
the asses tail, a miracle in Lamps, candles, beads, breeches, rags, bones,
stones, omnia stultorum and miraculorum plena, nothing done in his religion
without a miracle and a Vice. And that which passes all, the least bone of a
canonized Saint, (traitor Saint Campion forsooth), has more force in it
sometimes to cast out a Legion of Deuilles, then the name of Jesus, then
prayer, fasting, invocation of the Trinity, Exorcising, coniuring, and Mary's
relics, Cross, holy water, and all. And would to God the Pope could vaunt of
this trick alone, that none but he and his were seen in this mystery: and
that there were not risen up amongst us scholars, not out of his school,
but of his occupation as touching this point, who, (upon what aim, I leave to
God and their conscience, such as it is), whether upon Simon Magus his (...),
to seem to be great in the peoples eyes: or the enchanters pride, to cross
God his governors in the church, who profess not this pretty feate: or the
Bellites conceit, to grace an idol of their own idle brains: or of an
impious simplicity, holding it lawful to lie, cogge, and feign, so as it be
to a good end, and (as their favorites term it) to the glory of God, have
taken upon them to be deeply seen in this mystery of deuilles. And one
especially above the rest, has played his public prize in this iugling
science, casting out more devils by prayer and fasting after a good dinner,
perhaps at after nooone, then we read that ever any of the Apostles at so
full a season did. Which being now discovered to be but a pure play, containing
two principal parts, of a vice and a devil, there has been devised two
miserable shifts to help him off the stage, that he might not be hissed at of
all the world. One, that this action (like the day of judgment acted on a
stage) though feigned in it self, yet procured reverence and fear in the
simpler and looser sort, whilst the imaginary Deuilles seemed to stand in such
awe of the word of God: the other, that to cast out a Devil, is no such great
matter, as men make account of, being but mirandu^ and no^ miraculum, in the
nature of a wonder, and not of a miracle. The former is borrowed from a
Champion of the Popes, who to uphold the shop of his forgeries and lies in an
Apologeticall treatise: sticks not to affirm this impious rule: honesta
docendi ad pietatem nunquam potest esse ratio inhonesta: So as a man's meaning
be good and religious, it skils not, though his means be bad and impious. A
singular foundation to uphold the Pope his playhouse, and to make religion a
pageant of Puppittes. It was peradventure at the first, a supposed good intent
to devise the fearful fire of Purgatory, the least sparkle whereof, is of
more tormenting force, then all the fires that be in the world: that men might
be more fearful, of committing small sins. And so likewise the painting of
Almighty God like an ancient Philosopher, with a grave long beard, and a book
in his hand, that the boys might have a reverend impression of his fatherlike
wisdom: voluntary poverty whippings, pilgrimages, images, worshipping of
relics, and adoration of the Cross, and the blessed Budget of all the Pope
his pedlary and trash, is blanched over with as fair a face of good intent to
the glory of God, as this iugling mystery of casting out devils. Open but this
creuise in the door of the church, that ill may be done to any good end: you
shall have religion like a Homers Ilias, a fardle of fictions, and a bundle of
lies. God is truth, and will be worshipped in spirit and truth: all falsehood
and forgerie are of the Devil, and as opposite to truth, and consequently unto
God, as death unto life, and darkness unto light. Saint Austine his resolution
is of so high a pitch in this point, Ad Cresce^tium cap 4.
as he says plainly it is not lawful to dissemble for the safety of a man's
soul. And the heathen Philosopher in the fourth of his Ethickes, speaks
better Christianity in this case, then our iugling divines (...) a lie is
simply bad, and simply to be condemned.

The second shift is as silly as this is sinful, that to cast out a Devil is
but a wonder, and not in the nature of a miracle in deed. What dull conceits
had the rulers of the Jews, that they could not see this sly silly shift, to
deprave the miracles of our savior Christ, and to tell the people there was no
just cause they should believe, that our Savior was the son of God, in doing
such mighty miracles among them: the chief one whereof was casting out
Deuilles, by reason that action was but Mirandum and non miraculum* a strange
thing for silly people to wonder at, and not a miracle to enforce them to
believe. But they not able to deny the evidence of the miracle, put it upon
Beelzebub, alleging that it was done by the Prince of the Deuilles. Our Savior
pointing at the hand that did the deed, tells them that it was no other power
then the finger of Almighty God: secluding both the arm of nature, and help
of the Devil, from this divine action. And if our Deuill-stingers can point
out a finger equal to the finger of God, and challenge as good interest in it,
as our Savior Christ did, or his Apostles, they shall easily obtain the
credit of effecting a miracle. There is a place in the last of S. Mark,
wherein they mightily please themselves, and taking it as a rod of defense to
maintain their cause, it proves in handling, a serpent that deuoureth them up.
The words are these: These signs shall follow the^ that believe in my name: they
shall cast out devils, and shall speak with new tongues, and shall take away
serpents, and if they shall drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them,
they shall lay their hands upon the sick, and they shall recover. Foelix
quem faciunt etc. I doubt not but they are wise enough to keep themselves
warm, and to deny joining issue out of this place, but rather take example
from a giddie brother of theirs, who conceyting a warrant out of these words
for proof of certain brainsicke conclusions, that he held, made this his
issue, that if he took down Rattes-bane, and it did him no hurt, that then
his positions should be received as the Oracles of God: which he doing
accordingly, and for a little time, not feeling any harm to ensue, was
ravished with a wonderful iollitie of this his strange trial. But his
pitiful Metamorphosis was as quick and strange: for as soon as the poison
came near unto his heart, he roared, yelled, and raged exceedingly, and in this
miserable torment ended his life. We will not be so hard taskmaisters, as to
put them to this trial for their extraordinary gifts, but will set them up an
easier rest. Let them with all their iugling drive out a melancholicke spirit,
out of any poor soul in Bedlame, let them lay their hands upon those that
are troubled with the dropsy, sciatike, or the gowt: let them recover sight to
the blind, or limbs to the lame, and we will give ear unto their application
of that scripture. But if they be unfaithful in those lesser mites, who will
trust them in matter of their greater treasures? These gifts are acknowledged
by the fathers, to have shined in the Apostles time, and in some few ages
after the Apostles: but always with this note, as the learned hold, in ijs qui
dono miraculorum claruerunt, in such as were evidently endued with the gift of
working miracles. Touching the niceness of the difference between Mirandum
and miraculum, both terms spring from one root of wonder or marvel: an
effect which a thing strangely done does procure in the minds of the beholders,
as being above the reach of nature and reason: and not only God his
supernatural acts done in the land of Egypt, are called maruailes and
wonders, but one and the self act done by the finger of God, has diverse and
sundry names given it in diverse and sundry considerations. Christ his miracles
in the 4. of Saint John are generally called (...), as being significations of
his omnipotent power. His miracle in the 5. of Luke, showed upon the man taken
with the palsy, is called by the multitude that beheld it, (...), because it
extended the compass of their conceit. In the 8. of John, Christ his deeds
are called (...), for their power in amazing the understanding and senses: and
so (...), as causing men to gaze: (...), as procuring wonder: (...), for the
excellency of their cause: and (...), for their wonderful effect: and the
very same names that are given by the holy Ghost to the acts of Christ,
effected by the only finger of God, are attributed to false prophets in the
13. of Mark, and to Antichrist himself in the second of the second to the
Thessalonians, (...), in all power and signs and wonders. And therefore,
whether they iuggle under the color of (...), or (...), the feate is alike,
and the deceit all one. Thus much for a taste of Deuill-driuers legerdemaine:
open the curtain, and see their Puppettes play.

S. H.

The First Book.
This first Book contains the number, that are pretended to have been
dispossessed by M. Darrel: The occasion that his practices were called in
question by her Majesty's Commissioners for causes ecclesiastical at Lambeth:
The endeavors of M. Darrels friends to extol both him and his doings: The
great uncertainty of the grounds, whereupon M. Darrell, and all other casters
out of Devils do in these days build their skill, and of the shifts they
have, not only to set themselves on work, but also to maintain their
credites, when their iugling is called into any question.

CHAP. I. The number of such persons as are said to have been dispossessed by
M. Darrels means.
John Darrell a Bachelor of Arts, being about the age of three or four and
twenty, but then no minister (as he says) did take upon him about thirteen
years since to cast, first one Devil, and afterward (upon a pretended
repossession) eight Devils, out of a maid near seventeen years old in
Darbishire, named Katherine Wright. M. Darrell ad art. 4. and ad 8.
The history of this feate he himself writ, and gave one copy of it to the
Lady Bows.

From the time above mentioned vz. 1586. till the 28. of March in the year
1596. M. Darrell for ought that is generally known, was out of work.
Notwithstanding (besides the publishing of the said history) he omitted few
occasions to intimate, what he had done touching Katherine Wright. Insomuch as
growing thereby into some small credit with the simpler sort: he became very
peart and proud in that respect. Something to this purpose he confesses in
these words: M. Darrell ad art. 8.
Some thought that I did glory somewhat too much in the action of casting
forth Devils. The cause of which his glory enlarged it self forsooth in the
said year 1596. when pretense is made that he cast a Devil out of a boy in
Burton, called Thomas Darling, then about the age of fourteen years. Of this
worthy act a book being penned by one Iesse Be a Sadler in Burton, the same
was first contracted by one M. Denison a minister in that country: and then
after it had been seen and allowed by M. Darrell, and M. Hildersham, it was
published in print: and was commonly sold and called for, by this title, vz.
The book of the dispossessing of the boy of Burton.

What M. Darrell took upon him after this his second exploit, it may be
surmised by glorying in the first. But yet his name was not so famous, until
the 17. of March next following, when being sent for into Lancashire by one M.
Starkie, upon the report of M. Dee his Butler, who told the said M. Starkie
what M. Darrell had done at Burton, he dispossessed in the said M. Starkies
house seven persons, at one clap: vz. John Starkie, Anne Starkie, Margaret
Hardman, Elianor Hardman, Ellen Holland, Margaret Byrom, and Jane Ashton: which
Jane is since fallen into the hands of certain Seminary priests, and has
been carried by them up and down that country, to sundry recusants houses (as
certain idle men were wont to carry puppets) and by her cunning counterfaiting
of certain fits, and staying of herself by the secret directions of the said
Priests, she has gotten God knows what: they by such lewdnes have won
great credit, but her Majesty's subjects, have in the mean time been
shamefully abused.

Of the dispossessing of the said seven parties, there is a book that runs
from hand to hand, penned by M. Dicons preacher at Leigh (as M. Darrell says,)
and justified from point to point (although very childishly) by one M. More, a
preacher of his own allowance: who joined with M. Darrell in the pretended
dispossessing of the said seven. Touching which book there are added (in the
end of the said history of the boy of Burton) these words, vz. Shortly you
shall have the true story come forth of those seven in Lancashire, that were
possessed with unclean spirits, and all seven delivered at one time by this
man: M. Darrell ad art. 6.
meaning M. Darrell, as he himself confesses.

But of all that ever M. Darrell dealt with, William Summers one of Nottingham
supposed to be possessed, is the youth, by whom (as it seems) he has won
his spurs in the opinion of many, especially women. He had in his hands nine of
the former persons, but two or three days, and so dispatched them: but Summers
stuck in his fingers almost five months. When he began with Katherine
Wright, he dealt but rudely and (as he confesses himself) unskillfully: Marry
by the time that he took Summers in hand at Nottingham, which was in November
1597. he was grown his crafts master. Of his proceedings with the said
Summers, and of the said Summers fits, diverse treatises are come abroad. M.
Darrell himself has written a short history concerning that matter, and
besides that, an Apology of his own penning, for the justifying of himself is
lately come out in print: there is also published and printed an other book in
his behalf: entitled, A brief narration of the possession, dispossession,
and repossession of W. Summers.

Lastly, M. Darrell having played his tricks so long with William Summers, that
all which the boy could do began to grow very stale in Nottingham, then he
attempted to practice with Mary Cooper the sister of Summers, and there was no
remedy but she must be possessed: and so he set a new matter on foot, which
was very zealously followed by certain wives in that town: but before it came
to any perfection M. Darrell began to be disclosed for a dissembler. Touching
all these (saving those in Lancashire) examinations have been taken, and
as well by the confessions of the parties, as by diverse other circumstances, it
does plainly appear, that all which was done betwixt Darrell and them was
merely counterfeyted. But for as much as his greatest piece of cunning and
legerdemaine was employed chiefly about Summers, (as having then learned more
iugling-skill then before) and that his practices with that boy, were and still
are so greatly insisted upon by him and his friends, that nothing will be
digested that is spoken against them: the greatest pains have been taken to
find out the packing that has been used in this cause.

CHAP. II. The occasion why M. Darrels dealing with Summers was called into
question at Lambeth.
IT is a common use when any men for matters of crime are called into question,
(and especially if they are like to fall out hardly with the defendantes) to
discredit the witnesses, to slander the plaintifes, and to take exceptions
both to the Judges, and to their proceedinges. And hereof the course that M.
Darrell and his friends have held, may be an example: he the said M. Darrell
being charged with diverse notable cosenages, in pretending by hypocritical
sleightes to cast out Devils. The particulars to this purpose in every point
are not here so pertinent: some of those only, that concern the occasions
pretended, why M. Darrell has been called into question, and the persons that
by authority have looked into this cause, and the witnesses that have been
produced in it, are meet to be considered: For they do argue a great
combination or associatio^ to have wrought some great work, if they had not by
fortune stumbled in their way.

Some give it out, I.B. etc.
that the detecting of one Alice Freeman to be a Witch, was the occasion
through M. Freeman her kinsmans dealing, that William Summers was first
accounted to be a counterfaite. Others of deeper insight, say that the Devil
himself envying the happy estate of Nottingham, by means of M. Darrels
preaching there, The written Treatise.
did raise up that slander of possession to hinder it. There be also that give
it out (justly as they say) that the first occasion of moving this evil
(forsooth) against M. Darrell, was his threatening the judgments of God against
such Pastors, as let their people perish for lack of instruction. The brief
Narration.
And one seems to ascribe the hard conceit held by some, of M. Darrel, to
the want of faith, telling us that when Lazarus was raised from the dead, some
were hardened, and complained upon our Savior. The same fellow also reports,
that it has been given out by one, a great man amongst them (meaning her
Majesty's Commissioners for causes ecclesiastical) that seeing they have taken
it in hand, they will have the credit of it: insinuating that otherwise M.
Darrell might long before this time have been discharged, as a man blameles
and innocent in those points whereof he was accused, and to strengthen this
gross untruth, that appertains, (as shameless as the other,) where he says
that there has been running to the Court, to forestall the Lords and Ladies
of Honor, and to hinder the preferring of petitions in M. Darrels behalf, to
the Lords of her Majesty's Privy Council. Who have troubled the Lords and
Ladies in that matter, they know best themselves: but indeed some have done it,
peradventure to have had Darrels practices smothered up, for the avoiding
(forsooth) of such slander, as might otherwise fall upon the Ministry. But
above all the rest, that is a substantial conceit, that M. Darrel cannot be
endured, because he has such a feate in casting out Devils as many other men
want. It cannot be endured (says the author of it) that those kind of men,
which are accounted the of-scouring of the world, Narration.
should be thought to have such interest in Christ Jesus, as that by their
prayers and fasting, he should as it were visibly descend from heaven, and
tread down Satan under their feet: whereas other men, who account themselue,
more learned, excellent, and wise, then they, do not withal their Physic,
Rhetoric, pomp and primacie accomplish the like. But God has chosen the
foolish things of the world, to confound the wise, and the weak things of
the world to confound the mighty. A place indeed of scripture as well applied,
as that in the fourth of S. Matthew, He will give his Angels charge over thee,
least at any time thou should dash thy foot against a stone. But to insist
no longer upon these vanities and foolish surmises: the true occasion, that
moved her Majesty's said Commissioners to intermeddle with this Impostor,
(wherewith his confederates and companions are so much grieved) and to proceed
therein as they have done, was as follows.

William Summers having counterfaited himself to be possessed, dispossessed,
and repossessed, and held on that course successively, for the space of about
three months: he did at the last, being got out of M. Darrels hands, confess
and auow, that all he had done that while, was but dissembled: showing to the
Mayor and Aldermen of Nottingham, how he had acted all his former fittes.
Herewith M. Darrell and his friends were greatly moved, especially when they
perceived the boys said confession to be so generally believed, as that there
began an hart-burning amongst the neighbors: some holding with M. Darrell,
and some against him. I.W*
To meet therefore with this mischief, and hearing (as it is supposed) that
the Archdeacon of Darby had written to the L. Archbishop of Canterbury
touching that matter, it was thought good to use some prevention, and to
procure a Commission from the L. Archbishop of York for the examination of
such witnesses, as should be produced in the behalf of M. Darrel, to prove
that Summers had not dissembled. The said Commission obtained, exceptions were
taken against it, because all the Commissioners were addicted to M. Darrell.
Thereupon it was renewed, M. Euington ad artic. 34. page 190 Pet. Clarke then
Mayor. William Freeman. Nich. Shepherd. John Couper.
and upon one M. Euingtons motion, some were made Commissioners to join with
the rest, that were known to have disliked of M. Darrels proceedinges. When the
time came that this second Commission was to be executed, (certain persons
having been examined,) Summers was brought before the Commissioners, who
shortly after his coming, fell to the acting of some of his fittes in their
presence, upon a former Compact and Agreement made betwixt him and others,
before he came thither.

Herewith, all that favored M. Darrell, began to rejoice, M. Aldridge narration.
and to run abroad into the town, telling their friends with great joy, that
Summers was now found to have been no dissembler: but the rest that had held a
contrary opinion, they were greatly rated and checked: insomuch as when some of
them came out of the house where the Commissioners sat, they were not only
rated at exceedingly, Nich. Shepherd.
but to one of them by the throwing of a stone some violence was offered. Thus
M. Darrell and his friends triumphed for nine or ten days, having by the
direction of the said Commissioners Summers amongst them again, who playing his
old tricks denied that he had dissembled. But this their joy ended, when the
said days were expired: for Summers, by the direction of the L. Chief Justice
of the common Plees, was no sooner gotten again out of the hands of M.
Darrell and his friends, but of himself he confessed (as before) the whole
course of his dissimulation, and why he had affirmed to the said Commissioners,
that the fittes acted before them were not counterfaited. I. W
With this alteration M. Darrell and his adherentes were greatly troubled; the
parts taking on both sides began to be more violent, and the town became to
be extraordinarily divided, one railing upon an other, at their meeting in the
streets, as they were affected in that cause. The pulpets also rang of nothing
but Devils, M. Aldridge
and witches: wherewith men, women, and children were so afrighted, as many of
them durst not stir in the night, nor so much as a servant almost go into his
masters celler about his business without company. Few grew to be sick or
evil at ease, but straight way they were deemed to be possessed. Briefly such
were the stirs in Nottingham about this matter, as it was feared the people
would grow (if they were not prevented) to further quarrels and mutinies, or to
some greater inconvenience.

Hereof the L. Archbishop of Canterbury being advertised by the said L. Chief
Justice, and others, did think it in his wisdom very necessary to call for
M. Darrell by virtue of her Majesty's Commission for causes Ecclesiastical,
who being accordingly sent for, appeared before him and others at Lambeth: from
whence he was committed to prison, by reason of his absurd and untrue (but
yet very confident) assertions: giving thereby just occasion to suspect, that
he was but a counterfaite: and order was taken for the further examination of
that cause, according to the usual course by the laws of the Realm, in such
cases provided. The issue whereof was, that upon the hearing of M. Darrell, and
the depositions against him in open Court, before the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, the L. Bishop of London, the Lord Chief Justice of her Majesty's
Bench, the L. Chief Justice of the Common Plees, M. D. Caesar M. of the
Requests, M.D. Bing Deane of the Arches, and M. D. Stanhope: (the Earl of
Shrewesbury and some other gentlemen of good note, with many others being
present,) he the said M. Darrell, was by the full agreement of the whole
Court, condemned for a counterfeyte: and together with M. More (his companion,
who took upon him to justify the said Darrell, and had otherwise greatly
misbehaued himself) they were both of them deposed from the Ministry, and
committed to close prison, there to remain until order were taken for their
further punishment. The justice of which sentence will sufficiently appear by
this treatise, enforced (as it were) to be published by the casting out of
certain Pamphlets, which do so much impeach it: suffering none to escape their
bitterness, that have dealt against M. Darrell (but yet for the truth) in this
cause.

Upon M. Darrels first committing, and within a while after, some matters
began to break out against him, besides the Confession of Summers: it
remains to note how many of his friends were kindled, and what choler they
shewde by deprauing, not only of such lawful courses as were taken to find
out the truth, but also of those persons that had to deal therein:
notwithstanding they were often desired but to stay themselves, and suspend their
judgments, until the cause were througly examined, heard, and determined.
Diverse of them came up to London, and in secret corners exclaimed bitterly
against his committing to prison, justifying by many devises his former
actions. Those who had dealt in his behalf at Nottingham (thinking by his
imprisonment themselves to be touched) ceased not to solicit great personages
in his behalf. Hard words were given out against such as had M. Darrell in
examination, and the rest also of her Majesty's said Commission. A letter was
written to the Lord Bishop of London, threatening him with the authority of
great persons, who were said (but falsely) to have taken upon them the defense
of M. Darrell: and resembling both him and another of Honor (as the author
terms them) to the two false Judges that condemned guiltless Susanna, and to
the Scribes and Pharisees that took council together to put Christ to death

But of that which is more worthy of reprehension in them, it might in some
sort have been borne with (as the common Proverb says) for loosers to have
their words: so for them to have taken their pleasure in speaking what they
list, whilst the matter did hang in suspense, and was but in the way of
trial. But now seeing that after long deliberation M. Darrell has been judged
for a dissembler (as is before expressed) which might have satisfied any
reasonable men: it cannot but be thought a very outrageous course, to continue
such like their bold and railing lewdnes, and with some increase thereof to
publish their choler and stomachs in printe, giving forth at their pleasures
some other written copies containing the like stuff. They that imagine Summers
was not possessed, The preface to M. Darrels Apology.
but did counterfaite (says the Preface) do by consequence deny the
soueraignity of our Savior in the action. And one of the written Pamphelites:
To deny the work of the Devils, and God in the dispossession of Summers, may
seem to be after a sort, to deny them in the Gospel. Indeed if M. Darrels
credit were as good in saying, that Summers was possessed, and that by his, and
his fellows means he was dispossessed: as the Evangelists and Apostles ought
to be, when they tell us of diverse that were possessed in Christ's time,
(whom our Savior did not only himself deliver, but gave power also to them
and others to do the like,) then their said Collections were pertinent.
Otherwise many false knaves from time to time, having deluded the people with
hypocrisy, and pretense of casting out devils, it is a suggestion of Satan
for any to collect, that thereby the said actions of our Savior, and his
Apostles, are in any sort blemished: but let them rail on.

The proceedinges against M. Darrell and others, (says the Author of the
brief Narration) Have been very violent. And again, being brought before
the seat of Justice, they who at the same time gave gentle audience to
Papists, Arrians, Atheistes, and Blasphemers, would not permit M. Darrell to
speak any thing almost in his own defense. And the Author of the Preface to
M. Darrels Apology: M. Darrell hitherto could not obtain so much, as patient
audience, or any judicial course of proceeding. Again, Their proceedinges
have been indirect, contrary to the royal commandment of her Majesty, her
laws, and lawful Liberties of her loyal Subjects. And again, the said
Narration: his Judges became parties, pleaders, and accusers: Again also M.
Darrell and M. More are now imprisoned for giving testimony to the truth.
Again, let men beware in crediting false rumors against those holy men of God,
who do now, or shall hereafter suffer in this holy cause. Again, the Devil
and his Agents conspire in one complotte, against this mighty work of the
Lord Jesus. It seems so evidently to be the finger of God, as though we our
selves should forsake it, as with Judas to betray our Master: Yea with Pharao
set our selves to obscure it: Yet the Lord if he love us, will rather make the
stones to cry and utter it, yea the deuels themselves to acknowledge it, then
it shall be hid. Again, when they have had their swinge but a little, they will
be ashamed of their own folly: Again, I would advise them that slander this
work, and persecute the servants of God without cause, to take heed, least
they be found even fighters against God. He that sits in Heaven sees their
devises, and laughes them to scorn, and they and all their conspiracies,
plots, slaunderinges, and reuilinges shall consume like a snaile. And again,
when the Saduces, Gallenistes, and Naturalistes of our time have considered of
the matter, we will expect some new objections. In the mean season let him
that is filthy, be filthy still: but do Satan what he can, wisdom shall
be justified of her children.

These are children indeed: To what ripenes in railing think you they will
grow, by the time they be men? It is true that there is a wisdom: whose
children by their outward appearance they may well be accounted. Of which
wisdom S. James speaking says. If ye have bitter envying etc. rejoice not,
neither be liars against the truth, for this wisdom descends not from
above, but is earthy, sensual, and devilish. And S. Jude comes also as
near them: who makes it a particular note of false seducers, to speak evil
of them who are in authority.

Now as concerning the witnesses that are used in this matter: the said
Wisdoms children are mightily (as it seems) offended with them, and with
such also as did examine them. The witnesses (says the Preface) that
voluntarily offered to be deposed for the truth, were repulsed: all partial
persons that could be thought upon, were presently called. Also the Narrator:
These proper Commissioners refused such as were willing to justify the truth
upon their oaths, they picked out whom they listed, and wrote what pleased
them. And a third writes thus to the Bishop of London, concerning himself,
and others in authority. You condemn the guiltless servants of God, upon
Summers bare report only, excepting eight or nine false witnesses, who say,
that they think in their consciences, that the said Summers did but
counterfeit. If these fellows words or writings deserved any answer, the truth
in this behalf were sufficient to stop their throats: being so wide and open
sepulchers of falsehood and corruption. But their tongues are their own, and of
likelihood they are determined if they can (as it is in the Psalm) to prevail
with them. Howbeit (as by the way, and a little to clear these calumniations)
be it observed, that the whole number of witnesses produced against M. Darrell,
being about forty and four: thirty and four of them at the least, are such
as had some extraordinary liking of him, and were reputed to be his friends and
favorers. Of the said forty and four, twelve were used by Master Darrell
himsefe, as witnesses examined to prove Summers no dissembler: four of them
being ministers. Seven came up to London, to justify his proceedinges, and to
procure him what friendship they could: three of them also being ministers, and
eight others not reckened before, are preachers or graduates. If there be some
three or four of the whole number, that suspected more falsehood in M. Darrels
proceedinges then the rest, yet are their depositions, but unto some one or two
points, and those not greatly material. The matters of importance, whereby M.
Darrels iugling is detected, are deposed by his chiefest friends: and
therefore there is no such cause of clamor, why they should either be charged
with partiality, or falsehood. If they have in any sort offended, it may be
thought to be rather in concealing something that they knew, then in devising
of any untruths against him. And for the writers of their examinations, they
were men lawfully authorized in that behalf, and public Notaries, sworn to
deal truly in such causes. Besides, every of the said examinations is
subscribed with the hand of the party examined, and of the Commssioners who
took the same. But it is an easy matter to speak evil, for such as are of
the diuising and slaundering humor: who care not what they either say or write,
so they think it may serve their turn.

Why these men should thus be ouercarried, that nothing will content them, but
that when they have not what they would, they will thus lay about, may be a
question. There is mention made before of a combination or association: the
intent whereof may be left at large. Some little gesses may be made, so they be
not enforced as concludent. M. Darrell being taken at Nottingham by some, for a
time, to be a marvelous bugge to scarre the Devil, was in the heat thereof
chosen by certain in the town, to be their preacher, having otherwise no
lawful authority in that behalf. The written treatise.
This choice, one of his friends terms such a comfortable calling, and so
warrantable, that very few ministers in our Church have had the like. The
author of the brief Narration, to draw us peradventure from further dealing
with M. Darrell, or at the least to show his humor, propounds in his margent
this question, vz. Whether a Bishop and Elder be all one in scriptures. And M.
More, (as cunning as M. Darrell in dealing with Satan) says: that the faith
of the Church established under the Pastors and Teachers etc. shall bring forth
this fruit* namely, to cast out devils: etc. Hereunto it may be added, that
many, who have taken M. Darrels cause most to heart, have been noted heretofore
as favorers of the ouerworne Consistorian faction. Of these premises it would
peradventure anger them, if any should collect, that in all likelihood, seeing
neither by learning, nor sufficient arguments, they could heretofore prevail,
for the setting up of their Presbyteriall conceits, they thought to supply
their wantes therein, by this devise of casting out Deuilles. It were to be
wished, that at the last they would leave this giddines, or at the least
touching the matter in hand, to think more reverently of those that be in
authority, and not persist as yet they do, in the further justification of M.
Darrell, their weakness therein being more apparent by those points that
follow.

CHAP. III. How M. Darrels friends have set out the pretended dispossessing of
William Summers.
AS M. Darrels favorers have been bold to slander the persons and courses
held for the detecting of his cosenages: so are they very earnest (by extolling
above the rest, the pretended dispossessing of William Summers) to justify
therein his course and proceedings with him. The brief Narration terms it,
A marvelous work of God: a glorious work greater then which has scarcely
been heard of, either in our days, or in the days of our forefathers for
many years. The truth of this work (says he) shall break forth as a light,
and the glory thereof as a burning lamp. And again: it is a candle lighted by
God upon a candlestick, in the heart and center of the land, that the beams
thereof might shine forth, and give light to all the Realm. And another of his
friends in his said written treatise tells us, that, All who love the Lord
Jesus in sincerity, must be careful to clear and publish this work, as the
wonderful work of Christ's own finger. And again: it may be justly hoped,
that it will prove a matter of as great consequence, as ever any such work
that the Lord gave extraordinarily, since the time that he restored the Gospel
amongst us, and as profitable to all that truly profess the Gospel of Jesus
Christ.

These fellows (we see) are maruellously ravished with this superexcellent
wonder. But mark how truly one of them speaks: peradventure against his
will. It will prove (forsooth) to be a matter of as great consequence, and as
profitable, as ever any such work, since the restitution of the Gospel
amongst us. Any such work: you may believe him. For the pretended
dispossessing of the maid of Chester, was nothing else but a ridiculous toy. M.
Darrell himself will not say, that Devils are cast out in such sort. And like
to that was the casting of a Devil out of one Mildred, the base daughter of
Alice Norington, at Westwell in Kent, in the year 1574. which for all the
goodly pretenses that were made by two ministers, Roger Newman, and John
Brainford (equally to M. Darrell and M. More) was confessed in the end to be
but a mere cosenage. Read M. Scotts discourse of witchcraft, the 7. book,
the first Chapter. It seems that practice was one of M. Darrels patterns.
Such a work also was the very wonderful and strange miracle of God, (as the
title of the book runs) showed upon a Dutchman, of the age of xxiii.
years, which was possessed of ten Devils, and was by Gods mighty providence
dispossessed of them again, the 27. of January, in the year 1572.
Notwithstanding that the Mayor of Maidstone, Nicasius Vanderscheure, (the
minister of the Dutch Church there) and John Stikelbowe (the instrument
forsooth, that cast out the said Devil) with diverse others, did subscribe that
pamphlet. In this number may also be ranged, the strange news out of
Sommersetshire, Anno 1584. termed, a dreadful discourse of the dispossessing
of one Margaret Cooper at Ditchet, from a devil in the likeness of a headless
bear. Hereunto in like manner may be added, the very strange vexation of the
maid of Bury: of Agnes Brigges, and Rachell Pinder in London: all of them
counterfeite and lewd practices, resembling or imitating the wicked devises of
the holy Maid of Kent: who by the instigation of two false Priests, Edward
Bocking, and Richard Masons (with their associates) took upon her in King
Henry the eights days, to have marvelous traunses, to the great admiration of
the whole country: as it appears very fully in the Statutes at large. An.
Hen. 8.25. Cap. 12.

But why does M. Darrels friend omit the dispossessing of Katherine Wright, the
boy of Burton, and the vii. in Lancashire? Are not their deliverances of as
great consequence as that of William Summers? Surely they are thought so: and
the profit which is expected, that will ensue of all those four strange
works, is, the punishment due to such lewd cosenages: that others hereafter may
eschew such wicked practices.

But let us hear M. Darrels said friend tell his own tale, how the
dispossessing of Summers will prove so profitable: It will so do (says he) by
confounding all Atheists, who think there are no Devils: by conuincing the
Papists, who hold, that our Ministers can not dispossess any: by discovering
of witches, Satan by Summers having disclosed many: by teaching us in Summers,
that Gods providence reaches even to children: by encouraging us to fast and
pray often, the same being of force to cast out Devils: and by the general
furtherance it gives to the Gospel, whilst thereby we may learn, (says M.
Moore, or his companion, one M. Dicons, writing in deed of the vii. in
Lancashire) that it is Gods word which we now preach, even the sword of the
spirit which slays Satan.

It is not amiss, that the Papists are driven to the Devil, to seek after
his testimonies for the confirmation of many things: As to win a better
estimation, and greater liking of their Sacrament of the Altar: their praying
to Saints: their fustie relics: their coniured holy water: their Agnus Dei:
and of their shauelinges, and hypocritical Exorcists, they bear the world in
hand, that the Devil can not endure any of them, and that he does not therein
dissemble, (as seeming to be troubled with them,) per astutiam, through craft
thereby to deceive, but per infirmitate^, in that he is not able for their
holiness (indeed) to abide them. And let them comfort themselves (seeing they
will not be reclaimed) with that uncertain distinction, and many other such
like stratagems of Satan. But for ministers of the Gospel, or any other,
(that would seem to favor it) to send us to M. Darrels dealing with William
Summers, for the confounding of Atheists, for the conuincing of Papists, or for
our assurance, that the word of God is truly preached amongst us, must of
necessity be held by the grauer sort, to be a mere madness, or a frenzy at
the least. What the casting out of Devils amongst other miracles in the
scriptures can effect, that has been long since wrought, through the
expelling of them by Christ himself, and by his Apostles: and their miraculous
working therein continues still the like force for the confirmation of our
faith, whilst the same is daily offered unto our consideration by the holy
Ghost in the word of God. It is not here meant to discuss, what we ought to
think touching the continuance of the power of casting out Devils: Howbeit for
as much as M. Darrels friends do so often allege Tertullian, De sacramento
ordinis. Cap. 2.
S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S. Austen. S. Chrysostom, with Prosper, etc. it is
not amiss to hear what Komnitius (writing against the Council of Trent)
says of this point. Exorcistas etc. They have transformed their Exorcists into
magical inchanters. In times past it was a peculiar gift to cast devils out
of men's bodies by the voice of man, and power of God. And the same gift
continued in the Church, in the times of S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine,
S. Chrysostom, and of Prosper: Obsessi in templu^ adducebantur, and saepe
co^munibus ecclesiae precibus liberabantur: The possessed were brought into the
Church, and were oftentimes delivered by the common prayers of the Church:
postea illud donum. etc. But afterward (says he) that gift ceased. If M.
Darrell have again obtained it, let him make much of it: and when he can bring
us one, whom we may know to be in deed possessed, both he and his friends may
have herein a fuller resolution.

CHAP. IIII. How M. Darrell is made a fitter instrument to cast out Devils,
then many other.
IT is commonly said, that no excellent work is performed but by excellent men.
The dispossessing therefore of W. Summers, being a matter so admirable, M.
Darrell must of necessity be some rare person. In which respect, as before they
have told us, of glory, of lights, of lamps, and shining beams (rese^bling
belike the supposed dispossession of Summers, to the glory that appeared in the
transfiguration of Christ, thereby to justify that lewd action) so are they as
lavish, in extolling and commending of him: ascribing unto him many
extraordinary virtues, to cover (if it might be) his counterfaiting and
cosenage. And herein they follow the beaten tract of such like devil casters:
For every man is not fit for that mystery. The Exorcising Rabbis amongst the
Papists do tell us, that in Christ's time, there were some being infidels,
that cast out devils, having no authority given them by Christ so to do: our
Savior granting that power then (they say) to Christians only. Now of
Christians, some were Apostles and Disciples, and some were Lay people, as they
termed them. Both which sorts were made fit persons to cast out devils: the
one by virtue of their calling, being ecclesiastical: and the other in respect
of their holy conversation. The layetie had this power (they say) but a while,
except it were upon some extraordinary occasions. And therein they give the
chief place to women, naming S. Brigit, S. Katherine of Seen, S. Genouefa, and
S. Anatolia: that sex (as it seems) having a general disposition, to like
well of Exorcismes. After the Apostles time (they say) that the power of casting
out devils, which the Apostles and Disciples had, was made an ecclesiastical
office, to be bestowed by the Bishops, upon such as were termed Exorcists:
whom in our language we may call Coniurors. But it is to be observed, that for
this assertion, Thyraeus the Jesuit (an especial Author of M. Darrels, De
Daemoniacis. Thyreus part 3. Cap. 37.
and his favorers) has no scripture for his warrant, neither does he pretend
any. Touching these Exorcistes, as amongst the Apostles there was a Judas, the
rest of them having purity of life, annexed to their gift of casting out
Devils: so (they say) it happens now that some Exorcists, although they be of
wicked conversation, may notwithstanding, (albeit more rarely) cast out devils
by virtue of their office, given them by their Bishops: whereas generally those
who are fit to undertake that work, must be also of an Apostolical
conversation: whereupon it comes that the Jesuits, and popish Antizans do
tell us in good sooth, that their Exorcistes must be men of very humble
spirits, void of all leuitie: such as are greatly inflamed with the love of
God: persons endued with hope and assurance, to cast out such spirits as they
meddle with: (of which hope and assurance the Apostles being sometimes
destitute, as they say, did attempt in vain to cast out one devil:) men also,
whose consciences are not burdened with any mortal sin, but for piety and
innocence of life, are persons of especial note. And one reason alleged for
this purpose, is very Logical: Contraria Contrariis pelluntur: they ought to
be as good, as the devil is bad, that can cast him out of his possession:
marry men thus qualified, no marvel though they tell us, that Satan cannot
endure them: that the spirits themselves have complained, how they have bin
tormented, Sanctoru^ praesentia, with the presence of such Saints: that the
devils sometimes have been glad to leave their possession, not daring to abide
their coming unto them: that the devils that have presumed sometimes to abide
their presence, have been so dressed, as they durst never afterward return
to those places again, where they met with them: and that therefore it is not
to be wondered, that when me^, who are troubled themselves with Satan, or have
their children, friends, or servants so vexed, do seek after such holy
persons, to be delivered by them.

Indeed our experience does make it no wonderment, as the Jesuit says. And
herein M. Darrell has had great luck: For when he was not past two or three
and twenty years old, he was supposed to be such a man, as could do somewhat
in that art. When Katherin Wright was first troubled, she was by one M.
Beresfordes advice sent to M. Darrell at Mansfield, and to one M. Beckingham,
to be comforted, or cured of her infirmity: because (as he says) he had
heard M. Beckingham to be a man of note, and M. Darrell a man of hope, for the
relieuing of those that were distressed in that sort. Thomas Darling being
troubled (forsooth), some of his friends sent to Witches. A cunning man was
also procured to come unto him, who took upon him within a week to cure him.
Afterward Alice Goodridge the supposed Witch, told them that the boy would
not mend, except they sought for help, saying, they might have help enough.
But at those words, the Book says, that the devil stopped her throat, or
else peradventure, (the author means) she would have told them, what kind
of help they should seek for: this is but a conjecture. The certainety hereof
is, that M. Walkeden (the boys grandfather) hearing how M. Darrell had helped
Katherine Wright, procured him to come to Burton, to help Darling: and the
report was before he came, that one should come from Ashbie, that would give
the boy such directions, as without doing him any hurt, should relieve him.
When the seven in Lancashire were troubled, M. Starkie going to M. Dee for his
counsel, was advised by him, to call for some honest and godly preachers, with
whom he should consult. And behold how it hapened. M. Dees Butler telling
them, what one M. Darrell of Ashbie had done at Burton, M. Starkie and M. Dee
resolved upon him, and writ their several letters unto him, for his repair
into Lankashire: howbeit in this their course, there was a great imperfection.
For Edward Hartley the Witch, did afterward tell M. Starkey, that no one man
could do his children and the rest there any good, it was too great a work:
but there must be two or three at the least, with fervent and hearty prayer.
And here you may observe a little kind of Wonder. For M. Darrell not knowing
(for ought that appears) what the said Witch had affirmed, did of his own
accord, (after he was sent for by M. Dee and M. Starkie,) acquaint one M.
Moore with the matter, and obtaining him to be his companion in that action,
fulfilled and devils words, that two at the least must undertake that work.
By the time that Summers had his fittes, M. Darrell was of some name: and
besides having a sister in law in Nottingham, one Mistress Wallys, she was
not tongue-tyed, what a man her Brother was: and thereupon being urged by
certain women, she writ to M. Darrell the letter, importing (says Mrs. Gray)
that the Lady Zouch, she her self, and diverse other Gentlewomen, requested him
to come over to see the said Summers.

Hitherto it may appear, how M. Darrell has bin sought unto, which argues
that he was thought by some to be such a man, as if he met with the devil, he
was able to curb him. But whether his gifts, and conditions be like the better
sort of Exorcistes, as they have been described out of Thyraeus, that
remains to be declared. For he does not challenge any power to cast out
devils by virtue of his ministry, and therefore it must be his Holiness, or
nothing, that must support him. Upon M. Darrels calling into question, for his
dealing with Summers, and the rest, there has bin great endeavor used to color
the same by an extraordinary commendation of his carriage, and conversation. A
man would think that Thyraeus had bin perused, he is made so suitable unto his
Exorcistes. One Serson an Attorney with one Serson a Preacher, M. Walleis and
M. Small went publicly from house to house in Nottingham, to procure hands
(as Small confesses) unto a certificate, or testimonial, concerning his the
said Darrels unspotted behavior. The like endeavor was also used, for the
procuring of such an other testimonial from Ashbie. Others in like manner of
his friends have published in writing: that he abhors all kind of
counterfeyting and dissembling: that he is not given to any desire of vain
glory: that if he had plotted any such matter as is laid to his charge, he
is not of disposition to have concealed it, etc. An other says, that he is so
far from cosenage or deceit, as that he has himself been deceived: that
having begun the study of the law, he perceived therein such great
corruption, as he gave himself to the study of Divinity, that so he might
serve God, and keep a good conscience: that being a Minister, he preached for
the trial of his gifts, having no ecclesiastical living: that such was his
integrity, as it has not been beard of, that ever he did labor for any
Church living: that he might have had once a Personage, if he would but have
said, I could be content to accept such a thing, if it were offered me, which
he durst not do for displeasing of God: that he is a man so far from
couetuousnes and ambition, as if he would have given a little underhand, he
might have had a Benefice or two, worth five or six hundredth pounds yearly:
that he is so far from pride and vain glory, as he has not been known to
disdain the company of any honest man, though never so base: that he is
indeed earnest and bold, but it is when he has a good cause, as the
servants of God, Peter and John, with most of the faithful Martyrs of Christ
have been: and that his adversaries having sifted him, through the whole
course of his life, can find nothing against him. What is reported of M.
Darrell, shall not now be confuted, his honesty, he may be sure will never hurt
him: You may only be advertised, that his said friend forgets himself in
affirming, that M. Darrels life has been so searched into. For true it is,
that diligent care was had, and commandment given accordingly, that touching
his conversation, otherwise then appertayned directly to his pretended course
of casting out devils, there should not any one point be inquired into: neither
was there, as by the acts in record it may appear, and as it is supposed, M.
Darrell will himself confess.

But to come more directly to the point in hand. Although these M. Darrels said
pretended virtues, do make him answerable to the popish Exorcists: yet that
forsooth is not sufficient, but Thyraeus the Jesuit, must in effect tell us
so. For M. Darrels said friend, setting down certain reasons, why God has
made him the said Darrell, rather then many, (otherwise more wise, and learned
then he) an especial instrument in these days, for the casting out of devils,
makes this one, vz. in that he is such a man, as is qualified according to
Thyraeus the Jesuits said rules, set down by him in his Book, de
Daemoniack, Cap. 38.39. Out of which Chapters, that which Thyraeus requires in
his Exorcistes, this man alleges to be manifest in M. Darrell, saving that
amongst some other things, he omitteth, whether M. Darrels conscience be
burdened with any mortal sin. Otherwise for many of the rest, naming them,
vz. that he is a man of good report: one that despises the world: not
covetous: of an humble spirit: not ambitious: not proud: zealous of Gods
glory: much given to prayer and to the service of God: and of an especial
confidence in the Lord: these graces (he says) God has bestowed upon M.
Darrell: and therefore by Thyraeus rules, were there nothing else to the
contrary, he might be thought to be a well furnished, and very complete
Exorciste. But one thing is reported of M. Darrel, which passes the rest, and
makes it probable, (you may not doubt) that God has given him an especial
Grace above all other Exorcists, now a days to expel devils. For they say,
that after a sort, he has forsaken house, lands, and all for Christ's sake:
which being an Apostolical resolution, A written treatise.
why should he not have that Apostolical gift granted unto him? Indeed one
is as true as the other. For will you know, how he has forsaken all to follow
Christ? Having two or three houses, and a little land in Mansfielde and else
where, left him by his Father, he sold the same, by his own confession, as
dearly as he could, and since has lived upon the money, being (as one of his
friends says) five or six hundredth pounds. How the devil in regard of
this M. Darrels Holiness, could not abide his presence, will appear in the next
Chapter. In the mean while, it may well be said without offense, that if to
sell land, and live upon the money, be to leave all and follow Christ, and a
fit note of one that can cast out Devils: we shall not want men of that
trade: many Usurers in England will prove good Exorcistes. But touching his
honesty, judge thereof, when you have perused this whole Treatise. Now his
skill to cast out Devils, rests to be a little looked into, together with
his doctrine, whereupon he does ground it.

CHAP. V. How M. Darrell knew William Summers, and the rest to be possessed.
He that will take upon him to cast Devils out of men, must first know
whether they have any in them, or else he may peradventure loose his labor.
Forasmuch therefore as M. Darrell and M. More, are the persons of note amongst
us, that have entered into this course: it is a point of good justice, that they
be heard with some assistance of their friends, to speak for themselves. M.
More says, Page 82.
That in the Apostles times, those that had the gift of casting out Devils, had
also an other praecedent gift: first to discern the spirits, which gift was
called, Discretio Spirituum. But M. Darrell is of an other opinion, and that an
absurd one. For he affirms that Christ did not ordain any means, Page 67.
to know who was possessed in the Apostles time: but left that to be discerned
by the manner of their fittes. And so framing his judgment accordingly, he
says, that the only means, whereby now men are discerned to be possessed,
are the signs which are mentioned in the Scriptures. But M. More is bold
again herein to dissent from him. For although he conceyueth, that the said
gift named Discretio Spirituum, is taken away, and that now it is to be known
in some sort, who are possessed, by the signs mentioned in the Scriptures:
yet he will not have those signs, the only means, Page 82.
but adds Prayer unto them: saying, that the said signs, and prayer are now
the means ordained by God, to succeed, and continue in place of the other:
And he ascribes so much to prayer in this work, as without it, he
accounts the other part, to be very uncertain. By prayer (says he) men
that are acquainted with the said signs, may ordinarily obtain such measure
of Gods holy spirit, as that they may be able truly to discern, whether the
party, in whom the said signs do appear, be indeed possessed or not. A
pretty matter, the gift of discerning of spirits is left, and a measure of
Gods spirit is brought us for it. It would be known what that gift was: If
not a measure of Gods spirit, to discern betwixt counterfeytes, and such as
were indeed possessed. But let that go.

It being objected, that forasmuch as very many worthy, and godly men,
notwithstanding their knowledge of the signs of possession mentioned in the
scriptures, and their earnest and fervent prayers, have been very greatly
deceived by sundry counterfeyts, it seems probable, that he and M. Darrel
might be also deceived in judging the vii. in Lancashire, and W. Summers to be
dispossessed: one by way of prevention answers, that M. Fox, and others,
might easily be deceived therein by Satan, as not having read (as he
supposes,) Bodinus, Wierus, Mingus, and Thyraeus, that write of devils, as he
himself, M. Darrell, and the rest of that Crew have done. But M. More
answers after an other fashion: saying, that it might be they used the said
means indirectly, whereas he and M. Darrell used them directly: that they
were assured, that God gave them power, so to use them: that such their
assurance grew from their full persuasion, that the said parties were
possessed: and that it pleased God to endue them with that full persuasion,
because they had used the said means so directly. In which his circular
folly, every point is more uncertain the^ other, even that of their full
persuasion: because it is supposed, that they dealt like a couple of cosening
hypocrites, (at the least one of them) making show of that which was not. But
what will M. Darrell say to these points, thus confidently set down by his
fellow M. More? They tend so much to his greater worship, as ten to one he will
wind himself one way or other within the compass of them, that so he may
therein part stakes with him. And yet it will be hard for him so to do: For he
holding (as it will appear hereafter) that the wicked, and such as are not
reconciled to God, by a true justifying faith, may in these days (the power of
doing miracles being ceased) cast out devils: either he must say, that they
have no means left them to discern who are possessed (which were absurd): or
confess, that the prayers of the wicked may prevail as much to that effect
(as M. More affirmed theirs did): or else leaving M. Moore to his prayers, he
is driven to his own hold, that the only means whereby the possessed may be
discerned, are the signs of possession mentioned in the scriptures. Amongst
which signs (he insisting so much upon them, and keeping so many Audits of
them) it is much meruailed, why he still omitteth the breaking of fetters and
chains mentioned by S. Luke. If it had appeared without all iugling, that no
iron chains or fetters could have held either Summers, or any of the rest,
(they having been fastened with them, as the keeper of Newgate could have used
them) he had said something.

But to proceed with M. Darrels only means, being the signs mentioned in the
scriptures: Of them he tells us there are eighteen, but in his Apology he
names but six of them: crying, gnashing of teeth, wallowing, foaming,
extraordinary and supernatural strength, and supernatural knowledge. To the
which the rest may be added after his understanding: casting into the fire,
casting into the water, tearing, pyning, falling to the ground, nakedness, the
party striking of himself, abiding in no house but about graves, mountains,
and in the wilderness; dumbnes, deafness, fierceness, brusing the body of
the party when his fit ends. It may be marvelled why M. Darrell and his
friends, talking in their late pamphlets so much of the signs of possession,
they still omit those two, or at the least speak not of them directly, which
served his turn in place of iugling sticks, and were the principal grounds,
whereupon his legerdemaine did consist. The one is, that whosoever is
possessed, is in his fittes altogether senseless, and deprived for the time,
both of his understanding, and memory: the other, that albeit such as are
possessed do in their fittes many things, as if they were not possessed, and
also make very reasonable answers to such questions as are propounded unto
them, yet it is not they, but the Devil in them, that does both answer and
do them. But it may be they are now ashamed of these points: for it will be
hard to find any author amongst the grossest sort of the popish Exorcistes, or
else where, that ever maintained these assertions. The lunatike in the
scriptures, was in his fittes dumb: but it can not be showed that he wanted
the rest of his senses. In some others also it is plain, that Satan did
speak at some times, as when the wicked spirits desired our Savior, that
they might go into the heard of swine: but it cannot be thereof inferred, that
the party possessed with those spirits, did never in his fittes, speak or do
any thing of himself. Besides, it is a general position, that Satan
possessing ones body, has not to do either with his understanding or memory,
otherwise then by troubling his fancy.

But let it be supposed, that these two were in the number of M. Darrels
eighteen only signs of possession, mentioned in the scriptures: yet some of
his own friends will therein also oppose themselves against him. For if the
signs mentioned in the Scriptures, be the only means to discern who are
possessed: what must become of many other signs, that Master Darrell and his
friends do so much ground themselves upon, as the running in Summers flesh, of
a lump as big as a Mouse, etc. which must either uphold their reputations,
or else they are in danger to fall to the ground? For the preventing therefore
of this inconvenience, and for the enlarging of their bounds to work in, the
author of the Brief Narration, not contenting himself with Master Moors
prayers, nor allowing of Master Darrelles judgment in this point, has
learned of the said Jesuit a new shift. Seeing (says he) that men in this
matter are grown more incredulous then heretofore, it has pleased God,
(besides the signs of possession mentioned in the Scriptures) to give other
signs also more free from cavil, to make his glorious works most apparent and
certain. And hereof he brings for an example one of Summers pretended fittes
in these words: all the signs mentioned in the Scriptures, might more easily
be deluded by this conceit of counterfeyting, then this moveable swelling. If
men were here disposed to take exceptions, it might be demanded, when God was
pleased to give these new demonstratiue signs of possession, and unto whom,
and how he signified the same: or whether this conceit does not proceed from
some of the popish unwritten verities? In deed he relyeth in this devise
upon Thyraeus the Jesuit, and quoteth for it his book De Daemoniacis.
Howbeit, if he follow him too far, as he has already brought him from the
Scriptures, so will he quite dash both him and Master Darrell concerning
their old and new devised signs of possession: leaving them no assurance at
all, how they may discern who is possessed. For the Jesuit is flat, that
neither the confession of the party, Thyraeus part. 2. cap. 22.23.24.25.
nor his wicked life, nor his fierce conversation, nor his barbarous and
beastly outcries, nor his terrible countenance, nor the privation almost of all
his vital functions, nor his continual diseases, and inward torments,
incurable by the Physicians, nor the having of the Devil often in ones mouth,
nor for a man to consecrate himself to Satan: nor the suffering of more
grievous torments, then those do endure that are in deed possessed: nor for one
to seek to kill himself: nor for a man, giving himself to the Devil to be
presently snatched away by him: nor the revealing of secret matters: nor the
knowledge of strange languages, never learned by the party: nor extraordinary
strength: nor all the signs, that appeared in such as were possessed in the
Evangelists, are sufficient and undoubted signs (says he) that the party in
whom they appear is possessed.

If therefore M. Darrell will be a right Exorcist, after the current fashion
amongst the Jesuits, he must learn other signs of possession: and Thyraeus (a
man so often alleged by his friends) will not be dainty to teach him. For
(says he) these are the signs indeed, whereof there is no doubt, vz. when the
parties that seem to be possessed, refuse to call upon God, or to pray to
Saints, or to pronounce the word Jesus: or to receive some prayer or Psalm:
or when they tremble, are afraid, grow impatient, or blaspheme at the applying
unto them of the relic of any Saint, or of a picture made in wax, called an
Agnus Dei, or at the making of a cross upon their foreheads, or at the
bringing unto them the sacrament of the Altar, or when they can not abide the
Priests, that do exorcise them, or at the least do endure them very hardly.
His and similibus signis Daemones prodi dubium nullum est: there is no doubt
(says he) but that by these and such like signs the Devils are disclosed: to
be, it may be added in these that practice them, either as possessing them, or
at the least seducing them. For what a ridiculous illusion is this, to reject
upon simple pretenses, so many strange signs of possession? some of them
carrying with them impossibilities by the course of nature: and to bring such
unto us, as may so easily be counterfeyted, by every youth or girl within an
hours instruction.

Here M. Darrels friends will peradventure say in anger, that both he and they
are as far from these fooleries, as any that have disliked of their
proceedings. Howbeit, by their leaves, they may in some sort therein be
checked. For there is pretense made to the like effect, that the Devils that M.
Darrell and M. Moore met with, could neither abide them, nor the word of God:
which are two of Thyraeus infallible signs of possession. When the parties
that are pretended to have been possessed at M. Starkies house in Lancashire,
did hear that they two would come unto them, they are made to have said thus
to their particular spirits: vz. Thou naughty lad, thou make us sick, for
thou know the preachers will come shortly, meaning (says M. Moore) himself
and M. Darrell. Likewise, when they were come to the said M. Starkies house,
and that three of the said parties being all of them quiet in the kitchen, and
sent for severally to come to them into the hall, they appeared no sooner
before them (as the history reports) but having made low courtesies unto
them, they fell down by course into their fits. And the third of them, coming
in with both her hands closed to her face (not being able (as it seems) to
endure the brightness of the godly men's countenances) uttered these words: I am
come to council before I am called. At Nottingham also M. Darrell so used the
matter with Summers, as the boy being in a fit, when M. Darrell one night left
him, and crying, now he is gone: now he is gone: Rob Cooper. page 98.
now black coat is gone: all that were present (says Robert Cooper) thought
M. Darrell to be so godly a man, as that the Devil was glad, and rejoiced when
he was departed. This conceit had of him, may also further appear by the
Ballet maker, concerning Summers description in his fittes, of the sins that
reigned in Nottingham, whereof hereafter, who rymeth thus: But when that M.
Darrell came, the Devil was vexed with the same: His limbs he rackt, he rent
and tore, far worser then he did before. And touching the other pretended
sign, it was an ordinary course held by the keepers of the boy of Burton,
that when any strangers came in, that desired to see him in his fits (as men
desire to see monsters and strange beasts play their tricks): then they
would read some parts of the Gospel by S. John: and straight way (forsooth)
the Devil must show himself, by casting the boy into some fit. This
reading, they termed, the offering of battle or combat to Satan. When one
Phippes, a servant of M. Brinsleyes, supposed himself to be possessed, and
that the Devil entered into him, as he thought in the likeness of a Nitte:
Master Darrell persuaded him, that he was not possessed: because (says he)
you received comfort, Brinsly. pa. 130.
when you hear the word of God read, or any prayers, or godly exhortations:
whereas William Summers, and others being possessed, were at such times greatly
troubled and tormented. Again, M. Darrell and M. More, beginning to exhort
some of those in Lancashire, two of them presently cried out mightily with
outrageous roaring and bellowing: and the note upon that place says thus,
History. fol. 14.
though the Devil had dissembled and hid himself in both these (for they had
been quiet sundry days) yet now the word of God finds him out: he can
dissemble no longer, but must needs show himself.

By these two sleights borrowed from the popish Exorcists they did greatly
inueagle and seduce their beholders: the first tending to the setting out of
themselves, and to be had in admiration, whilst they were supposed to be such
devout men, as Satan could not endure: and the other, under pretense of
magnifying the scriptures (which seek no falsehood to win them commendation)
they used a color to ouershaddow their lewdnes, when at their pleasures, they
might thereby without less suspicion, begin and practice their fittes or
pageants. Assuredly it may well be supposed, that if this their course had not
been met with in time, we should have had many other pretended signs of
possession: one Devil would have been mad at the name of the Presbyter: an
other at the sight of a minister that will not subscribe: an other to have
seen men sit or stand at the Communion: and so as it had pleased our good
Masters the Exorcists. And that this conjecture may not be thought to be a
vain collection, you shall see how stinted (as they term them) and read
prayers, are notably foiled. M. Moore tells us: that when a prayer was read
out of prayer book, in the hearing of those that were possessed in Lancashire,
they, that is the Devils in them, were little moved with it: but afterward
when M. Darrell, M. Moore ad art. 9. page 232.
and he, with one M. Dicons, did severally use such prayers, as for the present
occasion they conceived: then (says he) the parties, that is, the wicked
spirits, were much more troubled, that is, troubled the parties much. See, the
Devil was tricte with their conceived prayers, and could not abide them,
therefore such must needs be excellent prayers. As for read prayers, he cares
not for them, they have no force to trouble him, and therefore who should
respect them? But you are detained too long in this matter. When M. Darrell,
with his fellows, and all other Exorcistes, or Devil driuers are agreed, and
(this one position of theirs granted unto them, that the Devil may torment a
man as much being without him, as within him) can make it apparent unto us
without their gross and palpable forgeries: that they are able to discern who
is possessed: then let them tell us, that they have dispossessed them.

CHAP. VI. Of M. Darrels knowledge, who sent the Devil into Summers, and the
rest.
IT seems to be a matter very pertinent to the dignity of an Exorcist, that
he be able to declare who sent the Devil into his patient. For men of that
trade do affirm, that sometimes it is God, sometimes holy men, and sometimes
witches, that do send them. To omit their assertions touching God and godly men
(although they contain very strange points, and interpretations, as they are
propounded, and handled by the Doctors of Devil driving) that of witches is
now most pertinent. For all the Devils that M. Darrell has hitherto
incountred, were sent by them (as it seems) into his patients. Whether
witches can send Devils into men or women (as many do pretend) is a question
amongst those that write of such matters* and the learneder and sounder sort
do hold the negative. Against whom Thyraeus opposes himself, and with
Thyraerus M. Darrell, and that not without very pregnant reasons, if he may be
credited. For he is able to specify or describe the particular parties that
sent their spirits into his patientes, together with their several names,
Dar. ad artic 24. pa. 42.
and in what manner the witches did send them. Middlecub the Familiar spirit
of one Margaret Roper of Eckling in Darbishire, did by her commandment
possess Katherine Wright, The Book of Darling.
Alice Goodridge of Staphen-hill in Darbyshire, having a spirit called Minny,
in the likeness of a dog, part colored red, and white, did send the same to
torment Thomas Darling, having first taught her said spirit, by strayning her
own body, and vomiting, how he should handle and vex his. The story.
The seven in Lancashire were, (as it seems) possessed by the means of one
Edward Hartley, who breathed wicked spirits into them, (as it was supposed) by
kissing them. Dar. ad art. 6. Pa, 228.
An old woman meeting William Summers upon Blackewell-more heath, did procure
her spirit to enter into him, or by his accepting at her hands a piece of
bread and butter, and eating it. Touching this old woman last mentioned, M.
Darrell for a time was peremptory to the effect specifyed, but since (there
falling out a matter contrary to his expectation, whereof hereafter he now
affirms, Darrels lust
and one of his fellows has printed it, that an old woman in Worcestershire,
did that stratageme, by sending into Summers a Familiar of hers, called Lucie.
Mary Couper.
And for Marie Couper (M. Darrels last patient) it was one Alice Freeman of
Nottingham, that directed the devil to possess her: she poor woman,
suspecting she had been with child, till M. Darrell told her it was a
wicked spirit within her, that caused her so to swell, would any man desire to
have a question more directly resolved? The only doubt is to those that be
simple men, how M. Darrell came to the knowledge of these things. And it would
be well cleared. The Jesuitical and popish Exorcistes, that hold for this
work of Witcherie, have but two ways, (as it seems) whereby they know when
the spirits are sent by Witches, and the one is the Confession of the devil,
that is cast out, and the other the Confession of the Witches, who threw him
in. And thus far M. Darrell is fully provided to answer for his skill. For it
was Middlecub the spirit (he says) that told him, that Margaret Roper, did
send him into Katherine Wright: And touching Thomas Darling, Alice Goodridge
confessed, that she sent her Minnie into him, mistaking him for one Sherrartes
boy.

The Book also of the seven in Lancashire, does after a sort insinuate, that
Edward Hartley confessed his sending of seven devils into them: But how he
will shifte concerning Alice Freeman, and the foresaid old woman of
Darbishire, and Worcestershire, he has nothing as yet for ought that is
known, but William Summers, and Marie Coupers reports, which his M. Thyraeus
says, are not sufficient, although the parties for the justifying of them,
should offer themselves, ad plagas and virgas. But to help him herein, if men
may be bold a little with the Jesuit: why should not either Mary Couper, or
Wlliam Summers, be as well believed, in saying that Alice Freeman, and the said
old women bewitched them, and by that means sent their wicked spirits into
them, as Middlecub, who told M. Darrell, that Mary Roper sent him into
Katherine Wright? For when either Thyraeus, or M. Darrell tell us, that the
spirits have confessed, who sent them: what do they say in effect, but that
the parties themselves told them so? Neither of them both dare say, that the
devils, after they were cast out, did, or do use to tell any such matter: but
the truth is, that when by their knavery, they have induced the parties
supposed to be possessed, to say that such or such a woman bewitched them: then
they tell those that are present, that it is not the said parties, but the
wicked spirits that so confess who sent them. And touching the confession of
the Witches themselves, that may be left well enough to such learned men, as
have written sufficiently of it. In the mean while, let M. Darrels foolish
conceits be further considered of.

CHAP. VII. Of the Causes pretended, why men are possessed.
AS there are pretended diverse means, whereby Satan is sent into men, and
women, to possess them: so are there sundry causes devised, why they are sent.
For example, sometimes they say, they are sent without any respect of the
parties offenses, into whom they are sent, and sometimes, in regard of their
offenses. Now of sins or offenses they make two sorts: the one Mortal, and
the other Venial; the Mortal are thus recyted. Infidelity, Thyraeus de
Demoniacis, part. 2. cap. 30.
abusing of the Eucharist, blasphemy, pride, luxuriousnes, envy, covetousness,
persecution of godly men, disobedience to parents, slaundering speeches,
contempt of religion, for one to curse himself to the devil, to be at league
with Satan, and the contempt of the Sacrament of confirmation. The Venial,
you must think are in number many: these following are reckoned to be of that
kind: Idle words, jesting speeches, sporting lies, immoderate laughing, and
such like: For the remission whereof, Gabriel Bicl.
Non requiritur poenitentia proprie accepta, neque actualis, neque habitualis,
neque sacramentalis, repentance being properly taken is not necessary, neither
actual, habitual, nor sacramental. The Bishops blessing knocking on the
breast, and a little holy water, will rid a man of them.

That the Devil is sent into men for mortal sins, they hold it clear: but
whether for Venial sins or not, that is made a great question, and Thyraeus
resolves it. It is most certain (says he) that Venial sins have given
Satan occasion to possess men, and they are accordingly delivered corporally
unto him, pro leuissimis quibusque, delictis, for the least offense that can be
committed: A very hard cause, that men should be in such a plight for no
greater a matter, then a little holy water will wash away. Now, forasmuch as
the spirits that possess men, have interest more or less in the^, (as some
hold), according to the quality of the causes, for the which they were sent
into them: and will not therefore be so easily expelled, when they enter for
mortal sins, as for Venial, as it is an especial part of the Exorcistes
duty (as their rules declare), when they endeavor to cast out the Devil, to
travel by all the means they can devise, that they may learn the cause of
his entrance. And least any man should think, that therein they loose their
labors: and for the better justifying of Thyraeus resolution for Venial
sins: both he and M. Darrell (together with his friends) do tell us very
pretty tales. The Jesuit says, that the Devil entered into one maid,
because she was in great love with a young man, and into an other, for that
she endeavored herself to have a resemblance of Venus picture: and into an
other, propter impatientiam, and durius prolatum verbum, for uttering a sharp
word: and into an other, because with some greedines, she did eat the leaf
of a Lettice, (the devil cleaving unknown to her, to the nether part of the
leaf,) forgetting to bless it with the sign of the Cross. But hereof there
need no more examples: the doctrine being so plainly set down, that Satan
enters into men, for the least Venial sin: Howbeit if any man desire more,
he may be assured, that their Legendes will afforde him store of them: and
for a new supply, M. Darrell, and his friends in the mean while, will not
herein be silent. Dar. ad art. 24,
Katherine Wright (forsooth) denying something to Mary Roper, the devil by the
said Mary's direction did possess her. Afterward also, Satan coming to the
said Katherine Wright in the likeness of a handsome man, John Wig. fol. 7.
that making suite unto her in the way of marriage, gave her a piece of bread,
she in taking the same at the devils hands, and eating it, became to be
repossessed. Will. Summers had the devil sent into him, either by the old woman
of Darbishire, because he denied at the first to give her a penny, or by the
old woman of Worcestershire, for that he refused to give her a hat-band, which
she much desired. Why Mary Couper became to be possessed, the cause indeed is
not expressed, except it were for dwelling in one house with W. Summers: it
being Satan's practice (as M. Darrell said) not to content himself with one
in a Family. Mary Couper. pa. 203.
But Thomas Darlinges Venial sin exceeded the rest. For he meeting Alice
Goodridge in a Coppice, did let an escape (as the book terms it,) which she
taking to be done in her contempt, used these words: Gip with a mischief,
and fart with a bell, I will go to Heaven, and thou shall go to Hell. And
thereupon her Minnie entered into him. True it is, that M. Darrell (when Summers
pretended himself to be in his fittes greatly tormented) did affirm, that
he was not so much troubled for his own sins, as for the sins that reigned in
Nottingham. And yet then he ascribed some part of his grief, to his singing of
wanton and filthy songs: he being a musician. For of likelihood, he has some
other devise: as that the Devil may enter into a man for small Venial sins:
but being in him, may torment him in many respects. A bird in a lime bush, the
more she strives, the faster she is. When a man is out of his way, the
further he goes, the more he erreth. One absurdity granted does bring forth
many. And such is M. Darrels case in his grounds, he has laid to work upon,
which has brought him into a maze, that he cannot get out.

CHAP. VIII. Of the means alleged by M. Darrell, and others, whereby men are
dispossessed.
IT belongs to those that challenge the skill to cast out devils, to know the
means how it ought to be done. He were a mad Physician, that would undertake to
cure a man of the palsy, or of any other disease, that never had learned any
medicine for it. As good Physicians therefore have fit remedies for their
patients to help them: so you must think of our cunning Exorcists, that they
want no medicines for their possessed to ease them.

The ordinary means ordained to continue in the Church, for the casting out of
Devils, M. Darrell makes to be very ancient. M. Darr. page 65. etc.
For he says that it has been in the Church, since the fall of Adam.
Howbeit herein he has no great certainety. For he confesses that there is
no mention in the old Testament of the institution of that means. And so of
likelihood; if other of his positions be true, men were possessed from time to
time during the space almost of 4000. years, God himself having ordained no way
to cure them. But in saying that the same means do continue now in the
Church, that were in use before the coming of Christ: that, his masters the
popish Exorcistes, will condemn as an error in him. For one of them says:
that the ways of casting out devils, Thyraeus par. 3. cap. 4.1.
in the old Testament, iam vetustate, si non alia de causa antiquatae sunt and
abolitae, as being grown in dotage, are now abolished for their age. If you
will know, what these ways were, Thyraeus tells you, one was nomen
Tetragrammaton: an other the smell of a certain root, revealed for that
purpose to king Solomon: the third, the smoke of the heart and liver of a
certain fish being laid on the fire: and the fourth, the playing of an harp
or citterne, as though Saul had been possessed, (which the said Thyraeus dare
not resolutely affirm,) and David's music had dispossessed him.

But M. Darrell does herein differ from the Jesuit, and says: that the
means in the old Testament to cast out Satan, was fasting and prayer, even
the same that yet continues: therein also differing from his fellow M. More.
For whereas M. More says, that Christ did plainly ordain fasting, and
prayer, to be part of the ordinary means to continue in the Church, in these
words. This kind goes not forth, but by prayer and fasting, thereby showing
the beginning of the said means. M. Darrel affirms, that Christ finding that
means to be good and godly, did in those words but approve it, and so makes
it a secret ordinance of Christ to have his continuance by way of consequence:
As Christ approving it to be good, did thereby command it. Furthermore,
whereas M. Darrell holds, that in the Apostles time, there were two sorts or
kinds of casting out devils, the one ordinary, which was in the Church before
the coming of Christ, vz. fasting and prayer, and the other extraordinary,
vz. commanding of Satan, to depart in the name of Christ: M. More says,
that although he belieueth that Christ did ordain fasting and prayer in the
said place of Saint Matthew, to be part of the ordinary means for casting
out Deuilles: M. More pa. 80.81.
yet the same was not a mean to cast out Deuilles in the Apostles time, there
being then an other extraordinary means given unto them: and that Christ's
meaning was, that fasting and prayer, should not be the ordinary means, till
after the time that the extraordinary should cease. To hold with M. Darrell,
that there was an ordinary means to cast out Devils in Christ's time, does
derogate much from the honor of his miracles in casting out Satan: For the
Infidelles might have surmised, that Christ had done it by the ordinary means,
having used the same secretly without their knowledge. Moreover, it may argue
the extraordinary means to be superfluous: there being then an ordinary
means, and that of such facility, as will after appear. There is great
commendation given by M. Darrel, in his Apology of certain men, (who it
seems do favor him,) that they are learned and reverend, and of great
wisdom and godliness: and indeed, he says truly of some of them: howbeit
it is thought, that ere it be long, he will be angry with two of the best
of them. For one of them holds, (and of the other hereafter,) that by the
said words of Christ: Prayer and Fasting are as effectual to cure a man, I.
B. page. 7*
that is sick of an ague, as to cast out a Devil: His words are these. I am
not of their opinion, that think the words of Christ. Mark. 9. vz. This kind
can by no means come forth, but by prayer and fasting, do importe that Christ
did ordain fasting and prayer, as a particular means to cast out Devils, more
then to procure men's deliverance from other afflictions.

It has been touched before, that M. Moore accounts prayer and fasting, but
a part of the means that Christ has ordained for expelling of Devils: for
that he adds in the first place, Faith, as it is mere he should do:
although therein he dissent from M. Darrell, as he the said Moore understands
Faith. For M. More by faith, M. Moore. page 79.
understands the faith that justifies, in these words: A justifying faith,
having annexed unto it fasting and prayer, is the ordinance of Christ for the
casting out of Devils, for ever to continue in the Church. But M. Darrell,
confessing the necessity of Faith, in the said ordinary means, says: M.
Darr. page 66.
that neither the faith of doing miracles, nor the justifying faith is therein
necessary: but that the temporary or historical Faith may suffice. It being
here objected, that an historical faith sufficing, (as is before expressed)
and that the prayer and fasting in such as have but that faith, can not please
God: it will follow, that the ordinary means which Christ has left in his
Church, for casting out of Devils as necessary, is such a means as is not
acceptable to almighty God: M. Darrell answers, that the consequence is not
good. And so that point lies: but an other may not be left a sleep. He says,
that in the said place of Mat. 17.20. that the Faith there mentioned, is to be
understood to be the faith of doing miracles: that the Apostles were reproved
for their weakness in that faith: and that if the same had been strong
enough, they might have cast out the wicked spirit mentioned in that Chapter,
ver. 21. without prayer or fasting: whereby it follows (for ought that dull
men can easily discern) that M. Darrell holding (as is before mentioned) that
place of scripture to be a secret ordinance, for the continuance of fasting and
prayer, as the means to cast out Devils, and that therein by faith is
understood the faith of doing miracles: (which if it had been strong enough in
the Apostles, prayer and fasting had been superfluous): it will follow it is
thought, that the historical faith will not serve his turn, but that it must
be the faith of doing miracles: which must be understood for the faith that
is required of necessity, when there is need to cast out Devils. So as if he
want that, he may (by his own doctrine) cast his cappe at them.

I omit here, that some of good account for their learning, do interpret the
prayer and fasting mentioned in the places of S. Matthew, and S. Mark, to be
required in those that are possessed with wicked spirits: and that the
forbearing of both, was not any want in the Apostles. Master Darrell himself
does confess, that the party possessed ought to fast and pray, if he be
able. Wherein if Satan hinder him, yet he says, Almighty God accepts of
his will, and purpose so to do in steed of the deed. Furthermore, the popish
sort do generally require the said prayer and fasting, as a preparation, in the
Exorcistes, and not as a means: although Thyraeus confesses, that prayer is
something. For speaking of the means, how the Devil is to be cast out, after
he has named many, he is content to give some little room to prayer, saying:
Oration quae adhibetur damnari non debet: Prayer, which is used in the casting
out of Devils, must not be condemned. You see how hardly prayer comes into
the rank of the said means. And it is likewise manifest, what little account
they make of the said place in Saint Matthew, to ground themselves upon, for
their casting out of Devils: (albeit they are as earnest to make a trade and
merchandise of it, as Master Darrell) in that they do not once mention it for
that purpose: saving that they retain the commanding of Satan to depart in
the name of Christ: which was the means that those used (says M. Darrell)
which had the faith of doing miracles.

Marry besides that, they have a great number of ways, whereby they vex and
torment Satan wonderfully in their expelling of him: whereof the scriptures
are as silent, as they are lavish. For example, the sacrament of the Altar, the
merits of Saints, the relics of Saints, the praying to Saints, by saying
their letanie: the sprinkling of holy water, the sign of the cross: the
imposition of the priests hands, the stole which the priest uses, being laid
on the party: the whipping of the possessed with holy whippes, and the putting
of the priests finger into their mouths. Every one of these will cast out
the Devil in a mischief, (as Thyraeus by sundry pleasant tales, but in good
sadness does report:) their legendes being in deed full of them. Not long
before, you heard that these fooleries were reckoned for the signs of
possession: and here you see they are (very wisely) made the means to
dispossess men. As if the Physicians should appoint the signs of diseases for
the medicines to cure them. But suffer the said grave Author to proceed: for
he has many other things of singular virtues, to terrify Satan with, in this
great work: as Vestes sacrae (for their priests usually come to the parties
in all their massing garments and attire) Coerei ardentes, hallowed candelles
burning, etc. And to have the matter done in a Church, that is a point of good
importance: For some Deuilles, that would in no wise be cast out in private
houses, being brought to the Church, were straight ways expelled. But Master
Darrell very prouidently did prevent this superstitious and erroneous conceit.
For upon some talk and conference at Nottingham, where his fast should be
held for the dispossessing of William Summers, and some deeming Saint Maryes
Church there for the best and meetest place, he would in no respect yield
thereunto, saying: That if it should be kept there, there would be much
attributed to the holiness of the place: M. Shute fol. 19. M. Hallam fol. 7.
Anne port. fol. 3.
and wishing rather, that the place of his dispossession might be in the field,
that so all people might behold it. But upon better advise, it fell out to be
in a narrow low room.

What effect the said popish means have to cast out Devils: how easily they
expel them, and how they torment them: will have a time to be imparted. In the
mean while it is pertinent to the purpose, to consider, how mightily
(forsooth) the fasting and prayers appointed by M. Darrell, M. Darrell.
wrought in his patients. He and his wife, with two or three more, fasting and
praying from morning till noone, out went the Devil from Katherine Wright: he
could no longer endure it. At the pretended dispossession of Darling, by means
of the fasting of half a score, from morning till night, and by reading
certain prayers out of the book, entitled: The enemy of security, (wherein
they were often interrupted, by reason of the boys fittes) and by M. Darrels
assistance though absent: it is to be marvelled (by such as delight in wonders)
how the Devil was afflicted: as appears by his words (forsooth) but
delivered by the boy, vz. Radulphus, Beelzebub can do no good, his head is
stricken off with a word. Again, we can not prevail, let us go out of him,
and enter into some of those here. Again, we can not prevail, their Church
increases. Again, we can not prevail, for they will not be helped by
witches. Brother Radulphus, we cannot prevail: let us go to our mistres and
torment her: I have had a draught of her blood to day. Again, there is a woman
earnest at prayer, get her away: Nay quoth John Alsop (a man that was present)
with a loud voice: we can not spare her. Thus the boy graced Mistress
Wightman his Aunt. And again: Brother Glassop, we can not prevail, his faith
is so strong, and they fast and pray, and a preacher prays as fast as they.
By which preacher Master Darrell confesses, that he thinks the Devil
meant him. The same also is at large entreated of, in the book of the seven
possessed in Lancashire. Master Dicons the author of the history says: that
whilst he was in his sermon, at the time of the pretended fast for their
deliverance, Margaret Hardman used these words, I must be gone, I must be
gone: which must be understood to be spoken by the Devil, who was so pinched,
that he could stay no longer. And again the said Margaret, (whilst Master
Moore was preaching) I can not tarry, I can not tarry: I am too hot, I am too
hot: let me go, let me go. Of likelihood Master Moore had coursed him. The
story also says, that Satan was so haunted by fasting and prayer, and by the
word of God so zealously and powerfully applied, as if fire had been put into
his hole to burn him out. The Devil also said to Elianor Hardman: You are too
holy now, and have Gods word amongst you. Margaret Hardman likewise being
greatly affrighted, in came Master Darrell and Master Moore, where she was
standing by the fire, who having comforted her with many godly exhortations,
out goes Satan, saying: that it was too holy a place for him. It should seem,
that when Summers was dispossessed, as men being greatly astonished, are
therewith stricken into a silence, so the devil was shrowdly dressed. He was
forsooth, so extremely tormented by the fasting, prayers, and preaching of
Master Darrell, and the rest, as he had no leisure to say what he must do, or
what he would do: but rudely without taking any leave of them, departed.

The means that Master Darrell and his friends do pretend in casting out
Devils, are as you have heard, fasting, prayer, and faith: an historical faith
(says Master Darrell,) a justifying faith (says Master Moore). But if you
mark well what they say, and what they did, you shall find, that their
preaching bare away the bell, in the dispossessing of those in Lancashire, and
William Summers. For whilst Summers was in hand, Master Darrell, and an other
occupied the day with two sermons, and so likewise with the other: Master
Darrels and Master Moors, and the said Master Dicons exhortations spent the
most of that time. Now it is to be supposed, that the rest who were present,
did attend to the preachers, and continued not their own private prayers.
Besides, you hear indirect terms out of the said history of those in
Lancashire, that their powerful preaching is annexed for a means to prayer
and fasting. Whereunto may be added the word of God (as the story says):
Which the Devils (forsooth) could not endure to hear, but would be gone. And
so you see them fall into the said popish follies, making the signs of
possession the means and causes of dispossession. As it is also most apparent
by M. Mores conceit, who thinks prayer more necessary, then the signs of
possession mentioned in the scriptures, for the true discerning of those who
are possessed. And who knows whether in time, the naming of the Presbytery
would not have had the virtue of a popish relic, as well to cast out a
Devil, as to disclose him: and the presence of M. Darrell, M. More, and such
like; as great force therein, as the popish priests, thrusting their fingers
into the parties mouths. Surely, that smells hereof, that when M. Darrell
and M. Moore came into the place where Margaret Hardman was greatly troubled,
the Devil departed, and stayed no longer. But the point is, we see these
fellows as ridiculous in their conceits, touching the means how they should
cast out Satan, as they have appeared in the premises, and their judgments
are as well settled in that which follows.

CHAP. 9. Of the signs whereby M. Darrell and others do discern (as they say)
when Satan is expelled.
THe assurance that the Exorcising impostors have in these days, of the
Devils departure, is answerable to the rest of their uncertainties. M. Darrels
ignorance makes him (as it seems) in this point confident. He is
peremptory, that because it is said, in the scriptures: that the spirit of the
lunatike, when he was cast out of him, M. Darrell ad art. 30. page 18. and ad
art. 31. page 20. M. Darrell ad. art. 17. page 144.
did cry and rent him sore, and that he lay as one dead: that therefore these
three are infallible signs appointed by God to know when one is dispossessed.
Nay rather then fail, he will be content with one of them, as in his dealing
with Thomas Darling hereafter will appear. It may be marvelled, why the
author of the brief Narration, seeing how easily some lewd knave might
counterfeite these signs: that he has not devised some other of greater
certainty (because men are so dull now a days (forsooth) to believe such
matters) as he has done touching the signs of possession. Master Darell
confessing, that in the Apostles times, some spirits were cast out more easily
then others, might in reason have thought, that those that went out so easily,
did not so grievously torment the parties at their casting out, as the rest did.

And somewhat it is, that although there are diverse mentioned in the
scriptures, to have been dispossessed by our Savior Christ and by his
Apostles: yet it is said of none but of the Lunatike, Mark 9. that when Satan
departed, the spirit either cried, or rent him sore, or that they lay for dead.
To make therefore such particularities in one, a general rule for all, argues
greatly the weakness of his judgments.

True it is, that he blundereth out sometimes, some other signs for his
assurance when Satan departs: and it may not be omitted, of whom he has
learned them. The popish Exorcistes, Thyraeus part 4. Cap. 52.
finding no assurance in the scriptures (as it may be thought,) touching that
point, have devised many more signs: as when the patie can abide holy
relics, and the presence of the Exorcistes, etc. When he says, that he is
delivered from Satan: when the Devil himself tells the Exorcist, that he
will be gone: and when according to the Exorcistes commandment, he either
puts out some candle, or breaks some such quarrel in the glass window,
as he was directed to break at his going: Also, the departing from the said
parties, of certain living creatures: as of flies, spiders, antes, and such
like: the ceasing of their former deformity, which Satan procured: vomiting,
Cum quo spiritus egressi leguntur non raro, spirits are often times vomited
out: faetor grauis: the Devils leaving behind him a great stinch: a great
swelling in the part that Satan departs at: the casting of them to the
ground: And lastly, Magni tumultus, and cum tumultibus damna, great noise, and
therewith danger: as when the Devil going out, carries a piece of the house
with him.

And now let Master Darrell be heard. When William Summers had lain a while, as
though he had been dead, and after came again to himself, Master Darrell
said thereupon, that he was dispossessed. His persuasion also that Darling is
dispossessed, is confirmed (as he says) by the boys continuance so long well.
The chief assurance, M. Darrell ad art. 17. page 144.
that M. Darrell and M. More had, that Satan had left Jane Ashton, was her
own words, vz. when rising from her fit, she said, he is gone, he is
gone, I am well I thank God. And having wept in the said fit, she also
said, that then Satan departed from her. So as here we have a new sign of
Satan's going out of one, vz. the weeping of the party. Concerning Satan's
own word, that he would be gone, there are diverse testimonies (forsooth)
mentioned in the 8. Chapter. The book of the boy of Burton says, that
toward the end of the fast for his pretended dispossession, he began to
heave and lift vehemently at his stomach, and getting up some fleagme and
choler, said (pointing with his finger, and following with his eyes) look,
look, see you not the mouse that is gone out of my mouth? and so pointed after
it, unto the farthest part of the parlor. And M. Darrell affirms, that when
he did so vomit, and used those words, that then spirit left him. But
because he will affirm nothing without good reason, he says he is
confirmed in that opinion by his own experience, in that it has fallen out so
with others, at the instant of their dispossession, as they have reported.
Behold his demonstration, vz. as they reported, and who were these reporters,
and what did they report?

Margaret Byrom said, that at her reuerting, The history of the vii. in
Lancashire-
after she had lien as dead half an hour, she felt the spirit come up from
her belly toward her breast, thence to her throat, when it left her throat,
it gave her a sore lug, and all that while a dark mist dazeled her eyes: then
she felt it go out of her mouth in the likeness of a crows head, and sat in
the corner of the parlor, with darkness about it for a while. Then went it with
such a flash of fire out of the window, that all the parlor seemed to her to
be on fire. It left behind it a sorethroate, and a filthy smell, that a week
after her meat was unsavory. Here we have the Jesuits stinch. And besides,
the most infallible note amongst M. Darrels three signs of dispossession, vz.
lying for dead, is here confuted. For this party was revived again before
Satan was gone. Moreover, if his position be true, that every one that is
possessed, is senseless in his fit, then either it must be confessed, that
the said Margaret was in no fit when Satan was going out of her, in that
she felt him: or else that she lied when she so reported. But to go forward
with the rest.

John Starkie said, that the devil went out from him like a man, with a great
bunch on his back, as big as a man. Anne Starkie, that he left her like a
foul ugly man with a white beard, and a great bunch on his breast as big as
a man's head. Margaret Hardman, that he departed from her like an ugly man,
with a great bunch on his back. Elianor Hardman, that he went out of her like
an vrchen, and went through a very little hole out of the parlor. Ellen
Holland, that her spirit was like Anne Starkies: and Jane Ashton, that the
devil went out of her like a great breath, ugly like a toade, and round like
a ball. Now upon the credit of these testimonies, M Darrell is grown to be a
man of great experience: and knew well, what the meaning was of Darlinges
mouse. But why should knowledge be mentioned in the practices of these
iuglers? M. Darrel (I trow) will not take upon him to have greater skill in this
point, then all the great Jesuitical and popish Rabbis, who have written
much, and have used great traffic in the trade of casting forth Deuilles.
Thyraeus confesses plainly, Thyraeus part 4. cap. 52.
that all the said signs before mentioned, are not infallible arguments of
Satan's dispossession: for says he: sicuti pro voluntate sua spiritus haec
post se signa relinquunt: ita eadem possunt dare, and nihilominus in hominibus,
quos aliquandiu obsederunt, seeds suas retinere: as wicked spirits may at
their pleasure omit these signs, so they may show them, and yet
notwithstanding keep their possession. Et de hoc nullum apud doctos dubium
est. Besides, he is also resolute, that there is no necessity, why wicked
spirits when they are cast out, should show any signs at all of their
departure, non raro fit, vt discedant nullis sui discessus post se datis
signis. It is not seldom seen, that Satan departs, leaving no signs of
his going: whereof he brings sundry examples. When therefore these cosening
merchantes, do tell men now a days, that they have cast devils out of any
their children, servants or friends: it is hereby manifest, what credit their
words do deserve.

CHAP. X. Of M. Darrell, and M. Mores conceit: that Satan being cast out of
one, does presently after seek to repossesse him.
WHen men have escaped any great danger: it is commonly the advice of their
friends, that they should take heed of the like. And in many cases there are
appointed sovereign preservatives. M. Darrell like a kind friend, had never to
deal with the dispossessing of any: but for his care therein, he may be
thought to have deserved great commendation. For his persuasions to such still
have been, that they should use all diligence and circumspection, that Satan
did not again reenter into them. This his persuasion has ever bin drawn from
a position, which he stiffely holds, vz. that Satan being expelled out of a
man, does seek presently after to reenter into him again: and that it is
commonly a very hard matter to withstand him, by reason of his subtelties, in
alluring them by promises, and terrifying of them by threatninges. He had no
sooner cast the devil out of Katherine Wright, M. Darrell ad art. 11. pa. 40.
but the evil spirit seeking to reenter into her, was for one time, by his
assistance resisted (as he himself confesses). And concerning Darling, he
says thus: The monday after his dispossessing, I told him apart, that the
devil would seek to repossesse him: and therefore counseled him to watch
over himself, Tho. Darling. pa. 72.
and resist him: adding these words, (as Darling reports,) that peradventure
he would appear in the likeness of a friend, and use all the means he could to
persuade him to some evil. Touching William Summers also: presently after his
pretense, that the boy was dispossessed, he affirmed that for a certainety,
Satan would seek to repossesse him: making that a ground for a new work, as
afterward is declared.

For his said opinion of Satan's seeking to reenter, he relyeth upon a
metaphorical place in the scriptures: Mat. 12.
but for his said addition of Satan's promises, and similitudes, that will not
so easily be colored. When M. Darrell and M. More were in hand with the seven
in Lancashire, and had (if you will believe them,) dispossessed six M. More
told them, that Satan would surely assault every one of them, and that both
diverse times, and by diverse and sundry means. He will (says he) appear
unto you in some likeness or other: and he will entreat you, that he may
enter in again, and promise you many goodly things, as gold and silver, etc:
And if he cannot so prevail, then he will threaten you to break your necks, to
cast you into pits, etc. If it be here demanded how M. More knew, that Satan
would appear unto them in some likeness, his answer is, vz. for that he had
been told, that the Devil seeking to repossesse the boy of Burton, did
appear unto him in sundry likenesses. And concerning his knowledge, that
Satan would make such promises unto them: he relyeth upon this, vz. because
the nature of man is subject to be seduced by such offers.

If these childish answers remained not in record under his own hand, would
any man believe them? does it not give us just occasion to think, that he
told them such tales of a lewd purpose, thereby to draw them to pretend the
like? Otherwise would a man fearing God, being in such a conflict with Satan,
(as he pretends) for their dispossession, have told them any such matters
upon hearsay? Or does it carry with it any such consequence, as to tell them
that Satan would allure them by promises, and threatninges, because men's
natures are subject to be seduced by such means?

But what should we dispute the matter with him, or examine the force of his
arguments: seeing every thing came to pass, as he had foretold? Remember the
similitudes, that the devil departed from them, and even in the same (as the
story says) they sought again to reenter into them. Besides, they attempted
them also in other forms, as of a black Raven, of a black boy, The history
the head bigger then the body, of a black rough dog with a firebrand in his
mouth, of fine white doves of a brave fellow like a Woer, of two little
whelps, that playing on the table, ran into a dish of butter; of an Ape, of a
Bear with fire in his mouth, and of an hay-stacke, promising them bags of
gold and silver; and threatening them when they so could not prevail, to
break their necks, to drown them in pittes, to hang them, to break their
backs, to throw them out of the windows: etc. even in such sort in effect, as
M. More, of likelyhoode inspired with one of them, had before declared. What
the story reports of M. Moore, may also be applied to M. Darrell: who made
great use of these ridiculous conceits, in his practices with Summers.

Out of all question, if these absurd mates had gone on, they would have
proved as gross deluders, as any of the popish or Jesuitical Exorcistes, if
not more gross: For the popish sort, having hammered this point of Satan's
seeking to reenter into the same party, out of whom he was cast, are so far
from M. Darrell, and M. Mores opinion, as some of them hold, that those
spirits, which are once cast out of men, secundo ^osdem ingredi, and vexare
non possunt. And those that rely upon the place of S. Matthew, Cap. 12. do
only infer, that sometimes Satan does so seek to reenter, but not always.
Besides, the Captain or Marshall of Devils, (who takes upon him to write
most exactly of them in this point,) reduces all the places, whether the
wicked spirits go at such times, into the number of six, as out of one man
into another: out of men into beasts out of men, into fair and great houses
(whereof it comes, that some houses are haunted with spirits,) out of men
into desert places, and out of men into hell: pretermitting as a place more
extraordinary, the returning of Satan, into the party, that he had lately
possessed.

But M. Darrell and his friends, will peradventure be better provided in this
point hereafter. And it were convenient also, that they furnished themselves
with some better proofs, for their tales of Mice, of Bears, and Bugges,
threatening and promising such great matters. It may be they have some conceit,
that the Deuilles tempting of Christ, will serve their turn: but assuredly for
shame they dare never publish it.

CHAP. XI. How those that took upon them to cast out Devils, do get
themselves work, and of their devises to cover their lewdenes.
THey that make it so ordinary a matter in these days to cast out devils, do
not say, that it is an ordinary thing amongst Christians, for men or women to
be possessed: whereupon it comes to pass, that the tradesmen in that skill,
have devised many ways to keep themselves in work. It is not pertinent in
this place, to show how the Papists have entitled their Exorcising priests, to
the coniuring of young infants, immediately before their baptism: because
although they hold, that thereby the devil is driven from them: yet they dare
not resolve, that every infant when it is born, is possessed. In their
exorcising of infantes, they may pretend that they work great matters, but
except you will take their credit for payment, nothing appears, but blowing
upon the infantes, (thereby pretending that they blow away Satan:) thrusting
of salt into their mouths, wetting their noses and ears with spittle, and
their anointing of them with their hallowed oil; mere toys, whereby their
estimation is not much increased. For the beholders, seeing nothing in those
actions to be maruayled at, are not so much moved with them. It should seem
that these kinds of devils (that are thus exercised) are but doltes, and
therefore cannot serve these iuglers turns, as being peradventure but newly
hatched, when infants are borne, and therefore ignorant, how to apply
themselves to their contentment. They cannot cry out, or rage by their praying
to Saints, by their casting of holy water upon them, by their bringing unto
them of the Sacrament of the Altar, or their Agnus Dei, by their application of
holy relics, nor by their own approaching near unto them, being holy
catholic priests. And therefore they are devils of greater understanding, and
better experience, that the Exorcistes hunt after: such as are acquinted with
the divine virtue of their so catholic iuglings, and practices. It is disputed
amongst them, whether all infantes be possessed or not, it seeming an
absurdity to command the Devil to come forth of them, if he were not in
them. For the deciding of which doubt, it may be maruailed, if those kinds of
devils be of any standing, when they use not their infallible means, to know
the truth therein: which are (as heretofore has been expressed,) their
application of relics, and so forth* For if they be so terrible to Satan,
(as they pretend,) why should he not be compelled by the force of them to show
himself, or his presence, as well in infantes, as either in boys or wenches,
or any other? But as these deluders must have (it seems) more skilful devils,
so must they also have some elder persons, that are more fit to be seduced
by them. Otherwise their reputation, in that behalf would soon decay, and
their holy water, with the rest of their trumpery, want that testimony, that is
drawn from the devils disliking of them: which may not be endured, but
prosecuted and defended with all their might and skill. Neither is this cunning
appropriated only to the Papists, but extends it self further, there being
men also amongst our selves, who want not their Relics and devises, which
these elder devils must fear, and tremble at.

There is a profound question amongst the Romanistes, Whether all Protestants,
whom they account heretics, be not possessed with wicked spirits. If it had
fallen out, that they had so been, their Exorcistes would in such sort have
been set on work, as they should not have been driven to have sought far
for it. But it is otherwise ouerruled: that (forsooth) although heretics have
great fellowship and intercourse with Devils: Obsessi tamen omnes, nec possunt,
nec debent dici: yet al of them neither may, nor should he thought to be
possessed: propterea quod, etc. because the signs of possession do not appear
in them. And they that take upon them to cast out Devils amongst our selves:
notwithstanding, it seems, that stinted prayers are very offensive to them,
and that they are not resolved of the difference betwixt a priest and a Bishop,
yet they will not say, that they who hold against them are possessed: albeit
men of that humor both have, and still do dep^^ue them, malign them, and
slander them upon any occasion at their pleasures. So as these Exorcists of
both kinds, for want of work are driven to their shifts: and like Tinkers
walk up and down from place to place, seeking to be employed. It is a matter
of some difficulty to discover their shifts, and sleights to that purpose,
they have so many; and by their experience do manage them so craftily. Diverse
of them are here set down, and the rest may be supplied peradventure by
some hereafter.

Sometimes they make choice of some such boys or wenches, as they think are
fit for their purpose, whom they procure by many promises and allurements, to
keep their counsel, and to be (as they term it) advised by them. And these
are commonly of the poorer sort, either the children, or servants of such
persons, as the Exorcistes do well know, to be of their own stamp, and well
affected toward them. It falls out now and then, that they have some
scholars of their own, whom they mean, to prefer: the popish sort to some
Seminaries, and others as they may. And there are none to these, they are so
apt to work upon: howbeit, they can soon frame the other to their bent, by
their cunning. When they have any of these in hand, they do instruct them so
perfectly, as when they come to exorcise them, they are in a manner secure:
their scholars knowing as well what to do, as their false masters
themselves. These are not dealt with, but there must be a great assembly
gathered together, in one corner or other: all of them such persons, as they
know to be their friends, or at the least such as their said friends do
bring with them, and are thought fit to be perverted. The company met, the
Exorcistes do tell them, what a work of God they have in hand, and after a
long discourse, how Satan does afflict the parties, and what strange things
they shall see: the said parties are brought forth, as it were a Bear to the
stake, and being either bound in a chair, or otherwise held fast, they fall to
their fittes, and play their prankes point by point exactly, according as they
have been instructed. As if they be of the new cut: they cry, they wallow,
they foame, and show the signs of possession, mentioned in the Scriptures,
with some others. But if they be of the old instructions: then there are
notable Tragedies. Out comes the Priest in his massing attire: the hallowed
candles are lightened: their relics, with their Agnus Dei are brought forth:
the holy water flies about the chamber: their hallowed frankincense perfumeth
the place, and so forth. Whereupon all that are present, (having worshipped the
said holy mysteries) no sooner cast their eyes toward the parties pretended
to be possessed, but there is starting, struggling, and striving: they scriche,
they rail, they spit, they cry, they rage and fare, as not being able in any
wise without danger of present death, to endure the presence of the catholic
Priests, and of their holy complements.

But when these Exorcistes can not work this way (as wanting such fit
scholars to dissemble and collude with them) then by casting about, they
(especially the popish iuglers) have in readiness some other, as need shall
require. At their coming to the places where they know they are welcome, but
cannot practice as before, if they find any youth, boy or girl, that is not
well at ease, and whose disease is not apparent, (as either an Ague, the small
pockes, or such like, where of every man is able to judge) they will seem to
take great care of them: as being desirous to know the cause of their grief,
and the means to help them. In this case it is sufficient for them, if the
party be troubled, either in his stomach with choler or fleagme, or in his
belly with gripinges or collicke, or in his head or joints with aches or
numnesse: they can work upon it. In their said pretended care for such a
party (which makes them the better welcome) they will procure some ordinary
things to be given unto him, and then after a while, their manner is, to
admire the disease: saying, that for a certainty, it is very strange: that by
the rules of learning, there can be no reason given of it: and so after much
ado, they come by degrees to suspect forsooth, and then after a while,
plainly to affirm, that out of all question the party is possessed. And
herein our reformed Exorcistes do in some sort agree with them: but that
which next ensues, does properly (for ought that appears) appertain to the
others.

If at their coming to any such places, (the houses of popish Recusants, their
most assured friends,) they find all the household well, and yet think it
convenient to show their skill there: then observing such youths as are in the
house of either kind, and marking which of them is fittest for their purpose,
they practice this devise. Their manner is, when they come into any such place,
to use every one very kindly, but especially the younger sort, whom they will
take upon them to instruct. In which respect they grow shortly to be familiar
with them: and then in their private talk together, they will cunningly fish
from them, whether at any time tofore they have been sick, or troubled, and
the manner how. Here if the parties tell them, that they have had but so much,
as a pain once in their sides, or any particular grief in some other part of
their bodies: they have caught the gudgin, that is, the whole matter that they
fished for. Then they use the parties much more kindly then before, and do
seem to have a more especial care of their good estate. Marry, at the length
(as men very careful, least the said parties should not do well) they will
begin to suspect, and give out words accordingly, that the said parties are
not in so good case, as they look for. They insinuate, as though they knew by
their learning, that the parties were inclining to such, or such a disease:
naming that, whereof before cunningly they had gotten notice. Herein they
proceed with such craft, as they easily draw from the parents, or masters of
such parties, how at such or such a time, or about so long since, they were
indeed troubled with such a kind of disease. By this means their credit is
somewhat increased, being deemed for men of especial knowledge, in that they
are able to discern of such matters. When they have gotten this hold, then
they begin to deal privately with the parties, and to say unto them, that they
greatly fear their state of health to be in great danger: insomuch as with
little trouble (such is their cunning that way) they make them in deed to
suspect themselves. Then they tell them many strange tales, of bugges and
spirits: how Satan seeks to molest those children that God loves, by
vexing them in these and those parts, and how afterward he will lie hidden
in them, and suffer them to be well for diverse months, and sometimes for a
year together. And here they add, (but with very good terms) that they are
afraid by the signs they see in them, that their ancient grief did proceed
from Satan's malice toward them: and that they verily suppose, he does still
lurk in them: and that notwithstanding, in respect of their good will and
liking toward them, they will do their best to make them sound, if they will
be ruled by them: not doubting but in very short time, fully to deliver them
from that their ghostly enemy, and restore them to perfect health. When they
have thus framed the children to their minds, then ordinarily they deal with
the parents, or masters, to the same effect, who finding their children or
servants somewhat drooping, are easily drawn (through the good opinion they
have of the Exorcistes) to yield to any course, which they shall think meet to
be undertaken in that behalf.

A man would wonder, how all this should sort with their intents. For if there
should be no further appearance of Satan's possessing the said parties, their
friends might suspect they were never possessed: and they in pretending to
dispossess them, would be deprived (in all likelihood) of the glory and
fruit that thereby they gaped after. It is therefore further to be observed,
that when they have prepared all parties (as is before mentioned) then they
appoint a time, when (as they say) if the parties be possessed, they will
compel the Devil that lurketh in them (will he nill he) to discover and show
himself. In the mean while, with great devotion forsooth, they tell many
tales of the virtue of holy relics, and other such trumperie as are before
specified: how wicked spirits have been constrained by them in such cases, to
disclose their lurking: how they have tormented the parties, and how in the end
they have been cast out. By these means, if the parties pretended to be
possessed, be not over dull, they may learn somewhat: and for the most part
they do so. But howsoever, as the Exorcistes do use the matter, it much
forces not: their friends, and those that hear them, are thereby prepared
(they know) to admire those tricks, which afterward they shall see. At the
time appointed, many are not then called to be present, because the Exorcistes
will first see how their gear works: and afterward they do frame their
company accordingly. In the morning when their mass is ended, the Exorcistes
keeping still upon them their massing attire, and all things being prepared (as
in the other case before has been specified) the party that must be dealt
with, (having been at the mass, and either perfectly well in deed, or
troubled with some little ache, saving that the said iuglers have skarred him)
is in the presence of that assembly, set and bound fast with towels in a
chair. Then the Exorcistes set their holy engynes a working, they cross, they
kneel, they pray, and come with such solemnity and show of devotion unto the
poor youth, that is so bound, as no marvel if they should fright him out of
his wits. His color comes and goes: his fear is great what will become
of him and therewith begins sometime to tremble, and to be in a cold
sweat: wherewith, Ah (say the Exorcistes) see you not how Satan begins to
show himself? This is he that works these effects: but you shall see more
anon. Then they give to the party their holy potion, (as they term it)
which they tell those that are present, has a marvelous power to plague and
vex the Devil. Sure it is, that the operation of it is great. It is almost
half a pint of holy Oil, mingled with almost as much hallowed Sack, having
in them both a quantity of the juice of hallowed Rue. This drink (which an
honest man would scarce give to an horse) these iugling knaves do constrain
the youth (being bound) to take at their pleasure: wherewith he is in a short
time so troubled and intoxicated, as his head grows giddie: he heaueth and
vomitteth, and if all this work not, (as they would have it) then they burn
hallowed brimstone under his nose, holding his head by force so over the smoke,
as they may be sure to stuff him with it. By the time that this has wrought
together with the potion, the youth grows in effect to be besides himself:
He raueth, he strugleth, and shows great signs of pains and grief. In
which his fit, you must think, that the Exorcistes are not idle. They bring
unto him peradventure the Sacrament of the Altar, and apply their relics, and
other trinkettes, still ascribing every thing that the party either does or
says, to the Devil: who by that means is compelled (as they say) to show
himself. As the operation of the said potion and brimstone diminishes, so the
Exorcistes do use their charms: commanding the Devil to cease from
troubling the party, and to lodge himself for that time, for example, either
in his foot, or his toe, and sometimes in his toe nail.

And this is their first pageant, whereby they make it apparent (forsooth) that
the parties, whom they undertake, are possessed. When all things do fall out
herein to their desire, the people present greatly wondering at the matter (as
little suspecting the lewdnes of their ghostly fathers) then they appoint some
other time for a greater concourse, to see this wonderful work of God, by his
holy catholic priests. The parties, whom they have before instructed, are not
then much troubled with the said potion, or brimstone: because they can show
their tricks sufficiently, as compelled thereunto by virtue of the priests
words: and in short time also the other, hearing what effects they ascribe to
that drink and smoke, do frame themselves, for the avoiding of them both, to
practice all they hear without them: which is a means to procure them great
ease. For you must not think, that when they have such a matter on foot, they
give it over suddenly. True it is, that sometimes they will keep the poor
youth in their hands, in spite of his head, to work wonders with, sometimes
half a year, even as long as they list themselves.

Again, there is another way, whereby these fellows do get themselves more
work. It falls out sometimes, that diverse children, having heard how such
and such have been thus and thus troubled, they of themselves will begin to
feign themselves sick: if they be boys, peradventure because they would
remain from the school: if wenches, for that they would be idle, and both of
them, that thereby they might be much made of, and dandled. Now, there being no
apparent cause of such their dissembled sickness, they are driven to
counterfeite, and to fall to those tricks which they have heard of in others:
Wherein, if either their parents or masters begin to pity them, then they
run on in their knaueries above measure: but especially if they begin to
wonder at them, and to devise some remedies for them. If any of our Exorcistes
do hear of such an opportunity, they will not let it escape, but by one means
or other they will have occasion, to go to that place: where being well
entertained, and of credit, the said parties are pretended by them forthwith
to be possessed. And here by the way, you shall observe a little wonder. It
will hardly be showed, that any of this sort have been found, but either in
the houses of Recusantes, or of such as have on the other side pretended some
zeal, for they know not what reformation. Where railing is ordinary, and every
slight tale (which is countenanced by a Minister or Priest of those sects,)
is made a great matter, and urged as an argument for some purpose or other.
Besides, it falls out amongst us: that they who have taken upon them, to have
cast out devils, have still been men of that humor, as being forsooth more pure
then the rest of their brethren.

But to proceed, when these fellows (as is aforesaid) have bred a conceit,
that the parties mentioned are possessed: then they tell their friends in
their hearing, especially when they are in their pretended fittes, what great
experience they have in such matters. And amongst many things, they beat into
their heads, these false grounds, vz. that those who are possessed, are in
their fittes altogether senceles, and that whatsoever they do or say, it is
not they, but the devil in them that speaks, and does it: though it seem
never so apparently otherwise. There has not been of ancient time any
certain doctrine in these points: but now they are grown into practice with
the Exorcistes of both sorts, as being the best means to work their fears
by, that hitherto has been devised amongst such kind of counterfeites. They
are comparable to the aforesaid holy potion and brimstone. For the children or
youths, (as such must be betwixt the years of xiiii. and xviii. or there
aboutes,) hearing what these seducers do report, are very apt and ready to
make their advantage of such their speeches: although they know very well, that
they lie in so saying. These grounds thus laid, then the companions go on in
setting out their skill. They repeat the signs of possession, and how they
have seen these, and those things done, by such as were in the like case, not
doubting (as they commonly add,) but that the devil in the parties, whom
they have in hand, will show and do the like in them. Which things and
reports the parties hearing, they fall, as well as they can, to the practice of
them: as having thereby liberty, to do and say what they list, and in a sort
to work wonders. It is also the custom of the Exorcistes, when they have
gotten such youths to use them very gently: whereby the said youths, are the
rather induced, so to apply themselves, as they may please them. For after a
short time, they easily perceive by the Exorcistes speeches, what they would
have them to act or speak: and the rather because they find themselves, not
only to be admired, and very much made of: but that likewise, the whole
course of their former dissimulation, is by their means altogether covered.
When the people that are present at these and the former iuglinges, with such
like, (suspecting no fraud,) do behold how every thing comes still to
pass, as the Exorcistes do foretell, and what a dexterity and boldness they
have, in hunting and coursing of wicked spirits, commanding them, coniuring
and cursing them at their pleasure: it is not much to be maruailed, that they
are cast thereby into a wonderful astonishment.

If any do surmise these practices to be improbable, as being much subject to
danger, in that the said parties, that are so cunningly drawn on in those
courses, may upon many occasions detect them: they must know that these
fellows are well enough furnished in that behalf. For first amongst the
Papists, it were sufficient to bring a man into suspicion of Heresy, that
should but doubt that one were not possessed, if their Priests affirmed the
contrary. And we see amongst our selves, how hardly it is endured, that our
pretended Exorcistes are called into question, But be it, that the worst
should fall out: yet have they such rules, as if you will allow them, they are
safe enough. For if any do once fall into their hands, or yield themselves
unto their practices, they can never be rid from them by any means, so long
as they are pleased to work upon them. Some of their said rules, Thyraeus.
are as follows: vix aliquem deprehendas, etc. you shall scarsely find any
amongst those that are possessed, which has not many wicked spirits in him.
The use of which rule is very ample, and extends far. For if any of their
patientes, after their pretense of their dispossession, shall in remorse of
conscience confess, the knaueries and lewd dealinges of the Exorcistes with
them: then they say that thereby it appears, they had many devils in them,
whereof some remaining vncast out, they continue in as evil case almost as
they were before. If the said confession be made shortly after their
pretended dispossession, then the said rule is accounted more probable. But if
the parties continuing well for a longer time, as for a year or more, without
making show of any trouble, or vexation of Satan, (whereby it may well be
thought they have no Deuilles in them,) and then detect those holy men; by an
other rule, they avoid that also: which is, that Satan for fear of being
cast out, will lie lurking in those that are possessed, showing no signs
thereof for a great time, and that the slaundering of them, (being holy
Exorcistes) is an apparent argument of Satan's continuance in them. It falls
out also oftentimes, that such as have been in these Exorcists hands, as they
do detect their false practices with them, so do they also confess their
own dissimulation, acknowledging the truth in every thing, and that they were
not at all possessed. To meet therefore with this inconvenience, Flagellum
Demon.
they have this rule: Egressi solent persuadere etc. When the deuilles are cast
out of a man, they endeavor by all the means they can, to persuade, that he
was never in them: that so the party being unthankful to God for his
deliverance, they might the better reenter into him. And therefore there is an
other rule to be observed (they say) by the Exorcistes: Vt liberatum moueant
quantum possint, ad credendum se liberatum: that they admonish the dispossessed
as effectually as they are able, to believe, that being possessed, he is
delivered, and dispossessed: and the pretense is fair, that thereby he may
be thankful to God. If any man, suspecting the parties that are pretended to
be possessed, to dissemble in their fittes, shall offer to make some trial of
it: that it is a point almost of infidelity, and amongst the popish
Exorcistes, is very dangerous, and is not well taken by ours. Howbeit,
sometimes it falls out: that men are more bold therein then welcome, and
that they find by many direct circumstances, that the parties do
counterfeyte. But there are rules also to meet with this mischief: as, that
Satan does sometimes permit the parties to dissemble, and to act some loose
tricks, thereby to make the beholders believe, that all the rest that they
do, is likewise dissembled, thereby to hinder the glory of God in their
dispossession: and likewise to conceal his own presence. Which latter point
depends upon an other rule: that forsooth the Devil laboreth by all the
means he can, that he might not be known to be in those he possesses, that so
he might avoid the power of the Exorcistes, and continue still his said
possession. If a man shall reason the matter with these Exorcistes, or their
vpholders, and besides the said confessions of the parties shall allege, that
many who saw them in their fittes, were of opinion, that they did
counterfeyte: oh, (say they by an other rule) that is the practice of Satan to
stir up great discord and dissension, in making some to deny, that the
parties were possessed: and hereof we have experience in domibus and familiis,
Fuga Daemonum.
in houses and families: Dummodo plures sint in eadem domo: if there be above
two or three in the house: yea, but (say some unto them) it is well known,
that the Devil is skillful in all languages, that he is able to reveal many
secrets, and if he were present in any man to show the same at his going
out, extinguendo luminaria magna, and alia similia, by blowing out great
lights, etc. And therefore how comes it to pass, that they whom you term
to be possessed, can speak neither Latin, Greek, nor Hebrew, etc. but their
own natural language only, nor reveal hidden matters, nor show their
departure by such notable signs? For answer whereunto, they have sondrie
shifts, or rules: some of them being general, and others more particular, as
the qualities of the said objections do require. First (say they,) all
Deuilles are not endued with the like knowledge. Then that the Deuilles by
their fall, although they lost not their knowledge, yet they lost
possibilitatem illa vtendi, so as they cannot use the same, nor do any thing
of themselves, but when God will permit them. These general rules thus laid,
they come unto their particular answers, saying, Quod Daemones non loquuntur
Latin, Greece, etc. that the Deuilles do not speak Latin, Greek, and other
strange tongues in the possessed, because God sometimes does not permit them
so to do. And why does God abridge them? Vt confundatur humana curiositas,
that human curiosity (says Mengus) might be confounded, which is delighted
rather to hear the Devil speaking curiously in the possessed, then the words
of God, uttered by their Exorcistes. But the said Mengus, has else where two
or three other shifts, to meet with this objection: as that the Devils, do
very rarely use strange languages, ne credantur ibi adesse, least they should
be thought to be in the parties: and that the Devils using the tongues of such
as he possesses, does not easily speak in an unknown language: for example,
to make an Italian to speak French, but does use his own language: quia
lingua ad vnum modum loquendi habituata, est illi obedientior, and ad motus
illi placentes dispositior: because the tongue that has an habit to speak but
one language, is therein more obedient unto him, and more apt to be disposed
of, as it pleased the Devil. And touching the revealing of secrets, (as the
sins of the parties possessed,) and speaking of high mysteries, they say:
that if God do give them leave, they know, and are able to speak, and reveal
great and hid matters, but do it not, although they be known to be in the
said parties, least, in showing their sins, they should be brought to
repentance. If sometimes (says Mengus) they speak of the great mysteries of
Divinity, vt iam audiui, as I have heard them: nunquam vel raro intersunt isti
euriosi, vt eorum curiositas confundatur: yet such curious men as make these
objections are never present, that their curiosity may be confounded.

Thirdly, concerning the showing of some great sign, when the Devil
departs, that they hold it not much to be respected, because it is no
argument of the devils presence in the possessed: in that the wandering deuilles
in the air at the request of those that are in men's bodies, possunt facere
illamet signa, can blow out great lights, and work such signs.

And to an other objection, which is made, how it comes to pass, that for
the most part such as are pretended to be possessed, are either men of the
simpler sort, or women, who may be strangely afflicted, being subject
humoribus matricalibus, though they be not possessed:, they say that the
Deuilles do easier possess men and women of light brain, then those that be
wise, ne deprehendantur ibi adesse, that they may not be thought to be in them,
and that they vex women and maids, rather then men, for these two causes, vz.
that they seek to hyde themselves, sub nomine humerum matricalium, and because
women are more subject to terrors, which open the passage for the Deuilles
entrance into them.

Unto these and such like rules, answers, and grounds, Fustis Daemonum. Cap. 6.
may be added an other, whereupon all the rest are in a sort built, which is,
that the art or exercise of casting out deuilles, is most odious to Satan, and
that therefore he endeavors by all means possible, to slander and
discredit the Exorcistes, being the men that he most abhors. By this rule
these Impostors have such a privilege, as nothing can either be said or done
unto them by any: but they are presently reputed for the Deuilles
instruments. If they be called into question for their falshoode and iugling,
Fuga Demon. ca. 3.
or brought before the Magistrates, or imprisoned, or proceeded against: all is
done (they say) by the Devil, or his ministers: daemones superiores mouent, the
Deuilles move the magistrates: illos faciunt incarcerari: the deuilles cause
them to be imprisoned: and all is done by the devil (forsooth) that is
attempted for the finding out of their lewdnes. Their own words, when their
iugling is detected, must serve for their justification: because they are men
so loathsome to the devil. If they say, that any is possessed, it must be so.
The parties confession touching his own dissimulation is nothing, if they will
testifye for him, that he did not dissemble. It appears by one of the
Councels of Carthage, that it has been a practice long since, amongst some
lewd persons, to counterfeyte themselves to be possessed. And Lyra writing
upon these words: The Babilonians worshipped the Dragon, Daniel 14.
says: that therein they were deceived by the Priests that worshipped him,
propter quaestum temporalem quem inde reportabant, for their temporal profit
which they reaped thereby. And even so (says he,) aliquando sit in ecclesia
maxima deceptio populi in miraculis fictis a sacerdotibus, vel eis
adhaerentibus, propter lucrum temporale: sometimes in the Church the people are
greatly deceived through false miracles feyned by the Priests, or by their
adherents, for temporal profit. Howbeit, Mengus (an old seducer, having been
an Exorcist, as he says, almost forty years,) writing diverse books of the
casting out of Deuilles, as Flagellum Daemonum, a whippe for Deuilles: Fuga
Daemonum, the chasing away of Deuilles: Fustis Daemonum, a club to beat them
down: and likewise Thyraeus, with many others, having written upon the same
argument, amongst them all, it will be hard to find, that they ever make
mention of any whom they dealt with, that did falsely pretend themselves to be
possessed. As though they would make men to believe, that there neither were or
could be any such matter: whereas like cosening companions, they do very well
know it, to be an ordinary thing amongst them, especially in Italy, for women
to make an occupation, of pretending themselus to be possessed. Whereof it
comes to pass, that in their ordinary stations, and solemn feasts in
Rome, they never want some of those counterfeytes, who pretending themselves to
be possessed, must forsoooth, by putting their heads under some Altars, or by
touching some relics, with stoles about their necks, and some other
trinkets, feine themselves to be dispossessed. By reason of which false
miracles, with diverse others: as the Babilonians were induced to worship the
Dragon, so are the bewitched Romanists, to worship those false relics, and to
embrace diverse other points of Popery.

But for the conclusion of this point, that shall serve, which a public person
in authority once said to Mengus: Fuga. Demon. ca. 11.
Volo vt scias quod ex numero quinquaginta exorcistarum, quadraginta nouem
trises existunt: I would have you to know (says the said Magistrate) that of
fifty Exorcistes, nine and forty of them are counterfeites. To whom Mengus
answered: If I were not present, you would so judge of me. And in deed he the
said Mengus might as well have made up the fifty, as any of that kind then
living.

The end of the First Book.
The Second Book.
This second Book entreats of M. Darrels particular courses held with
William Summers: how he instructed him at Ashbie de la Zouch, to practice such
tricks, as he might be thought thereby to be possessed: how afterward he
dealt privately with him at Nottingham, supplying his defects in that behalf,
upon every occasion with new instructions, of such his extraordinary cunning,
as in deed deceive the people, and was sufficient to have drawn Summers on
throughout the whole course of his dissimulation, though he had never dealt
with him before at Ashbie, nor privately at Nottingham.

CHAP. I. Of M. Darrels intercourse with Summers by startes at Ashbie, from
about the year 1592. until 1597. for his instruction, how to dissemble
himself to be possessed.
Master Darrell, having affirmed that William Summers was possessed: that he
with others had dispossessed him: and that he was repossessed: was accused
before her Majesty's Commissioners, for causes ecclesiastical, Anno 1598. for
a counterfeiting hypocrite, as having by many sleights and false pretenses
compassed such a conceit amongst his favorers, to the dishonor of God, and
great abuse and cosenage of sundry her Majesty's loving subjects. And for
some proof of this general imputation, he was charged with these particulars:
vz. that he became acquainted with William Summers, at Ashbie de la-Zouch,
about five or six years past: that he imparted unto him the manner of
Katherine Wrights fits: that he gave them unto him in writing, and moved him to
learn the practice of them: that he promised him, in so doing he should not
want: that he willed him, when he did practice the said fits before any
company, he should make mention of his name: that afterward Summers having put
them in practice, and telling him the said Darrell, that M. Brakenburie had put
him away thereupon for a counterfeite, he the said Darrell told him, that he
had not acted his fits artificially, and did himself in Ashbie park teach him
to do them better: that within a while after he willed Summers for his better
instruction, to go and see the boy of Burton, how he used himself in his
fittes: that an other time he moved Summers, that when he should find a fit
opportunity, and had learned to do the said fittes cunningly, he should put
them in practice at Nottingham, and that he promised Summers to come thither
unto him, and not only assist him, but likewise said, he would procure his
Master Thomas Porter to release him of his years, which he knew by the boys
own report, to be the thing that he chiefly desired.

Touching every one of these particulars, M. Darrell has been examined, and
upon his oath has denied them all, so far forth as they do any way concern
himself: but Summers, of the age of one and twenty years, being deposed, does
justify them point by point, as it may appear by his words following, with
this alteration only: that his examination running in the third person (as the
manner is) now he speaks in his own: for the avoiding of many needless
repetitions (as this examinate says, etc.) which otherwise of necessity must
have been used: which order is likewise used in reciting the depositions,
which are produced in this cause.

Summers.
About a quarter of a year before my departure (says he) from M. Thomas
Grayes, ( with whom I then dwelt at Langley Abbey in Leicestershire) I was sent
one day, to Ashbie de la Zouch (being four or five miles distant) upon some
occasion of business. At what time I with other boys, going into an Alehouse,
found there M. Darrell, whom I little regarding, but playing the wag, and
shrewd boy with my companions, M. Darrell departed out of the house, and stayed
at the door until I came forth. And then he took me apart, asked me my name,
where I was borne, with whom I dwelt, and how I was brought up. To whom I
answering, as the truth was in every point: alas ( quoth M. Darrel) thou art a
pretty boy, and my countreyman: I knew thy father, and am sorry to see thee in
so mean a case: for I was simply apparelled, even as meanly almost as could
be. He also then asked me, what I had to do in the town, and how long it
would be before I had dispatched my business: whereunto I answering truly,
and that I would return that way very shortly, he promised to bring me out of
the town, and to tell me some things, wherein if I would be ruled by him, I
should not be driven to go so barely as I did, but be able to maintain my self
as long as I lived.

When I had dispatched my business, I returned homeward, and found M. Darrell
not far from the place where I left him, talking with two or three strangers,
about one Katherine Wright, whom he said he had dispossessed of an unclean
spirit. After he had ended his communication with them, he went with me along
the street in my way homewards: and as we were going together, I having
ouerheard some of his speeches with the said strangers, asked him what they
meant: he answred me with a long speech concerning the possession of Katherine
Wright, and told me the manner of her fits, in such sort how the Devil
troubled her, and how he had delivered her, as I was greatly afraid lest M.
Darrell had been a coniurer, and would have done me some hurt: which he
perceiving (as I think) bad me be of good cheer, and told me there was no
cause why I should fear. For (says he) if thou will swear unto me to keep
my counsel, I will teach thee to do all those tricks which Katherine Wright
did, and many others that are more strange. Besides (quoth he) if thou will so
do, thou shall never want whilst thou live. Hereunto when I had agreed, he
told me more particularly what the said Katherine Wright did at several times,
in her fittes: as that she foamed at the mouth, gnashed with her teeth: cried
and scritched, catched and snatched at those that stood by her, ( especially at
him the said M. Darrell): laughed out of measure: fell into great shows of
sadness: wallowed and tumbled: cast her self into the fire, and sometimes
into the water: would lie as though she had been senseless: and many other
things M. Darrell then told me: saying, that I might learn to do them very
easily. And the better to teach me, he did thereupon himself, act diverse of
them. For gnashing with his teeth, he knocked his own teeth together diverse
times. For foaming, he rolled his tongue in his mouth, and then put out some
little spittle betwixt his lips: but said, that I might soon learn to do it
better, by rolling a stone in my mouth, but especially if I could get a little
soape to use at such times. Likewise he showed with his hands half open, the
manner of her snatching and catching, and for some other of her doings he
showed some other gestures. Also he then told me, that for my better
remembrance, he would give me in writing, all the said fits and gestures before
mentioned. And thereupon sitting down upon a bank, he did write them, and
delivered them unto me, saying: when thou have learned them, so as thou can
do them perfectly, thou may put them in practice. He likewise then told me,
that when I could put the said fits so in practice, as that I should be judged
thereby to be possessed: I must name him, and then (quoth he) it is very
likely, that I shall be sent for: Which if it fall so out, then (said he) thou
must at my coming unto thee, do all the former things that I have told thee,
Katherine Wright did. Upon that occasion, I will take upon me to dispossess
thee: and afterward, if thou will still be advised by me, I will take thee my
self, and maintain thee. In the end he gave me xij. pence, and so we departed.

Summers being here demanded, where the said writing was that Master Darrell
delivered unto him, of Katherine Wrights fits: answers, that after he had
learned them by heart, he did tear the paper in pieces, as M. Darrell had
straightly charged him. But further says, that he writ them in one of his
books, called Sententiae pueriles: which book, together with three others,
one Mary Holding, then servant with M. Gray, but since married to one William
Arnold, kept from him (as he was informed by some of M. Grayes men) in liew of
eight pence, which he did owe unto her. Also the said Summers affirms, that
after his former acquaintance begun with M. Darrell, and whilst he still
remained with M. Gray, he met M. Darrel three or four times in Ashbie: and once
he affirms, that M. Darrell called him unto him, and asked him, if as yet he
had practiced any of those things, which he had showed unto him. To whom Summers
answering, that he had not, because the time had not served him thereunto:
Well (quoth M. Darrell) do them often to thy self privately, until thou shall
be perfect in them, and then thou may practice them the better publicly. At
other times also the said M. Darrel did kindly salute him. But let him proceed
in his own person.

Within twelve or thirteen weeks (as I think) after my first acquaintance
with M. Darrel: M. Gray placed me with one M. Anthony Brakenburie, to keep
certain silver haired Connies: with whom after I had remained about six or
seven weeks, (as far as I remember) I began to put in practice sundry of
those instructions that M. Darrell had given me. I fained my self to be
sick: I foamed at the mouth: I did sometimes lie speechless as though I had
been dumb: and so by the space almost of a month I did counterfeit as well as
I could, such fits as Master Darrell had told me, that Katherine Wright did
practice. Howbeit, I was not (as it seems) at that time my craftsmaister. For
M. Brakenburie, and M. Randall Barton his brother, being verily persuaded that
I was but a counterfeit, and that I had dissembled all that I had done, I was
turned out of service, and went home to Nottingham to my mother: with whom
after I had remained about a month, I was bound a prentise for seven years,
to one Thomas Porter, a musition in that town. Summers being here demanded, why
he did not call for M. Darrell, whilst he was in his fits at M. Brakenburies,
according to the plotte agreed upon betwixt him and M. Darrel, answers: that
if he had perceived that he had been thought to have been possessed, he would
so have done: but seeing his dissimulation took not that effect, he made no
mention of him. The said Summers, after he was bound prentise as is aforesaid,
ran twice from his master: the first time, in regard of his masters hard
usage, when he had served him not above a year: and the second time, for the
like cause, and for that his master was not able to teach him, about a year
and a half before he fell to his practices at Nottingham. Touching his first
vagary, he says thus. Being gone from my master, I went to Ashby, and
enquiring for M. Darrel, found him in a house by the school near the
Churchyard. Having met with him, he walked with me a long the way into the
fields, and after some other speeches, he asked me, whether I had put in
practice any of K. Wrights fits, that he had told me of. Whereupon I declared
unto him, what I had done at M. Brakenburies, and of the evil success I had
there, as before it is expressed: and then M. Darrell said, that I had not done
those things which he taught me, so perfectly as I should. Then upon some other
further questions moved by M. Darrell, I told him how I had been bound prentise
to a Musition: how and why I was gone from him, and how I meant to go into
Worcestershire, to see if I could place my self there. This my determination
Master Darrell did seem to dislike, wishing me rather to see if I could get
a Master about Burton, or about Market Bosworth, or about Tamworth, because
(says he) I would be glad to have thee in some such place near unto me, so as
I might have occasion more conveniently now and then to see thee. Nay ( quoth
I) I may not place my self so near to Nottingham, least my master do hear of
me, and so get me again home unto him. Well then said M. Darrel, do therein
as thou will: but remember to put the former points (that I have taught thee)
in practice, as thou can conveniently: and then thou shall be sure to hear
of me. And so he giving me xij. pence, we departed.

It may be here omitted, how Summers further bestowed himself, whilst he was
from his master, and how he returned to him again, in hope to have his years
bought out: saving that (as he says) he did practice M. Darrels instructions
oftentimes privately, but had no fit opportunity to make any apparent show of
them, because in all that time he could not settle himself in any place. Now
upon his second running from his master, and after he had remained in Essex a
good part of a year, till he was weary: he returning homewards again toward
Nottingham, with better hope then before, to buy out his years, thought it
convenient in his journey homewards, to take Ashby in his way, of purpose to
see M. Darrel, who^ he found there as he says, and had dealing with him, as
follows.

Upon my coming at that time to M. Darrel, he asked me where I had been:
whither I was going, and whether I had attempted to pactise any of his
instructions. To whom I answered according to his questions: and that I had
had no convenient time, otherwise, then when I was alone, to do any of those
things. Then he told me many things of the boy of Burton. Whereupon, I
showing my self to have a desire to go and see him: M. Darrell said, I should
do well in so doing, because that seeing of him in his fittes, I might the
better learn to do them my self afterward. Being thus encouraged, I went to
Burton, where I saw Thomas Darling: but perceiving that a great number of
people came likewise to see him, and fearing that some of them might know me, I
returned to Ashbye, not staying to see Darling in any of his fittes. At my
coming back again to M. Darrell, he demanded of me, whether I had seen the
boy in any of his fittes: and I answered, that I had not, for the reason last
mentioned: which M. Darrell not well approving, said, that I might well enough
have stayed to have seen some of them, because it was not likely, that any
there could have known me. Then upon some further occasion of speeches
betwixt us, M. Darrell delivered unto me in writing, the particular fittes,
which he said Thomas Darling lately had, and did act the most of them himself
before me, we two being in the park together alone, by Ashbye. At that time
also, M. Darrell delivered unto me in writing, certain signs and gestures,
which were to be used, he said, to signify sondrie kinds of sins: which
gestures he did likewise act himself in the place before mentioned. Which
things thus declared and acted by M. Darrell, he would needs see how I could
do them, and the other also, which before he had taught me. And so under a
bush in the said Park, I did act sondrie fittes, vz. these to my remembrance:
falling upon the ground: moving of my belly: foaming at my mouth: gnashing of
my teeth: thrusting out of my tongue, and doubling of the same: drawing of my
mouth awrye: staring with mine eyes: turning my face backewardes: the making of
two bunches, the one after the other in my face: lying as though I had been
senseles, with some others. Then M. Darrell after I had showed these fittes,
did read out of his paper, the gestures before mentioned, to signify diverse
sorts of sins: which he himself acting as he read them: I lying upon the
ground, did also by his direction imitate the same, wherein if I missed, M.
Darrell did teach me to do them better, and said that with a little practice
by my self, according to that which he had done, and according to his
directions given me in writing, I would quickly learn to do them perfectly.
But he straightly charged me, that for my life, I should keep these things
secret, saying, that if ever I bewrayed them, it might bring us both in danger
of hanging. These things thus finished, I told M. Darrell, that I meant to
return to Nottingham, to see if I could get my self released from my Master,
and he approving my purpose therein, said, that when the time served, I might
well put all the former things in practice there with good effect: and that in
so doing he doubted not, to procure me a release from my master. He also told
me, that he having a sister in law in Nottingham, one Mrs. Wallys, I could no
sooner name him, when I should be thought to be possessed, but that presently,
and the rather by his sisters means, he should be sent for to come unto me.
And so we departed. And thus far Summers for the proof of all the former
particulars, wherewith M. Darrell is charged.

Against this deposition of Summers, there are made sondrie exceptions. His
friends, and likewise he himself, are greatly offended, that M. Darrell being a
Minister, his oath may not be credited before the oath of a boy. But M. Darrels
oath is greatly impeached by his denying of sondrie things, wherewith Summers
charge him in some others of his bad dealings with him, about his pretended
dispossession: the same being deposed by diverse very sufficient witnesses. M.
Darrell in his Apology (published since he was condemned for a counterfeyt)
does pretend that this was all which was laid to his charge, concerning his
dealing with William Summers at Ashbye, vz. Summers dwelt with Mr. Gray, when I
dwelt at Ashbye: therefore we two met together in the Park, and I did instruct
him. And there is nothing (says he) but this, besides Summers bare oath, to
strengthen his accusation. It were to be wished, that for his calling sake, he
could not otherwise have been charged herein: nay rather that he might not
have been so charged at all: for in such a secret compact, the confession of
Summers is of great moment, especially the same being not so bare, (as M.
Darrell pretends,) but is strengthened with many such circumstances, as do
argue the same in all likelyhoode, to be true. It is confessed by M. Gray, and
Mrs. Gray, and by M. Darrell himself, that Summers dwelt with M. Gray at
Langlye, within 4. or 5. miles of Ashby de la zouch: and did run on errands, as
Mary Holden the wife now of one Arnold says.

M. Darrell at one of his examinations, propounding certain questions to W.
Summers, touching the situation of Ashbye, the standing of the Church, the
school and such like, did well perceive by his answers unto them, that he
had been at Ashbie. So as there is no impediment in that respect, why he might
not meet M. Darrell there, as he has deposed.

It is also confessed to be true, that Summers going to dwell with Master
Brakenbury, left certain books at Master Grayes, as it may appear by the
depositions following. William Summers told me before the time of his pretended
dispossession at Nottingham, T. Porter, pa. 114. Mrs. Gray pa. 161,
that he had left certain schoole-bookes at Master Grayes. And Mrs. Gray,
when Summers went from me, he left with one Mary Holden my cook, a coople of
books in pawn for eight pence. All that Summers deposes to this point in
effect, appears to be true, saving that, of his writing into one of the books
the particular fits, which he says M. Darrell had delivered unto him. And
that point was not looked into, because it was found that M. Gray, and Mrs.
Gray, were so addicted to M. Darrell in this matter, as there was little hope
to try out the truth thereof amongst their children and servants: it being
uncertain, who were fit to be examined therein: and Marie Holden affirming,
that she had not the books, although she said that Summers owed her two pence.

That Summers practiced at M. Brakenburies some such fittes, as he had
afterward at Nottingham, and that M. Brakenbury accounting him thereupon a
dissembler, did discharge him from his service, (as he the said Summers has
affirmed,) is thus deposed.

I heard it reported by some of my neighbors in Nottingham, T. Porter, fol.
113.
that William Summers did play the lewd and counterfeyting boy, whilst he was
at M. Brakenburies, and that M. Brakenburie did so account of him, and
thereupon did put him out of service.

Edm. Garland. pa. 117,
And an other: I have heard that William Summers did practice certain fittes at
Master Brakenburies, and that M. Brakenburie finding of him as he thought, a
counterfeyte, did put him away.

Likewise a third: my brother Brakenbury told me, that he thought Summers did
dissemble in his fittes, Mrs. Gray pa. 161
whilst he was with him, and that he would keep him no longer.

M. Darrell ad. art. 9. page 35.
And M. Darrell himself confesses some thing to this purpose: but observe how
he would cover that knauerie. I have heard that whilst Summers dwelt with M.
Brakenbury, he was handled after a strange manner.

Likewise that Summers was bound a prentise with Thomas Porter some month or
five weeks, after he came from M. Brakenburyes, and that he ran twice from
him, (as he has deposed,) is acknowledged to be true, by M. Darrell himself.
And so the said Summers had sufficient opportunity to go to Ashbie, and to
talk with M. Darrell at such times, as upon his oath he has declared.

Furthermore, that Summers in his fittes at Nottingham, and before M. Darrels
coming thither, did name him the said Darrel diverse times (according as he
says M. Darrell had instructed him) is deposed by Edmond Garland. Ed. Garland
page 117.
Before M. Darrell was sent for, I have been present twice or thrice at
several times, when William Summers has in his pretended fittes used these
words: Darrel, Darrell, Darrell.

It sauoreth also of some thing, R. Cooper,
that Robert Cooper deposes: how M. Darrell within eight or nine days after
his coming to Nottingham told him, that if he would carefully look to
Summers, he should not loose a penny by him: which sorteth with that deposed by
Summers: how if he would be ruled by M. Darrell, he should not want. And the
savor is increased by that which M. Darrell himself confesses, vz. that he
was a means with some others, to have a collection made for the relief of the
said Cooper: but indeed there were two. Again, according to Summers words,
touching M. Darrels promise, that if he would put his instructions in practice
at Nottingham, he would come thither and release him of his apprentiship,
(the same being his chief desire), M, Darrell ad art, 38, pa, 20,
he the said M. Darrell confesses thus: I gave my word to Summers his master,
that he should have thirteen shillinges four pence to release him of his
apprentiship, which afterward I did perform.

There was such kindness betwixt M. Darrell and Summers at Nottingham, as being
(it may be thought) old friends: he and some other of his adherentes entertained
him with good cheer: and when afterward he was accused to have bewitched
one, M. Darrell dealt with the Mayor of Nottingham, that he might be bayled.
Touching the first: George Richardson fol. 20.
I well remember (says a Deponent) that the boy was one night at supper with
M. Darrell, M. Brinsley, and two Ministers more at the sign of the Castle.
And for the second, (although M. Darrell deny it,) yet M. Aldridge says, that
the occasion of Summers bayling, M Aldridge pa. 91.
was partly in respect of M. Darrels and his earnestnes with the Mayor to that
effect.

Moreover it touches M. Darrell somewhat near, and does generally argue such
a compact to have been betwixt him and Summers, in that whilst he was at
Nottingham, Mary Cooper. fol. 1
he had secret conference with him diverse times. This M. Darrel denies, but
it is thus proved. I saw M. Darrell often times talk with my brother alone in
my fathers house.

Eli. Thomlinson. fol. 1
I well remember, that William Summers did often come to M. Bonners house,
whilst M. Darrell lay there, to enquire for M. Darrell, and went to him to his
chamber.

Anne Chrichley. fol. 1. M. Shute. fol. 19
I saw the boy William Summers come one morning to M. Darrels chamber, and (as I
remember) no body with him.

I came one afternoon to M. Darrels lodging, and there I found M. John
Beresforde, and the boy with M. Darrell. And I have heard by good report, that
the boy did much frequent to go to M. Darrell at many and several times.

Again, when Summers was fallen at jar with M. Darrell, he the said Summers
did both write unto him in a threatening sort, and use to others, such kind of
words, as did argue, that there was some pack betwixt them, the opening
whereof might much concern M. Darrell.

In his said letter, he did write thus, as M. Darrell confesses. All things
that I did were counterfeyte, and I pray you let it pass, for the more you
meddle in it, the more discredit it will be for you. Nich. Shep. fol, 2,
And for his words to others, Nicholas Shepherd says: I being desirous to
know of Summers, what he meant to write so boldly to M. Darrell, he answered,
that M. Darrell had best to let him alone, or else it would turn to both their
discredites. And to the same effect, John Cooper: Io. Cooper, page 202
Many times Summers did speak very hardly of M. Darrell, wishing that he had
never known him.

Besides, in that M. Darrel has turned his copy, as touching the Witch,
pretended by him, to have sent her spirit into Summers, it sits very near
unto him, whilst he was in Not. little suspecting (as it seems) that Summers
would have disclosed their packing at Ashby, or having not so thoroughly
foreseen what might fall out in that behalf, he was confident (as he pretended)
upon a tale told by Summers in one of his fits, of a certain old woman, that she
the said woman had bewitched him, and been the cause of all his trouble. The
tale was, that the Lent before his pretended fits at Not. he met an old woman
on Blackwel more-heath: that she spoke unto him: that she told him she knew
Katherine Wright, and that how they two would come to Not. unto him, that she
asked him a penny, that he saying he had none, she affirmed he had three pence,
and how except he would give her a penny, she would break his neck, and
throw him into a colepit, (that was near at hand): that he gave her thereupon
a penny: that she gave unto him a piece of bread and butter, which was the
sweetest that ever he did eat of in his life: and that he saw a black cat at
that time come unto her. Thus far the tale devised by Summers, as he confesses
as a trick of knavery in one of his fits. Howbeit M. Darrel hearing the same
(in sort as is before expressed,) confesses that he affirmed for a certainty,
M. Darrell ad art, 6, pa, 228.
or as he verily thought, that the said woman was a Witch, and that it was she
that had bewitched the boy, and had been the cause of all his former trobles.
Whereupon there was a general rumor says M. Pare, that it was she that had
bewitched Summers, and none other. M. Pare, 264
Howbeit all this notwithstanding, M Darrel now finding, as it may be thought,
that he laid the cause of Summers pretended possession to short (in that he the
said Summers had confessed their packing together at Ashbie,) does now ascribe
the cause of all the boys troubles, unto a woman of Worcestershire, that
thereby he might make it somewhat probable, that Summers counterfeyting at M.
Brakenburies, did not proceed from his instructions, (as the boy deposes:) but
from the said woman that had bewitched him. And thereupon, M. Darrell, history,
the brief narration
now both he and his friends do give it out in printe and otherwise, that
William Summers became to be possessed by the means of a Witch in Worcester,
who had sent a wicked spirit into him, called Lucy: and that rumor runs
thereby strongly amongst such as do favor him. The tale and occasion of it was
thus.

William Summers, being playing his prankes before M. Darrell came to
Nottingham, in such sort as it began to be reported that he was possessed,
he was urged (as he says) at one time by some that were present, to tell how
he thought, he first grew to be troubled. Whereupon he devised this story (as
he confesses of mere knauerie, and to maintain and set forward the opinion
already conceived, that he was possessed,) vz. that whilst he dwelt with M.
Brakenburie, he was bewitched as he thought by an old woman, who accompanied
him as he was going to Bramsgroue: that he denying to give her a hatband,
which he had found in the way, she threatened him: that thereupon the night
following, he was frighted, and so began at M. Brakenburies to have such like
fittes, as then he had at Nottingham: and that in one of his said fits, he
heard something say unto him, that upon such a day he would leave him, and not
come to him again, til about 4. years after* which time (quoth Summers) being
now expired, I began to be again troubled, as now you may perceive: but all
these devises and knaueries of the boy, will not serve M. Darrels turn: it
being the common practice of such iuglers, to teach the parties with whom they
deal, to attribute their trouble to witches, thereby to make it more probable
to the simpler sort, that they are possessed. And Summers has else where
confessed, M. Darrels course held with him to that effect: and how at their
first acquaintance, he told him, that Katherine Wright was first molested by
the means of a witch. Moreover, he had heard and read some part of a very
ridiculous book, concerning one M. Throgmortons children, (supposed to have
been bewitched by a woman of Warbois) whereby he says, that he learned some
points, and was not ignorant, as fit occasion served, to ascribe what he list
to witches.

But all these probabilities and circumstances M. Darrel would avoid, by
enforcing diverse supposed contradictions, and impossibilities in Summers
deposition.

Summers affirms (says he) that when he repaired to me to be taught, M.
Darrell Apolog.
he came from one M. Grayes of Langly (with whom he says he then dwelt) to
Ashbie, where I then dwelt, as he affirms: and in a park there we met. In
which words there are four untruths. First, Summers does not say, that ever
he repaired unto him to be taught, but that being with him, he was taught by
him. Secondly, the times of Summers repairing to M. Darrel, were not whilst he
dwelt with M. Gray: but afterward, when he was run from his master, Thomas
Porter of Nottingham. For Summers only lays to M. Darrels charge, that on a
time, when he dwelt with M. Gray, he met him the said Darrel by chance at
Ashbie, and was then first instructed by him. Thirdly, Summers does not affirm,
that M. Darrell dwelt then at Ashbie, when he dwelt at M. Grayes, and met him
(as is aforesaid) in Ashbie. They might meet there together, though M Darrell
did not then dwell there. Fourthly, whereas M. Darrell says, (if he mean
plainly) that Summers affirms, their meeting in the park to have been
whilst he dwelt at M. Grayes: he is therein greatly deceived. For their said
meeting there was little above a year, before his pretended dispossession at
Nottingham: at what time (having seen the boy of Burton by Master Darrels
direction) he returned again unto him at Ashbie.

Furthermore, M. Darrell proceeding in the disproofe of Summers imputations
laid to his charge, he says thus. Now the truth is etc. that Summers was gone
from M. Graies five years before our pretended meeting: For it is nine years
or there aboutes since he went from M. Graies, and but six years since I went
to Ashbie. If M. Darrell mean their first meeting at Ashbie, it is a palpable
untruth to say, that Summers was gone from M. Grayes five years before that
time: if he understand their last meeting in the park, he was gone in deed
from M. Graies above three years before that time, but not five. But where he
says it is nine years or there aboutes, since Summers went from Master
Grayes, and but six years since he went to Ashbie: if that were true he said
somewhat. For the clearing therefore of these two particulars: M. Gray ad art.
1. page 153. M. Gray ad art. 1. page 161
First, M. Gray and Mistres Gray being interrogated 23. October. 1598. how long
it was since Summers left their service: the one says: more then six year
past: and the other, about six years as they remember. But there is some
better certainty to bolt out the truth herein. Summers was bound prentise (as M.
Darrell confesses) with Thomas Porter, about a month or five weeks after he
was discharged of M. Brakenburies service: and Summers says, that he remained
little above a quarter of a year (if so long) with Master Brakenburie: and it
will be confessed, that he went from M. Graies to dwell with Master
Brakenbury. So as if we can find when Summers was bound prentise, it will
appear how long it is since he dwelt at master Graies. Now the Indenture it
self whereby he was bound, is to be seen amongst the rest of the
examinations: and it bears date the seventh of May, in the 35. year of her
Majesty: whereby it is manifest, the premises being true, that it is not yet
seven years since Summers dwelt with M. Gray, which iumpeth both with his, and
his wives depositions, and controlleth M. Darrels nine years.

And touching that which M. Darrell affirms, vz. that it is but six years
since he went to Ashbie: it is well he limiteth himself to six years. If he
had said but four, he might have been put in mind by a certain token of the
untruth therein. For in the year 1594. now 5. years past in one of his
sermons at Ashbie (as there is advertisement given in writing) upon the
seventeenth day of November (the day of the beginning of her Majesty's most
happy reign over this kingdom) falling then upon the Sunday: he inueighed
mightily against the people there, for ringing the bells as they do throughout
all the realm, in signification of their joy, and thanksgiving unto Almighty
God, for the beginning and continuance of her Highness most Christian and
blessed government: and his zeal, or rather fury, was so seruent therein, as
he termed their said ringing, to be the profaning of the Sabbath, and said
they were all in danger thereby of Gods heavy displeasure, or to that effect.
But to the point it self. Although it were true, that it is but six years,
since he went to Ashbie, yet that is not greatly material: for he might come
to dwell there a year or two after his first acquaintance with Summers, without
any contradiction to that which Summers has deposed. Howbeit (if the
information since given be true) he does therein forget himself: for it is
reported, that he dwelt in one Perrins house in Ashbie about one year, then in
one Io. Hollands about six years, and lastly in William Swinsons, about a
year and a half: which being laid together, do amount to about eight years
and a half. Whereunto, (if Master Darrell do not still continue his family
there, but have dwelt since a year or two at Nottingham) that time also since
he departed thence, may also be added. So that for ought that M. Darrell does
here allege for himself, there does nothing appear, but that all may be
true that Summers has deposed, touching their several meetings together at
Ashbie.

The last circumstance observed here, for the justification of Summers
deposition in this matter, is this: that as soon as Summers was supposed by
some in Nottingham to be possessed, Mistres Wallis, according to M. Darrels
former words (as Summers has deposed) did presently send for Master Darrell
to come unto him: which circumstance had in this place been omitted, but that
it ministers a fit occasion to proceed with Summers confession, how he
demeaned himself, after his last departure from M. Darrell at Ashbie.

Having (says he) thus left Master Darrel, I went toward Nottingham, and
coming thither, procured my father in law to deal with M. Mayor, to be a
means to my master, that I might be delivered from mine apprentiship. But my
Master would not be entreated. Whereupon I was compelled to stay with him
again, and so did, till by Master Darrels means I was delivered from him.
During this my continuance with my Master, I found my self to be as hardly
used before, and my maintenance with him rather worse then better. Besides, I
did better perceive, that my Master could teach me nothing, being himself
brought up with a Weauer, and having no skill at all in music. Furthermore, I
understood by his speeches oftentimes, that he meant to keep me as his
apprentise, not only for the rest of the years that I was bound unto him, but
for the time also that I had been absent from him. Whereby, observing that he
meant to keep me as his servant about four years to come, I confess that to
be released from him according as M. Darrell had promised me, I did begin
the course that M. Darrell had wished me before to undertake. And first, I
feygned my self to have a swelling in my belly, pretending thereby to have
great pain: which my Master told me was nothing else but some cold, that did
procure the collicke, and gave me a drink, and some other things for it.
Afterward, when I pretended to have the said collicke, I did make show at
sundry times of many wild looks and gestures, and about a month or three
weeks before S. Martins day last (as I remember) I began to fall more
roundly to my work, according to my former instructions. At one time, I making
a motion in my belly, in the presence of one M. Euans Curate at S. Mary's in
Nottingham: he, coniecturing thereby that some quick thing was in my belly
began to make a doubt, as if I were possessed. This Euans dwelt next house to
my master, and coming often unto me, brought with him John Sherrart the
Clearke of Saister Mary's, who diverse times told me of M. Throckmortons
children in Huntingtonshire how they were possessed: and having a printed book
thereof, he declared to M Euans in my hearing, the manner of the fits that M.
Throgmortons children had. Whereby I learned something more then I knew before,
and did still proceed further and further in my dissimulatinn, as M. Darrel had
taught me. By which occasion M. Euans and the said Clearke grew to be
persuaded, that I was in deed possessed, and sent for M. Aldridge the preacher
of S. Mary's, to come unto me: who refusing twice or thrice, came at the last:
and being greatly afraid when he saw me in my fits, he gave it out for a
certainty I was possessed. And then the brute thereof grew to be very rise,
and many both of the town and country came to see me. At whose coming I
would be in my dissembled fits, and call often for M. Darrel: sometimes railing
against him, and sometimes willing him to be sent for, according to our former
agreement. And at one time amongst the rest, whilst I was in my said fits,
making mention of Master Darrell, Mistres Wallis his wives sister was present:
who being persuaded with the rest that I was possessed, did affirm to sundry
persons in my hearing, that her brother, M. Darrel had delivered nine, that had
been possessed, and said that she would cause him to be sent for. And
accordingly one Hugh Wilson was hired to go for him.

CHAP. II. Of M. Darrels private directions to Summers whilst he was at
Nottingham with him, how he should from time to time behave himself in his
counterfeiting.
FOr the further strengthening of the general charge exhibited against M.
Darrel before her Majesty's said commissioners, to prove his proceedings with
Summers to have been meerelie counterfeited: he is further accused: that he
finding the said Summers at Nottingha^, playing and acting of certain tricks and
signs (as they term them) of possession, did by his private instructions so
lead him on, from one dissembling course to an other, as it was sufficient to
teach him in that behalf what he had to do, although the matter had never
been plotted, betwixt them before at Ashbie. It is manifest, that as Summers
had counterfeited certain fits and toyish behavior at M. Brakenburies: so he
was acting the like when M. Darrell came unto him at Nottingha^. But to omit
who it was that taught him so to do, it is here to be considered with what
craft and cunning he did proceed with him. The first night being the 5. of
November that M. Darrel came to Not. he could have no private speeches with
the boy, by reason of the company that were then present. But the day
following, he took his opportunity. Here of Summers deposes thus.

The next morning being Sunday, 6. Nouem. 1597.
and the 6. of Nouemb. before Church time, M. Darrel came unto me, and told me
wherein I had done well over night (for the night before he had played his
feats very artificially) and wherein I had failed, wishing me to act my fits
more boldly and more lively. He also then signified unto me, that the next day
he meant to have a fast, and said, that then I must act the fits he had taught
me as a he should make mention of them, promising that in his sermon he would
name them with such leisure, as I might have time to act them one after an
other in order. The second morning being the 7. of November, also M. Darrel
came again unto me, before the fast began, and asked me if I remembered all
that I was to do that day. To whom I answering, that I thought I should not
forget to do them as he expected: M. Darrell said, thou must in deed show thy
self this day, as it were once for all. And then also he told me this tale.
The same morning says he, that the boy of Burton, and the seven in Lancashire
were to be brought to the places where the fasts appointed, were held for
their dispossessing, the Devil knowing himself to have but a short time of
dwelling in them, did cast them into sundry fittes, and did trouble them more,
then at any time before. In so much as when some were sent to will their
friends to make them ready, they brought word to him the said Master
Darrell and others, in what case they found them. Whereupon ( quoth Master
Darrell) we were driven to send six or seven at every such time, to bring them
by force to the said place: which six or seven were very much troubled in the
carriage o the^. And even so said M. Darrel, the like order shall be taken with
thee this morning. Anon one shall be sent to see if thou be ready: at what
time thou shall show thy self to be much troubled in thy sits. Upon
signification whereof, six or seven shall come to bring thee upon their
shoulders, whom thou may greatly trouble in their carriage of thee, by
struggling with them, as others that were possessed did: and as though the
Devil had compelled thee so to do, being very loath to come to so godly an
exercise. Shortly after Master Darrels departure, all things were done
accordingly. One Langford was sent to see if I were ready: at whose coming I
did make show of my greatest fits, in an unquiet manner. Thereupon the said
Langforde returning to Master Darrell, by and by seven came to carry me, whom
(as I think) I did very much trouble: and whereupon it was given out, that I
was so heavy in my fittes, as seven were scarce able to carry me.

For the justification of these particulars thus set down by Summers, there are
few depositions. Howbeit M. Darrel (notwithstanding his general denial before
mentioned:) yet he confesses somewhat, which tends to the confirmation of
this his second conference with Summers: I sent (says William Langford) that
morning, M. Darrell ad. art. 29. page 18.
to take order for the present bringing of Summers to Smalles house, and M.
Langford brought me word back, that so soon as he spoke of the boys
removing, M. Darrels history.
he was presently cast into a sore fit. And again: The boy was brought by six
or seven strong men, who had all of them enough to do, to bring him to the
next convenient and seemly room, to the place of his abode: he means to
Smalles house. The fast being ended, and Summers dispossessed (as it was
pretended) M. Darrell gave unto Summers instructions privately, how to behave
himself in a new matter, that he was to take in hand concerning his behavior,
when pretense should be made, that the devil sought again to repossesse him.
To this effect Summers deposes after this manner. The same night after my
supposed deliverance, M. Darrell came unto me, and told me, that as yet my
former practices must not be quite given over, saying, that the continuance of
them would turn both to his and my great benefit. And then he further
signified unto me, how after that Katherine Wright, the boy of Burton, and the
seven in Lancashire were dispossessed, the Devil did seek to enter into them
again, and came for that purpose unto them in diverse similitudes, as of a
Rat, a dog, a catte, an old man, an Ape, a toade, a mouse, etc. Whereupon
said he, for a good while after, they were not perfectly well, but awaking out
of their sleeps, and at other times starting, they would cry, away with that
dog, keep away that catte, and so sometimes besides the former beasts
specifyed, they would make mention of Lions, Dragons, Bulls, etc. And so quoth
M. Darrell to me, thou may easily do. Whereunto I agreede, and did after
put the same in practice, as occasion served accordingly.

After that Summers had continued his new begun practices about a fortnight
(in which time he had played many feats under a couerlette, 22. or 23.
November 1597.
as afterward shall be showed,) then by M. Darrelles direction, he fell
into a new course, which was of the detecting of certain persons for Witches.
I did then (says Summers) undertake an other matter concerning certain
Witches, W. Summers page 22.
according to M. Darrels former directions. For he had told me before, that
the boy of Burton, and the seven in Lancashire had detected certain Witches,
and that I might do the like. Also he had said unto me, that when the Witches
detected by them, were coming unto the said parties, whom the Deuilles
sought to repossesse: they the said parties were wonderfully afflicted, until
the said Witches came unto them, and then the Witches being come, and standing
by them, the said parties lay still, and so continuing till they were departed,
they grew again after the Witches were going away to be as sore troubled, as
they were at their coming. And thus ( quoth M. Darrell) thou may do as
occasion shall serve. Hereupon I began about the xxv. of November (as I
think) in my pretended fittes, to make mention of Witches: and likewise when
they were brought unto me, did pretend as though I had been greatly vexed,
until they came to my beds side: and then I lay still as though I had been a
sleep, until they departed: When I did again dissemble my self to be
troubled as before. In these my pretended fittes, this was my manner, vz. Look
where mother Higget stands, take her away, and so of diverse others to the
number of six or seven: as Alice Freeman, Thomas Groves, William Bend, and his
wife, widdowe Boot: my Aunt Else: Millicent Horseley and her sister. This
report of my naming of the said parties for Witches, was presently spread
abroad, as to have been done by me through the deuilles skill, in using my
tongue: whereas I do constantly profess, that I only named them, because I
had known them before to have been commonly suspected for Witches.

About the 6. or 7. of December, Summers did grow weary of his new kind of
dissimulation, having now continued as long in troubling himself about
Witches, as he had done before in his tricks under the Couerlette. And
thereupon contrary to M. Darrels persuasions gave them all over, and forbear any
further practices, til about the xiiii. of January following. 14. January 1597.
Summers.
Hereof Summers in this sort. About the beginning of December, I did grow
very weary of all my former practices, and thereupon did wholly leave them,
contrary to M. Darrels good liking: who endeavored to persuade me still to
continue in them. But when he could not prevail with me so far, although he
alleged that it would be an hindrance both to him and me: and that this
course begun, was not hitherto finished, as it ought to be: then M. Darrell
gave it out, that the Devil would lie lurking about a man, without troubling
of him, sometimes a month, sometimes a quarter of a year, and sometimes more.
Whilst I thus continued without making any show of trouble, M. Darrell had
private speeches with me, sometimes in his own lodging at M. Bonners, and
sometimes walking alone in S. Mary's Churchyeard. And always his speeches
tended to this effect: that I must not as yet desist from my former practices.
But for any thing that he could say unto me, I gave that course over, for the
space of about six weeks.

After many persuasions used by M. Darrell, that Summers would undertake again
his former courses: and upon some other occasions, (as afterward it will
appear) he the said Summers falling into his former fittes, M. Darrell
presently gave it out, that now he was repossessed, accordingly as he had
foretold, both privately and in his sermons, that it would come to pass* and
then gave him further instructions, how in his old fits, he should behave
himself after a new fashion. W. Summers.
When I had entered again into this course (says Summers,) M. Darrell told me
of certain words, that as he said the boy of Burton had used, vz. he fell and
I caught him, and willed me to use some sentences, or dark sayings, that thereby
such as should hear me, might wonder the more at me. And accordingly, in one of
my next fits, when M. Darrell was present, (as he was very seldom absent at
such times) I uttered amongst some other vain speeches, the words before
mentioned: he fell and I caught him. Which words I had no sooner delivered, but
M. Darrell taking hold of them, presently said. O good people I pray you mark
this: for it is a matter of importance, the very same words the Devil uttered
in the boy of Burton: whereby you may observe the occasion that the Devil did
again repossesse him. Furthermore according to M. Darrels former advice, I
invented and delivered in an other of my fits these words: the said stone is
soft and the bolder, and flint is hard. Which words M. Darrell being present,
did expound to this effect: vz. that by these stones were meant the magistrates
of Nottingham, signifying, that some of them had soft hearts to believe the
mighty works of God, and that some of them were so hard hearted as they would
believe nothing, although God himself should come down from heaven amongst
them, thereby condemning such as did affirm, that I was but a dissembler. At
the same time also, I used these speeches: he that runs on the Ice, let him
take heed least he slip: and these also, he that stands on a hill, let him
tumble down, and he will be the sooner at the bottom: which words M. Darrell
did likewise expound: but I could not well hear him, by reason of the noise,
which was at that time in the place where I lay, and therefore I cannot tell
what sense he made of them.

When Summers had continued his fits again, whereby he was deemed to be
repossessed about three weeks or somewhat more, he was very weary of them,
and would have given them over: but M. Darrell would not permit him so to
do: but kept him in his former course by the space of about a week after, vz.
until the xxiiii. of the said month of February, that the Mayor of
Nottingham, did then upon good occasion seize him into his hands. Hereof thus
Summers has deposed. Having remained about four weeks in this course, I grew
again very weary of it, and did refrain sometimes two or three days
together from my former tricks, and walked abroad as I thought meet. Hereof I
advertised M. Darrell privately in his chamber, saying, that I was determined
to give that course over: But M. Darrell answered me, that I might not in any
wise so do as yet: that in so doing I should bring them both into great
danger, peradventure of their lives: and therefore willed me to persist,
promising that if I would be advised by him, I should never want. But all his
persuasions notwithstanding, I still affirmed, that I would no longer continue
in my former dissimulation, and further said, that if I might not be suffered
to be quiet and leave it with his good liking: I was fully minded to tell all
that came unto me, from that time forward, that all I had done from my first
pretended trouble was but dissembled. Well, ( quoth M. Darrell) if thou will
not follow my counsel, it will be worse for thee, and I will do well enough
with thee. But I accordingly did keep my promise. For afterward when some
came to see me, I told them plainly in the hearing of M. Darrell, that I had
dissembled all that I had done. Whereupon M. Darrell being offended, said to
those that heard me, that they might not in any sort believe me, because it
was not William Summers, but the Devil that so said, and willed them therefore
to hold me. So as I was at my wits end what I should do: because M Darrell
had got such credit, as whatsoever he said was believed to be true. After I
had thus confessed my self to be a dissembler, I was restrained by M. Darrels
means from going abroad, except two or three, such as he liked, were in my
company: which was the cause that I fell again, for the space of about a week
unto my former dissimulation, until I had thereby gotten more liberty: and
then meeting with one John Cooper of Nottingham, the keeper of the poor in S.
John's, I did reveal my mind in part unto him, telling him, that I would
gladly remain with him, whereby I might be quiet at the last.

All that hitherto has been said, for the proof of this second general
accusation, laid to Darrels charge, does pend especially upon Summers own
deposition. And in this case little more is to be expected. For it had been
madness in M. Darrell, if he had not taken such a course in the instructing of
him, as he might be sure none knew but Summers: and then he doubts not (it
seems) but that if the worst fell out, his credit would be sufficient to
ouerweigh the boys. Howbeit therein he has ouershot himself. For although
the circumstances before mentioned in the first Chapter, should be thought
insufficient to convince M. Darrell of his practicing with Summers at Ashby. Yet
many of them together with the boys oath are very pregnant proofs of this
second accusation. For example, M. Darrels undertaking that the boys Father in
law should not loose a penny by him, deposed by Robert Cooper. Likewise his
procuring of a collection for Cooper: confessed by himself. Also his private
conference so often with Summers: which four likewise have deposed. Moreover his
buying out of Summers years: acknowledged by himself. Furthermore, his earnest
dealing, for the bayling of Summers, when he was charged with felony: deposed
by M. Aldridge. Again, his entertayning of Summers at an Inn or Tavern: as
George Richardson does affirm. Again, Summers threatening of M Darrell, when
they were fallen out: as M. Darrell himself confesses. And again, Summers his
wishing, that he had never seen M. Darrell: as John Copper deposes.

CHAP. III. Of M Darrels instructing of Summers by speaking to others in his
hearing, those things which he meant that he should practice from the fifth of
November, when he came unto him, until the seventh of the same, being the day
of his pretended dispossession
FOr a third proof of the aforesaid general complaint, exhibited before her
Majesty's said Commissioners: that M. Darrel did counterfeyt with Summers
concerning his pretended dispossessio^: he the said M. Darrell is charged to
have dealt with the boy at Nottingham, so cunningly, as that albeit he had
never seen him at Ashbie, nor dealt with him privately at Nottingham: (both
which points have been proved in the two former Chapters): yet the course
which he held with him there, and with those that came to see him in his fits,
was so contrived, as it might easily inform Summers what he had to do, and did
indeed blind and misleade many of the people. Which second point, vz. the
seducing of the people, was as necessary for M. Darrell to compass as the
former. For otherwise both he and the boy might have dissembled, till their
hearts had aked, if no man had believed them. This accusation reaches to such
M. Darrels last mentioned practices, from the time that he came first unto him
at Nottingham, being the 5. day of November, 1597. until about the xxiiii. of
February following. Howbeit, for the more perspicuity, and in respect of the
variety of the matters, that fell out within the compass of that time, this
Chapter comprehends, but his cunning and sleightes to the purpose here
expressed, from the said fifth of November, until the seventh of the same,
when it was pretended that Summers was dispossessed.

It being agreede upon by all those, who in these latter times do take upon
them the chiefest skill in casting out Deuilles, that it is a matter of
especial great difficulty to discern truly who is possessed, because there
have been, daily is, and may be hereafter so great dissimulation and falshoode
practiced in that behalf, as partly it does appear in the first book of
this treatise: yet M. Darrel having never seen VV. Summers (as he now
pretends), did affirm, that he the said Summers was certainly possessed by
a wicked spirit, upon the rude report of a simple man, one Hugh Wilson, and
upon a letter received by Wilson from his sister in law, one Mistress Wallys.

This M. Darrel confesses in these words. Being certified in my sisters letter
and by the messe^gers further speeches, ad art. 9 pa. 16,
of the manner of Summers fittes, I did send them word, that those things
being true, the said Summers was possessed, and this I did before I saw Summers.
And herein M. Darrell was so confident upon so light a report, as in his journey
toward Nottingham, (the said fifth of November), he took M. Iretons house in
his way, M, Darrell ad art. 1 pa. 57,
and told him (as he confesses), vz. of the possession of William Summers,
that he was sent for to come to him: that he was purposed to have a fast for
his dispossession, and that he doubted not of good success, by that means to
procure the boys deliverance. Ieronimus Mingus.
This M. Darrels confident bragging, being directly against one of his Masters
rules, that he doubted not of good success, as it argues his ignorance: so
the same being joined to his rash credulity, does make it probable, that
either he had laid his plotte with the boy before, or else that he knew very
well, how by his counning to draw on the boy, for the serving of his turn, as
he himself list. More might be collected hereof, but where other matters are
so pregnant, it is needelesse to insist upon it.

The chiefest means whereby M. Darrell did seduce the people, and cunningly
instruct Summers, without suspicion in any that believed him, were these two
false grounds, (whereof in the first book), vz. that those who are possessed,
have in their fittes no use of their senses or faculties of their minds, and
that whatsoever they either do or say at such times, it is not they but Satan
that does both say and do it. Whereupon purposing to go to Nottingham, he
first prepared his way, by laying (as he could) a grounde-worke suitable to that
which he meant to build upon: vz. that upon the foresaid bare relation of
Hugh Wilson, and before he had then seen Summers, he sent word by him to
Nottingham, that he the said Summers was in his fittes senseles, and that all
he then did or spoke was done by the Devil. Master Darrell being examined
hereof, denies it. But it is deposed by diverse witnesses.

Master Darrell, among many speeches had with me, told me, Hugh Wilson fol. 3.
that Summers in his fits was without reason, and did pronounce, that if the boy
were so handled, as I had told him, then by the example of others, with whom
(as he said) he had been, he neither hears (quoth he) sees, nor feels any
thing.

Hugh Wilson, upon his return from M. Darrell, Anne Porter. fol. 3.
came to my house, and did report, that M. Darrell said, that the boy was
altogether senceles in his fits: that it was not he, but the evil spirit
within him, that made him so unquiet.

Hugh Wilson did report at his return, Th. Porter page 113.
that M. Darrell said, that Summers in his fits had no sense, and therefore
willed that he should not be troubled at such times, and that when the said
Summers did speak or do any thing in the said fittes, it was not he the said
Summers, but the Devil that so did, or spoke in him.

Concerning these two grounds of M. Darrels, Rob. Cooper. pa. 106.
it is not much impertinent that Robert Cooper deposes in this sort, vz. The
chief deceit which was used to bleare all their eyes at Nottingham, was the
persuasion beaten into them by M. Darrell, that the boy was senseless in all
his fittes, and that when he seemed to speak, it was not he, but the Devil
that spoke in him.

Besides, M. Darrell is further charged, that as he had sent word to
Nottingham, that Summers was possessed, be fore he had seen him: so at his
coming unto him thither, he said he was possessed before he had seen him in
any fit: M. Darrel ad art. 1. page 215,
especially such a fit as might not easily be counterfeited. This M. Darrell
denies in these words. Coming to William Summers the 5. of November, I did not
then affirm William Summers to be possessed, before I had seen him in any such
fittes, as can not be counterfeited. And being here demanded to set down what
signs he saw him then act, that he thought could not be counterfeited, he
answered: that he saw a certain extraordinary swelling in his body, beside
certain signs mentioned in the scriptures. But he would not be drawn to name
any of them. And it had been good for him that he had not mentioned the said
swelling: but confessed the truth plainly: for that which he has here denied
is proved directly.

Th. Wallis page 268
At M. Darrels first coming to the town before he saw the boy, he said he
was possessed.

When M. Darrel did first see the boy at his coming to Nottingham, Th. Wallis
ibid.
he said that he was possessed, notwithstanding that he was not in any fit.

To. Cooper page 97. Io. VVigge^ fol. 6
Upon M. Darrels first coming to William Summers, he did presently affirm upon
the sight of the boy, that he was possessed.

At M. Darrels first going to Summers, he heard him say, that out of doubt the
boy was possessed.

Tho. Porter page 114.
M. Darrell did then (vz. at his first coming, and before the boy had any fit)
affirm to those that were present, that William Summers was possessed.

Furthermore, it was objected against M. Darrell, that as he had sent word to
Nottingham, before he had seen the boy, that those things which he seemed to
speak in his fits, were not spoken by him but by the Devil: so upon his first
coming unto him, notwithstanding that he the said Summers did answer him
directly: yet he the said Darrell affirmed, that it was not Summers, but the
devil. M. Darrell does confess some part hereof: but the rest that he denies
is sufficiently proved.

M, Darr. ad art. 2 p. 215
I thought (says he) that certain words then spoken by Summers were not
spoken by Satan. And I was moved so to think, because being persuaded that he
was possessed, and having read in the scriptures, that the devil does speak
in those that are possessed. I did thereupon say, that I thought it was the
devil that spoke in Summers.

I asked of Summers the same night a question about some matter of faith and
principle of religion: M. Darrel ad art. 3. page 215,
whereunto Summers made a fit answer, but with such gestures, as I supposed the
said answer to proceed from Satan. What folly, boldness, and ignorance
appears in these two depositions may easily be espied: and his falsehood also
is as manifest by the depositions ensuing.

M. Darrell then affirmed, Th. Porter page 114.
that when Summers in his fits spoke or did any thing, it was not he, but the
devil, that so did, or spoke in him.

M. Darrel asked Summers that night how he did, and he answered, well I thank
God. Whereunto M. Darrel replied: Nich Shepard. fol. 2.
I doubt it is not W. Summers that speaks unto me. This M. Darrell denies.

M. Darrell demanded of Summers what was his name: who answering, that his name
was William, and smiling therewith: Mistres Gray ad ar, 8, page, 163,
he the said M. Darrel looked very earnestly upon him, and then said to the
standers by: I am afraid it is not William that speaks: whereat the boy fell
a laughing again. This also M. Darrell denies.

The boy then lay as if he were a sleep, and when he awaked, Mary Cooper, fo.
1.
M. Darrell asked him where he had been, and he said no where, but a sleep:
and then M. Darrel said, I fear it is not William that speaks unto me. This
in like manner M. Darrell denies, as he has done the rest.

Also M. Darrell was charged, that as he had said before he came to Nottingham,
that Summers was in his fits senceles: so the first night of his coming to the
boy, he affirmed the same again to many in the presence of the said boy:
whereunto M. Darrel answered thus: M, Dar. ad art 2. page 215.
I do not believe that I said that night, that Summers was in his fits
senseless.

Tho. Porter 114. and fo 3
Master Darrel affirmed, that night that William Summers had no sense in his
fits, and said to the people: I dare assure you that the boy does not know what
he does in his fits.

Mary Cooper. fol. 1.
Master Darrell bad that night: let the boy alone: for he neither knows, nor
sees any thing.

The former three points first laid: vz. that Summers was possessed: that those
things which he seemed to speak, were spoken by the Devil, and that he was
in his fittes senseless: For as much as he deemed it not sufficient, to
persuade those that were present for him to affirm the same barely: he
alleged his experience for them all in the boys presence: saying, that
Summers was troubled in like manner and sort to Katherine Wright, the boy of
Burton, M, Darr. ad art. 15 p. 17 Io. VVigge^ fol. 6
and the seven in Lancashire, who had all of them been possessed. This M.
Darrel denies: but it is deposed.

Out of doubt the boy is possessed (quoth M. Darrel that night the boy being
present) for my experience is such, that I know it, by the example of seven in
Lankashire, the boy of Burton, and Katherine Wright, who had the like fits that
this boy has.

Nich Shepard. fol. 2.
Summers falling into a laughter that night, M. Darrel said, I know this was not
the voice of William Summers. And then added: this boy is as the boy of Burton
was.

Mary Cooper, fo 1.
M. Darrel said that night (Summers being present) that the boy was possessed,
and that he did as the boy of Burton did.

To. Cooper page 97.
M. Darrel did that night affirm in the presence of the boy, that diverse others
that had been possessed ( naming the boy of Burton, Katherine Wright, and the
seven in Lankashire) had been troubled even as William Summers then was.

E. Garland. ad art. 9 174.
M. Darrel affirmed the same night (the boy being present) that William Summers
was possessed in the very like manner, that Katherine Wright, the boy of
Burton, and the seven in Lankashire were possessed.

Master Darrel affirmed then to those that were present with the boy, that
William Summers was possessed, Th, Porter page 114.
that in his fittes he had no sense, and that when he spoke or did any thing in
them, it was not he but the Devil, that so did and spoke in him. And this the
said Darrell affirmed to be true, because in his experience, others being
possessed, did show the like signs, who had no sense in their fits: and in
whom the Devil spoke and did as is before expressed.

Besides M. Darrell was charged, to have specified the same night in the
presence of Summers, and diverse others, the manner of such fits as the possessed
had in the scriptures, and of those which were seen (as he said) in Katherine
Wright, the boy of Burton, and the seven in Lankashire: that in their fits they
would cast themselves into the fire, and sometimes into the water: that they
would tear themselves, gnash with their teeth, writh their necks as though
their faces had stood almost backwardes: draw their mouths far awrie: and
lift up their bellies. M. Darrel ad art. 13. page 16.
Unto all these particulars M. Darrell answers thus: I do believe they are
true.

Again, M. Darrell was charged, that after he had told the manner of the fits,
(as last before he has confessed) he then also said to the persons present in
the hearing of Summers: that he the said Summers would do the like. M. Darr. ad
art. 15. page 17.
This M. Darrell denies: but it is deposed.

M. Darrel having declared (the first night in the presence of the boy) what
strange fittes Katherine Wright, Io. VViggen. fol. 6.
the boy of Burton, and the seven in Lankashire had, he then said: vz. This boy
will have the like.

M. Darrell having named (the first night the boy being present) certain
signs which the possessed use, he further said: Th. Porter fol. 3.
vz. If the boy be possessed you shall see such signs in him.

She heard M. Darrell say at that time (vz. the first night) before Summers: If
this boy be possessed, Mary Cooper fol. 1
he will foame and wallow and gnash, and many other such like: and by and by
he did some of them.

Summers page 10.
When Master Darrel had showed them etc. he said that I would do them all, he
was sure, and many more before it was long. Whereupon I knowing his meaning,
began to put some of those sits in practice, whereby they that were confirmed
in that which M. Darrell had told them of my possessing. And M. Darrel did with
some earnestnes confirm them therein, as having himself (as he said) good
experience in such matters. After that Summers for a time had practiced some of
those fits, (whereof M. Darrel had made mention,) and said he would do the
like, to the great admiration of those that were present, and his own no small
reputation: (he but speaking the word, and all things falling out accordingly)
then he was charged to have proceeded to some other points, and to tell them in
Summers hearing, that he the said Summers was not so much troubled for his own
sins, M. Darrel ad art. 16. page 17.
as for the sins of the people, or of the inhabitants in Nottingham. This M.
Darrell denies: but it is sufficiently proved.

Rob. Cooper. page 97
At that time M. Darrel affirmed ( in the hearing of Summers) that he the said
Summers was not punished so much for his own sins, or for the sins of his
parents, as for the sins that reigned in Nottingham. And so he affirmed of
Katherine Wright, the boy of Burton, and the seven in Lancashire.

Th. Porter, page 114.
M. Darrel made a godly exhortation to those that were present, that every man
should be careful to look to his own ways, because otherwise the like
judgment of God might well enough happen unto them. For (says he, in the
hearing of the boy) this boy is not so much troubled for his own sins, as
for the sins of the people.

Mary Cooper. fol. 1
M. Darrel said the same night in Summers presence, that the boy was very evil
troubled, and out of doubt it was not for his own sins, but for your sins
(meaning her, and her mother) and others.

M. Darrel said, that out of question, W. Summers, page 12.
I was not possessed either for mine own sins, or for the sins of my
father and mother only, but for the sins that rained in Nottingham.

When M. Darrel had laid down his conceit touching the cause of Summers
trouble: then he was charged to have affirmed in the presence of the boy, that
Satan did use to show by gestures in those that were possessed, the particular
sins that reigned in those places where they dwelt. M. Darr. ad art. 16. page
17. Summers page 10.
This M. Darrell denies: but it is deposed.

M. Darrel told them that were present diverse tales of the boy of Burton, of
Katherine Wright, how in their fittes they showed by gestures, the especial
sins that reigned in those places where they dwelt.

M. Darrell then and there delivered before Summers and the people present, M.
Berefford. fol. 9.
that the devil did use the parts and members of those that were possessed,
so as by signs and gestures he does often use to signify the particular
sins reigning in those places, where the possessed be.

M. Darrel said ( that night in the presence of Summers) that it was a practice
of the devil, Th. Porter page 114.
by signs and diverse gestures to show the sins of other men.

After that M. Darrel had thus showed his cunning concerning satan's accustomed
practice last mentioned then he was also further charged, to have affirmed in
the hearing of Summers, and presence of many, that he verily thought the devil
would do the like in Summers, and declare by signs and gestures the sins of
Nottingham and of others. This M. Darrell denies, but it is deposed. M.
Darrell ad art, 17. pa. 17 Summers p. 12.


When M. Darrell had mentioned these points, he told the parties present, that
the devil no doubt would make me to put them in practice.

Rob. Cooper. page 97
Master Darrel then said in the presence of the boy: that now those who would
not believe the word of God, should be driven to acknowledge and confess
their sins by the means of the Devil, who would in this boy preach unto
them their sins, by showing the same by certain gestures of the boys.
Whereupon the boy lying upon a bed, began to use many gestures: as of dancing,
fighting, robbing, drunkenness, whoredom, etc. as they are put put down since
in a ballade.

Th. Porter, fol. 3.
M. Darrel discoursed ( that night in the presence of Summers) of the sins
that reigned in the world, which the Devil would make show of.

Summers being an apt scholar for Master Darrell to practice upon, hearing by
Master Darrels speeches, what he was to do, and what was expected at his
hands: did leap and skip upon a bed, and make many signs and gestures:
Summers page 12,
Wherewith (says Summers) all that were present were much amazed: being
deceived with that error, which Master Darrel had taught them, that I though
I were present could hear none of those things, that be had then told them.

Of these gestures though they were but very rude and gross: yet M. Darrell
(as his manner is to make every thing strange that Summers did) gives them
this report. These things (says he, M. Darrell Histor.
meaning the sins that Summers had gestured) were in such lively and orient
colors painted out unto us, that were present, being to the number of some
sixty, that I do verily think, that it is not in the skill and power of man
to do the like. With these gestures Master Darrel it seems was so greatly
delighted, as he could not choose but give some apparent show thereof. For he
was in this place charged by her Majesty's said Commissioners, that whilst
Summers was acting of them, he himself did expound them very learnedly, to
signify this or that sin that reigned in Nottingham. M. Darrell ad art. 16.
pa. 17. W. Summers, page 12.
This M. Darrell denies. But it is deposed.

As I did use any of the said gestures, oh would M. Darrell say, to the
standers by: see you not how he does thus, and thus? These things signify
that such and such sins do reign in this town. They also that were present
having heard M. Darrell, would as I tossed with my hands, and tumbled up and
down upon my bed, presently collect and say: oh, he does so for this sin,
and so for that sin, whereby it came to pass, that I could do nothing in
any of my fittes, either that night or the day after, either stir my head, or
any part of my body: look merrily, or sadly, sit or lie speak or be silent,
open or shut mine eyes, but some would still make an interpretation of it: as
to be done by the Devil in me, to declare such sins in Nottingham, as they
themselves imagined.

Amongst other collections, that M. Darrell made by sondrie of my gestures:
some he said the Devil did in me, to signify my own sins, as those of
dancing, of Vyols and instruments, I being an apprentise to a Musition.
Likewise my turning the top of my toungue toward my throat. Master
Darrell said, that it is signified how I had used it to sing filthye songs.

When Summers began his gestures, To. Cooper page 97. 98.
M. Darrell affirmed that they were the signs, whereby the Devil showed the
sins that reigned in Nottingham, and did himself interpret some of them,
and by the course of his interpretation, many present seeing the gestures which
were plain, did take upon them likewise to expound them, affirming this sign
to note such a sin, and that sign some other sin. And in the end ( quoth
M. Darrell,) behold did I not tell you so? This is the Devil, By this course
the people were very much amazed, as thinking the Devil to preach so unto
them, and to note the sins that reigned in that town.

T. Porter, pa. 205.
M. Darrell when the boy was in his fittes, and acting certain gestures, did
interpret the said gestures, to mean and declare the sins that reigned in
Nottingham.

John Sherrart, pa. 315
The first night that M. Darrell came, the boy acting certain gestures, he the
said Darrell did interpret them, to signify the sins that reigned in
Nottingham.

M. Bernard pa. 254.
Summers did act his dumb fit, consisting of gestures, which Master Darrell
did say, did signify the sins of the people, and when the boy laughed, (as
he would laugh extremely at the end of some of his dumb gestures), then
Master Darrell would say, that it was the devil that laughed, to show the joy
that he had in regard that he had brought them to commit such sins, as those
gestures signified.

Mrs. Gray, pa. 103
The dumb shows which Summers did express in his fittes that night, both
Master Darrell and all the standers by did conceive and apprehend, that the
sins reigning in Nottingham, and else where abroad, were represented unto them
very lively: and so much (I think) was declared both by M. Darrell and others
at that time.

Tho, Porter page 115.
I remember that the Lady Zouch, and Mistress Gray, had the most talk, and
did especially interpret some of the said signs: and that when sondrie that
were present would ask what such a thing meant that Summers did: they, the said
Lady Zouch, and Mrs. Gray would tell the meaning of it, what sin it did
signify.

Likewise Master Darrell himself, although he disclameth for his part the
expounding of any of the said gestures: yet he is pleased to tell us what sins
were then set out by Summers, in such sort, as Roscius himself could not have
done it better. M. Darrell historic.
This evening (says he), he acted many sins by signs and gestures, most
lively representing and shaddowing, them out unto us: as namely brawling,
quarreling, fighting, swearing, robbing by the high ways, picking, and cutting
of purses, burglary, whoredom, pride in men and women, hypocrisy, sluggishnes
in hearing of the word, drunkenness, gluttony, also dancing with the toys
thereunto belonging, the manner of Anticke dancers, the games of dycing and
carding, the abuse of the Violl, with other instruments. At the end of sundry
of these, he laughed exceedingly, diverse times clapping his hands on his
thighs for joy: percase to shadow out the delight, that both himself, and
sinners take in their sins. And at the end of some of them, as killing and
stealing, he showed how he brought them to the Gallows, making a sign
thereof.

It is not unlikely but that M. Darrell, has made bold with his oath, in that
he denies to have made then any interpretation of Summers gestures, seeing
that he does not refrain in these words last mentioned, after a sort to
interpret some of them. Besides, it is not likely that the women's expositions
would have carried such credit, except M. Darrell himself had been an Actor
in them. For within a Sunday or two after, they were of that account, as they
were thought worthy to be read publicly in the Church, as it is deposed by
Mistress Gray, and Edmond Garland in these words.

The next or the second sunday after, Mrs. Gray pa, 164 Edm. Garland p: 175.
M. Aldrige did repeat in the Church publicly the said signs acted by
Summers, with their interpretations before made of them, affirming that
forasmuch as they in Nottingham, notwithstanding the admonitions of many godly
Preachers, did still continue in their sins: God had sent the Devil to
reprove them, and to make them ashamed of their former obstinacy.

Upon this authentical reading of the said (more then sottish) fooleries, out
comes a ballade, wherein is supplied some want in M. Darrels history. He
tells us that Summers did notablye set out by gestures this sin, and that
sin: but does not express the manner how. Herein therefore the Ballader has
showed his skill, as you may perceive by some of his rymes. He played the
antike there in skornes, and flowted men in making horns. And after that he
did bewray, how men at Dyce and Cards do play. He showed the manner of our
Fardingales, our Buskes, and Periwigges, Masks, and Vales, and by clapping of
his hands, he showed the starching of our bands. Much good matter may
further be found in the said Ballade, very agreeable to the worthiness of that
exploite. And thus we are come to the end of the first nights work, after M.
Darrelles coming to Summers at Nottingham.

The next day (being Sunday,) M. Darrell is charged, that coming to Summers
toward that night for that sondrie persons were then with Summers, which had
not been with him the night before,) he used the like speeches then in their
presence, and in Summers hearing, that he had done ouernight: vz. that he the
said Summers was in his fittes senseles: that the Devil at such times did
speak in him: that he was troubled in such manner and sort as the boy of
Burton, Katherie Wright, and the seven in Lancashire were vexed, when they
were possessed: that he then also told them, what kind of fittes they had:
what were the signs of possession mentioned in the scripture, and how Summers
by gestures had showed the sins that reigned in Nottingham, M, Darrell ad
art, 24, and 26, pa, 7
with much more to the effect specifyed. All these points Master Darrell
denies to have been mentioned by him that night: but the contrary is deposed.

W. Summers p. 14. and 15
Upon the Sunday in the afternoon, many resorted to see me, upon the report of
those things which had been done ouernight. Unto whom Master Darrell
repeated all that he had said the night before. In the beginning of whose
speeches, I did lie as though I had been asleep, and thereupon, he telling
them that I was possessed said also, that Katherine Wright, the boy of
Burton, and the seven in Lancashire, were in their fits altogether senseles,
and neither heard nor saw any thing, more then if they had been either stocks
or stones: and that he said was my case. He told them also what manner of
fittes the said parties had, and that I was possessed in the very same manner,
that they were: also what gestures the devil had used in me, to show the
sins that reigned in Nottingham: and in the end he added, that no doubt they
should see the devil work them again, (meaning the fittes which I had acted
over night), before it were long. Whereupon, I (having lain still all this
while, as though I had been a sleep,) began to use all those tricks, which
I had done the night before, but with some more readiness. As I did counterfeyte
any of the said fittes: even so said M. Darrell did such a one, and such a
one: it is not the boy, but the devil that does them in him These things
made the people to wonder, seeing me do every thing almost in such manner and
sort, as M. Darrell had told them before, that the devil would do them in
me.

M. Darrell affirmed the next day at night, Th. Porter page 115.
(being sunday) to those that were present, (diverse being then there, which
were not there the saturday at night before,) to the same effect, that he had
ouernight, vz. that for a certainety. William Summers was possessed, that he
knew it by the signs of possession mentioned in the scriptures, that he was
senseles in his fittes, that when he spoke or did any thing in his fittes, it
was not he but the devil that spoke and did them.

M. Darrell did upon the sunday at night declare the signs of possession in
William Summers. Mrs. Gray page 164. Anne Porter, fol. 3.


On the sunday at night in the presence of many hearers M. Darrell did
discourse at large, of the seven possessed in Lancashire, and of the boy of
Burton, concerning the manner of their fittes, and said that Summers had the
like.

To. Cooper fol. 7.
Upon the sunday at night, he heard M. Darrell discourse of the seven
possessed in Lancashire, and of the boy of Burton, and said that this boy did,
and would use the like tricks that they did in flearing and laughing, and such
like.

When M. Darrell had thus brought the people that were present, into a great
admiration of his pretended knowledge and experience, of Satan's proceedinges
with the possessed, and some of them to incline that Summers was indeed
possessed as he affirmed: it was moreover laid to his charge, that then
appointing a fast to be held the next day for the boys dispossession, and
moving men to refrain from the company of their wives that night, for their
better preparation against the said fast, he did take upon him to foretell many
things that would happen that day: as that they should see very strange
things: that Satan would wonderfully torment the boy, and that he doubted
not, but that they should perceive by the signs of possession and
dispossession, that the boy was possessed, and that then he should be delivered
from Satan. M. Darrell denies all the premises, M. Darrel ad art. 24. and 25
page 18, W. Summers page 14.
saving, his appointing of a fast, and moving of men to refrain from their
wives. But the rest is deposed.

M. Darrell told them that were present, what signs and tokens were showed at
the dispossessing of certain in the scriptures. He also then said that the
Devil would show strange fittes in me, at the time of the fast, whereby they
might certainly know that I was possessed, and that they should further
perceive by sure and certain tokens that I should be dispossessed at that
time, if it stood with Gods glory to have it so. Which thing thus declared
by M. Darrell, made the people very willing (as I perceived), to hear of the
said fast.

Th. Porter. page 116.
Master Darrell told them, that the next day there should be a fast: that
then they should see, that God would work great wonders if it stood with his
glory: that then they should perceive by the signs of possession, that
William Summers was indeed possessed with a wicked spirit, and that if it
stood with Gods glory to have him dispossessed the next day, they should then
perceive that he was dispossessed, by the signs likewise in the scriptures of
dispossession.

M. Darrell said before the fast, Io. Wiggen fol, 6,
that they should see the boy do strange things, and then named all the signs of
the possessed in the scriptures.

M. Mayor seeming to wonder at diverse strange fits, which Summers had on the
sunday at night, M. Darrell said, Mrs, Gray pa. 164.
that he had seen others in the like fits, and that he made no doubt, but that
if they might meet together, and join in prayer, they should see him
dispossessed, except it were more for Gods glory to have it otherwise. M.
Darrell did then and there say thus: M Berefford fol. 9
you see strange things: but you shall see more strange things done by this
boy hereafter before his dispossession, if it please God.

I agreed to M. Darrels motion, M Aldridge fol. 10
to be one of the Preachers the next day, upon the comfort of M. Darrell: who
affirmed that without doubt they should see great good come of it.

M. Darrell did tell me before the fast, M, Aldred. fol. 5.
that out of doubt I shall see the Devil deal strangely with the boy, and
recited many particulars thereof, which I remember not. And further I making
some doubt of the event, and success of the said exercise: the said Darrell
told me, that he made no doubt, but that the said exercise would work to good
effect, in helping of the said boy: and to that end he did persuade the hearers
then present openly to believe the same.

M. Darrell said (at that time) that out of doubt we should see the Devil
strangely deal with the boy, To. Cooper fol. 17
that we should see before to morrow at night, (if it stood with Gods glory)
that the devil should be cast out.

Master Darrell at the time did pronounce to all the people then presnt, Anne
Porter. fol 3
that they should see the Boy do many strange things and named them. Amongst
all which, I do only remember this, vz. That when the evil spirit went from
him, he would rent and tear him, and leave him for dead.

Garland ad art. 17 pa. 175,
M. Darrell affirmed, that the next day, they should see Satan wonderfully,
torment the said Summers, and perceive in him the very true signs of
possession, and that also if it stood with Gods glory, the deliverance of the
said Summers, should be made manifest by the true tokens of dispossession.

When the day of the fast came, M. Darrel is charged to have affirmed in his
Sermon, that they should evidently perceive by the signs of possession, that
Summers was possessed, and by the signs of dispossession, that Summers should be
dispossessed, if God would: and that afterward coming to entreat of the
particular signs of possession, and so of dispossession, he used such pawses,
as that the boy had leisure to act them in order as he named them.

W. Summers, page 16.
Whilst the first sermon was in preaching (for there were two,) I did lie
still for the most part upon a bed, saving, that now and then, I did struggle a
little, some being appointed to hold me. But when M. Darrell began, then I
fell to prepare my self, according to my instructions. After he had proceeded
a little way in his Sermon, he did signify unto his hearers, that they
should see at that time strange fittes wrought by the Devil in my person:
whereby it would most plainly appear that I was possessed. Not long after,
Master Darrell read or said out of Saint Mark: He teared sore, and then I
pulled open my doublette, and snatched at the clothes with my hands. After he
read or said, and he foameth, and then I (being readily prepared) did foame
at the mouth. At Master Darrell named wallowing, I did tumble and wallowe on
the bed, Diverse other kinds of fittes M. Darrell at that time did make
mention of which I then did act severally, as M. Darrel made mention of them.
After a long time, which M. Darrel and I did spend in showing of these fits (to
the great astonishment of those that were present): then he drew near to the
time, wherein he pretended that I should be dispossessed. He told his hearers,
that as they had seen me before troubled by the Devil with so many fits, and
had perceived me thereby to be possessed: so now (if it stood with the glory of
God) they should see me publicly delivered, by those signs which the
possessed in the scriptures did show in the time of their deliverance. When he
came to the mentioning of the said signs, I applied my self to imitate them
accordingly. As he named the first sign, vz. the spirit cried: then I
presently cried. As he named the second, vz. that the spirit would rent him
sore: then I did as before is mentioned. And at his mentioning of the third,
vz. he was as one dead: then I did presently lie a pretty while, as though I
had been dead. Whereupon there was presently a great noise in the hall, by
reason of the people voices, being greatly moved to see me so dispossessed, as
they thought.

It falls out in this point, that M. Darrell himself does not much disagree
from Summers. M. Darrel ad art. 31. page, 19,
Prosecuting my matter (says he) as my text gave me occasion, I made mention
of fourteen several signs of a man possessed, partly out of my text, and
partly out of other places of scripture: which I did, thereby to persuade my
auditorie, that Summers was possessed. And as I named those signs, and did
insist upon them, the word and work of God concurred together. So as Summers
in his fits, or the devil in him, did then act sundry of those signs, even
as I read and insisted upon them. As for example, I repeated out of my text
(and he foameth) and then presently the boy foamed: and o of the rest. And
likewise toward the end of my sermon, I noted and insisted upon the three
signs of dispossession mentioned in the scriptures, and presently the boy
first cried, without any appearance of life at all in him, and so continued
almost one quarter of an hour.

Dar. history
Thus far M. Darrell upon his oath, but in his history he is more free. There
he says, that he handled at that time fifteen signs of possession: (but
Summers lies there for dead only some half quarter of an hour) that he said
thus to his auditorie. Whenever one having an evil spirit, shall be brought
to Jesus to be cured (which is when the means sanctified thereunto is used)
and lying there before him, shall be handled in that manner as Summers is here:
that is, rent sore, cry and lie for dead, then a commandment is gone forth
from Christ to the devil for his departure, and accordingly he is gone forth.
When therefore you shall see these things come to pass, whereof we are told
before hand, then let us know, and be certainly assured, that the devil is as
truly gone out of this boy, as we are now assured that he is in him. This
last clause is the truest part of his deposition. The one was as sure as the
other: both of them being very cosening prankes.

But let us hear how the people were affected. They brake forth (says M.
Darrell) confusedly, and all as one man, when they saw Summers lie for dead,
into loud cries unto the Lord, in his behalf, Rob. Cooper. pa. 100.
as men astonished. And Rob. Cooper says thus: when the people that were
present saw and heard these things, they cried out most vehemently in the doing
of them: Lord have mercy upon us: M Darrels history.
Lord have mercy upon us: and so did M. Darrell with his hands lift up as high
as he could. The fear and astonishment then was exceeding great, there being
none present (as I think) but that they quaked and trembled, and wept most
bitterly. Two of the company ( says M. Darrel) there being present some 150.
confessed their sins with tears before us all publicly. As it came to pass
in the 19. of the Act. 19. ver. 17.18. and 20. even so it fell out with the
inhabitants of Nottingham after this work. For many were stricken with fear,
and some came unto me, confessing the same, and craving mine advice. And
presently after I had publicly used some words of exhortation unto them (which
was a week after the said work) they made choice of me for their preacher:
and not only so, but flocked to the house of God, made have, and were swift to
hear the word. And so the word of God grew mightily in Nottingham, and
prevailed.

How such impostors have from time to time inueigled the people by such false
sleights, it were not much to fill a whole volume. The popish crew of Monks,
Jesuits and Friars could never have gotten so much wealth and reputation, nor
have possessed the peoples minds with so great an opinion of them, nor have
been able to have drawn them to so great superstition and palpable errors,
but by these and such like counterfeit miracles and knaueries. And thus you
have the worthy acts of M. Darrell, from the saturday at evening, until the
Monday at night next following.

CHAP. IIII. Of M. Darrels cunning instructing of Summers, by speaking to others
in his hearing of Satan's seeking to repossesse him, and of the acting of
certain tricks under a couerlet, from the seventh of November, until about
the xxi. of the same.
THe Scope of this Chapter is set down in the beginning of the former, and
proceeds with M. Darrels course, from the time of his pretended dispossessing
of Summers, until his supposed repossession, vz. for the space of above a
month which was carried on so cunningly, as it was sufficient to instruct
Summers what he had to do, although they had never been acquainted at Ashbie,
nor M. Darrell privately instructed him at Nottingham.

Whereas it is agreed upon, amongst the chiefest of those writers, (who take
upon them great skill concerning the casting out of devils); that Satan does
seldom return to seek the repossession of those out of whom he is cast, as
it further appears in the first book: yet M. Darrell is charged, that he had
no sooner made an end of his sermon on the day of the fast, but that he laid
an other ground for a new cosenage, by affirming to his Auditorie, and in the
hearing of Summers, that for a certainetie, Satan would seek to repossesse the
said Summers, and prevail against him, except he were mightily withstood by
faith. M, Darr. ad art. 32. p. 20
Master Darrell denies that he used then any such words to his auditorie, or
to that effect. But it is deposed.

VV. Summers page 17.
At the end of the Sermon, M. Darrel said (as I remember) that very certainly
the devil would come again, and enter into me, except very great care were
taken to prevent him by prayer.

Ed. Garland fol. 4.
At Smalles house upon Monday, (where the fast was kept, and before M. Darrell
and other preachers brought Summers back to his masters) M. Darrel said to the
boy after the supposed dispossession, that the devil would be busier with him,
then with any other: and that therefore it stood him upon, to be careful of
himself.

Tho. Porter fol. 3.
And when the boy was dispossessed, M. Darrel said: that now the boy was
cleansed, the devil would return to him again, and be worse with him then
before, except he did withstand him by faith.

Mrs, Gray page, 265,
After M. Darrell had done his sermon, he said in the hearing of the people,
that Satan would assuredly seek to repossesse him the ( said Summers,) and
that without great resistance by faith, and great care taken, he would again
prevail against him.

To. Cooper page 100.
When the said Summers was dispossessed (as it was pretended) M. Darrell
affirmed, that the devil would seek again to repossesse him.

Again, M. Darrell was charged, that afterward he affirmed also the same
night, in the hearing of Summers, and diverse others: that Satan returned the
same night he was dispossessed out of certain in Lancashire, and that so
returning, he appeared unto them in certain similitudes, as of a Rat, a Catte,
a Mouse, etc. and sought to reenter at their mouths: that he verily thought
that Satan would so deal with William Summers, except by faith he were
prevented: and that according to his the said Darrels cunning instruction,
Summers afterward affirmed unto him and others, that the devil sought the same
night afer his pretended dispossession to reenter at his mouth, M, Dar. ad art.
23. page 17.
in the likeness of a Ratte. All this and every part of it, M. Darrell denies
to have been uttered by him that night. Howbeit in another place, being again
examined, he says thus. At one time Summers affirmed, that Satan did attempt
to enter into him, the same night after he was dispossessed, M. Darrel ad art.
17 page 40.
in the likeness of a Ratte. But that which he denies is sufficiently proved.

William Summers having set down at large as much as is here objected against
M. Darrell (as spoken by M. Darrel unto him privately that night) says: W.
Summers. page 18.
The same things that M. Darrel told to me, he also told that night to some
others that were in the house (as far as I remember). Upon these instructions
the next morning after my pretended dispossession, I affirmed (but falsely) to
M. Darrell in the presence of diverse, that the devil sought to have reentred
into me as I lay in my bed, in the form of a Ratte, which would have gone into
my mouth, but that I stopped it with my hand. Then ( quoth M. Darrel) to those
that stood by, I knew that some such thing would happen: and further said unto
them, that the devil would assault me many other ways hereafter.

Ed. Garland page 175.
M. Darrell the Monday at night (as I remember) affirmed to diverse in the
presence of Summers, that satan returned the same night that he was
dispossessed out of certain in Lancashire unto them again.

T. Porter, pa. 116.
M. Darrell affirmed that night (the fast being ended) or the next day, or
within three days, in the presence of Summers and others: that Satan would out
of doubt seek to repossesse him: alleging a piece of Scripture to that
purpose: that it was his custom so to do: that he himself had seen the
experience of it in others, as in Katherine Wright, the boy of Burton, and the
seven in Lancashire: that he did use to appear in diverse similitudes, as of a
Ratte, a Cat, or a mouse, and many other likenesses: that the Devil so
appearing, was used to allure them by fair promises, that he might again
reenter: and even so he said, he verily thought the devil would deal with
William Summers, and therefore willed him to stand steadfast in Christ, or
otherwise the said wicked spirit would repossesse him, and bring seven worse
with him.

Th. Porter fol. 3.
M. Darrell at his house after the dispossession, did pronounce to the boy and
the people present, that after Katherine Wright, the boy of Burton, and the
seven in Lancashire, were dispossessed, the devil came unto them again at
diverse times, in diverse likenesses, seeking to enter in again at their
mouths, in the likeness of a Ratte, a Mouse, a Dog etc.

To. Cooper fol. 17.
M. Darrell said after the supposed dispossession, and in the presence of
Summers, that after Katherine Wright, the boy of Burton, and the seven in
Lancashire were dispossessed, the devil came to them again the same night, and
at diverse other times, in diners likenesses, seeking to enter in again at
their mouths.

M. Hallam fol. 7.
M. Darrell said, that the devil did come to some of the possessed the same
night they were dispossessed, even as they were set at supper, offering to
reenter them again.

Within a day or two after the pretended dispossession of William Summers, M.
Darrell dealt with his master Thomas Porter, that he the said Summers might go
home to his father in laws house, Robert Cooper, being a thing which he much
desired. Hereunto his master did yield, W. Summers. page 18.
so as he went to his said father in laws (as he says) about the xi. of
November. And within a week after M. Darrell bought out his years, upon this
pretense, for that he wished the boy to be of some other calling then a
musition, because (quoth he) in that calling, he shall be driven to sing
many filthy songs.

Thus William Summers having changed the place of his abode, it seemed that M.
Darrell thought it necessary to prepare that place as he had done the other.
He was therefore charged by her Majesty's said Commissioners, that resorting to
Summers, at Robert Coopers house, he affirmed to the said Cooper and diverse
others in the hearing of the said Summers (making then no show of any trouble)
to the effect in every point, as lastly he was charged: adding diverse other
things: as that when the devil had appeared to some that had been
dispossessed in diverse similitudes, they would sometimes start, and sometimes
bid away with the Cat, that Ratte, that Dog etc. that Satan for a
certainty would deal with Summers as he had dealt with the rest: that he
would allure him by promises, and sometimes draw him by threatninges: that if
he were not well looked into, he would cast himself into the fire, or to
seek to break his own neck, or by some other means to kill himself, and
that when Summers had put all these things in practice, saving killing
himself: then said M. Darrell to Cooper; did I not tell you that these things
would come to pass?

Touching these points of M. Darrels foretelling that Satan would seek to
reenter into Summers, and what would happen in that behalf, he the said M.
Darrell confesses the substance of them: saving (that he finding what was
collected by his foretelling in Summers hearing, what would come to pass) his
memory would not serve him, to set down the particular times when he used such
speeches.

M. Darrell ad art. 36. page 20.
Sometimes (says M. Darrel) I have told William Summers, that assuredly the
devil would return, and seek to reenter into him, except by faith and prayer
he should prevent him.

M. Darr. ad art. 16. page 37.
I have told William Summers, that Satan would seek again to repossesse him,
and it may be that I did also tell him, how the devil did seek to repossesse
Thomas Darling. And having had talk with some others, I have told them in what
similitude the devil departed from some of the parties possessed, as they
affirmed: as namely, that he went out of one in the likeness of an Vrchine,
and out of another in the likeness of an old man, with a crooked back: and I
have had likewise communication with them, concerning the seeking of spirits to
repossesse them.

What M. Darrel has not here confessed touching that which is in this place
laid to his charge, he denies to be true. But it is proved very particularly.

Rob. Cooper. pa. 101
William Summers being brought to my house, M. Darrell told me that for a
certainty the devil would seek to reenter into him: that the devil had so
dealt with the boy of Burton, and with seven in Lancashire, and had repossessed
Katherine Wright: that the devil for a certainty would appear to Summers in
diverse likenesses, would assault him with diverse promises, and many great
things, and not so prevailing with him, would threaten him with many hurts and
dangers. These things M. Darrel told me in the hearing of W. Summers, being then
present and well. He also at that time did further admonish me very earnestly,
that I should not suffer Summers to be alone, and that he might be very
carefully looked unto. For (says he) he will otherwise cast himself into the
fire, or seek to break his own neck, and by some means or other kill
himself. And I was the rather encouraged to look well unto him, because
Master Darrell told me, I should not loose a penny by him. Within three or
four days after these speeches, Summers began to make show as though he had
been troubled, (as M. Darrell had foretold): he made mention of a black
dog that offered him gold and ginger. He said that the Devil would have
stopped his breath: Look where a mouse comes: now she goes under me. He
affirmed that the Devil offered him a pair of velvet breeches and a Satin
doublet: that he saw a rough ugly beast: that the Devil appeared unto him with
a crown on his head, and six more coming with him: also like a cocke-chicken,
like a Crane, and like a Snake, like an Angel, like a Toade, like a Newte,
like a set of violles, and Dancers, and that he stood before him with a
fowre-forked cappe on his head, etc. In all these new kinds of fittes, M.
Darrell was seldom absent, and in the beginning of them, he said unto me:
See, did I not tell you, that all these things would happen? And these words of
his foretelling of me of Summers trouble, and the other also of the care I
should have of him: he uttered unto me in the hearing of diverse. Whereupon
some of them said, that I must be careful for him indeed, least otherwise he
might hang himself, as one Richardsons wife did.

Master Darrel said in the presence of William Summers, Mary Cooper. fol. 1.
that after Katherine Wright, the boy of Burton, and the seven in Lancashire,
were dispossessed, the Devil came unto them at diverse times, seeking to
reenter into them, in diverse likenesses, and that he entered into Katherine
Wright, in the likeness of bread which she did eat, and was again repossessed.
And that the possessed in Lancashire, the boy of Burton, and Katherine Wright,
would oftentimes on the sudden say, take away that Catte, that Ratte, that
mouse, that dog, and that this boy ( meaning Summers) would likewise do so.

I have heared M. Darrell say in the presence of the boy, M. Pare, f. 4.
that Katherine Wright, the boy of Burton, and the seven in Lancashire, would
many times say on the sudden: take away that cat, that ratte, that mouse, that
dog, and after such his report of them concluded: so this boy shall do.

W. Summers, page 20.
And William Summers himself. After I came to my fathers house, I began within
a while to look as though I had been afraid: I did now and then starte, and
make mention of dogs, of cattes, of bulls, of lions, and saying, when I
started, and when I made mention of such things, that they seemed to come
toward me. Afterward, I began to counterfeyte my self to be much more
assalted then before. I cried oftentimes in my fits, pretending that the devil
sought again to reenter into me, in the likeness of a man, a dog, a lion, a
snake, a toade, a newt, etc. and that he promised so he might enter into me
again, to make me the wisest man that ever was, and likewise to give me gold,
and costly apparel, as velvet hose, and Satin doblettes. Also I affirmed,
that the Devil threatened me diverse times to hang me, and to break my neck.
And all these things I did, according to M. Darrels instruction: and as he had
told both me and others, that the boy of Burton, and the vii. in Lancashire
had done before.

After that William Summers was thus drawn on to the acting of his fittes last
mentioned, and that M. Darrell (as he says) had renewed his two old grounds
of his want of sense, and the deuilles working in him, and ceased not to
procure every thing he did, to be wondered at: he the said Summers devised
new tricks under a Couerlette, upon this occasion. Lying upon his bed with
a Couerlette cast over him, he moved by chance he knew not how, some part of
his body, when he was supposed to be in a fit, and therefore senseles.
Whereupon he the said M. Darrell gave it out, that it was the devil, that
made that motion under the couerlet: which was such an instruction to Summers,
as he ceased not to feed that error: M. Darrell still most constantly
affirming, to every one that came in: how it was the devil that so moved the
clothes, showing himself under them, in the forms of Kitlinges or whelps.

Likewise, (says Summers) lying in my bed, I did sometimes knock and fillip
with my fingers and toes, against the bed sides and feet: and this also was
ascribed by M. Darrell, as to have been done by the Devil. Hereupon M.
Darrell being interrogated, whether he had affirmed that Summers in such his
fittes was altogether senseles, and that whatsoever he did or spoke, it was
not he but the devil that did both, considering that then the devil by his
sayings, was not within Summers, but without him, he the said Master Darrell
confesses: that he affirmed him to be senseles in the said fittes, and that
it was a wicked spirit without him, M. Darrel ad art. 18. page 41. ad art. 5.
pa 50. and ad ar, 17 pa. 39*
that made those motions, and that the Devil appeared under the said
Couerlette in the similitudes of Kitlinges or whelps, he himself having
seen, and felt them.

Upon this his answer, it being objected unto him, that Summers being
troubled, and in case whilst Satan was without him, as he had been in the
time of his pretended possession, it should thereby seem, that he was as much
possessed then as before, M, Darrell ad art. 17 pa. 39,
his refuge for answer was this: that those kind of troubles were not like
any of the fittes he had in the time that he was possessed, but were of an
other kind, and different from the same. But it is otherwise deposed.

Being often at Summers fathers house during the time of his pretended
dispossession, I have found him doing the same fittes, Ed. Garland page 201.
as wallowing, tombling, staring, foaming, and the rest which I have seen him
before to do, being at Porters house, during the time of his supposed
possession.

M. Bernard page 254.
What time it was said, that Satan was seeking to reenter into Summers, I found
him at his fathers house acting his fittes, the same, and after the same
manner, that I had seen him act them before at Porters, during the time of
his pretended possession.

James Alwood. page 289.
A few days after that I had heard that Summers was dispossessed of a Devil, I
went to see him at his fathers house: where I found him doing all the same
fittes in a sort, and after the same manner altogether, that I had seen him
do them before, when he was at his masters house, and said to be possessed:
which persuaded me more strongly, that he was nothing but a counterfeyt.

Io. Sherrart, page 153
In the time, whilst the devil was said to seek to reenter into Summers, he
had the like fittes in every respect (without any difference that I could
discern,) that he had before he was dispossessed, saving, for the running in
his flesh.

To. Cooper page 292.
Summers fittes in the time of his pretended possession, and in the time whilst
the devil sought to reenter, were all one, saving, for his foaming and
wallowing, insomuch as I told M. Darrell that I thought he was repossessed:
but he answered me, that notwithstanding the fittes were alike, yet the devil
was not in him, but assayling of him.

Concerning the vanity of the said motions under the Couerlette, and M.
Darrels foolish conceit of the Deuilles appearance in the likeness of Kitlinges
or whelps: besides, that which Summers himself before has confessed, there
are sondrie depositions, which are set down in a place hereafter more
convenient.

CHAP. V. Of M. Darrels cunning instructing of Summers, by speaking to others in
his hearing such things, as he meant he should practice in the detecting of
witches: from about the xxi. of November, until about the vii. of December.
AFter that Summers had played his pranks by starting and railing, and making of
motions under a Couerlette, for the space of about a fortnight: then M. Darrell
brought him on to an other matter concerning the detecting of Witches:
affirming in the presence of Summers to diverse, that it was ordinary with those
that were lately dispossessed to detect Witches, and that Summers would do the
like. These things M. Darrell denies, saying: M. Darrell ad art, 1. pa. 49
After William Summers began to detect some women for Witches, I have affirmed
at some time or other, that Satan uses sometimes to discover by the parties
possessed such lewd persons, as he had before stirred up, and made instruments
for the possessing of them. But I deny that ever I said that Satan uses in
seeking to repossesse a man to detect any Witches.

And here M. Darrell was very much plunged: for being demanded whether Satan
in seeking to repossesse Summers, did not by him detect certain Witches, M.
Darrel ad art. 7, page 58.
he answers, that for ought he could perceive, Satan did not seek again
to repossesse Summers, during those days, wherein he detected certain for
Witches. This answer seeming strange, he was asked how he knew, that Satan
did not for that time seek to repossesse him. Whereunto he said, that he did
so conjecture, for that William Summers did affirm no such matter: adding that
he had noe other knowledge at any time, that Satan did seek to repossesse
either him, or any of the other nine before mentioned: but their own reports,
and some other outward troubles. If he had been here further pressed, he would
no doubt have started from this answer: or otherwise he must build a months
work upon this bare conjecture. But this is too far prosecuted: considering
that the point here objected and denied by him, as is before expressed, is
sufficiently proved by diverse witnesses. Mrs. Gray, ad art. 25. page 165


I heard M. Darrel, affirm, that it was ordinary with those that were lately
dispossessed to detect witches.

M. Aldridge page 88.
I thought that the boy by extraordinary means had knowledge, that they whom
he named were Witches: and I was therein confirmed by M. Darrels speeches of the
detection of witches, by certain that he affirmed had been possessed in
Lancashire.

George Richardson page 270.
One Mrs. Wallys and others did talk in the room where Summers lay, of such
persons as were suspected to be Witches, before he the said Summers did name
them.

M. Pare, f. 4
I have heard M. Darrell say in the presence of the boy, that the possessed in
Lancashire, Katherine Wright, and the boy of Burton, would often use these
words: See, See, where the witch stands thus, and thus attired: see where he
comes, behold him. And after that report of them concluded, so this boy
shall do.

Rob. Cooper, pa. 102.
When M. Darrell understood that Summers had named certain persons to be
Witches, he said unto me, that he thought he would come to this. And then he
told me, that they who had been in other places so trobled, did ordinarily
detect witches. So (says he) it has commonly happened in Scotland. And that one
M. Throckmortons children, did the like not long since.

As Summers named any to be witches, M. Darrell procured them to be sent for,
for that they might be tried by Summers, whether they were witches, yea, or nay.
Wherein M. Darrel is charged with a very notable cosenage. When he had sent for
the first witch to be brought to Summers: he told in the mean time to those
that were in the house, and in Summers presence, that it was an ordinary thing,
that when witches came nigh to those that were in Summers case, then they (in
such case) would scritch and cry out, and be greatly troubled, and so at the
Witches departure. And that they would lie quietly snoring, as if they were a
sleep, when the witches stood by them: and so he said it would fall out with
Summers: which coming to pass accordingly, as Summers has set down more
particularly in the second Chapter of this book. M. Darrell was greatly
admired, and the parties so brought unto him, were thereupon reputed for
witches, and by his persuasion, that Summers could not be quiet, till they were
made fast, they were, as Summers detected them, committed to prison. M. Darrell
denies, that he either foretold any such matter, or that afterward he ever
affirmed the same to be an ordinary thing, M. Darrel ad art. 3 page 50.
with those that had bin in Summers case. And he yields this reason for his
said denial vz. for that (says he) I had never seen any so troubled before,
(at the coming and going of Witches) but in mine experience: and namely, in
Katherine Wright, she was tormented and troubled only, during the time, that
the Witch was present by her, and remained quiet both at her coming and
departure. And the like I have heard of the seven in Lancashire. By which his
deposition, it seems very improbable, that the points wherewith he is here
charged should be true. For he had never seen any troubled as Summers was,
and his experience is to the contrary. But the Fox was near driven when he
took this muce, and he ferreted out of it by very pregnant depositions.

To. Coorper pa. 103
M. Darrell having sent for some, who were named by Summers to be Witches, he did
affirm in the hearing of this examinat and diverse others then present, that
when the said Witches were coming, the boy would be greatly afflicted till
they came before him, and then he would lie quietly till they were gone, and
afterward at their going away, would be greatly molested again. And
accordingly all things happened, as M. Darrell did foretell. At their coming
he was vehemently tormented (as it seemed) when they came to the beds side to
him, he would lie as quietly as though he had been asleep, and would sometimes
snore: but when they were going away again, then he seemed to be tormented as
before.

M. Darrell affirmed in the presence of Summers, and diverse others, Edm.
Garland p: 176.
that it was an ordinary thing, when Witches came nigh unto one in Summers case:
that then such the party possessed would scritch and cry out: but when they
stood close by him, that then he would lie quietly, snoring as if he were a
sleep: and at their departure away, scritch and cry out again: and afterward
he saw Summers so do in all respects, when diverse suspected to be Witches were
brought unto them.

Mrs. Gray, pa. 156
I have heard M. Darrell upon occasion of speech say, that when Witches stood
by one possessed, the party possessed should be quiet: but at the coming in
and going out of the Witches, the said possesssed party should be much
disquieted.

Mrs. Gray pa, 166
I have heard M. Darrell say, that it was ordinary with those that were in
Summers case, when the Witches have been brought unto them, to be greatly vexed
at their coming, and at their departure, and to lie very quietly whilst the
same Witches stood by them.

M. Hallam. fol. 8
Summers discovered his witches after this manner. Being in a fit, he would
amongst other speeches say, fetch me such a woman. Now or ever she came to
him, he would seem to be strangely vexed, and more strangely when she
approached near unto him. But when she was with him, he was in quiet as if he
were a sleep: but if she turned her back, then was he troubled as before. And
this was their custom (that were his friends about him) so soon as they had
tried any woman detected, straight way she was sent to prison, and so they
served six or seven. This trial was sufficient: Mother Boot (and so of the
rest) is a witch, and therefore with the rest must go to prison.

As Summers did name any for witches, M. Aldridge page 88.
M. Darrel procured them to be fetched out of their houses.

Summers naming some for witches, Rob. Cooper, pa. 102.
M. Darrel procured them to be sent for, and bringing them to the boy, did
afterward go himself to see them put in prison: saying, that the boy could
not be in quiet till they were laid fast. And this course M. Darrell held
upon the boys words: so as in two days he procured to be imprisoned six to
seven, under this pretense, that they were witches. Afterward also upon the
like occasion, he caused to be apprehended, and examined, on Millicent
Horsley and her sister.

Furthermore M. Darrel was charged, to have grown to such vanity at that
time, through the admiration had of him, especially by his followers, and some
other credulous persons, by reason of the said course which he and Summers held
for the detecting of witches: as that he affirmed, he doubted not by Summers
means to detect all the witches in England. M. Darrell ad art. 13. page 52.
M. Darrell confesses part hereof in these words. I finding William Summers to
have discovered thirteen witches at Nottingham, and afterward: said in
private to some friends of mine, that I thought Summers would be able to
discover any witch, if he came where they were, or they came where he was: But
he denies the rest, which is deposed as follows.

M. Hallam. fol. 8
I heard M. Darrell say, that he doubted not by this means (vz by Summers
detecting of witches) to discover all the witches in England.

Besides, the folly of that, which M. Darrel himself does here confess, might
easily by himself have been discerned; but that through the conceit had of
him, he grew to be very impudent. For those whom Summers had named for witches,
no man could justly blame.

Rob. Cooper. pa. 102
M. Darrell ( says Robert Cooper) desired the Mayor of Nottingham, to make
inquiry through the town, if any person could charge any of the pretended
witches. The Mayor did so accordingly: and nothing being laid to diverse of
their charges, they were all set at liberty upon bonds, saving two. But this
devise of Darrels concerning the detecting of witches, is almost laid asleep.
Of all the parts of the tragical Comedy acted between him and Summers, there
was no one Scene in it, wherein M. Darrell did with more courage and boldness
act his part, then in this of the discovery of witches. He sends for them,
procures the^ to be examined, carries them before Justices of peace, goes to
see the^ imprisoned, makes no doubt but that they are witches, and so
bestirreth himself therein, as many thereby were greatly seduced, The written
treatise.
and had him in wonderful estimation. One of his friends makes this discovery
of witches, to be one of the worthy fruits of that admirable work of
dispossessing of Summers: telling us, that witches are the Lords chiefest
enemies: that God would not have them suffered to live, and that the hiding and
saving of these witches is justly thought to have been one of the first and
principal causes of slaundering this work of Summers dispossessing.

But consider how now the tide is turned. The author of the brief Narration,
making a catalogue of all the worthy acts, that fell out betwixt M. Darrell
and Summers, skippeth over the detection of witches, being the fruits of a
fortnights work. M. Darrell himself in his Apology in this matter is
altogether silent, being otherwise very plentiful in the rest. And this which
follows, is supposed to be the cause of such a change.

M. Ireton, (being a man of very good parts, and yet somewhat ouercarried in
this cause, being unacquainted with the proceedings in it, and suspecting no
evil) is one of the men, of whom M. Darrell and his friends have greatly
bragged. And it is true, that his credit wrought some inconvenience, through
his faculty in believing those things which were told him: albeit his speeches
still did rely upon this supposition, that if those things which he heard
were true, then thus, and thus. Besides some indiscreet opposition in points of
learning, did make him to say something, whereof more hold was taken, then
peradventure he meant. M. Ireton ad ar. 3. pa.
This M. Ireton having been examined, and particularly concerning the point in
hand of detecting of witches, says thus: I think that Summers did counterfeit
those fittes, wherein he took upon him to disclose witches, and am persuaded,
that he never had any skill by satan's means, or otherwise so to do.

By this deposition, that deceit of Darrels is so dashed, as it is supposed we
shall have no more of it: and the rather because it may be thought he was very
weary of it, being diverse ways greatly plunged in it.

Summers tells to this purpose one pretty tale. I cannot omit (says he) how
Master Darrell and I had like to have been foiled in this matter. Widow Boot
suspected for a witch, Summers page 23.
being to be brought unto me, and I having notice thereof before, did show my
self to be greatly troubled, both at her coming in, and at her going away,
as my manner was. But upon a cunning trick used by some that were there
present, I was greatly deceived. For after the departure of the said widow,
she was brought and carried back again into the chamber, and out, twice or
thrice secretly under one of their cloakes, that had laid that plot as I
afterward perceived: so that neither Master Darrell nor I having
understanding thereof, nor any suspicion of such kind of dealing, I could not
put in practice my former tricks, but was quiet at every such her going in and
coming out. Whereupon they that used this devise, did presently publish the
same, and thereby affirmed, that out of all question I was but a dissembler.

CHAP. VI. Of M. Darrels course, from about the seventh of December, until the
14. of January, whilst Summers refused to dissemble any longer.
BY this time Summers began to be weary of counterfeiting, having spent a
month from the time of his pretended dispossession, in starting and in playing
his gamboiles under a couerlet, and in detecting of witches. And afterward
for ought that M. Darrell could do, he altogether refused to continue his
dissembling course any longer: and so made no show of any of his prankes for
the space of five weeks. Howbeit, in the mean time M. Darrel for his part was
not idle. For a general opinion being then conceived, that Summers had
counterfeited in all his former proceedings, partly in respect of some more
apparent arguments thereof, in his tricks under the couerlet, and in his
pretended detecting of witches, M. Darrel being greatly netled therewith, flew
to the pulpit, and there rang out diverse peales with great bitterness against
that conceit. And for as much as the opinion of Summers former dissimulation,
was the rather confirmed by his continuing well, and refraining from such
follies: he the said M. Darrell bent his chief force to persuade his
auditorie, that Satan would lurk sometimes about one (out of whom he had
been cast) suffering the party to be well for a good space, but that he was
verily persuaded, that Satan would not give him over, until in the end he
had repossessed him. Also he took upon him to answer some such treatises, as
had been set forth of particular persons, concerning their dissembling in such
cases. With this argument of devils he so troubled his auditorie, that they
grew very weary of it, and some blamed him for it to his face. These
particulars M. Darrell does after a sort confess some to be true. But the
depositions are full enough.

I preached at Nottingham about that time six or seven sermons, M. Darrel ad
art. 2 etc. page 35.
upon the 43.44.45. verses of the 12. of Matthew (concerning satan's return to
reenter) and in one of them I said: that if any who were strangers did doubt
whether Summers was a counterfeit or no, I would be glad to satisfy them. But
for them of Nottingham ( I said) that I scorned to confute them. which words
being laid to his charge at that time of his examination, he did thus expound
himself: I scorned to confute them: that is, let me (meaning my self) be had
in scorn or disdain, if I do confute so palpable an error, In an other of my
sermons, at such times as it was commonly given, out that Summers was a
counterfeit: I did persuade my auditorie to the contrary the best I could:
affirming confidently, that he was no counterfeit. And both in my sermons, and
at other times I have affirmed, that the devil would seek to repossesse
Summers. What he has not here confessed of the premises, he says is untrue.
But consider of the proofs.

Summers page 19.
It seemed that diverse, who affirmed that I was a dissembler, were induced so
to think, because they had heard of some, who having done such things as I
did, afterward confessed upon examination, that they had altogether
dissembled. Some of them I heard my self make mention of a book that was set
out of a certain maid in London, that had deceived many by avoiding at her
mouth pinnes and needles, and by doing of other very strange things. Of this
book M. Darrell made mention in one of his sermons, and did greatly blame
those, that because some had dissembled, did therefore affirm, that I was but
a dissembler. And in this point he was so earnest, that after many words, for
the justifying of me and my doings, he said, that they should be condemned, who
having seen the great works of God in me, did notwithstanding give it out,
that I was but a dissembler. And in most of his sermons he did enter into
diverse discourses of the devils seeking to reenter into those, out of whom he
had been cast: and of bringing with him seven other wicked spirits worse then
himself.

M, Aldridg. fol. 89.
In five or six of his sermons concerning the spirits return, M. Darrell did
greatly reprove those, that would not believe that Summers had been possessed:
but gave it out that he had dissembled: and likewise against those, who did
maintain that he the said Summers was not dispossessed. He said also, that for
a certtaintie Satan would repossesse Summers, except he did mightily withstand
him. He dwelt so long upon that text, Matthew 12. concerning the spirits
return, that this examinate was much moved with it, and told him he did not
well therein: affirming, that the people were cloyed with his often repeating
of one thing, and much offended, in that as they said, they could hear of
nothing in his sermons, but of the Devil. But I was especially moved with his
often repeating of these words: even so shall it be with this wicked
generation, applying them still to the people of Nottingham, where I have been
a preacher these twenty years: the people there being but as other such
congregations are, and as willing to hear the word of God preached, as any
other in mine opinion.

This M. Aldridge was then a great companion of M. Darrels, but not of his
cosenage. Howbeit, when he thought his freehold touched, he was moved with it.
But what will he say when he reads the brief Narration, wherein the Author
writes thus. Upon Summers dispossession M. Darrell was retained preacher in
Nottingham, that populous town, having had no settled preacher there before
this time, since the beginning of her Majesty's reign. Either M. Aldridge or
this companion are in danger of an hard imputation: except it may be thus
helped: M. Aldridge is Vicar of Saint Mary's in Nottingham: whereas this fellow
peradventure accounts neither Parsons, nor Vickars, nor any that bear such
popish names, for preachers: the Doctor to be chosen by the parish, as M.
Darrell was, is the preacher (forsooth) that must bear the bell.

CHAP. VII. How Summers about the xiiij. of January fell again to the acting of
certain fits, wherein he continued at times, till about the xxiiij. of
February, and how M. Darrell pretended that he was repossessed.
AFter that M. Darrell had spent about a month or five weeks in preaching,
and reuiling of those that held Summers for a counterfeit, and in dealing
privately with him, (as he says) to undertake again his former dissembled
course: he the said Summers began to stagger, not knowing what was best for him
to do. For (says he) by M. Darrels doctrine I well perceived, that many did
expect the Devils assailing me again, and so looked for my further trouble:
whereby, together M. Darrels former perswasitions, I was the rather induced to
bethink me of my former dissimulation, as perceiving the same to tend to the
justifying of all my other actions: With this inducement some others also did
concur. Whereas my father in law (he says) had received at two collections,
made by M. Darrels means, the sum of twenty nobles, or thereaboutes, in
respect of his trouble and charge, when I was in my former pretended fits: and
likewise of such as came to see me at those times, diverse gifts in money: For
as much as now by my desisting so long from my former practices, I felt some
want of my former relief, and perceived that my father grew very weary of me,
using my mother very hardly, and threatening to drive both me and her, and my
sisters out of his doors, I thought with my self, that it would be best for me
to enter again into my accustomed dissimulatio^: that so my father receiving
more relief, I and my mother might be better used, and furthermore, in respect
of M. Darrels former persuasions, that if I would so do, I should never want.

Now whilst I was thus debating with my self, what I should do: there happened
a very strange matter, which made me to resolve with my self, to fall again
to my old tricks. One Sterland of Swenton near Nottingham, having been one
day in the market at Nottingham, upon his coming home fell sick of a bastard
plurisie, as the physicians reported. Of this sickness he died, but before in
his rauing he said (as his wife and others affirmed) that I had trodden upon his
heel, when he was last at the said market, and that I had certainly bewitched
him. Hereupon his said wife charging me with felony, before the Mayor of
Nottingham, I was committed to prison, where I remained about an hour or two,
until I was bayled by my father in law, and by my uncle, one Randolph Milner.
When I was in prison, then not knowing what issue the said false accusation
might have, and in the respects before specified, I thought it the safest way
for my self that I could take, to return to my old by as again of
dissimulation. Whereupon, whilst I was in prison, I affirmed that the devil
came unto me in the likeness of a mouse. And so about the fourteenth of
January, I began to pretend, as though I had been again vexed, being come
home (after I was dismissed) to my father in laws house.

Upon this William Summers relapse before mentioned, M. Darrell was charged
before her maisties said Commissioners, that although it be accounted (amongst
those who take upon them the chiefest skill in casting out devils) to be a
matter of especial difficulty to discern when one is repossessed: yet he
upon the sight of Summers in his first new fit, did confidently affirm, and
afterward preach, that for a certainety he was repossessed, and that the
former spirit had brought seven more with him worse then himself: blaming
those with great bitterness, who had before affirmed, that the boy was a
couterfeyt.

M. Darrel ad art. 39 page 20, and ad art, 3 and 5. pa. 34.
M. Darrell hereof confesses thus much. I have said at diverse times that
Summers was again repossessed, and that the same spirit that was cast out of
him before, was returned again into him, and had brought seven more with him
worse then himsefe. And so likewise I have preached.

W. Summers page 25.
When these things thus fell out, ( says Summers) his falling again to his
new fittes, M. Darrell did grow to be more and more in credit, it being
commonly believed, that I was indeed repossessed, as he in his sermons had
foretold, that it was like to come to pass: which opinion M. Darrell did
nourish as much as he could, and was very bitter upon every occasion against
those, who had said before that I was but a dissembler.

Whilst Summers was imprisoned, he said that a mouse began to follow him: M
Aldridge pa. 91
and coming home to his father in laws house, he cast himself upon a truckle
bed, and so fell presently into a fit. Upon the sight whereof M. Darrell told
me, that for a certainty he was repossessed. And afterward also, so affirmed
in some of his sermons in S. Mary's publicly, blaming greatly, and also
condemning those in Nottingham, who had before affirmed, that Summers was a
counterfeyte. And this he did with very great earnestnes and vehemency.

In this place it is to observed: how some of M. Darrels chief friends have
left him after a sort in two of the chiefest points of this whole action. One
of them having given his opinion, that Summers did not dissemble those fits
which he acted before the Commissioners, deputed from the L. Archbishop of
York: but that it was the Devil in him, that played those prankes in his
body, could (it seems) be content to acknowledge, that he was possessed: but
at the time of his examination, he wouls not affirm, that he the said Summers
had been at any time dispossessed, although (says he) I have heard by
depositions and other reports, I. B. pa. 137.
that might induce me probablely to think that he was dispossessed. The other
being a very rash and headstrong young man, one M. Brinsley a Minister: I.
Brinsley pa. 129,
he at the time of his examination, doubts as much of Summers repossession, as
the former did of his dispossession. I am fully persuaded (says he) that
William Summers was possessed with an evil spirit, and that he was
dispossessed: but concerning his repossession, I am not therein so fully
persuaded: although I have many reasons to induce me so to think.

Upon M. Darrels report and preaching that W. Summers was repossessed, there
was then greater resort unto him then before, M. Darrell still persuading every
one that came (as Summers says) that he the said Summers was repossessed: and
that he remained in all his fittes utterly senseless.

It might greatly be maruayled (by such as have not experience, how easy a
matter it is, with fair pretense to seduce the simpler sort): what estimation
and credit M. Darrell gat by this new forgery of Summers pretended
repossession. Howbeit many of the wiser sort, that were not possessed with the
giddie humor of novelties, (covered forsooth with zeal and sighinges), did
laugh this to scorn, as they did the rest: and the rather, because the boys
fits after his pretended repossession, when he was supposed to have eight
deuilles in him, were not so grievous or strange in show, as when he had but
one: which argued sufficiently M. Darrels untruth, in saying he was
repossessed. That they were not then so grievous and strange, M. Darrell
denies it: but it is deposed.

The most of those things that Summers did at Garlandes, M Aldridge page 242.
(vz. after his supposed repossession), were mere fooleries

M. Bernard. fo. 13
Summers latter fittes (having as he thought gained sufficient credit in his
former), were more loose and not so cunningly handled as the first were.

Ed. Garland pa. 197.
The fits which Summers had at my house, were not so strange as those were which
he had at Porters house, but were more suspicious and likely to be dissembled,
then other were, either at Porters house, or at Coopers house, after his
dispossession.

R. Cooper pa. 292
Summers fits in the time of his repossession were less grievous then the other
in every respect. And I think if M. Darrell had not put the boy in mind of his
foaming and gnashing in the said time of his repossession, he would not have
showed those signs.

How Summers grew werie of this his said relapse, after he continued therein
about six weeks, and of his words to John Cooper, that he should be quiet if
he might get out of M. Darrels fingers, and be at S. John's: he himself in the
former Chapter has made mention. So as now we are come to the xxiiii. day of
February, mentioned in the beginning of the third Chapter: because things
being made so clear, that M. Darrell was a mere dissembler, and a packer and
contriuer in all the premises: there was no great care taken to look into his
practices: during the time of the said six weeks, whilst he was pretended to
be repossessed.

The end of the Second Book.
The Third Book.
This Book contains William Summers public confession, that as well his
pretended possession, as his dispossession and repossession and all he had
done or, pretended, touching the same, was counterfeyted and dissembled,
together with the opposition and devises of M. Darrel and his friends, to
discredit and impeach the same, from the time that he first came to S. John's,
by the Mayor of Nottinghams direction, until his departure thence. vz. from
about the xxiiii. of February, until Assizes at Nottingham, that Lent.

CHAP. I. How Summers confessed his dissimulation at S. John's in Nottingham, as
soon as he was out of M. Darrels disposition.
COncerning the occasion of William Summers removing from his father in laws
house, to S. John's in Nottingham, (a place where the poor are set to work,)
John Cooper the keeper there, deposes thus. Being oftentimes with William
Summers, in his fittes, and diligently beholding the course of his carriage in
them: I grew very suspicious that he did but dissemble, and thereupon was well
content, to have the tuition of him, to make trial of the matter: the rather,
for that the boys keepers and friends that were about him, were willing to
please him in all his humors. This Cooper, after he had signified to some
(...) former presumptions. For Cattes coming to him, he never saw any such
thing in his life, nor any other vain supposed apparition. For showing the
several manner of offenses: he heard M. Darrell and others speak of them, and
of his own fantasy, he devised to show them by demonstration. Falling into
the fire, he did voluntarily, being assured, that always some body was near
him to catch him up again, before he could receive any hurt.

Nich. Shepard, pa. 247.
After that William Summers had made this confession, before the Aldermen the
same night (says Nicholas Shepherd) he and I being to lie together: at our
going to bed, he showed unto me at my request some of his tricks, in the
presence of John Cooper, vz. the knocking with his toes, his motions under a
couerlet, the writhing of his mouth, and how he thrust his tongue backwards
into his throat, with some others. About three or four days after, Frances
Wyrom. Henry Scot. Tho. Donnycliffe. Rob Spencer. John Cooper.
Nicholas Shepherd, acquainting one Fraunces Wyron with Summers dissembled
course: and he the said Fraunces being thereupon very desirous to see his
tricks, the time was appointed. Summers prepared himself: Four or five
persons meet together: a couerlet was laid upon the ground for the purpose,
and so the boy goes to his work.

Nich. Shepard. 228.
And first ( says Shepherd) he fell down as though he had been in a swound:
then having lain so a little while, he wallowed and tumbled, he foamed at the
mouth, he gnashed with his teeth, he thrust his tongue backwardes toward his
throat, and gaping, those that were present looked into his mouth. These
tricks thus performed, he rose up, but still pretending to be in his fit, he
leapt and daunced, as he did the first night that. M. Darrell came to him, and
showed the same gestures, which he then also had used, and were interpreted to
signify the sins of Nottingham. Then the company desired him to show his
tricks under the couerlet, and he having laid himself down upon the
couerlet that lay on the floor, I cast a cloak upon him, under the which he
did show them: they that were present catching at the said thing that moved
under the said cloak, being his hand, and he diverse ways preventing them:
sometimes by clapping his hand under his side, and some times under his hamme.
Lastly, we moved him to fall into the fire: whereunto he would in no sort
yield: but after a while (as we were talking together) he came unto me and told
me in mine ear, that if I would stand by the chimny, and be ready to catch
him, he would on the sudden fall into fire. Accordingly, (I not acquainting the
rest then present with our purpose) stood by the fire: and Summers standing by
me, he did (suddenly running a little back) fall upon his buttocks into the
fire, and presently I plucked him up. With this his sudden fall into the fire,
those that were present, were greatly amazed: whereat the boy laughed, and then
they demanding of him, why he would not cast himself into the fire, when they
willed him: he answered, that if he had so done, it would not have seemed
strange unto them: whereas falling into it upon the sudden, they saw it did
amaze them. And in deed I perceived them to be greatly affrighted therewith, as
they then confessed, and do yet acknowledge. At that time also they asked him,
how he became so heavy as it was reported, and he willed them to come and try
him. The manner whereof was thus: He standing upon the floor, did shrink
himself downwards, and then, first M. Scot, and afterward Frauncis Wyrom,
coming to lift him, and taking hold upon the upper part of his body, the boy
clapped himself close unto them, and seemed to be so strong and heavy, as
they could not lift him. But Donnycliffe going unto him, and by my direction
taking him below his girdlestead, he did lift him up very easily. And then the
rest perceiving their own error, did also lift him up at their pleasure, and
went away fully persuaded, that (as the boy himself had confessed) he had in
deed dissembled in all the course by him formerly held.

All which hitherto is deposed by Nicholas Shepherd, is likewise affirmed from
point to point, in effect by the depositions of four of them: Henry Scot,
Fraunces Wyron, Thomas Donnicliffe, and John Cooper.

CHAP. II. How M. Darrel dealt with Summers, for the reuocation of his said
confession, that he had dissembled.
Whilst thus some were desirous to see the boy do his feats, and to be
satisfied, concerning the truth of his confession, and the manner of his
tricks, acted before the said Aldermen of Nottingham: so on the other side, M.
Darrell and his pertakers were wonderfully perplexed, how the matter might (as
it seems) be bolstered out and salued: wherein, how Master Darrel troubled
himself, it is not to be doubted. For although he never had suspected, that
Summers would have detected the secret plottes betwixt them: yet because he
had taken so much upon him, and in respect of his pretended experience, had
been so resolute in every thing, it went to his heart: as well perceiving, that
thereby his credit in casting out of Deuilles would be altogether dashed.
He therefore to encounter this detection, having heard what Summers had
confessed and done before the said Aldermen, was charged before her Majesty's
said Commissioners, to have gone unto him at Saint John's, and to have dealt
with him very earnestly, for the reuoking of his said confession: and for the
justifying of his former proceedings, in sticking unto it, that he was no
counterfeite. This M. Darrell does in effect confess, in these words. Once I
went to William Summers, to S. John's, after that I understood that he had
confessed, how in all his former dealings he had dissembled, and labored to
make him revoke his said confession, that he had dissembled, and to affirm the
contrary.

Furthermore, M. Darrell being charged, M. Darrel ad art 42. pa 21
that he was so moved with William Summers at S. John's, when he affirmed
constantly to his face, that all he had done before was dissembled: as that he
pronounced him to be in a desperate case, and in the state of damnation: M.
Darrell ad, art. 10. page 51.
answered thus: I did at that time use diverse sharp words unto Summers, upon
the occasion mentioned, but I did not use the words of damnation, or
desperatio^, or any words to that effect. But it is deposed.

Summers, having affirmed to M. Darrell at S. John's, N. Sheph. fol. 2.
that he had dissembled, he the said M. Darrell told him, that he was now in
worse case then ever he was. For now he was possessed with legions of Devils,
and that if he continued thus, he was in state of damnation, and could not be
saved.

Master Darrell, upon Summers saying unto him, Ioh. Cooper. fol. 21.
that he dissembled, grew impatient, and threatened him, that he was in state of
damnation.

M. Darrell, upon the boys affirmation of his dissembling, M. Shute. fol. 19.
said, thou art a lying boy, and were possessed, dispossessed, and art now
repossessed with many Deuilles: and art in a desperate case. Which I thinking
to be uncharitably spoken, persuaded M. Darrell to forbear such speeches, and
to comfort the boy by some good means.

Again, M. Darrell was charged by her Majesty's said Commissioners, to have
sought so many ways to have withdrawn Summers from his said confession, and
have stuck unto it, that he was possessed; as the poor boy was driven to write
unto him, entreating him to let him alone, and to intermeddle no more in that
matter, for his own credit: and that notwithstanding he still persisted,
urging him as before. Some. page 363.
The tenor of the letter was thus. M. Darrell, my hearty commendations unto
you: This is to desire you, that you would let me be at quiet. For whereas you
said that I was possessed, I was not: and for those tricks that I did before
you came, was through folks speeches that came to me. And those which I did
since, was through you speches and others. For as you said, I could not hear,
I did hear all things, that were spoken, and knew all things that were done
in the house, and all things that I did were counterfeite: and I pray you to
let it pass: for the more you meddle in it, the more discredit it will be
for you: and I pray God and you, M. Darrell ad art, 43, page 21.
and all the world, to forgive me. M. Darrell hereunto answering, says: I
confess that Summers did write unto me, to the effect here mentioned: and yet
such his letters notwithstanding, I did afterward persuade him, that he should
not say that he had dissembled his former fits, but confess the truth: meaning
thereby, that he should confess that he was possessed.

When M. Darrell perceived that Summers, by no private means that he could use,
would be drawn to follow his humor any longer, but did constantly persevere in
the affirmation of his aforesaid confession: he the said M. Darrel was charged,
that then he sought to work for himself in the pulpit, and that so grossly
and ignorantly, (but yet very maliciously) and that he presumed to preach: that
Summers was not only repossessed in body as before, but now also possessed in
soul, which was worse. And his answer hereunto is thus. I confess, that I
did both preach in one of my sermons, and afterward affirmed so much to
diverse, M. Darrell ad art. 6. page 34.
that Summers was not only repossessed in body as before, but also possessed in
soul, which was worse. And the reason that moved me to say, that Summers was
possessed in soul, was this: vz. Because in saying he had in the whole course
of his former fits dissembled, he lied therein grievously against his own
conscience, to the dishonor of God, and hurt of his Church. Consider the gentle
zeal of benefiting the Church, by his faculty and skill in casting out
Devils. But wretched is his own case, if lying should be so dangerous, who
has so often by the testimony of so many witnesses, forgotten his oath in this
cause.

CHAP. III. How M. Darrell devised two or three shifts, to have avoided Summers
confession, that he had dissembled.
WE have found by the premises in the former Chapter M. Darrelles care to have
brought Summers whilst he was at S. John's from his foresaid confession, by
persuasion and preaching. Now there comes to be considered, how, when he
could not prevail thereby, he devised two or three sleights, as well as he
could, to cover so bad a matter.

Touching the first, W. Summers page 30.
whereof William Summers deposes thus; When my confession before the said
Aldermen was blown abroad, M. Darrell and such as favored him, gave it out,
that it was not I, that had made that confession, but the Devil, and that my
said confession was a sure argument, that I was again repossessed. Part hereof
M. Darrell himself confesses: and for the rest, an other witness does concur
in effect with Summers.

Summers, being at S. John's, and telling me and others present, M. Darrel ad
art. 40. page 21.
that in the former course of his pretended fits, he had dissembled. I
answered, that he lied in so saying: and have said at some times, that the said
speeches of Summers were a confirmation, that he was again repossessed. M.
Darrell asked William Summers, M. Shute. page 250.
being at Saint John's, whether he had said, that he had dissembled. To whom
Summers answered, what I have said, I have said. I have said, that I have
counterfeyted, and so do I say now, the Lord forgive me for it: and I protest
before God, and before Iejus Christ, that I have in this action greatly
dissembled with God and the world. Say thou so (quoth Darrell?) But how shall
I know that this is thou William Summers, which now speak unto me: unto whom
I said, that I thought that to be a vain and frivolous question: for that
Summers used his tongue and throat with other parts of his mouth, in as orderly
and as natural an habit at that instant, as any of us all that were present
could do: and M. Darrell, could yield no other reason to the contrary, but that
William Summers might as well ask of him, whether it were M. Darrell that moved
the question.

At the same time M. Darrell, proceeding with the boy asked him some other
questions: as if he had dissembled then, whether he could act those fittes
again. The boy said he could: let us see quoth Darrell. The boy did diverse of
them: whereupon M. Darrell, growing to be in a great chafe, breathed out his
second oracle: saying, that it was no marvel though he could do them,
considering that he had more Devils in him then before. Hereof M. Darrell has
not been examined, because it was one of the interrogatories whereunto he
refused to answer. For true it is, that after that he had been examined
diverse times about this matter, he found himself so perplexed, as that he
refused to be any further examined: saying, that his conscience was troubled,
in that he had answered so much already. Wherein he is not greatly to be
blamed. For although a liar must have a good memory, yet by many cross
questions, he may be taken short, as it has happened to him in many
particulars. But to follow the purpose, M. Shute ibid,
thus M. Shute has deposed. M. Darrell proceeded with Summers into further
questions. How could thou foame so vehemently? send forth such loud and
fearful cries? draw and extort thy mouth to thy ears? frame thine eyes so
wide and broad? and so ghastly to behold? etc. To whom Summers answered: I did
nothing at the time and day of dispossession, but I can perform it, as
absolutely now. Then let us see sayeeh M. Darrell. Whereupon Summers foamed
immediately, after he had a little prepared himself thereunto, that the foame
ran down on both the sides of his month, and about his chinne. After that,
he sounded forth very loud and fearful cries, etc. Herewith (as also in
respect of some other speeches,) M. Darrell being offended, was ready to
depart the house: and being desired to stay, and see the boy perform some
other actions, he answered, that he would not stay any longer. For (quoth he) I
am persuaded, that he can do the like again, in that he does them by the
same power, whereby he did them before: but I will stand to it till death,
that he was possessed, and was dispossessed, and is now repossessed, with many
devils. And so for that time in great impatiencie departed.

When M. Darrell perceived, that Summers acting of the like fittes voluntarily,
that he had done dissemblingly, it began to be held more commonly, that the
boy was a counterfeyte: then thirdly, he the said Darrell, and his
adherentes, turned their tale, and gave it out; that his voluntary fittes were
but toys, and nothing like those that he had when he was possessed. But the
contrary is deposed.

The fittes which William Summers did act, M. Shute. pa. 251.
before M. Darrell at S. John's voluntarily, did very aptly resemble those that
he had, upon the day of his supposed dispossession.

In the presence of M. Scot, and others, William Summers, Io Couper* pa. 295.
did voluntarily act his fittes in like sort, and as strangely to the sight
of them, that had seen him do them before, but especially, to one that was a
stranger, they seemed to be done very extraordinarily, as when it was said,
that he was possessed. Howbeit, upon the acting of them, (though indeed they
differed nothing from the former) yet I said to the boy, that they were not so
strange, to see what the boy would say unto me. To whom the said boy
answered, that now I knew them to be done voluntarily, they might seem not so
strange: but if I had not known them to have been counterfeyted, they would
then have seemed as strange as before.

France, Wyron pa. 276.
I having been present at Porters house, and at many of W. Summers fittes, in
the time of his pretended possession: these fittes, ( meaning the voluntary
fittes, which Summers had acted before him, and 4. or 5. more at S. John's) were
as strange for the manner of them, as those that I had seen him do in the
time of his supposed possession, and the very same for the kinds and
qualities, and continuance of them, as those were in every respect. And besides
the casting of himself into the fire, being soda ine and unlooked for of me
(the boy having a little before denied earnestly to act that fit by name) did
affright and skarre me much, until Shephearde told me, that it was done upon
compacte between Summers and him. With this deposition of Fraunces VVyron, Tho.
Donnycliffe pa, 276,
agrees the deposition of Thomas Donnycliffe, Henry Scot, and Nicholas
Shepherd.

CHAP. IIII. How M. Darrell and his friends to discredit Summers confession,
did falsely report, that he was induced thereunto by promises, threatenings, and
enchantments.
THe three sleightes mentioned in the former Chapter, albeit they were of some
force to content those, who were desirous to take any thing for payment, yet
were they not thought sufficient, without some further stre^gthning: whereupon
(as it seems) sundry factions and slanderous devises, were cast abroad by M.
Darrel and his friends, to discredit the boy, and all that the he had
confessed, by surmising, and thereupon constantly affirming, that Summers had
been induced there to speak against the truth, by indirect and unlawful
means.

Summers being at S. John's, there was a rumor cast about the town one evening,
that the Devil had carried him thence, and in his departure with him, had
dashed out his brains against a wall. This was of likelyhoode a simple devise
of M. Darrels grossest friends: but yet such as it was, it wrought for the
time. And thereof there are these depositions.

One evening, whilst Summers was at S. John's, Nich. Shep page 211.
two Shoemakers, vz. one Randall Triuette, and one Phillippes, having heard (as
they said) that the Devil carrying him away, had dashed out his brains
against a post, came running in great haste to know if it were true.

I hearing of John Bate of a report, that the Devil had taken away William
Summers, and dashed his brains against a post, Randall Trivet. pa. 311.
went down to S. John's, to see whether it were so or no.

Amongst many ways whereby men are corrupted, and induced to speak falsely,
allurements by fair promises, have not the least force: which being very, well
known to M. Darrell and his good friends, they thought it might carry some
good probabilities, and serve for a shift, to give it out: that Summers was so
wrought and drawn on to affirm, that he had dissembled. But how untruly
they have charged him herein, the depositions following will declare.

William Summers deposes, that he was not induced by any promises so to
confess, but that he did it willingly, Summers pa. 365.
as being weary of his former dissimulation, and thinking (says he) that I
could not use these wicked vices, that I used bofore, but it would be spied,
God put it into my mind to reveal the truth. Only he adds this, saving,
that when the Alderman, and M. Gregory came first to examine him, he desiring
that he might be pardoned for his former follyes, and then affirming that he
would reveal all unto them: they, the said Aldermen and M. Gregory, promised
to be a means for him to the town in that behalf. The men, who were chiefly
suspected to have dealt with Summers (as here it is supposed) were John Cooper,
and Nicholas Shepherd,: whom M. Darrell procured to be examined at
Nottingham, by his own Commissioners, touching that point: and thereunto they
have sworn as follows.

N. Shephea. fol. 17.
I never knew of any promises made to the boy, to confess that he had
counterfeyted: but I remember that M. Iackson promised, that if he would
declare the truth, he would be good unto him, and help him to a service in
London: And John Cooper thus: Io. Cooper. 19.
I do not know any that persuaded Summers to confess himself to be
dissembler.

page 343.
Richard Hunt, Anchor Iackson, and William Freeman, Aldermen of Nottingham, and
William Gregory Town-cleark: do affirm, that repayring to William Summers, at
S. John's, he made this suite unto them, vz. that they would be a means to
procure the towns favor toward him* so that he might not be punished for
any of his follyes past, and that he might be sent to London, out of that
Country, to avoid disgrace: and then he said he would disclose the secrets
of his supposed possession. Whereupon they promising him, that if they found
him to deal truly, they would be a means for him, as he desired, he showed
them all his tricks, together with the several ways, how he did act them:
as it is before set down in the first Chapter.

Again, that which said of the force of promises, what they are able to
work, may also be verifyed of threatninges: and therefore considering that (as
they say,) every thing eeketh. M. Darrell and his adherentes have labored to
impeach the aforesaid confession of Summers, M. Darrels Apolo.
by giving it out, that he was moved thereunto by terror, and threatninges. But
upon what slender grounds they have so done: it will partly appear by the
deposition of those, whom M. Darrell himself procured to be examined at
Nottingham: and by the Testimonies also of others.

John Couper says, that Summers, Io. Couper fol 16. and 17
(after his coming to S. John's) did pretend himself, thrice within a day or
two to have certain fittes. Whereupon the said Couper, putting at one time
sondrie wives out of the house, (at whose coming he the said Summers, did fall
into one of the said fittes,) and then giving him some words of correction;
vz. threatening to whip him, he the said Summers presently rose up.

Also Nicholas Shepherd confesses, that in one of the boys fittes at S.
John's, he threatened to have a pair of pincers to pinch him by the toes, if
he used those tricks: and in an other place also (as it is before specifyed,)
he says, that upon his said threatening words, Summers being acting certain
tricks, he the said Summers gave them over, and never used them afterward,
whilst he was at S. John's. By neither of these depositions it can be
collected, that they threatened the boy, to say he had dissembled, or that
thereby he was induced so to affirm. But by M. Darrels own rule, in that
Summers being in a fit, heard their said threatening speeches, and rising up,
had no more fittes, M. Hurt. M. Iackson. M, Freeman. M. Gregory pa. 345.
whilst he was in that place, it seems to be apparent that he was a
dissembler.

The said M. Hurt, M. Iackson, M. Freeman, and M Gregory, do further also
testify, that after William Summers had showed unto them his fittes, with the
manner of the doing of the^, he did acknowledge that all he had formerlie done,
when he was supposed that he was possessed, was dissembled, and done by himself
voluntarily, without the assistance of any Devil or spirit: which he knew to
be so, for that he was (as he said) in good and perfect memory, at the doing
of every thing: and constantly affirmed, that whatsoever he had then confessed
unto them, he had done it of his own free will, without compulsion any ways.

Moreover, for a surcharge unto the said promises and threatninges, it was
also given out by M. Darrell, or his adherents, that the said Summers, whilst
he was at S. John's, was compelled through sorcery and charms, used by one
Nicholas Air or some others, to say that he had dissembled: insomuch that (as
it seems) some were examined by M. Darrels means at Nottingham, upon that
point. But nothing was proved, the conceit proceeding from a shifting and
detracting humor.

Summers. page 365.
William Summers, when he heard of this report, writ thereof thus. Be it
known unto all men, etc. that I did confess my counterfeyting voluntarily,
without any witchcraft, sorcery, oyntementes, papistry, or comurations, or any
other unlawful means.

Io. Cooper fol 16.
John Cooper deposed says, that he never knew one Nicholas Air to have
access to the boy, whilst he was at S. John's, to his knowledge. Of all
likelihood, this Air was suspected by M. Darrell, to be either a Witch or a
Coniurer: and then if he were with the boy at all, it was sufficient for M.
Darrell to work upon, and to enforce the said effect of sorcery. But the
surmise of charming was pretty. One M. Gregory finding by Summers words, that
his legs were so ^ore, that he could not act his tricks, he the said M.
Gregory gave direction to the boys keepers, that they should anoint them with
some oil, whereby he might be the more nimble to show them. Now forsooth,
this oil was either charmed, or when the boy was anointed, some charms were
used: and so he said that he had counterfeyted.

Touching this grave point, there are these depositions. William Summers
answered, that his legs were so sore, Nich. Shepard. fol. 17.
he could not show his tricks, and then M. Gregory commanded, that some
ointment might he given him: which I did, and the boy anointed his knees. And
John Cooper: It is true that there was an ointment brought to Summers, by
Nicholas Shepherd, Fol. 16
appointed thereunto by M. Gregory, with the which Summers was anointed,
because he might be more nimble to show his tricks: But words of charm, I
heard not at the anointing of him But hereof to much: because M. Darrell (as
it seems) being ashamed of this ridiculous slander, has in his Apology,
where he has set down the rest, omitted this.

CHAP. V. Of M. Darrels ridiculous pretense, that Summers was induced by the
Devil in form of a black dog, and an Ass, to say he had dissembled.
^East there might be any defect ascribed unto the said promises, or
threatninges, or sorcery, or charms mentioned in the former chapter, as being
insufficient to draw Summers unto his said confession, the devil is brought in
by M. Darrell and his friends, as a chief Actor to that effect: who appearing
unto him forsooth, first in the likeness of a black dog, and then of an Ass,
persuaded him to affirm, that he had dissembled. The beginning of this shifte
may not be concealed.

William Summers having affirmed before the Commissioners deputed from York,
that he had not dissembled, was asked, John Brinsley. pa, 132.
why he had then said before, that he had dissembled. To whom (as the tale
goes) he made this answer: the black dog with abagge of gold: and being
able to go no further, fell down into an other fit. It had been well, if
he had made an end of his answer, before he so fell, page. 124.
that so the sense might have been perfect. But it forces not. For one George
Small deposed, has made it up: Who reporting his said answer, delivers
it thus. The boy offered twice or thrice to have answered, before he could
answer, his wind seeming to be stopped: but at the last said, that he had
seen a black Dog, which black Dog, had induced him to say, that he had
dissembled. The rest that were present, could hear nothing (it seems,) but
his said abrupt speech, vz, the black dog with the bag of gold: but this
fellow was of a quicker ear.

Summers being hereof examined, tells us this story. It had been a thing of
course with him, (as he says) in those his pretended fits, when Satan was
said to seek to repossesse him, to name a black Dog amongst other
similitudes, (wherein M. Darrell had affirmed, the devil was accustomed to seek
the repossessio^ of those, out of whom he had been cast,) which black dog he
feigned then to have allured him with gold and fair promises, that he might
again reenter. The remembrance of which his former instruction and practice,
caused him to name the said black dog with a bag of gold. Now for that he
had left his said speech imperfect, and also upon some other occasions, he the
said Summers being sent by the said commissioners, to one Edmond Garlandes
house: he the said Garland demanded of him, why he had affirmed whilst he was
at S. John's, that he had dissembled: seeing that he had now affirmed the
contrary before the said Commissioners. Whereunto Summers answering (as he
says) in his knauerie, told him: that being at S. John's, a thing did appear
unto him, in the likeness of a black Dog, and then of an Ass, which
persuaded him, partly by promises, and partly by threatenings, to say that he
had dissembled, and that if he would yield therein, he should do any thing
that he would. This tale of Summers was no sooner understood, but it was given
forth, that whereas there was a black Dog by hap in the chamber, whilst
Summers was acting his tricks before the said Commissioners: the said black
dog was out of question the Devil, that had willed the boy to say he had
dissembled, the dog belonging in deed to a Spurrier in Nottingham. Of this
idle conceit M. Brinsley had been a chief spreader, relying (as he says)
upon the reports of M. Ireton, and M. Leigh. Touching M. Leigh he reports
that he the said M. Leigh, seeing the Dog at the chamber door, did think the
dogs eyes did gloare like fire. But M. Ireton, and M. Leigh themselves being
deposed, do testify hereof as follows.

The black Dog, M. Leigh. page 266.
which was said to be in the place where the Commissioners sat, was a black
Spaniel, which since M. Hurt has showed to me (as I verily think) in the
market place.

A speech or conceit was raised (says M. Ireton) I know not how, that the
said black dog was a Devil: M. Ireton. 336.
which I think to be a mere toy, understanding that it was a Spurriers dog.

I saw a black rough Dog in the Chamber whilst the boy lay in his tricks:
which Dog was one Thomas Clerks, John Cooper. 202.
a Spurriar in Nottingham, and I do think in my conscience, that it was the
same, that was about William Summers there and none other.

Now M. Darrell building his Apology upon such lies Apology.
and fooleries, tells us this matter very gravely in this sort. Satan
visiblie appearing unto Summers (as his usual manner is to those he possesses)
sometimes promised him gold, and that he would be at hand, to do those things
for him, he had done, howsoever he would have him, if he would say he had
counterfeyted: at other times Satan also threatened to pull him in pieces, if
he would not say so. A man would think by these confident words, that M.
Darrell had been present, and a witness of the Devils said speeches: whereas if
he be well pressed, you shall find he has nothing but the premises to ground
upon: besides his great learning, whereby he affirms, like a cosening
impostor, what Satan's custom is in such cases.

CHAP. VI. How M. Darrell has falsely affirmed, that William Summers was induced
to say he had dissembled, for fear of hanging: whereas he falling into his
fittes before the Commissioners at Nottingham, (upon a former compact) the
fear of hanging was one of the chiefest causes, that he then affirmed, that
he had not dissembled.
IT should seem, that M. Darrell has a good vain in teaching: and that
Summers had a strong retentiue faculty in holding of that which he has
learned, in that he was so hardly drawn, as it is pretended, to confess that
he had dissembled. For besides that which hitherto has been reported, of the
said promises, threatenings, sorcerie, charmings, and the devil himself: there
is added a fixed inducement, vz. the fear of hanging: he being slaundred to
have bewitched one Stirlande to death. Whereof Master Darrell tells us:
Apology.
that undoubtedly, if he had stood to the truth, and never acknowledged any
counterfeyting, he had been arraigned and sore laid at for his life. Now the
proverb is, life is sweet, and who almost will not make a lie for the saving
of it. Assuredly, this fellow through his acquaintance with Satan, (as it
should seem) is grown to extraordinary and presumptuous boldness: not
shaming to say any thing that may serve his turn.

For the clearing therefore of this untruth: Summers before has deposed, that
one cause why, about the foureteenth day of January 1597. he fell again to
those fittes, (whereupon Master Darrel) affirmed that he was repossessed) was
this, vz. The fear of such danger, M. Crouen. fol. 15.
as he otherwise might have fallen into, by reason of the said accusation,
concerning his bewitching of Stirland to death. And this deposition of Summers,
is strengthened with that which M. Crauen has hereof deposed to this purpose,
saying: that one of the reasons which moved him to think, that Summers
dissembled, was: because that after his release, vz. from acting of such fittes
as he showed, when the Devil was pretended to reenter into him, at the time
of his detecting of witches, he never had any fit, for ought he knew, till
he was bound over to the Assizes for a witch.

Besides, after that Summers upon that occasion, and some others, fell to his
old tricks, he continued in them about six weeks, and did not make his
dissimulation publicly known, for all that time, and till his coming to
Saint John's.

So as it is apparent, that Summers for fear of hanging, fell again to his
former by ace of dissimulation: knowing, that thereby he should be sure to be
defended and vpheld by M. Darrell and his friends, so far forth as they were
able themselves, or by any other means that they could procure on his behalf.
It was therefore too much presumption in M. Darrell to tell us: that he was
drawn to say he had dissembled, for fear of hanging. But what, if it was the
fear of hanging, that caused him not only to fall to his old course of
dissimulation, (as is before expressed,) but likewise (after he had confessed
for the space of a month together, that in all his former courses he had
dissembled) to deny the same before M. Darrels Commisioners, and to affirm
for his safety that he had not dissembled? Surely, it will so fall out, if
you can be content to have the same by degrees, made manifest unto you: as
first why Summers fell into his fits before the said Commissioners, and then why
having so begun, he was driven to affirm, that he had not dissembled.

Summers. page 31.
Concerning the first, Summers deposes thus. It being known, that I was to
appear before the Commissioners, Nicholas Shepherd, and others moved me, that
when I should come before them, I should show some of my tricks in such
manner, and form as I had before done them, and not rise again, until M.
Mayor should call me, that thereby (say they) it may plainly appear to the
Commissioners, that whatsoever thou have done before, was done of thine own
accord, and merely counterfeited. This counsel being agreeable to M. Mayors
desire (as I was informed) I did willingly yield unto it.

Job. Cooper. fol 21.
Summers fell into a fit at Nottingham, before the Commissioners from the Lord
Archbishop of York, to the thinking of the beholders, that he was repossessed:
where in truth, that very fit was determined of, about seven days before his
coming before them, vz. that he should fall into a fit before them, and lie in
the same, Nich. Shepard. fol. 2.
until M. Mayor should call him: and accordingly M. Mayor was acquainted
herewith.

Summers told me, Nich. Shepard. fol 2
that he would fall into a fit before the Commissioners, and would rise again
at M. Mayors call, but at no man's else.

I well remember, VV. Freeman. page 377.
that about a week before my Lord of Yorks Commission was set on, John Cooper
or Nicholas Shepherd came to my house, and told me, that William Summers, when
he did appear before the Commissioners to be examined, he would fall down
into his fits, and lie still on the ground, until M. Mayor (being one of the
Commissioners) should bid him arise. And further the said Cooper, or Shepherd
said, that they would acquaint M. Mayor with Summers purpose, that he might call
upon him, and bid him rise, and so satisfy the company of his counterfeyting.

Cooper and Shepherd being the boys keepers at S. John's, Peter Clark, the
Mayor, page 377.
did acquaint me with a determination, that Summers had to fall into a fit,
before us that were Commissioners, and that I should have called him up from
forth the said fit: at which call he would arise, so to satisfy all men,
that it was but dissembled. Of which practice they acquainted me, at the least
a week before the Commission was set on.

Now for the second point, let Summers proceed: and the rather because that
which he says is otherwise deposed unto very fully. Upon the said agreement, I
appearing (says Summers) before the Commissioners, and after some speeches had
with me (by some of them) fell down, and played diverse of my tricks, as I was
accustomed to do in my pretended fits. There I continued tumbling and acting
my tricks for a long time, still expecting when M. Mayor would calm. Whilst I
was thus tumbling, two did prick me with pinnes: one in the hand, and an
other in the leg: which although I felt most sensibly, yet I endured it,
because I still waited, that M. Mayor should call me* but he forgetting so to
do, and I being no longer able to continue in that sort, I did rise up of my
self, as I was wont to do, in the end of other in my dissembled fits. When I
had thus ended these pranks, the Commissioners asked me, whether I had been
troubled with any fit, since I came into that place before them, or had feet
any hurt done unto me: and I answered no: and after affirmed upon other
speeches, that I had not dissembled. And being here demanded why he so
answered, he says thus.

Whilst I was in my pretended fit, I heard many reioycingly say, that now it
was most plain, that I was repossessed, and utter very sharp words against
those, who had given it out, that I was but a dissembler. Besides, I began to
suspect, that either Master Majors opinion ws altered, who was fully persuaded
before (as I thought) that I had altogether dissembled: or else that he durst
not speak his mind therein, and call me, seeing the rest of the Commissioners,
and many others so confident in deed, that I was repossessed. Furthermore, I
also then feared, least Master Markehams, and one Jacques words, with sundry
others, would prove true: who the same morning and ouernight had told me, that
if I were found to be a dissembler, I must be hanged: Whereas (quoth Jacques)
if it appear that thou art not a counterfeite, there can no law nor Judge hurt
thee. In these respects I thought it the safest way for my self, to yield for
that time to their humors, and to answer as before is expressed, that I had
not dissembled.

Nich. She. page 210.
Now, for the better justification of this which Summers has deposed: Nicholas
Shepherd says thus. I went to the Mayor, and desired him, to bid the boy rise
out of his fittes, saying, that thereupon the boy would rise. But Master Mayor,
being (as I think) terrified, by reason of the hard speeches of the Justices,
given out against those that had said the boy was a dissembler, and by the
general clamor and speech of all that were in the place, being addicted to
Master Darrell and his dealinges he the said Mayor would not call upon him.
And the then Mayor himself, M. Clarke page 377.
I must needs confess, that I omitted to call upon Summers, and thereby the
people grow to confirm their opinions, of the truth of his possession,

And touching that part of Summers deposition, Nich. Shep^pard. page 210.
concerning M. Markeham, and one Jacques threatening words unto him, they are
justified in this sort: The evening before William Summers appeared before the
Commissioners, Sir John Byron, and M. Robert Markeham (two of the said
Commissioners) as they were riding homewardes by S. John's, called for the boy:
who being brought unto them by me, Sir John Byron said unto him: art thou the
boy, that do thus disquiet the Country? And the boy answered, yea: Then
(quoth Master Markham) if it be proved, that thou art a counterfeit, thou
deseruest to be hanged. The next morning also, a little before the boy was
sent for to come to the Commissioners, one Jacques, a servant of Master John
Stanhopes (an other of the said Commissioners) came to William Summers, and
said unto him, in the hearing of me, and of John Cooper, that if he were proved
a counterfeite, he must be hanged.

Master Markham said to William Summers, Io. Cooper page 296.
the night before he was to appear before the Commissioners, that if he were
found to be a dissembler, he must be hanged: whereby I perceived the boy to be
much terrifyed, in so much as he fell a weeping.

Also one Jacques told the boy in my hearing, the morning before he was sent
for to the Commissioners, that if he did counterfeite, he would be hanged: and
perseuered so a long time in threatening sort unto the boy: and afterward
added, that if he were in case, as he was before, then he was innocent, and so
no law nor Judge could take hold on him, or condemn him. Diverse others, at
the least half an hundredth the same morning before he went to the said
Commissioners, used the like words of terror to the boy.

By these depositions, if the humor then regnant in M. Darrels zealous
adherents, so much addicted in outward show to set out the glory of God, do
not somewhat appear, the peruser of them may out of doubt be deemed partial.
This was threatening and terrifying in deed, able to have shaken the constancy
of a stronger man peradventure then Summers was, the time and the persons
considered, that dealt so with him. It had been good for M. Darrell, if he had
omitted in his Apology this calumniation, seeing that thereby he is fallen
himself into the same snare, which he had laid for others.

CHAP. VII. How Summers was persuaded by threatenings, and promises, to have
continued his dissimulation, after he had been before the Commissioners at
Nottingham, until M. Darrell might again dispossess him.
WIlliam Summers, having confessed before the Commissioners at Nottingham, that
he did not dissemble, he was sent by their authority (upon the desire of
Master Darrell and his friends) to one Garlands house. Of his being there, and
of the course then held with him, he deposes in this sort. Some. page 32.
When I came to Garlands house, there was great concourse again unto me, and
diverse persuasions were used, that I should never say again, that I had
dissembled. Also Mistres Aldridge, and (as I think) M. Aldridge himself said
unto me, that now it was apparent unto all the Commissioners, that I was
repossessed and that if ever hereafter I should affirm, that I had disse^bled:
M. Mayor, and the rest of the Commisioners were certainly determined to hang
me, and that they had a commission from the Queen so to do. She therefore
with the rest encouraged me to continue in the course that I had again newly
begun, and promised me, that the next friday after the Judges were gone
(whose coming was not then far of) there should be an other fast, and that
M. Darrell would then dispossess me again. They also said, that there should
be the same day a collection for me, and that then I should, being
dispossessed, be placed for half a year with M. Bolton Chaplain to Sir John
Byron, and afterward wait upon one of the said knights grand children.

These persuasions added to the reasons that caused Summers to say, he had
dissembled before the commissioners, moved him, as he confesses, to continue
his old practices, for the space of about ten days: until the Mayor of
Notingham sent for him thence by the direction of the Lord chief Justice of the
common Plees. And then he confessed before the said Mayor, (the last day of
March, 1598. Pet. Cleark. Rich. Hurt, William Freeman. page. 369.
) Richard Hurt and William Freeman, Justices of the Peace, the reasons that
moved him to tell the Commissioners, that he had not dissembled, and to
continue his fittes at Garlandes house, to the effect in every point, as is
before expressed. Within two or three days after, the judges coming to
Nottingham, he the said Summers, being sent for before the L. Anderson,
confessed at large, how he had dissembled: and there showing his tricks before
his Lordship, and diverse others, in some extraordinary sort, to those that
had not seen him before: he presently started up, upon his Lordships bidding
of him to arise, and showed himself to be as well, as he was before. Since
which time (says Summers,) I have been very well, I thank God,
notwithstanding, that M. Darrell did then, W. Summers. page 34.
and has since diverse times affirmed, that I remain still repossessed with
viii devils, and that I am likewise possessed in soul. And I trust that God
will hereafter give me grace, from ever consenting again to any such wicked
courses: hoping that God will grant both M. Darrell and me true repentance,
for our abusing of the world so notoriously, with such, and so many our
ungodly practices.

That William Summers did act his fittes before the Lord Anderson, and
confessed as it is above mentioned, to the Mayor of Nottingham, and others,
after he was taken from Garlandes house, M. Darrel ad art. 45 page 21.
it will not be denied. But for the rest, concerning a pretended fast for
Summers second dispossession, that M. Darrel makes altogether strange, as
though he had never mentioned any such matter: and Mrs. Aldridge quallifyeth
her speeches in some part, as well as she can. Howbeit there are depositions
which do argue, that to be true which Summers has herein deposed.

M Adridge pa. 96.
I heard M. Darrell affirm (says M. Aldridge) that there should be a new
fast after the Assizes, for the dispossessing again of Summers.

When William Summers was first brought unto my house, I heard speeches
delivered unto him, to this effect, vz. that now he having auowed the truth,
Ed. Garland pa. 117
in saying that he was no dissembler, he should stand steadfast unto that
truth: that there should within a short time, an other fast be appointed in S.
Mary's: when God were so pleased, he should be again dispossessed, and that
afterward means should be made to M. Bolton, that he might be with him. Fol
4.
Again, I heard Mrs. Aldridge say to the boy, when he was at my house, sent the
thereby the Commissioners, that if he would stick to the truth, she made no
doubt but to place him with M. Bolton. Mrs. Aldrid. fol. 9.
And Mrs. Aldridge her self: I willed the boy to stick to the truth, not
doubting to make means by some friends, to place him in service with M.
Bolton, Sir John Byrons Chapleaine, there to wait upon one of Sir John's
Grandchildren.

M Aldridge page 96.
M. Aldridge also confesses, that upon Summers coming from the Commissioners,
or very shortly after: he said unto him: that now it was apparent to the
Commissioners, and to the Mayor himself, that he had not before dissembled,
and that now if he should hereafter (as before he had done) affirm, that he
had dissembled, he deserved to be punished very sharply.

If the Proverb be true, that a man may see day at a little hole, what may
he then do at a great breach? If the Assizes had not been so near, M.
Darrell (it seems) would have quitte his hands of Summers, as being very
weary of that matter. He was therefore (as it seems) very earnest, both by
himself and his friends, to have had the boy continued his dissimulation a
little longer: then he might have bin rid of him with some show of honesty. But
it would not be: such iugling will out: and not be concealed.

CHAP. VIII. Of the depositions taken in M. Darrells behalf at Nottingham, and
how upon the reexamination of his own witnesses, it falls out: that the
bodily actions of Summers in his fitts, were not extraordinary, as they have
been misreported.
WE are now come to M. Darrels last shifte, wherein both he and his fellows
do so greatly triumph: which is, the authority of certain depositions, taken
before the said Commissioners, on his behalf, at Nottingham. Summers, who knew
his own doings best, said he had dissembled, and M. Darrell affirmed that
he had not dissembled. The wiser sort believed Summers, such as had some good
experience of the course held betwixt him and Darrell: others (not to be
impeached, so much for their want of wisdom, as for their blinding the eye
thereof, by their preposterous affections, they held with M. Darrell. The
issue was, it must be tried by a Commission, whether Summers said truly, in
affirming that he had dissembled. The Commission was procured, and expedited
the xx. of March 1597, by these Commissioners, (if the printed Narration said
truly.) John Thorold Esquier, high Sheriff, Sir John Byron knight, John
Stanhope, Robert Markeham, Richard Perkins Esquiers: Peter Clarke Mayor of
Nottingham, Miles Leigh Official, John Ireton, John Brown, Robert Euington,
and Thomas Bolton, Ministers and Preachers: men for their sufficiency, it is
true, very meet to have dealt in a far greater matter. The Gentlemen are
very well known, to be very fit Governors, and are a great stay in those
parts of the country where they dwell. If the examination of a matter of high
treason had been committed unto them, or any other of a lower degree,
concerning the good and peace of their Country, they had been within the
compass of their own element, and would no doubt with all sufficiency have
discharged themselves therein. But the hypocritical sleights of false
seducers, in matters that concern religion, they are of an other nature, or
else it had been impossible for Popery to have so far prevailed: the chief
points thereof having been vphelde by lies, and feigned miracles.

The Commissioners that were Cleargie-men, their oversight was the greater,
because they could not be ignorant, (at the least one or two of them) how the
Church has been abused from time to time, for above these 800. years, by
false Impostors, and iugling Exorcists, who for their own glory, profit, and
other preposterous ends, have taken upon them to cast out devils. Howbeit
something also may be said to extenuate their oversight, in that none of the
Ministers had ever seen Summers before, in any of his fittes, nor were
acquainted with such courses as were held on from time to time, betwixt
Darrell and the boy. Besides, they had (as it seems) a good opinion of M.
Darrell, and could not easily be led to suspect more then they saw. And for
them altogether: who almost being strangers to that cause, would not have
conceived as they did. They found M. Darrell ready furnished with many
abettors: but no man showed his face on Summers behalf. M. Darrell, (as the
Narrator reports) had taken the names of threescore persons, who were ready
to have been deposed, touching the extraordinary handling of Summers: but no
one witness was sought out to be deposed for Summers. Of the said threescore,
seauenteen were examined: which might very well have seemed to have been
sufficient: considering that the boy did also concur with them, in saying,
that he had not dissembled, as it has been before declared.

And concerning also the witnesses themselves, much might be said for their
excuse. They, having conceived well of M. Darrell, could not easily suspect any
treachery in him. And to say the truth, those grounds presupposed to be true,
(which M. Darrell had taught them,) vz. that whatsoever he did or spoke in his
fittes, it was not Summers, but the devil that did it and spoke it: it may
rather be maruayled, that they deposed no more, then blamed that they deposed
so much. For who seeing a man lie, in his conceit, as senseless as a block,
would not admire the very shaking of his toe: especially being persuaded, that
the Devil made the motion. But when he should see him leap and friske, move
the calves of his legs, the flesh of his thighs, thrust out his belly, and
make sundry strange motions with his jaws, eyes and tongue: it could not be
chosen, but it must seem terrible. Add hereunto the weakness of men's nature,
which is subject to be terrifyed with Deuilles, and wicked spirits, especially
when they suppose the said spirits to be present, and in action before their
eyes.

M. Aldridge pa. 87.
M. Aldridge being asked, why heretofore he had affirmed, that he perceived,
whilst Summers was acting his tricks, the forms as it were of kitlings, under
the Couerlette that lay upon him, the said Couerlette being betwixt his eyes
and them, rather then the forms of whelps, of Connyes, of Rats: etc. answers,
I think my so affirming, did proceed of this, etc. because I had heard
before, that certain Witches had spirits in forms of Kitlinges, and those
forms then came to my mind. And again, I do very well know, that a man's
senses may be deceived. Besides, I was then very greatly afraid, which is a
great means to deceive a man's senses: being a mighty passion, that will
procure many imaginations, and cause a man to think that which is but little,
to be great, that which stands, to move, and that to be, which is not. Whereby
I confess (my great fear considered) that I might be deceived, in affirming
many things, concerning the particularities of the said Summers fittes: and I
verily think it may be true, that Summers affirms, of making certain
motions with his fingers under the said Couerlette, and of his knocking
against the Beddestocke, whilst I was praying by his bedside. Add hereunto,
that the said witnesses were fully persuaded, that Summers had been possessed,
dispossessed, and was repossessed: and that they conceived some good effects
wrought in Nottingham, by that which they had heard so often, both in their
Pulpittes, and else where, concerning a power left to the Church, to cast out
Devils.

There have been many lewd practices of late years in England, thrust
forward by sundry traiterous Exorcistes, under the pretense of casting out
Deuilles: numbers of that generation, upon secret intelligence flocking unto
them. Whereof, if any inquiry should be made, and examinations taken, you may
be sure, you should have most strange things deposed by that crew, although
all that was done, was feyned and counterfeyted. To let men therefore in such
cases, and being so affected, run on forwards with their own tales, no
marvel if they seem very admirable. But one thing concerning our witnesses
in hand, is worthy of consideration: that the most of those that were
examined, were but simple persons, and such as had not been past twice or
thrice with the boy, in all the time of his trouble. Some (having threescore
ready) would have produced his chief witnesses first, but peradventure it was
thought good policy to lay the burden upon the simpler sort.

These points thus premised, concerning the expediting of the said
Commission: you are now further to be advertised, that sundry of the said
witnesses being reexamined by her Majesty's authority, in causes
ecclesiastical, from the L. Archbishop of Canterbury, and others directed:
have greatly qualifyed their former depositions, by diverse and sundry
interpretations of their meaning, and as though some parts of their depositions
had been mistaken. Inasmuch as now, the bodily actions of Summers in his fits,
which were supposed to have been extraordinary, do appear to have been but
ordinary, or at the least, such as a knauish expert boy might easily
counterfeyte, in such a company as he had about him: and thereby also, that
which Summers has deposed of the said supposed extraordinary motions, is in
effect fully justified: Summers pa* 36.
concerning the extraordinary motions of my body (as they were termed,) many
things were reported of me, which I never did: and those things which I did
indeed, were made much more strange then they were: I having done nothing in
any of my fittes, which an other man by practice may not easily do, without
the Devils help. The said reexaminations are as follows.

Whereas Thomas Hayes deposes, before the L. Archbishop of Yorkes
Commissioners at Nottingham: Th Hayes, fol. 1.
that he saw some thing run out of William Summers legs into the other, and
thence forthwith into his belly, swelling the same: insomuch that the same was
much bowned upward: and when the same departed thence, he saw it plainly in
his throat, in his tongue, and in his cheek, near to his ear root, to the
quantity of the yolke of an egg, which he taking between his fingers, found
the same to be in softnes like the yoalke of an egg. Being reexamined, he
says thus. I saw a swelling in his cheek, Th. Hayes, fol. 317
to the quantity of a yoalke of an egg, and in his throat, of the same
quantity: further then his throat and his face, I could not, nor did see it:
(William Summers lying in his clothes) but I saw a stirring run down his
breast, and into his legs, without any rising, or quantity, that I could
discern, saving in his belly, the boy at that time lying on his back, somewhat
bended.

This swelling and running of some thing in Summers body, is one of the chiefest
supernatural actions or passions, (for the Apology it seems knew not
whether to call them,) that M. Darrell and the Narrator do insiste upon, for
the proof that Summers was possessed. But if they were no other, then M. Hayes,
upon his last examination, has deposed: there was no great strangenes in
them. It is supposed that M. Darrell will be very angry, to have these
supernatural runninges so extenuated: He himself having labored so much to
have them admired. But he must be content, for it is very agreeable to his
former success, when he would have made them strange and marvelous. M.
Crauen. fol. 14.
Hereof consider what M. Crauen has deposed. When the Devil was said
sensibly to move within Summers body: first in one leg, and then in an
other, I could perceive the leg (says he) to shake and move, but nothing in
the leg, till Master Darrell catching hold of the boys thigh, affirmed that
he had it under his hand, and called me and M. Aldred to feel it likewise.
But Summers, being unwilling that we should so do, turned himself violently
upon his belly, till by force we drew him back, and then we found nothing,
but his gloves, or some such things as he had in his pocket. If M. Darrell do
not here say, that the Devil skipped out of the boys thigh into his pocket,
and turned himself into a pair of gloves: the Devil may rather be thought
to have run up and down in his own cosening pate, then in the boys body.

Of these swellings and runnings, Summers, VV. Summers page 36.
who should know them best, has thus deposed. Whereas (says he) it has
been reported, that I had diverse swellings, proceeding from my legs to other
parts of my body, contrary to all course of humors, or wind: this I say, that
of mine own knowledge, and in mine own hearing, very many false reports have
been made thereof: some affirming, that they saw a thing run in my body of
the bigness of a mouse, some of a Ratte, some of a man's fist, and that
sometimes those who were present, would affirm as much, of one and the same
thing at one time, differing in their opinions, concerning that which they said
they did then see. Besides, he likewise sets down, how he did make the
said motions that seemed to run in his body, in these words: I did move
first the calfe of my leg, then my knee-bone, which motion of the knee, will
likewise make a motion or rising in the thigh. Also by drawing and stopping of
my mind, my belly would stir and show a kind of swelling. The bunch (as
they termed it) about my chest, was by the thrusting out of my breast.
Likewise my secret swallowing did make the end of my windepipe to move, and to
show greater then usually it is: Again, by moving of my jaws, one bunch was
easily made in the side, my cheek near mine ear: and about the middle of my
cheek, with the end of my tongue thrust against it. These motions by practice
I would make very fast, one after another: so as there might easily seem to
be running in my body of some thing, from place to place: especially when he
was thought at those times to be as senseless, and for any motions of his own
to lie as a block.

Again, Henry Nussey deposed before the said Commissioners says: that he saw
William Summers with his mouth wide open, Hen. Nussey fol. 8
speak certain words to John Wiggen in Latin, which he understood not, his
chappes nor teeth moving, when he did so speak: and that he saw these things
evidently, for he came very near to him to behold him.

Rich. Newton. fol. 4.
Also, Richard Newton deposed then of this point, after this sort says: I found
Summers in one of his fittes, and heard him speak plainly with a continued
speech, with his mouth wide open, his tongue drawn into his throat: so that
there could be seen nothing of it, but the roots in his throat, neither
lips nor chappes moving, and uttered this speech amongst other: Ego sum Rex,
M. Darrell Apology.
ego sum Deus. And hereupon Master Darrell tells us this tale, relying for
the most part of it, upon one singular witness. He spoke (says he) with his
mouth wide open: yea his tongue retorted into his throat, and namely these
words: Ego sum Deus, ego sum Rex: I am God, I am King. But let us see what
Nussey, and Newton, being reexamined, He. Nussey page 323.
do depose of these points: I heard Summers (says Nussey) speak some words,
which I understood not: but one John Wiggen told me, that Summers said in
Latin, I am God: But I am not able to say, that he spoke those words, or any
other, without the help of his tongue, neither am I able to affirm, that his
tongue was turned into his throat, at the time that he spoke the said words.
And with this reexamination of Nussey, agrees the deposition of John Wiggen,
in these words. Io. Wiggen page 321.
Summers, in one of his said fits said, Ego sum Deus, ego sum Rex: which words
(I think) he spoke with his own tongue, and with the moving of his lips,
and I never meant to be understood, that Summers spoke, having his mouth wide
open, and his tongue turned into his throat, nor did ever at any time hear or
see any such thing in him. And touching Richard Newton, he being reexamined
says thus: I heard Summers say these words: Ego sum Rex, ego sum Deus: and no
more words that I remember: which words, I think he could have said at any
other time, when he was well, as having been at Latin school. He spoke then
after the same manner and fashion, as he spoke them when he was well, with his
tongue and lips, and his own voice, saving that I think he counterfeyted
his voice a little. I had heard say before I came, of many extraordinary and
strange things to be done by Summers, as that he could speak with his mouth
wide open, without his tongue, or without moving his tongue, which I never see
him do, nor think he either did or could do: for to my remembrance, his
lips did then move, and his tongue both, when he said the words: Ego sum
Rex, ego sum Deus.

With these three depositions of Nussey, Wiggen, and Newton, as M. Darrels
feined wonder is by them detected, so is Summers confession in that behalf
fully ratified. Concerning (says he) the report of my extraordinary speaking,
Summers. page 38.
with my mouth wide open, and my tongue drawn into my throat, neither moving
my lips, jaws or tongue: I say, that the most of these reports are utterly
untrue. But I confess, that I did diverse times change my voice, speaking
sometimes hollowly, and sometimes more shrilly: and likewise that I have spoken
many words, my mouth being open, as any other man may do, and also when my
lips seemed (in a manner) to be shut. But I never spoke any word, when my
tongue was thrust into my throat: only I confess that when sometimes diverse
would look into my mouth, I did often suddenly convey my tongue backward, as
it were, into my throat. Many are ashamed, I believe, of these their fond
reports, and I hope, that in time they will vanish.

Richard Me, fol. 13.
Furthermore, one Richard Me did depose before the said Commissioners, That
he had seen William Summers stand, and turn his face directly backward, not
moving his body, and that his eyes were as great as beasts eyes, and that his
tongue would be thrust out of his head, to the bigness of a Calves tongue.

The several parts of this deposition are pretermitted by Master Darrell, in
his Apology: saving that of turning his face backwardes, which he does
somewhat alter, terming it, the setting of his face against his back. But let
us see what the said Me has deposed, upon his reexamination. Whereas I have
been conceived, to say and swear, as is before expressed, Rich. Me page 325.
my meaning was, and is (says he) that he the said Summers turned his face a
good way toward his shoulder, and not otherwise: and likewise my meaning was,
and is, that his eyes were somewhat gogling out, but otherwise no more then
ordinary. And thirdly, my meaning was, and is, that by reason it was candle
light when I saw his tongue thrust out, and by reason of my conceit of the
strangeness of Summers troubles, before I saw him: his tongue being thrust out,
it seemed somewhat bigger, then if Summers had been well, I should have thought
it to have been.

Ione Pie. fol. 6.
Again, one Ione Pie, being deposed before the said Commissioners, affirms,
that William Summers in one of his fittes, upon the Saturday, that Master
Darrell came to Nottingham, used these words, with his mouth extraordinarily
wide, and strangely open, and without moving or stirring his tongue or lips,
in speaking any of these words: vz. I will use William Summers tongue and
members for three days: and that in an other fit the same day, she saw his
body doubled, his head between his legs. But being reexamined, she says thus:
Ione Pie. fol. 329.
I heard W. Summers say in the voice, he was wont to speak, his mouth not being
wide open, but with his lips moving as at other times, as I then marked and
saw, these words. I will use William Summers tongue for three days: but I saw
not his head between his legs, neither at that time, nor at any time after.

Lastly, W. Hunt: fol. 15.
William Hunt deposed before the said Commissioners: that he heard a voice
proceed from William Summers, lying in one of his fits, his lips being close
shut, and neither moving his lips or jaws, to his understanding, and that he
continued so speaking, to the space of a quarter of an hour. This deposition,
though it be but singular, yet M. Darrell has thrust it into his Aplogie, but
with some falsehood, saying: that he did speak distinctly, with a continued
speech for a quarter of an hour, his mouth being shut close. I heard a voice
proceed from William Summers (says Hunt): he spoke distinctly with a
continued speech (says Darrell.) But let us hear Hunt being examined. Whereas
I have been conceived (says he) to report and affirm, VV. Hunt. page 333.
that William Summers did continue speaking by the space of a quarter of an
hour, having his lips close shut, and neither moving his lips, nor his
jaws: I now say, that many times the said Summers would mumble some secret
words alone, and not seem to open his mouth wide: but when he spoke many
words together, he opened his mouth, and stirred his lips, as any other man
does. And when he seemed to mumble any words as is aforesaid, I could not well
mark, whether he stirred his lips, and opened his mouth, as at other times, by
reason the said Summers did so turn and writhe his face, as I could not well
see.

These were the chief points, which seemed most strange in the said
depositions, taken at Nottingham: whereupon it was thought good to have the
said witnesses examined. And how they qualify their former words, you see it
apparent: neither is it to be doubted, but that if all other reports, which
have been made touching Summers fittes, were thoroughly looked into, and the
authors of them discreetly examined, now that the heat of their affections is
somewhat cooled, the issue thereof would sort and agree, with the second
cogitations of these their fellows.

The end of the Third Book.
The Fourth Book.
In this fourth Book it will appear, how M. Darrell made all things strange
that Summers did: How loath he was that any man should make trial, whether he had
any sense in his fits: and how he shifted to excuse the boy, when by diverse
circumstances it was supposed he dissembled. Besides, it is herein directly
proved, contrary to M. Darrels grounds and assertions: that Summers in his fits
had his senses and understanding: that the casting of himself into the fire:
the motions and knocking in his bed: his pretended knowledge: his supposed
great strength, and his skill in diverse languages, were no ways
extraordinary: Briefly, that there was no impossibility at all in the boys
fits, and that as he was accounted a dissembler, before M. Darrelles coming to
Nottingham, so was he still reputed by diverse, all the while that Summers and he
were practicing together at Nottingham, notwithstanding that M. Darrell could
either do, say, or preach to the contrary.

CHAP. I. How Master Darrell labored from time to time, to make those things
that Summers did, (and were but very toys) to be thought both strange and
extraordinary.
THings that be strange, do cause men to wonder. If a man go to Rome, and be
desirous of novelties, he shall find sundry Priests that will feed his humor.
M. Attilius Serranus.
They will show him Christ's napkin, S. Inkes head, S. Andrews arm, S. Blases
wezand, a piece of S. Christophers arm, Saint Peter's fingers, the pincers
wherewith diverse Martirs were pinched, a piece of the earth where Christ
appeared to Marie Magdalen, Saint Annes thumb, Saint Dominckes stoale, a piece
of Saint Paul's staff, that he walked with, Saint Peter's tooth, the Table
whereat Christ last supped, some of the fragments of the five Barley loves
mentioned in the Gospel, a piece of the chain that Saint John was bound
with: Moses rod: Aarons rod, some of the shewe-breade, the towell
wherewith Christ wiped his Apostles feet: part of the reed that Christ was
struck with at Pilates house, the ashes of Saint John Baptist, the vessel
into the which blood and water flowed out of Christ's side: many cloutes died
with the blood of Martirs: a stone of Christ's Sepulcher: a stone or piece of
earth of Mount Caluarie: a stone or piece of earth from the place where Christ
ascended into heaven: the sponge wherein they gave Christ Vinegar and gall: the
cribbe that Christ was borne in: the thorns of the Crown that Christ was
crowned with: our Ladies hair: the Chinne of Saint John Baptistes father: some
of Mary Magdalens hair: a piece of the fat of Saint Laurence: a piece of the
arm, and some of the brains of Saint Thomas of Canterbury, with many such
trinkettes.

And they will vow and protest with great devotion, that these are no fictions,
nor feigned relics: but the very things themselves whose names they bear,
whereby many credulous and superstitious people are drawn to admire them. It
is the manner of the Mountebankes in Italy, resembled by some of our Pedlers,
when they open their packes, to set out their ware with many great words. Unto
which kind of people, and seducing Mirabilistes, Master Darrell in his
practices with Summers, may well be resembled. When the boy spoke, he told
the people it was the devil that used his voice: when he did any thing in his
fittes, he said that it was the Devil that did it. If he stirred his hands
or any part of his body as he lay in bed, he affirmed the Devil to be in
bed with him. The moving of the boys fingers under a Couerlette, he made to
be Deuilles, in forms of Whelps or Kitlinges: when he strugled, he
pretended, that for strength he was almost an other Goliath. If he spoke any
thing, whereof those that were present understood not the reason how he knew
it: he was straight become a kind of Prophet, and to have supernatural
knowledge. Two or three words of Latin, which he had learned at the school,
was sufficient to give it out, that in his fittes, he spoke Greek, Hebrew, and
Latin. Briefly, all that the boy did in his pretended fittes, M. Darrell would
needs have to pass, and exceed the natural power of any man: and so must
be done of necessity by the Devil. Whilst he was thus ietting up and
down the place where Summers was playing his prankes, and setting out the boys
actions, as his chief Wares, with such strange words and qualities, a man may
well remember the said Romish Priests in extolling their feyned Relics, and
the said Mountebankes, and Pedlers, in lying and cogging, to make the best of
their packes.

The particulers before mentioned, have been partly proved already, and it
will appear to be true more plainly hereafter: and touching some others,
there are these depositions following. Rob. Coop. pa. 98.
M. Darrell told those that were present, Summers being in a fit, that the
Boys tongue was drawn into his throat, quite out of his mouth, and taking
the Candle in his hands, would needs have the company to look into his
mouth, (the boy lying with his mouth open) and then said: see you not that it
is so? what reason can be given of this? It passes nature to do any such
thing: with Cooper herein, Edm. Garland pa. 301 M. Hallam, fol. 7.
concurreth Edmond Garland.

Upon the Sunday at night, says M. Hallam, M. Darrell said (the boy lying in
his fit,) behold his face is it just behind him, which is most strange: but
I saw not the same strangenes.

Rob. Coop. pa. 291.
M. Darrell told the people present at Porters house, on the Saturday at night,
when he came to Nottingham, that those things that the boy did, passed the
power and skill of any man to do. With this deposition M. Parre does fully
agree in effect, M, Par, 264
word for word.

Concerning the ridiculous gestures mentioned before, that were pretended to
signify the sins of Nottingham: M. Darrell himself has told us in his
history, that Summers did them in that lively manner, that he thinks, that
the like dumb description of sins, cannot be made, by any human skill or
power. It has also before been observed, how he willed the boy to utter some
dark speeches, whereby the people might wonder at him: especially, when they
heard his the said Darrels profound exposition of them.

Summers in one of his pretended fittes, did take upon him, to expound the
Articles of the Creed, which (he says) he was in some sort enabled to do,
by reason that almost every Minister, that came unto him, had in their speeches
with him, interpreted them diverse times unto him. Toward the end of the which
his discourse, M. Darrell came in: who being informed thereof, and also of some
errors, which had escaped therein, he made the matter very wonderful: first
observe what is deposed, and then what M. Darrell says.

Th Clearke pa 31^,
Coming one evening to Coopers house, Summers fell into a fit, (as they called
it) of squeaking, and scritching: and in his fiitte he began to repeat the
Articles of the Creed, and to tell the meaning of every Article orderly. The
which his exposition, I then thought, and do now think, to have been made by
Summers himself, by the assistance of God, and not by the operation of the
Devil.

Summers did expound the Creed at my house, Rob. Coop. pa. 2^2.
by the space almost of an hour, Whereupon, M. Darrel then said to those that
were present: that heretofore the boy had noted unto them, the sins that
reigned in Nottingham, and that now they should hear him deliver unto him, the
grounds of their faith, every Christian duty, and other godly rules, whereby
they might learn to guide their ways: and therefore willed them to hearken
unto his sayings, and to practice the same. M. Darrel pa, 223,
But now M. Darrell would be heard. Summers (says he) having made a every
glorious interpretation of the Creed, I came in, even as he made an end: and
being informed thereof, and that some of the simple people were so ravished by
the said interpretation, as they supposed it to be done by the Ministry of a
good Angel: notwithstanding, some others told me of some errors that had
escaped him: I answered them, that undoubtedly, the said glorious
interpretation, had been made by an evil spirit, transforming himself into
an Angel of light: adding, that thereof they might be assured, by his mingling
of some errors amongst many truths. And again, in his Apology, speaking of
Summers supernatural knowledge forsooth, he writes thus: M. Darrell Apo, pa, 13
From hence it was, that diuine-like he continued his speech, in expounding the
Creed for an hour together.

M. Darrell was not (as you have heard) at this exposition, and the
commendation it had, did proceed from the simple people: and yet here he
says, it was made diuine-like, and terms it a very glorious
interpretation. But his reason why he ascribes the same unto an evil spirit
is very strange, and peradventure may touch himself as nearely as Summers. For
if amongst many truths by him preached, the falling upon some errors, be an
argument, that it was the Devil that preached in him, the most of his sermons
at Nottingham, touching the possession, dispossession, and repossession of
Summers, will happily be censured in Nottingham, to have proceeded from the
Devil.

But amongst all the rest of Summers actions, which M. Darrell ascribed to the
devil, there is one other that may not be pretermitted: which argues, that he
thought himself to have won such credit, as he might say any thing, were
it never so absurd, without suspicion of falsehoode or iugling. At some such
times, as Summers being in his fittes, called for drink, M. Darrell would
suffer him to have none, affirming that it was not Summers, but the devil that
called for it. This M. Darrell denies, but it is deposed in sort, M Darrell
ad art, 3, page 223 Edm. Garland pa. 301
as follows.

William Summers asking for drink, (says Edmond Garland) M. Darrell caused it
to be denied him: saying it was not he, but the Devil that asked for it.

Rob. Coop. pa. 229.
Robert Cooper thus: I heard Thomas Porter say, that the boy being dry and
hungry in the morning, before his dispossession, they durst give him neither
meat, nor drink, till M. Darrell had been first acquainted with it. Again,
Summers being at Porters house in a fit, he said he was dry, but yet durst
not drink, Rob. Coop. pa. 292.
because M. Darrell had told him, that the devil would make him dry and
hungry, and did forbid him therefore, to take any drink or meat.

Few men but M. Darrell (it is supposed) would have suspected, when the boy was
dry, that the Devil called for drink. But it was his glory to show his skill
and acquaintance with Satan's practices, and still to pretend that the boys
actions were wonderful. Many that were present, when they saw Summers do his
tricks, supposing that it had been the Devil that did them, were greatly
afraid. But M. Darrell was so strong in faith (forsooth) as, seeming greatly
to disdain both Satan and all his doings, he checked him, commanded him,
and reuyled him at his pleasure: whereby the simpler sort of people, ascribed
great virtue and holiness unto him. If the resemblances before made of M.
Darrels practices in this point, to Pedlers, Mountebanks, and the
Reliquemongers of Rome be not so fit: then as you remember, Summers and
Darrell dissembling and colluding together, think upon the pretty feats,
betwixt Banks and his horse. Indeed it was one of the greatest wonders that
happened in those actions at Nottingham, that so many were seduced by such
palpable fooleries.

CHAP. II. How M. Darrell would not suffer (as near as he could) any to deal
with Summers in his fittes, to try whether he were senseles or dissembled.
IF M. Darrell in his practices with Summers, had been of a single heart, none
should have been more careful then he, to have searched and tried out his
dissimulation: considering the common opinion after a while, that he was but a
counterfyte. But he was so far from that, as he bent himself to the
contrary. For the chief ground that M. Darrell wrought upon, being the opinion
that Summers was senseles in his fittes: when some who suspected him for a
dissembler, thought good upon diverse occasions to make trial of it, by
touching of him, and asking of him many questions: M. Darrell withstoode them,
as much as he could, greatly blaming them for so doing, and alleging sundry
pretenses in that behalf. Herewith M. Darrell being charged, he confesses
part thereof, but much more is deposed.

M. Darrel ad art. 5 page 50,
Whilst Summers was in sondrie of his fittes, diverse attempting to try
whether he had any sense, and whether he had dissembled, and to that purpose,
pricking him with pinnes, and offering violence to some parts of his body, I
did reprove some, and hinder others for so dealing with him: affirming, that
though he could not then feel them, he would afterward feel the hurt of it,
and be sore.

And touching the asking of the boy any questions his shifte to hinder that,
was a pretense, that he held it unlawful so to do: because in demanding
any thing of him at that time, it was to ask the devil a question: wherein the
Gentleman disagreeeth from all his authors, that write of this art: who give
many precepts, when, how, and what they must charge Satan to tell them: as who
sent him: for what cause: what Saints prayer he feared most: what is his
name: what company he has with him, and such like. Besides, he also differs
from himself: for when he dealt with Katherine Wright, he had one or two
pretty Dialogues with the Devil. But it was expedient for him in this case, M.
Darrell, ad art. 22, pa. 42.
to dislike of that course. I confess (says he) that I charged the spirit
to tell his name, which I did then in ignorance, being drawn thereunto by
reading a little treatise that came to my hands, concerning the dispossessing
of one in the South Country. Furthermore, being charged to have asked Summers
sundry questions in his fittes, when he was grown a great man in the
understanding of these mysteries, he answers thus: M Darrell ad art, 3, pa,
215.
I never asked any one question of Summers, when I thought him to be in a
fit, supposing that if I should so have done, I should have asked questions
of the Devil, which I account a thing unlawful. But true it is, that Satan
oftentimes of purpose to deceive me, would suffer the boy lie quietly when he
was in his fit, whereby it came to pass, that I supposing his fit had
been done, asked him a question, whereunto Satan has answered. Here is fast
and loose, as the Egyptian lists.

Some that stood by (says William Summers, VV. Summers page 10
) endeavoring to make trial, whether I was void of sense or no, did call upon
me: with whom M. Darrell was angry, saying, that I heard no more then a
block. Others would have pinched me, but M. Darrell did prohibit them:
affirming that it would make me sore afterward. Within a while also, the same
night, vz. the 5. of November, an other asking me a question, I forgetting my
self did answer him: wherewith M. Darrell was discontented, and blamed the
party in so doing, saying, that it was not I, but the Devil that gave him
that answer.

Summers many times in his fittes, M. Crauen, pa, 258,
would talk merrily with the bystanders, and answer any man directly to any
question he would propound: Which thing M. Darrell himself has often
reprehended in the people saying, that the Devil took delight in such vain
prattle.

Summers falling to toys and laughing in his fittes, the fifth of November, M.
Darrell said in the end to the people, M. Hunt, Fol 18,
let him alone: for he is so full of knauerie, that there is no dealing with
him.

M. Darrell blamed such as asked Summers any questions, To. Cooper page 291.
saying, it was the Devil to whom they spoke, and who answered them: though
the boy did answer aptly and directly, to any questions that were propounded
unto him. Again, diverse would adjure the boy in his fittes, or the devil in
him, (as it was pretended) to tell them how he came into him, whom M. Darrell
would find fault with, saying, it was the devil, and not the boy to whom
they spoke.

George Richardson fol. 20.
I have asked some questions of Summers in his fittes: and M. Darrell has
answered, let him alone, for he neither hears, sees, nor knows any thing,
whilst he is in these fittes.

M. Darrell having told me that the devil was in bed with the boy, Geo,
Pendleton. pa, 109
and an other showing me where he was moving under the Couerlette, I catched
hold of him, (as it was supposed) with my left hand, and would have pulled the
clothes off with my other hand, saying, in the name of God, whatsoever it is,
I will see it: whereupon M. Darrell held the clothes down, not suffering me
to uncover him, and affirming, that the boy being in his bed, and in his
fittes, to uncover him, was as much as his life was worth.

M. Darrel, talking with the said Pendleton of the boys knowledge, Geor.
Pendleton, ibid.
by reason of the wicked spirit that was within him, he the said Pendleton,
affirming that he had lost something by the way as he came to Nottingham, would
needs know of the boy, what it was, that he had lost: nay quoth M. Darrell,
he cannot of himself answer any questions, but does speak only that which
the evil spirit does put in his mind to speak. This was a pretty evasion
upon the sudden: but Pendleton was no way satisfied with it. M. Darrell knew
very well, that the boy was not able to answer him: and therefore he used that
shifte, whereas if he had been indeed persuaded that the devil had been in
him, Pendleton, ibid,
he would no doubt have suffered him to have been put to his plunge, in
answering the said question. The thing that Pendleton had lost was his rapier.
Furthermore the said Pendleton, demanding of Summers diverse other questions,
and he answering none of them. What (qouth he) is the boy deaf? No ( said
Master Darrell) he is not deaf, but he cannot speak of himself in his
fittes, except the Devil do move him thereunto. Shift upon Shift.

It being objected to M. Darrell himself, that at one time he catching at that
which moved in Summers bed, and under the couerlet, said he had hold of the
wicked spirit: but would not do so much, as turn up the clothes to see what
he had in hand, that thereby both he himself, and others that were present
might have seen their errors: he the said Darrell does thus answer. At one
time, taking hold of that which seemed to move under the couerlet, M Darrell ad
art, 8, page 223.
(being about a foot from the mass of his body) I did feel the same stir
and move, as if it had been a living creature, but I did not turn up the
clothes, as thinking or regarding so to do. The fellow was near driven, or at
the least grown very dry in saying: that he thought not, nor regarded to
turn up the clothes. In an other place he says, that when they saw, M.
Darrell ad. art. 17. page 39.
as it were, a kitling, and sometimes three or four running up and down under
the couerlet, wherewith the boy was covered, as he lay upon his bed, they did
suddenly cast up the said couerlet, to see what was under it: but still the
supposed forms of kitlings were vanished away.

And is it then possible, that when he had grasped one of the said Kitlinges
in his hand, that he should neither think, nor regard to see and try what
he had hold of?

But of all the examples wherein Master Darrelles courage has appeared, there
remains one pertinent to the point in hand, wherein he showed himself a
man: regarding, or waighing the presence of five or six Deuilles no more, M.
Darrell. ad. art. 6, page, 223.
then if there had been but so many Butterflyes. I very well remember (says
he) that at one time whilst some were busily catching at the Devil or
spirits, M. Darrell ad art. 6, page, 223,
under the couerlet where Summers lay, and had so done for a good space, one
saying here he is, an other, there he is, and so catching at them (there being
five, six or seven spirits at that time there) I willed them to desist,
saying, they were but wicked spirits, that had taken upon them certain bodies.

They were but wicked spirits: a matter of nothing: M. Darrels familiar
acquaintances, and not to be feared. The truth was, that the boy was playing
the knave with his hands, elbowes, and knees, and other parts of his body
under the couerlet: which Master Darrell could not choose but know, and
therefore did what he could to prevent his detection.

CHAP. III. How M. Darrell endeavored to excuse Summers when he was taken
short, and did such toys, as did argue him sufficiently to be but a
counterfeit.
WHen M. Darrell could not always so prevail, but that many upon diverse
occasions would be dealing with the boy in his fittes: and thereuppon
perceived by their words, that they did collect by diverse circumstances, that
he had his senses, and so did dissemble: he the said Master Darrell was
charged by her Majesty's said Commissioners, M. Darrel ad art. 11. page 224.
to have labored by all the means he could with this excuse, and that
excuse, how he might withstand and prevent that conceit and opinion. Somewhat
to this purpose he himself confesses: but more is deposed. I have at sundry
times said, that Satan in his subtlety has done in the boy some slight and
trifling things, at diverse times, of purpose to deceive the beholders, and to
bear them in hand, that he did never greater things in him: thereby to induce
them to think, that he was a counterfeite.

Whilst I was in these practices (says Summers) diverse would snatch at the
spirit, Summers. page 21.
which they supposed to have been under the couerlet or clothes with me, and
did thereby sometimes catch me by the hand, sometimes by my foot, and
sometimes by my knee: which M. Darrell perceiving, and that some did thereby
imagine that it was but my knavery, he told them that out of doubt it was the
Devil that made those motions, and that he did sometimes put my hands or feet
into their hands that catched at them, of purpose thereby to hinder the glory
of God, which in this work he said, did manifestly appear. But when he was
present, he would not suffer (as near as he could) any to catch at the said
supposed spirits, nor to cast up the couerlet or clothes, as otherwise usually
they did, to have seen the Devil, as they pretended.

When Summers and M. Darrell had been deceived by the secret bringing of widow
Boot the pretended witch into the chamber, where Summers lay in one of his
fittes: whereby they not knowing thereof, Summers lay quiet, both at her coming
in, and at her going out: M. Darrell greatly misliking that practice when he
knew of it, and perceived that some thereby supposed the boy to dissemble, did
labor to persuade those that were present ( says Summers) that they should not
so think or suspect: affirming it to be the Devils practice, W. Summers page 23.
and that Satan would not of purpose vex me at those times as he had done
before, that so he might (as much as lay in him) rob God of his glory, and
blemish the great works which he did show in me.

When Summers fell to his fittes again after Christmas, Rob. Cooper. pa. 105.
I seeing him do and act certain foolish toys, was therewith discontented:
and told Master Darrell before diverse, that I verily thought the boy did
dissemble. And Master Darrell gave me this answer: that such things as he
did, were but the illusions of the Devil, assuring me, that he did not
dissemble, but was again repossessed. And again: Master Darrel would always
excuse the boy, To. Cooper page 299.
if he did any thing that might be thought to be counterfeit: saying, that it
was the Devil that did the same, thereby to blemish the glory of God.

M. Pare. fol. 5.
Being many times and often with the boy, I observed in him many foolish and
frivolous gestures: which gave me some spark of suspicion of his
dissimulation. For in all those fittes, Master Darrell would say: let him
alone, it is not he in deed, but the Devil that does it: and upon the like
occasions would further affirm, that the Devil endeavored to darken the work
of God.

M. Pare, ibi.
Again, I heard Master Aldred charge the boy, to take heed that he did not
dissemble: whereunto the boy answered, that he did not dissemble: for (says
he) I do not know of any strange things that you say I have done: and
thereupon Master Darrell said: let him alone, it is not he in deed, but the
Devil that does it. M. pare. 265
And again, Master Darrell did labor to persuade the people, and that in his
Sermons, that when the boy had done something that might argue him to be a
dissembler, it was but a practice of the Devil, thereby to blemish the glory
of God.

M. Aldred. fol. 6.
Master Darrell has said before the boy, to such as have been meddling with
him in his fits: let him alone, for it is not he, but the Devil, and that the
Devil would hinder the glory of God, by all the means he could.

M. Law: page, 262,
I telling Master Darrell diverse times ( says M. Low) that if the Devil were
in Summers, I wondered that Summers could speak no language but English: Master
Darrell answered me (as he did generally to my argument that was alleged of
the boys counterfeyting) that the Devil did it to hinder the glory of God in
his dispossession.

Being entreated by M. Euington to come to Garlands house, Geo, Richardson.
page, 270.
to see the boy in his fits, and to confirm me that he was not a
counterfeite, because I had always doubted him so to be: I went thither,
where I found Master Darrell, M. Dodde, M. Hildersham, M. Aldridge, M.
Euington, and others. At my first coming into the house, I found the boy in no
fit: but upon some few speeches used to him by the Ministers, he presently
fell into one. In the which fit he continued a while, and then foamed
excedingly: whereat (quoth M. Darrell, and the rest of the ministers) mark I
pray you, for this is the especiallest sign of his repossession. Hereupon
suspecting something, I laid my head close to the boys head, where I heard a
kind of grating of somewhat betwixt his teeth, and then I told Garland the
boys keeper, that I thought something was in his mouth. Whereupon Garland,
taking him by the hair of the head, and I by his mouth, we shook out of his
mouth a piece of black lead, and thereupon he awaked out of his fit. Then
quoth Master Aldridge, Will. had thou not a piece of black lead about
thee, or in thy mouth: no quoth the boy. And upon this the foresaid ministers
generally concluded, that it was a practice of the Devil, to throw the said
black lead into the boys mouth, thereby to choke him.

In one fit I saw William Summers froath at the mouth very much, so as the foame
roaped down into his neck: Edm. Garland. pa. 373.
and at one time I found a piece of black lead in his mouth.

At one time I foaming (says Summers) very much in my fit, W. Summers page 33.
Edm. Garland upon some man's motion (as I suppose) would needs search if I had
any thing in my mouth: and I confess, that he found there a piece of black
lead, which I had put into my mouth, that thereby I might foame in more
abundant manner.

Some other examples might be brought of M. Darrels shifting devises, to
preserve the boys credit, or rather his own. For this course was usual with
him, insomuch as when he was absent, and that the boy did any thing that went a
wry, his scholars were so cunning, that they were able to coin him some
excuses.

Edward Freeman, Ed. Freema^. page 299,
going one morning with two or three Shoemakers to Garlands house, and
perceiving that whilst he was there, Summers would not fall into any of his
fits, he departed, being desirous that the Shoemakers (who had never seen him)
should then see a fit: and at his departure he told them, that as soon as he
was gone, they should see him in one.

This Freeman was one, to whom Summers before had confessed his counterfeiting,
and therefore he forbear his fittes whilst he was present. But he was no
sooner out of the doors almost, when he fell to his prankes. Now at the said
Freemans departure, Mistres Aldridge affirmed, that the Devil would not show
any thing to them that did not believe.

M. Crauen. page 258
Likewise when M. Crauen twitching Summers by the finger in one of his fits: he
the said Summers cried: Oh who is that that nips me? One Wilkinson to excuse the
matter said, that it might be the Devil was then leaving him, when Master
Crauen began to nip him.

CHAP. IIII. How contrary to M. Darrels assertion, Summers had his senses and
understanding in his fittes.
THere is no building be it never so strong, that will long continue, if the
foundation be not sure. He is therefore accounted a very vnwiseman, that will
build either upon the sands, or upon hollow and false ground. which point of
good architecture or husbandry, if Master Darrell had well learned, he would
never have set the frame of all his cosening practices, upon that moist and
marish conceit, that Summers in his fits was altogether senseless. For besides,
that none of his fellow Devil driuers was ever so absurd, as to maintain his
position in that behalf generally, his weak ground in this particular of
Summers is shaken and overthrown, by many depositions.

The chief deceit to bleare all their eyes at Nottingham, Rob. Cooper. pa. 106.
was the persuasion beaten into them by M. Darrell, that Summers was senceles in all his fits, and that when he spoke, it was not he, but the Devil that spoke
in him.

George Noble alleges three reasons, why he thought Summers to have his senses
in his fits, and consequently, Geo. Noble. page 278.
to dissemble in pretending the contrary. The first is, because (said he) that
Summers dancing upon a bed, and a window being somewhat low, that would have
hurt him, if he had not taken some heed of the same, he the said Summers would
still be looking carefully at the said window least he should chance to hit it,
and so hurt himself. Secondly, in that a Londoner being by, and bidding him
the said Summers to serve God: he the said Summers bad him get him into his
country: and after being asked by the said Londoner where that was, ^e bad him
scoffingly, go look. Thirdly, he also then heard, that one should bid him put
up his shirt, then hanging out at his knee, whilst he was dancing upon his
bed, and he did so.

Nich Shepard. page 205.
Upon the Sunday in the morning I went again to see Summers, where after I had a
while remained, and that the boy was dancing, leaping, and playing diverse
tricks upon his bed, it happening that his shirt hanging out of his knees, and
speaking of it to one Rhodes, that stood by me, he the said Summers as he was
leaping and dancing in his said fit, did with his hand pull up his shirt,
whereby I, together with Peter Rhodes, George Noble, John Rhodes, and Thomas
Freeman perceived, that the boy had sense in that fit, contrary to M. Darrels
saying over night.

Pet. Rhodes page 280.
Upon the Sunday morning, after that M. Darrell came to Nottingham; I went to
see Summers, and the house being full, he began his tricks, and as he was
dancing and leaping, his shirt did hang out of his hose, and he put his hand in
at his codpeece, and pulled it up: and as he ran backward, he looked behind him
how near the wall was for hurting himself.

M. Hallam. fol. 8.
It was constantly received (says M. Hallam) that Summers in his fits had
neither sense, memory, nor understanding: which he refelleth: First, because he
answered directly unto certain questions when he was in his fittes, as being
asked whether a certain woman could see, he said she could: being asked how a
Sow was killed, he answered, that a waine ran over her. Secondly, for that
staring with his eyes (when I made as though I would have put my fingers into
them) he the said Summers winked. Thirdly, because Summers lying quiet when
mother Boot was brought in by me, I perceived, that at such times as Summers
showed himself to be troubled, at the coming in of witches, he knew of their
coming before hand.

M. Crauen sets down this position, that Summers being in his fittes, had
the use of all his senses. And he proves the same by five or six reasons: M.
Crauen. pa. 258.
the sum whereof follows. First, because Summers remembered what he said in
his fittes, and was afraid, which showed to him to have both memory and
fancy. Secondly, for his outward senses, as for seeing, in that I have been
many times present, when the boy has raised himself upon his bed being in
his fittes, to see who came in at the door, and has named them as they entered,
and iested upon them: also he would spy if any children stood near the
bed, and at them especially he would many times leap and make faces, and
laugh exceedingly when he saw them afraid. Thirdly, touching hearing, because
the boy would many times talk merrily with the bystanders, and answered any
man directly to any question he would propound. Fourthly, concerning smelling,
for that a Gentlewoman coming in, who had ciuette, and sweet powder (which
yielded indeed a sweet savor) oh (says the boy in one of his fittes) what a
sweet smell is here? Fifthly, for his sense of feeling, in that being pricked
with a pin before the Commissioners at Nottingham into the leg, he suddenly
plucked it up: and because the same day in an other fit, I made him to cry
out with a twitch of his little finger, and he said, oh what is it that nips
me?

Summers in one of his fittes, whilst I was present, Th. Hayes. pa. 317.
did laugh exceedingly: and I demanding of him when his fit was ended, what
moved him so to laugh, he told me, it was because the Devil showed him a
bag of gold, and told him he would give it him. etc. which moved me to
think that he understood and remembered what he did, or suffered in his
fittes.

His taunting and using of slanderous speeches (when he was in his fittes)
against such as he liked not, Edm. Garland, fol 4.
might easily be observed to proceed from his own ordinary lewd invention,
besides, many lewd and gross gestures, not fit to be mentioned. Again,
where it was said, he had no sense in his fittes, I have heard him diverse
times being in his fittes, call many by their true names, and describe others
by nicknames, so as it appeared, he had both sense and understanding. With
Garland also do agree in effect word for word, M. Parre, M. Aldridge, M.
Aldred, and John Sherrart.

M. Low. pa. ^62.
By Summers answer unto me in these words: Ah sirrah, you think I
counterfeyte, I resolved my self, that he had sense, and understanding in his
fittes, as at other times also I had observed in him.

CHAP. V. Of the motions and knockinges which were heard and seen about Summers
in his fittes, that they were done and made by himself, and were not as M.
Darrel has reported, extraordinary or supernatural.
IN the Certificate to the L. Archbishop of York, from the Commissioners at
Nottingham, the knocking and motions about Summers in his bed, were certified
amongst the extraordinary actions done by him in his fittes. M. Darrell
terms them extraordinary, and supernatural actions: and in his Apology
writes of them in this sort. Hereunto, add that most rare accident that
happened under the Couerlette, where Summers lay. There were certain things,
sometimes 4. or 5. at one instant, stirring and moving under our hands, as if
they had been kitlinges, whelps, or such living creatures: the Couerlette
being suddenly cast up, they vanished away, but thrown down, they were
presently there again.

He that once has passed the limits of modesty, does easily grow in short
time to be impudent. What Summers himself has said hereof, together with some
other fooleries of M. Darrelles, you may peruse in the fourth Chapter of the
second book, and what is deposed, does here ensue.

Having heard of many wonders, M. Hallam fol. 8.
of certain knockinges in Summers bed, I was very desirous carefully to
observe the same: so as one night about twelve of the clock, Summers being
waken, I heard this noise somewhat dully, and thinking it to be about the
beds feet, I conveyed my hand into the bed very secretly and softly, and
on the sudden laid my left hand on the boys feet, and there felt one of his
toes, slipping down from the other, which was the very knocking at that time.
After which time the boy never used the like knocking in my presence.

For motions, I have been oftentimes there, M. Crauen fol. 14.
when others have said, they have felt the quantity of a Mouse, moving and
panting under their hands: but my self, though I have often endeavored to
feel, and presently followed the hands of them, that said they felt, could
notwithstanding, never perceive any thing. For the knocking, I have also heard
it etc. notwithstanding, I more wondered at the boys cunning, then at the
Deuilles dancing. Again, this Devil was of a strange constitution, palpable to
some, but visible to none. And again, I have discovered the sleighte of his
iugling in many things: as when the noyce of four or five knockes were heard
together in manner of a chime, I found one of them to be his finger thrust
under his thigh, as he lay upon his back: which thing I would have showed
unto the people, had not the boy by force of his thigh wrested it from me, and
turned himself hastily upon his belly, whereupon the Chime for that night
ceased.

M. Barnard fol. 12
For any likeness or shape, or motion of any bodily substance, to be seen or
felt above or under the Couerlette, I utterly deny it: except it were the body
or parts of the body of the boy, who lying always under a Couerlette, might
be the slight and nimble motion of some parts of his body, deceit the eyes
of the beholders.

George Richardson fol. 202,
Touching the likenesses of Kitlinges moving in Summers bed, I have heard much
wonder thereof, and at one time Thomas Slater being with me, we beheld a
thing move and roll under the Couerlette, whereupon Slater catched it in his
hands, and drew his dagger of purpose to stab it, and presently we turned up
the clothes, and it was the boy^s foot, which I know to be true, because I was
present at the feeling and doing thereof. Again, to the tapping and rapping, I
have heard the same, and did upon the hearing of it, imagine that it was the
fillipping of one toe with another upon the bed, and sometimes with his fingers
as he found occasion, which I suspecting, did at my going to bed secretly
practice it. And it fell out to be so agreeable with that which the boy did, as
my wife being in bed with me, was on the sudden in great fear, that Summers
spirit had followed me.

Ed, Garland page
Catching on a time at that which I saw move the clothes, I got hold of it,
and offering to cast up the clothes, to see what I had in my hand, it
slipped from me, and I did then suspect, and do now believe it to be true, that
the thing I had hold of was the boys privy members, and that I offering to
pull up the clothes, he shrinking in his bed pulled them out of my hand, I not
holding fast, Edm. Garland. p. 301
because I then suspected so much, Again, Summers lying at my house, I found
him in a plain trick of dissimulation, vz. he lying in a bed, and I hearing a
knocking at the beds feet, stepped hastily to the place, and catched the boy
by the toes, which I perceived to have made the former knocking, and then I
said, this is a counterfeyte knacke indeed: Whereat Summers laughed.

For the knocking and tapping, I have often heard the same, Rob. Cooper. fo.. 17.
and now verily think, that it was done by the boys own devise, which I did
not formerly conceive, for that I gave too much credit to the opinion and
learning of M. Darrell.

Touching the rapping about Summers bed, M Aldred fol, 6.
I and M. Hallam came to the beds side and heard it: and afterward
conferring together privately M. Hallams opinion was, that it was nothing else,
but the tapping of one of his toe nails upon an other.

I have heard sometimes a tapping about the boys bed, M Pare, fol, 5,
which I verily think was either the fillipping of his fingers, or some motion
with his toes. Again, touching a matter of substance, which moved in his bed,
I did once catch hold of it, and grasped it in my hand, and I do think, that
it was either his knee or his thigh.

I saw a thing move in the boys bed, and laid my hand on it, Mary Cooper.
fol, 1.
but it got from me I know not how. The second time I catched at it under the
clothes, and something pulled my hand very straight, and held it fast, and I
think it was my brothers hand: for that I complaining of the hurt I had, he
fell a laughing at me: and at that time both his hands were in the bed.

CHAP. VI. How Summers casting himself into the fire, was voluntary, and no
extraordinary matter, as M. Darrell has pretended.
AMongst the admirable works of William Summers, his casting into the fire, M.
Darrell, Apolo.
has no mean reputation. M. Darrell tells us in his Apology: that the boy
being cast into the fire, his hands sometimes were in the fire, and that
sometimes his face did lie there a while, and yet that he was not burnt at all.
Omitting some other reports, as of likelihood condemned by himself, vz. that
lying in the fire, neither his freeze ierkin, nor his hair touching the
burning coals, were so much as sindged. But Summers himself, who should know
somewhat hereof, deposes as follows.

Summers. page 37.
As touching the report of my casting into the fire, without any hurt or
sindging either of my hayr or apparel, this is the truth therein. Because the
words of casting into the fire, do seem to importe much. First I say, that
the fyres in my Mistresses house, and then afterward in my father in laws,
were but very small, made of slate coals, and so compassed at the ends and
foreparte with bars of iron, that except I should have thrust my self
betwixt the said bars, and the wall, or have thrust my fingers betwixt the
bars, I could not in any wise have cast my self into the fire. But I
confess, that M. Darrell having told me out of S. Mark, and likewise having
straightly warned such as kept me in my supposed fits, that they should be
very careful to look unto me. I did cast my self now and then into the
Chimney, or upon the yrons or grates: but I never did so, but when there was
company by, that would pull me out presently, and then also, did it with such
warines, as I was sure, that rather then fail, I might help my self. And for
the sindging neither of my hayr nor apparel: when I cast my self into the
fire, I had commonly either my hatte or cappe on, which might keep my hair if
my head had touched the fire. And touching my apparel, it is untrue that it
was not sindged, for the wings and skirtes of my freeze ierkin did show the
contrary. For my manner was so to fall into the Chimney, as that sometimes my
shoulders only should touch the grate, and sometimes my buttockes only,
whereby the wings, shoulders, and skirtes of my ierkin, were apparantlie
sindged. But I wearing then old leatherne breeches which were greasy, they
indeed took little hurt. And more then this in effect, whatsoever is reported,
I say it is false. Unto this deposition of Summers diverse other testimonies may
be added. One thing amongst others, (says M. Bernard) I saw William Summers
act very foolishly. M. Barnard, page 255.
He standing by his sister in the Chimney, suddenly clapped his buttockes upon
the fire by her, having on a very good strong pair of letherne breeches, and
in his falling down, he did not clap himself right on the fire, but reeled
on the one side, and was snatched up immediately: which I seeing so vainly
done, I went away fully resolved of the boys villainous dissimulations, and
could never after be entreated to see him any more. Summers at the end of one
of his fittes suddenly starting up, went backewardes to the fire, James Alwood
pa. 289.
and fell down with his shoulders on the fire, but no man stepping to him, he
tombled quickly out again of him self. Hereunto also appertains that which
is set down in the first Chapter of the third Book, concerning his voluntary
falling into the fire at S. John's, to the admiration of those that were
present, and knew not the compact betwixt him and Nicholas Shepherd.

CHAP. VII. Of Summers pretended strength and weight in his fittes, that
contrary to M. Darrelles and his friends reports, there was nothing
extraordinary in them.
AS touching the pretended strength of Summers in his fittes, it has bin
reported and auowed: that three or four had enough to do to hold him: that
four or five had much a do to hold him: and that some times three, sometimes
four, and sometimes six could scarsely hold him. M. Darrell, Apolo.
And M. Darrell enlarging the matter above the warrant of his authors, says:
that his strength was often such, that sometimes six men could not rule him,
had much ado to hold him, could scarsely hold him. Had enough to do to
hold him, (say his witnesses): could not rule him, says M. Darrell. He has
so used his tongue to deceit, as hardly he can report any thing truly.
Summers has dealt since his examination at London much more sincerely and
particularly in this matter.

W. Summers page 39.
Concerning my supposed extraordinary strength, (says he) in that it is said,
that three or four, five or six, and sometimes seven men using their whole
strength, were much troubled to hold or carry me, I think indeed that I
seemed diverse times to be more strong then I was: because I often perceived
that they were greatly afraid, who took upon them either to hold or carry me.
Insomuch as at sometimes I have so skarred sundry with my looks, as they have
started from me. Again, I also so seemed, for that they (being many that toyled
themselves about me) much hindered one an other by pulling of me contrary
ways. Besides, for one of my years and bigness, I have a reasonable
strength, and do think it no great matter to trouble four or five, that
should take upon them to carry me: as I did those that took upon them to
carry me to Smalles house, the morning before the fast. It has also been
reported, that when I have seemed senseless, that I have not breathed, that my
pulse has not moved, and that I have been cold, as though I had been dead:
they might as well I think, have said, that I was dead, and that M. Darrell
has restored me to life again. That therefore which has been given out
touching my pulse, my coldness, and my not breathing, is utterly untrue. I
confess that the time of the year was very cold, when I did practice those
fittes, and I being for the most part in my doublet and hose, could not choose
but be often very cold. But of these last points, as by the way: his supposed
extraordinary strength is the thing in hand: whereof there are these
subsequent depositions.

Sometimes Summers would make show of great strength, Ed. Garland fol. 4.
when being proved by me, it was but ordinary according to his person. And
again, whereas it was reported, Edm. Gar. page 301,
that Summers had extraordinary strength, I found him often of easy strength,
and to make show of greater strength then in deed he had.

I saw and heard great admiration of the boys strength and weight, and seeing
one attempting to lift him, M. Foster fol. 18,
was tossed and sweat much therewith, I for my satisfaction endeavored to lift
him up in his fit, and did it very easily: neither finding nor perceiving any
supernatural strength or weight in the said boy.

I was at Garlands house with the boy, where were present M. Darrell, M.
Euington, M. Aldridge, M. Hildersham, Geor. Richardson, fol, 20.
and M. Dod, and some others: and there some one said, it is given out that
this is counterfeit, and therefore let us see him that does think so, now to
try his strength. Whereupon M. Euington called out me, (because he heard my
opinion thereof before) and bad me try the boys strength. And so said, the
boy was in a fit, and presently thrust down his leg as stiff as might be,
and I came to him and heaued at him and lifted him up. The ministers asked me
what weight he was, and I answered, that I had lifted an hundred and an half
with more ease in my youth: yet do I not think him to be of that weight. Then
they bad me to bow the boys leg: and I seeing how he had stretched it out,
set my knee to his knee, and then bended his leg backward at my pleasure.

M. Pare, 264.
Hearing of the boys extraordinary strength, I thought good to try it: and
upon proof, found it to be but ordinary: and so likewise for his weight, I
could never perceive it to be extraordinary.

Rob. Coop. pa. 291.
I have often proved the boys strength in his fittes, but never found it to
be but ordinary. And I have oftentimes, when he has fallen upon the floor,
taken him up my self, and laid him upon the bed, never perceiving him either
to be extraordinarily strong or heavy.

Edw. Freeman. page, 299.
Toward the evening, the boy making show as though he would throw himself into
the fire, I catched at him, and notwithstanding the great strength and weight
that he was supposed to have, vz. that four or five could scarce stir or
hold him, I threw him easily upon the bed, which when the boy perceived, and
that he was in my hands, to whom he had before discovered his counterfeiting,
he presently cried out: Lord have mercy upon me, and gave over his fit.

M. Hallam. fol. 8.
Being with Summers one night, after his knocking had been discovered, he
assaying to heave up his body in a marvelous manner, and I indeuouring to
keep him down, could not do it: but looking more nearly unto him, I espied
that he supported himself with his legs and sholders, wherefore putting my
hand into the bed, and taking his legs from under him, he came down quickly and
with ease. More to this purpose may be seen in the fourth Chapter of the
second book, how the boy by shrinking down, and standing close to him that
assaide to lift him, made show of greater strength, and weight then he had.

CHAP. VIII. Summers knowledge in his fits was not extraordinary, as M. Darrell
and his friends have falsely pretended: neither could he speak Greek, Hebrew,
or Latin, otherwise then he had learned.
THe author of the brief Narration, to prove that Summers had extraordinary
knowledge: and thereby to enforce that he was possessed, the same his
knowledge proceeding from Satan that was within him, does tell us, that Summers
in his fittes spoke of things done in his absence, at the instant when he spoke
them: as that (says he) of the examination of Millicent Horsley, and of M.
Darrels and M. Aldriges coming, unknown to any there present. These examples
which the Narrator alleges, being mere untruths, and cosenages, M. Darrell
(it seems) is in his Apology ashamed of them, and therefore he omitteth
them. Or if not so, his fault is the greater, in that he has so set down this
matter, as though it had been much more wonderful, then by the said examples
it could be well induced. For thus he reports it: His knowledge was such,
that by virtue thereof, he told of those things which were done and spoken
diverse miles of him, at the same instant they fell out, and foretold things to
come. From hence also it was, that divine like he continued his speech, in
expounding the Creed for an hour together. Who would not think by these
general terms, that the boy had been a kind of Prophet? But they are
(be you sure) a couple of false seducers, and counterfeyte companions: it
being impossible, (if they were not mad) but that they should write these
things, against their own consciences, and of purpose for their own
reputations, to abuse their Readers.

Concerning the boys diuine-like expounding of the Creed, the truth thereof
has been showed in the first Chapter of this book: and for the rest, how
ridiculous it is, that which ensues will declare and make manifest. And first,
as touching this foretelling of M. Darrels coming to Nottingham. Besides,
that the boy understood by Hugh Wilson, and by other speeches of diverse
persons, (to omit the compact betwixt them of his promised repair, when Summers
could so act his fittes, as he should be thought thereby to be possessed) that
M. Darrell was still expected, W. Summers, page 9.
he says thus, for his said pretended extraordinary knowledge. As M.
Darrell was coming, one ouertaking him upon Trent bridge, and ouergoing him,
reported in Nottingham that M. Darrell was coming, which report being brought
to the house where I lay, I heard thereof, and did also perceive, that he was
coming by their looking out, and by the speeches of some others, that ran
forth to see him. Whereupon I did say, that M. Darrell was coming: which
words of mine, they that were present and heard them, took them (as it
seems) to be miraculous, because M. Darrell had sent word by Hugh Wilson
(but falsely) that in my fittes, I heard no more then a block, which conceit I
did nourish as much as I could, during the time of all my counterfeyting. And
more then this, concerning this supposed wonder of my foretelling of M. Darrels
coming, I deny to be true.

Now, for his supposed skill in foretelling of M. Aldridges coming unto him,
Summers pa. 36.
and so of diverse which might as well have been added, I protest (says Summers)
that this is the truth which insueth, whatsoever is given out to the contrary.
There were for the most part diverse in the place, where I did lie, when I was
in my fits: and some of them would be commonly looking out at the windows,
and as they saw any Preacher coming, or any other man of note, they would say
amongst themselves, one to an other, that such a man, naming him, was coming.
Whereby I still over hearing them (they supposing me to hear nothing at all) I
did oftentimes then say, that such a man was coming, and likewise named him:
which they always thought through M. Darrels instructions, to be done by the
Devil, they supposing me to be possessed.

And thirdly, as touching the report of his skill, concerning Millicent
Horsley, thus also Summers himself does depose. It has been given out, that
I, having before named Millicent Horsley for a witch, should tell the time,
ibid.
and the words that she uttered, when she was examined before one M. Parkins, a
Justice of the peace, and others, four miles distant from Nottingham, where I
then remained: the truth whereof is thus: Master Darrell told my father in
law, and others in my hearing, that he the said Master Darrell, Master
Aldred, and some others, were going to carry Millicent Horsley (that present
morning) to the said Master Parkins, to be examined. Whereupon, I gessing by
the time of Master Darrels departure, and by the distance of the way, and of
the likelihood that she would deny her self to be a witch, said to those that
were present by me in one of my fittes, about eleven of the clock, that then
Millicent Horsley was in examining, and that she denied her self to be a
witch. Hereof when Master Darrell at his return was certified, he accounted
it a great wonder, affirming, that I had truly spoken, both concerning the
time, and the witches words. And then he and others took upon them to write
diverse things about that matter, which I had never thought of: as that I had
foretold, that the said witch was picking of her toes, when they came to her
house in the morning: and that she denying to go with them, they were compelled
to draw her forth by force: which things they also said, were true. Howbeit, I
did very well know, that I had never spoken of them: but I was content to let
them say what they list, because such reports did give the more credit to the
rest of my doings. And whereas one Ione Pie has deposed before the
Commissioners, authorized from the Lord Archbishop of York, that I made
mention of Millicent Horsleyes examination, about one of the clock in the
afternoon, I do not think, that therein she deposed truly, or at the least
I think Master Darrell at his return, signifying, that the said Millicent
was in examining, about one of the clock, did thereby make her the said Ione
to imagine, that it was about that time, when I had spoken of the said
Millicent Horsley.

But I marvel, why some other examples of my supposed wonderful knowledge of
one Beresforde, whom I was thought never to have seen before: notwithstanding,
that about a year or more then past, I went with the said Beresforde toward
Chesterfielde. Whereupon, when he came unto me in my supposed fittes, I named
unto him certain styles in the way: and some other things, whereof we had
spoken, as we were going together: as that he should have been a
schoolemaister, and that he was going to his brother, etc. which things
Master Beresforde, confessing to be true, it was reckoned for a miraculous
matter: the rather because he affirmed, that he had never seen me before,
neither was it known to any then present, that I had ever been in his
company.

Likewise, it might here have been added, how I told one of the Iaylors, (as
I remember) of the Queens prison, how much money he had in his purse: which
happened in this sort: I desired to borrow six pence of one Henry Ball that
stood by me: who presently said to the rest of the company, that I had
truly told him what money he had in his purse, and that he had in deed but
six pence in it. Whereupon quoth one of the said Iaylors (leaning upon Henry
Balls shoulder by my beds head,) If he can tell me how much money I have in
my purse, I shall then verily think that he has a Devil in him. And so the
said Iaylor telling Ball softly in my hearing (whom they supposed always to
be senseless in my fittes) that he had three shillinges in his purse, and no
more, he did then ask me what money he had in his purse: and I told him he
had three shillinges: which seemed to be a very strange matter to all that were
present. And thus far Summers himself, of his own extraordinary knowledge.
Now let us hear what is deposed of this matter.

Four things are worthy the marking ( says Master Crauen.) First, M.
Crauen, fol, 14.
that the boy never cried (in my hearing) at the approach of any person
accused, but either when some noise was made about the door, whereby he might
guess of her coming, or else some body told aloude in the house, that the
Witch was coming.

Secondly, that he would raise his head from the pillow at the coming in of
every Witch, and be sure to see her within the house, before he fell (as they
called it) into his sleeping trance.

Thirdly, that he cried sometimes, as though a Witch had been near at hand,
when none was either coming, or sent for. As once when the Constable said,
they would fetch one Morris wise, whom he had affirmed to be a witch, having a
familiar, in likeness of a bird: upon a noise of people at the door, he cried
out after his usual manner: which made every man present to look for the
witches coming in: whereas the Constable upon some better advise, never went
for her. Fourthly, that when a woman, accused for a witch, was closely brought
in for an experiment by M. Hallam, (a minister of honest report) the boy
neither cried at her coming or going, nor slept as he was wont whilst she
stayed in the house.

M. Aldridge pa, 88.
I thought that Summers had named some for witches by an extraordinary knowledge,
being therein confirmed by Master Darrels speeches, of the detection of
certain witches by some in Lancashire. But now because he named none for
witches, but such as were commonly reputed so before, and for that Summers
says, he had no other knowledge whereby he named them: I rather think it to
be true, which the boy affirms, then that he had any extraordinary
knowledge of them. And again, at one time, M. Aldridge page 234.
I came to Robert Coopers house when the boy was in a fit, and there was
brought into the house widow Else of Carleton, formerly nominated by him to be
a witch, and sent thither by M. Aldred (as I think.) Upon her coming, the boy
grow to increase in his fit: but when she came near, and that he saw her, he
became quiet. Whereupon I purposing to make trial, whether he dissembled in
that point or no, took the widow Else away, and walked to the Church door,
(which was about thirty yards distant from Coopers house.) And after some stay
made there, I returned to the house again, and brought the said woman close
behind me: where we found the boy well and at meat. And after some few
speeches with him (as asking him if he had any good meat, and whether I
should eat with him: and he answering yea, if it pleased me) I moved my body
awrie: by means whereof, he viewing the woman that stood still close behind me
all the while at my back, did fall presently into a fit.

It is likewise proved by M. Hallams deposition, M. Hallam, fol. 8
that the boy had no extraordinary knowledge, as it was pretended. First, in
that when a blind woman was taken in suspicion to be a Witch, he asking Summers
being in a fit, whether that Witch could see or no: he said she could:
Secondly, in that when widow Boot was brought in and out, three several
times secretly, he not knowing of it, neither altered either at her coming in,
or going out, as otherwise his manner was.

Now concerning Summers pretended extraordinary knowledge of diverse languages.
M. Darrell was charged before her Majesty's said Commissioners, that he had
very confidentlie affirmed, that the boy in some of his fittes, did speak
Latin, Greek, and Hebrewe, in a very admirable sort. And he confesses the
same in effect to be true: But he is convinced of great oversight therein, by
sondrie depositions. What M. Darrell has deposed, does here ensue: and the
witnesses to the contrary do afterward follow.

I have said that William Summers in some of his pretended fittes, did speak
some Hebrew, and Greek, M, Darrell ad art, 12, pa, 329,
being altogether ignorant in both those languages: but it was very little,
that he so spoke. And in that he spoke no more, it did proceed from the
subteltie of Satan, who if he had spoken much in that sort, should have made
his own work in Summers most manifest: and likewise I confess, that diverse
questions being propounded in Latin to Summers, he the said Summers answered
aptly in Latin so long, that he drive one speaking into him in that
language, to a non plus, as I believe, being one that was no great scholar,
although he the said Summers (as I believe) could not of himself have answered
so in Latin.

The said M. Darrell being here demanded, whether he was present, when the
boy did speak either Hebrew, M Dar. ibid.
Greek, or Latin, answers, that he was not: but says, that the Greek
words (which he does not remember) were delivered unto him in writing, by a
Master of Arts, one M Bernard: and the Latin words (which he has also
forgotten) by one John Wiggen: And touching the Hebrew, he says, that he
has so heard, but knows not who told him, nor any thing of the certainety
thereof. A man of such good parts as M. Darrelles friends do account him,
would not have published such matters upon so slender grounds. And yet if he
had said truly therein, his credulity might in some sort have excused him.
Consider what is hereof deposed.

Io. VViggen. pa. 321
Whereas it has been conceived, that I should report, that William Summers in
his fittes did answer in Greek, and Latin, to many questions demanded of
him: for the speaking of Greek, I remember that one Master John Low spoke
unto him in Greek, and he answered him nothing but laughed. And for his
speaking of Latin, my meaning was, that Summers said: Ego sum Deus, Ego sum
Rex: and sometimes, etiam, non, and, minime, and otherwise, not any saying, or
sentence whole together.

M. Bernard, page 401
Albeit, (says M. Bernarde) that I was oftentimes with Summers in many of his
fittes: yet he did never speak or pronounce any Hebrew, Greek, or Latin, at
any time, when I was present. And with M. Bernard, do agree word for word in
effect, M. Crauen, and M. Hallam.

M. Low, page 262,
I went to William Summers, of purpose to try, whether he could speak, or the
supposed Devil in him, either Latin, Greek, or any learned language, that I
might inform my self concerning the truth or falshoode of his pretended
possession. Whereupon apposing him with diverse questions in Greek, and in
Latin, neither he the said Summers, nor the supposed Devil in him, did
answer one word, either in Greek, or Latin, except etiam, or minime, or such
like, without any fit relation to that which had been asked. And again,
talking with Master Darrell diverse times about the premises, and telling
him, Ibid.
that if the Devil were in Summers, I wondered that he could speak no languages
but English: Master Darrell answered me, (as he did generally to any
argument that was alleged of the boys counterfeyting) that the Devil did it
to hinder the glory of God in his dispossession.

By the persuasion of Mistress Gray, M. Leigh pa, 266,
I did go to see William Summers with this resolution, that if he had (as it
was reported) a Devil in him: the Devil having the use of his tongue, could
speak Latin, Greek, or any other learned language. Whereupon, when I came
unto him, I spoke in Latin, and asked an answer from him in Latin again:
but he did not answer me any thing at all in Latin, but non, and nolo: which
I perceiving, took him for a counterfeyte, and so afterward did always
repute him.

CHAP. IX. There was no impossibility in Summers fittes, as M. Darrell and his
friends have falsely pretended.
THe general plee of M. Darrell in his Apology, and of the author of the
brief Narration, with the rest of his friends, in defense of himself, and to
prove that Summers did not dissemble, is this: vz. that those things which he
did in his fittes, were impossible for him to have done by any natural or
artificial power: and that therefore there was some supernatural cause of
them, which was ( says Master Darrell) and evil spirit possessing him. For
says he further, if those things most strange, and admirable can be done by
any human skill, I deny not but he may be a counterfeyte. For the better
satisfaction therefore of the Gentleman, it may please him to peruse the last
Chapter of the third Book, and there to consider, what his own witnesses
upon their reexamination have deposed, touching these pretended
impossibilities, and also to vouchsafe the reading of these depositions
following.

Rob. Cooper. pa. 106.
Now I consider without fear, what things the boy did in his fittes: I think
any other of his nimblenes and capacity may do the like.

Nic. Shep. fol, 2,
I never did see any thing that Summers did, to make me to think, that it was
supernatural. And again, I told M. Darrell, that Summers was no more
possessed then I was my self: for (quoth I) I have seen him do all his
fittes, and I my self can do two more then he has done. Why then (quoth M.
Darrel) thou art possessed with a Devil: pa. 209,
to whom I answered, that he lied, and that I was as good a Christian as he.

M. Crauen* fol 14.
Notwithstanding, all the wonders by other men seen, and reported, it was never
my hap, though often there, to see him do any thing, which an other boy
that would have endeavored himself to the like lewdenes, might not easily
have performed.

M. Foster, fol. 18
I was but twice with Summers in all his fittes, and at one of the same times, I
well remember, that M. Aldred asked me my opinion, touching the truth or
falsehood of the boys repossession, whereunto I answered, that I saw nothing but
it might be counterfeyted.

George Richardson fol. 20.
I was often with the boy in his fittes, and could never see any thing done by
him, but I could do the like.

M Aldred, page 246
Seeing Summers in his fittes the fifth of November, heauing up his belly,
drawing his mouth toward his ears: scriching etc. I departed away persuaded
that he was a counterfeyte, and that he did nothing, but that which a boy
naughtely disposed might do as well as he.

Standing near to the bed where Summers lay upon the day of his pretended
dispossession, M Pare. page 264.
and well noting the manner of his present fittes, I could not perceive any
extraordinary thing to be done by the boy, but what any other might well have
done, although M. Darrell did then endeavor to persuade the hearers present,
that they were past the power of any natural man to do.

Although ( said M. Wallys, T. VVallys. pa. 268.
brother in law to M. Darrell,) I had diverse times heard, that the boy did
things past the naturdll power of man: yet when I saw them, I could not
perceive any such strangenes in them: and therefore I did forbear much to
visit him.

Seeing William Summers upon the Saturday at night (before his pretended
dispossession,) lie on his bed, gaping, struggling, James Alwood p. 289
and spurning, I observed that any body naughtily disposed, might have done the
same.

I never saw (says Richard Newton, one of M. Darrels chief deponentes)
Summers do any thing, Rich. Newton.
but that a boy of his years might easily do.

Whether these depositions will satisfy M. Darrell and his friends, it may be
doubted, they are so strongly possessed with their own conceits: but to any
reasonable men, they will be sufficient, to show the vanity of the forsaide
pretended impossibilities.

CHAP. X. How contrary to M. Darrels and his friends assertions, William
Summers was accounted by many in Nottingham, for a dissembler, from the time
that he began his practices there, until he confessed the same himself.
IT has been falsely given out by M. Darrell and his friends, that there was
no suspicion and report that Summers was a counterfeyte, till about a month
after M. Darrels coming to Nottingham, and that then, he the said Summers,
having detected a kinsewoman of M. Freemans for a Witch, he the said M.
Freeman began to report that the boy was a counterfeyte. For the truth is,
that he was deemed for a dissembler, not only before M. Darrels coming to
Nottingham, but likewise as well whilst M. Darrell dealt with him about his
dispossession: as afterward also in the whole course of his pretended fittes,
as by the depositions following it will appear.

First therefore concerning the opinion held of Summers, before M. Darrels
coming to Nottingham. It being objected against M. Darrell before her
Majesty's commissioners, that he was advertised upon his first coming thither,
that he the said Summers was thought by many to be a dissembler: M. Darrell ad.
art. 1. page 215.
he denies the same: but that is deposed, as also that Summers was so reputed:
and that he the said M. Darrell understanding thereof, labored as much as he
could to persuade the contrary.

T. Porter, fol. 3.
At M. Darrels coming to my house (says Thomas Porter) on the Saturday at
night, the fifth of November, I told him, that it was reported by the townsmen,
that the boy did counterfeyte: and M. Darrell in the presence of the boy, and
of many people there present answered: I do assure you, they that think so,
shall see with their eyes the contrary.

After three or four days, To. Cooper page 97.
that William Summers did begin to have fittes, I did verily think that he did
but dissemble: and when I could not persuade him to desist from that course, I
did refuse afterward to come to him for the space of a week or more, until
M. Darrell came: by whose words I was drawn to be of his opinion, vz. that
the boy was possessed: R. Cooper. page 199
for the which I am now very sorry, and that I was so deluded. And again, it
was very generally received and thought, a fortnight before M. Darrels coming
to Nottingham, that the boy did dissemble.

M. Aldred also departing, upon the fifth of November, M. Aldred. pa. 246.
from Summers with this persuasion, that he was but a counterfeyte, as before
it is expressed in the former chapter, he further deposes thus. The next day
(says he) I spoke with M. Darrell, who told me, that the boy was no
counterfeyte, but possessed with a Devil: and that he knew it by the signs
in the boy, which were like to those signs that he had found in Katherine
Wright, and in the vii. in Lancashire. And then and there, I did change my mind
of the boys counterfeyting, relying on the report, credit, and experience of
M. Darrell only: and yet I did always doubt in my heart, that he did but
dissemble.

Indeed it was thought by many before M. Darrels first coming to Summers, that
the Boy did absolutely dissemble. Edm. Garland. pa, 246,


Unto these depositions, all those witnesses may be added, who have testified
that M. Darrel, the first three days that he came to Summers, endeavored
nothing more, then to persuade the people, that Summers did not counterfeyte,
but was indeed possessed, thereby to beat down the opinion of his
dissimulation: which argues directly that he was acquainted (as Porter has
deposed) with the said opinion.

Secondly also, notwithstanding M. Darrels peremptory assertions, and all his
persuasions, for the first three days, and afterward, that he came unto
Summers, that he the said Summers did not dissemble, but was possessed, and
afterward assalted to be repossessed: yet many still retained their former
opinions that he was but a counterfeyte, as the depositions, following do
declare.

Garland, pa. 197 and pa. 198.
M. Darrel, at his first coming to Summers, did signify to the people, that the
boy did not dissemble, and made many speeches to assure them thereof: but yet
many did still hold the contrary opinion. And again, M. Darrel in many of his
sermons, and at sondrie other times, has related the manner of the boys
fittes, before the dispossession, and at the dispossession: setting forth the
manner and strangenes of them, and has blamed such as would not believe the
same, charging them with weakness of faith: And yet notwithstanding, sondrie
persons still held and affirmed, that the matter was but dissembled.

T. Porter pa 198
M. Darrel, at his first coming to Summers at my house, both on the Saturday,
Sunday, and Monday, did signify that the Boy did not dissemble, and in those
times used many reasons and speeches to persuade the people there present, to
think so: but all that notwithstanding, diverse persons still held opinion,
that the boy did dissemble. Porter 199
And again, M. Darrell in many of his Sermons and other speeches, after the
dispossession, urging that the Devil would seek to enter into the boy again,
did blame those that would not believe that the boy was possessed, and
dispossessed, and charged them with unbelief: and used many such like
speeches: but yet all that notwithstanding, sondrie persons still held
opinion, that the boy did but counterfeyte.

To. Cooper page 200
When Summers was at my house, and made show that he saw the Devil, in this
form, and that form: and that Master Darrell told the people, that he saw
the Devil rolling under the couerlet, and expounded the knocking and tapping
to be the evil spirit: Master Hallam, and some others began then to suspect
the matter to be more strangely accounted of by Master Darrell, then in deed
it was. And from thenceforth, many began to observe the boys fittes with less
fear, and more circumspection: But at all times sundry persons still held
opinion, that all was but counterfeited: whereat M. Darrell was continually
much displeased. And again, M. Darrell in sundry of his sermons after the
supposed dispossession, did blame those, who held that the boy did dissemble
in his fits, both at the time of his dispossession, and at other times,
charging them with unbelief, page 199.
and delivering speeches of scorn and disdain to satisfy them any further
therein. But all this notwithstanding, many still held and affirmed, that it
was but dissimulation.

Likewise Peter Rhodes, George Noble, Thomas Freeman, and Nicholas Shepherd
(as it is before deposed and mentioned) perceiving by the boys pulling up of
his shirt, in one of his fits upon the Sunday morning, after M. Darrels coming
unto him, that he had his senses, they went their ways with this resolution:
that for a certainty (as they thought) he was but a counterfeit.

And thirdly, although M. Darrell, M. Darrell ad. art. 3. page 34.
when it was commonly given out in Nottingham, that Summers was a countererfeit,
did (as he confesses in his sermons) persuade his auditorie (the best he
could) to the contrary, affiming confidently that he was no counterfeie: and
notwithstanding all that he could say and protest concerning Summers fits, when
Satan was seeking to repossesse him, or any thing he did allege for his
repossession, either before or since: yet the general opinion in Nottingham
and thereabouts, then was and still does continue amongst the discreter sort,
that he the said Summers was in all his said practices a counterfeit dissembler.

The depositions to this purpose do ensue. Master Crauen says, M. Crauen.
fol. 14
that upon the wonderful report of the boys possession and dispossession, he
could not at the first but think it to be true: which if he had seen, he
should not perhaps have so lightly believed. But after his repossession (as
they called it) I soon changed (says he) mine opinion: First, because I
never saw him do any thing, which an other lewdly disposed, might not easily
have performed. Secondly, for that I discovered the sleight of his iugling in
many things, vz. in playing his tricks under a couerlet. Thirdly, because the
boy seeming weary of his service, did peradventure take this course to be rid
of it: which I do conjecture, because that after he was released, he never
had any fit (for ought I know) till upon an other coffeehouse, when he was
bound over to the assizes for a Witch.

M. Bernard. fol. 13.
Master Bernard yields in like sort certain reasons, whereby he was
induced to think, that Summers dissembled. The sum whereof is. First, because
he had heard that Summers began the like fits four or five years before.
Secondly, that being a prentise, he might thereby procure his liberty.
Thirdly, because his counterfeyting was gainefull. Fourthly, for that he being
a proud boy, his pretended wonderful fittes, did bring him great admiration,
which pleased his humor. Fifthly, in that his latter fittes were more loose,
and not so cunningly handled as his first. And lastly, because in discovering
of Witches, he named none but poor and base people, such as he thought he
might be bold with. And again, seeing the boy act his fittes vainly and
ridiculously, M. Barnard. page 254.
I verily thought that all his doings were but villainies and knaueries.

Ed. Garland page 301,
I observed many fittes to be feyned by the boy, during the time that he was
at my house: whereupon I held him, and accounted him afterward for a
counterfeite. M. Leigh. page 266,
And Master Leigh: When I perceived that the Devil, that was pretended to be
in Summers, could speak no language but English, I took the boy for a
counterfeite, and so always after did repute him.

Having talked with William Summers, M Aldred. page 96.
and comparing together all things, which happened in the time of his supposed
possession and repossession, and what has been brought to light since, and
considering the present estate of the boy, and diverse particulars, whereof I
have been now examined, I do verily think and believe in my conscience, that
they were all in Nottingham, who thought the boy to have been possessed, and
repossessed, very much abused diversely: and that the said Summers was but a
dissembler in all the course of his said fits: and so consequently, that he was
neither possessed by Satan, as it was imagined, nor dispossessed, nor
repossessed.

And the boys father in law: I do verily think, Rob. Coop. pa. 106.
and believe in my conscience, that William Summers did counterfeit all that he
did: that he was never possessed, dispossessed, nor repossessed: and that
Master Darrell has dealt very ungodly in all this cause, and either by
compact or cunning, did draw on the said boy in his dissimulation, for what
cause I know not, except it were for his own estimation: which I do verily
suspect.

These general depositions are further strengthened by sundry particular
testimonies, in every Chapter almost of this book: especially in the fourth
and fifth Chapters, where it is proved, that the pretense of the boys want of
sense in his fittes, and the knockinges and motions under a couerlet, were all
mere fooleries and dissembled cosenages. Besides, although this treatise has
grown to be over tedious: yet very many things have been omitted, which
would more fully have discovered Master Darrels iuglinges, and unconscionable
practices. It is true, that less might have been sufficient in such a paltrie
matter: saving that many have been carried so headlong with a preiudicate
opinion of as it seemed fit for their better satisfaction, to set out the same
more at large, then otherwise it had been convenient.

The end of the Fourth Book.
The Fifth Book.
In this fifth Book are discovered M. DARRELS proceedings with THOMAS DARLING,
commonly termed, the boy of BVRTON, and with one KATHERINE WRIGHT, concerning
their pretended possession and dispossession: and likewise a new course which
he had begun at Nottingham with the sister of WILLIAM SUMMERS, one MARIE COOPER.

CHAP. I. How M. Darrels credit, touching his dealing with the boy of Burton,
does rely upon a false and foolish book, that was published of the said boys
pretended possession and dispossession.
ONe Thomas Darling of Burton upon Trent, beginning to be sickly in
February, 1595. did afterward take upon him to dissemble certain tricks:
wherein continuing till the week before Whitsontide following, he was deemed
by M. Darrell to be possessed, and the next day after (as it is pretended) was
dispossessed. From which time he continued well, by the space of about eight
days, and then being at the school, he fell again to certain tricks, and
perseuered in them by starts two days, whilst it was pretented that Satan
sought to repossesse him. But since he has left those practices. Of this
whole matter, a story was afterward published in print, and is of such
credit with M. Darrell, and his adherents, as he the said Darrell does
account it in his Apology a great absurdity, to call the truth of it into any
question. Darling is said to have counterfeited. M. Darrell Apolog.
I answer ( says M. Darrell) that, that can not possibly be. For in the book
which is printed concerning him, it is reported etc. And again: To say that
Darling counterfeyted, is to deny the truth of the book printed: which for the
substance of it, has been offered to be confirmed by the oaths of a great
many: and is still, if by authority they may be thereunto called. In one of
his examinations he says thus: I account that history to be true in substance,
but I will not justify it in every circumstance. And being then demanded what
he meant by substance, whether he thought that Darling was troubled and vexed,
and had such dialogues with Satan in his fits, as the said book does report:
his answer is, that he so thinks. Iesse Be. page 188.
Concerning therefore the credit of this book, it was penned by one Iesse Be,
a sadler of Burto^, allied by marriage unto the said Darling, in this sort:
Darling having had many fits in my absence, sometimes I was informed of them by
word of mouth, from those two that kept him, and sometimes I received some
short notes. But for the most part, such informations as I had, were by word of
mouth, both from the said keepers, and diverse others. And when I was present my
self at his fits, I took the notes of his speeches and other things which
happened, which notes (when I came home) I joined together, as my memory would
serve me: always studying rather to write them in better order, then the boy
spoke them, then in worse: and rather binding my self to the sense of the
boys words, then to the words themselves. I also confess, that the boys
speeches were oftentimes delivered so fast one upon another, as I not being
able to write the brief notes of them, one man would tell me one piece, and an
other some other piece: which when I came home, I did still join together, as
is before expressed. But I am not sure, that either they told me the truth
directly, or that I have therefore written every thing as I should have done.
And again, Iesse Be, page 192.
I do confess that in penning the said book, I did of purpose set down
many points, to favor and give credit unto Thomas Darlings pretended torments:
and that in all my speeches and dealings, I used to countenance, and make
likely the boys pretended possession: wherein I confess my self to have
been greatly ouerseene.

Besides the said Iesse Be, being absent from Darling, by the space of a
month, and at London, one Thomas Saunders procured the latter part of this
book to be penned, and that in this order. He the said Saunders did take short
notes in his tables, and when he came home, he did cause one Edward Wightman
upon his report to set them down. Also upon the said Iesse Bees return from
London, the schoolemaister of Burton told him someting, which he likewise
thrust into the latter end of the book. So as (says he) all these points
touching my treatise considered: there may be for ought I know, very many
untruths in it. This book being penned thus faithfully by Iesse Be and
others, was afterward abridged by one M. Denison, M. Denison 163.
a minister, at the request of M. Walkeden, Tho. Darlings grandfather. In doing
whereof ( says M. Denison) after I had read two or three leaves together of the
said treatise, I did set down the sum of the^ as my memory would serve me,
leaving out many things, and adding sometimes of mine own according to the
general sense, as I imagined. Furthermore, being fully persuaded by the
constant reports which I had heard, that those things which were written by
the boy, were in substance true: Paid in the contracting of the said book,
very willingly amplify the boys commendation: as well in respect of his own
words, as also those speeches, which sometimes the beholders used of him: and
I did bend my self to make many things appear more probable then they were
in the written coppie. As when I found such points, as I thought might seem
absurd or repugnant one to another. I did of purpose leave them out: or else
amended them as well as I could. For example: where it was in the written
coppie (at large) the boys torments and afflictions in his fits were all of
them no doubt mere illusions: I judging those words to cross the whole intent
and meaning of the book, did of purpose leave them out of my Abstract. Again,
where it is in the said written coppie, of the boys fittes which he had the
ninth of May, vz. Will thou give me whatsoever I will desire of thee, if I will
give thee leave to enter into me again? Avoid Satan, thou were in me late
enough: all these words I purposedly omitted (as I think) for that they could
not agree with the rest of the discourse of the boys fits before the supposed
dispossession.

Moreover, by reason that I did so much trust my memory in the contracting of
this book, I perceive by comparing it with the written coppie, that I have
disordred some of the fits, and likewise the circumstance belonging unto them,
ascribing that to one fit which did belong to another: as also some points of
the boys supposed speeches to satan are mistaken by me, and some displaced,
altering the sense from the written copy.

M. Denison ibid.
Besides these omissions, alterations, and mistakings, confessed by M. Denison
him self, it further apeareth that his abstract, falling afterward into some
hucksters hands, received some new additions. For says he, whereas in the
printed copy in the 15. page, it is said, that the party of whom mention is
there made, did utter an oath: I do verily think that the same was added by
the printer or some body else. Again, where it is said in the printed coppie,
page 39. (speaking how the boy was assaulted after his supposed dispossession)
vz. here is to be noted, that howsoever satan grievously assalted him, yet did
he not once torment him, because he was not as before in him: I confess that
there were no such words in the written copy, nor believe that I of my self
did add them, but am rather of opinion, that M. Darrell when he perused my
abstract, having received it from M. Walkeden, did add them.

The occasion that the abstract came into M. Darrels hands, was this: I having
sent the book abridged, M. VValk^den, pa 159
to have it printed at London, (says M. Walkeden) I afterward met upon
occasion M. Darrell and M. Hildersham, and telling them of the sending of the
said book to be printed, they desired me to send for it back, that they
might have the perusing of it before it were printed, which accordingly I did,
and upon the receipt of it back again, I sent it unto M. Darrell. And (as I
think) both M. Darrell, and M. Hildersham had the perusing of it, and upon
their approbation I sent it to London again to be printed. And M. Darrell
himself confesses, that he read, or at the least did hear the said Book
red over, before it went to the press: and yet acknowledges upon diverse
occasions, M Darrell ad art. 9. page 141.
as hereafter shall appear, that sondrie points in it are untrue. Which being
considered together with the premises, it may well be thought that M. Darrell
writes falsely, when he tells us, that a great many would depose the said
Book to be true, if they might be called thereunto by authority, and that
the credit of it notwithstanding, Darling may well enough be judged a
counterfeyte. Besides, it is here likewise to be observed, that for ought
which hitherto has appeared upon any deposition, M. Darrell did himself never
see Darling in above one fit. So as al those particulars that are grounded
upon his experience, how the devil dealt with the boy of Burton, and whereof he
made so often mention, in his practices with Summers, do in effect all of them,
depend upon that corrupt and false and ridiculous treatise.

CHAP. II. Of M. Darrels rashness in affirming Thomas Darling to be possessed,
and of his cunning instructing him, how to behave himself upon the day of his
pretended dispossession.
Whilst M. Darrell was instructing of Summers at Ashbie by fittes, this matter
of Thomas Darlings fell out at Burton, about a year and a half before Summers
was ready for him. And it seems it was so acceptable unto him (having been
out of work from the pretended dispossession of Katherine Wright, vz. for
about nine or ten years,) as that he thrust himself into it somewhat
grossly. For being at Burton upon occasion, about a month before the
pretended dispossession of Darling, and before he had seen him in any fit,
he gave it out, that he thought him to be possessed, upon the bare report of
one Robert Toone the boys uncle, concerning the manner of his troubles: not
doubting (as it seems) but that (being the only man of note in the Country,
that had skill in casting out Deuilles,) he should again be employed, if he
could procure that the boy might be thought to be possessed. This his
rashness being objected unto him, before her Majesty's said Commissioners, he
denies it: but the same is proved as follows.

Rob. Toon pa. 171
About a month before Thomas Darlinges pretended dispossession, John Darrell
upon the day of the common exercise at Burton, came with M* Hyldersham, M.
More, (as I think) and diverse other Preachers unto my house, to see the said
Darling: but at the time of their being there, he had no fits. Whereupon I did
relate unto M. Darrell, and the rest of the said preachers, the manner of the
boys fittes: and then M. Darrell answered, that his opinion was, the boy was
possessed. But M. Hildersham, and M. More (as I remember) did say, that they
were of an other opinion, and asked of M. Darrell his reasons, why he thought
the boy to be possessed. And then the Preachers said, they would confer
further about the matter.

Touching this conference mentioned by Toone, it should seem, it was had by
the said ministers before their departure from his the said Toones house, and
that M. Darrell did so far prevail therein, as he did not only persuade
them, that the boy was possessed, but resolved with them of a fast to be had
at Burton for his dispossession: which resolution was altered upon a very light
accident. Iesse Be. page 188
The third of May, 1596. (says Iesse Be) M. Hildersham, M. Darrell, and
diverse other Ministers (having kept an exercise that day at Burton,) came unto
Thomas Darling: unto whom M. Hildersham used some short godly speeches, the
rest being altogether silent, and not offering either then, or afterward to
speak to the boy. At this time, as it should seem, the ministers had
resolved to have held a fast at Burton, for the recovery of the boy: but they
altered that their determination (as I have been informed either by goodwife
Toone, or by mine own wife,) for that (as the Ministers thought) one being
present, when they were with the boy, did laugh at them, wherein they were
deceived, the cause of the laughter being this. Whilst M. Hyldersham was in
his prayer, I did set my knee upon the leg of M. Hastinges Grisley, who
thereupon smiling, willed me to remove my knee, saying, that I did hurt him.
And this was the laughter that hindered the said fast, as I was informed.

Afterward Darlinges friends having taken diverse courses in the boys
behalf, it was resolved that M. Darrell should be sent for, and accordingly at
the request of M. Walkeden, M. Darrell himself confesses he went to Caldwal,
M. Darrell ad. art. 2. page 39.
where the boy then lay. Before whose coming thither there was (as it
seems) great expectation, that he would work wonders, as partly it may
appear by these words of Darling. About three or four days before M.
Darrels coming, I heard that one should come from Ashbye, T. Darling pa. 49.
as without doing me any hurt should relieve me. It is here also to be noted,
that the said Darling deposes.

Darling, ad ad art. 7. page 120.
That although he had heard it commonly supposed, that he was bewitched, and
that the Witch herself had confessed as much: yet he did never think himself
to be possessed with a wicked spirit, until M. Darrell had so affirmed to his
Grandfather. And true it is, that upon the examination since of some of the
boys friends, touching his counterfeyting, so they might have said, that the
boy was bewitched, and did not therefore dissemble those things he did: for
his possession or dispossession, that they would not stand upon.

T. Darling. pa. 71.
But to proceed with M. Darrell. Being come to Caldwall, he no sooner saw the
boy in a fit, but presently he affirmed him to be possessed, as Thomas
Darling has deposed, and as he himself in effect has confessed: saving (that
to set some little color upon the matter) he says (but untruely) that he
had first seen him have three or four fearful fittes, before he so
affirmed. If he had done so, yet the same had not been any sufficient ground
for that rash assertion, as it has been declared in the first book and fifth
Chapter. Now for the better persuasion of the boys friends, that he was
possessed, and likewise that the boy might have an example, (as it seems) to
imitate, he told them as he was charged in his hearing of Katherine Wright:
who having been possessed, was troubled in such sort, as he the said Darling
had been troubled. This Master Darrell denies: M Darr. ad art. 3. page 139.
Dart. page 71.
but hereof the boy deposes thus. Master Darrell told diverse in my hearing
that were then present, of a certain woman, whom he affirmed to have been
possessed, and said: that she in the time of her possession had some such fit
as I had endured. He also at the same time repeated (as he was charged) in the
boys hearing, what were the signs, both of possession, and dispossession,
mentioned in the scriptures: whereby Darling might learn, what he was to act
and practice the next day, when he was to be dispossessed. These points, M.
Darr. ad art. 4. and 5. page 139. Darling page 71.
M. Darrell also denies: But Darling deposes thus unto them: M. Darrell then
also repeated unto them the signs of possession mentioned in the scriptures:
as foaming at the mouth, and some others: and in like manner, he also then
told the signs of dispossession, as that the parties would lie as though they
were dead, and some other signs he then named.

It being further objected to M. Darrell, M. Darrell ad art. 2. page 14.
that then moving the boys friends to have a fast for his pretended
dispossession: he told them, that that kind of spirit was not cast out, but
by prayer and fasting: thereby taking upon him to discern the nature of the
spirit, which he pretended to be in the boy: He the said Darrell does deny
it. Whereupon, being pressed (out of the book before mentioned, perused by
himself) that having appointed the fast, and moved the parents of the boy,
with the whole family, to prepare themselves to that holy exercise of fasting,
and prayer, he alleged (to put by all doubts) the words of Christ: this
kind goes not out, but by prayer and fasting: his answer is, That this point
is not set down truly in the said book, and that he is therein iniurted.

Again, M. Darrell was charged, that having appointed the said fast to be held
the next day, he foretold to those that were present in Darlings hearing,
that they should see the devil cast him into very strange fits: and that they
should hear the devil speak in him, whereby the said boy might learn, that
he was to act that day the fittes before mentioned: and he the said
Darrell, procure to himself great credit, when all things should fall out as
he had prophesied. Whereunto he the said Darrell aunswering, M. Darr. ad
art. 4. page 15.
confesses somewhat: but more is deposed. I told (says he) some of the
company aparte, that if the next day in their exercise, they should see the
boy almost continually vexed, (as I said I thought it would fall out,) then
they should be thereby further confirmed, that the boy was possessed, and
encouraged to continue their exercise, etc. But Darling himself hereof says
thus: Master Darrell told my friends in my hearing, Th Darling page 72.
that they should see me cast into very strange fittes the next day, and
namely (as I remember) that they should hear the Devil speak in me: and
willed them notwithstanding, that they should not be discouraged: for (says
he) when you shall see these things, M. Darr. ibidem.
his deliverance is at hand. And whereas the Book hereof perused by himself,
says, that he foretold them what interruptions were like to follow by the
enemies rage: He says, that this point, as it is set down in the said
printed book, is not true.

When the pretended fast for Thomas Darlings dispossession began, there are
only named four persons (besides the boy) to have been present: and when
he is said to have been dispossessed, there were but nine. Besides, the boy
is noted in the treatise penned by Iesse Be, to have had eighteen or
nineteen sore fittes that day.

Furthermore, whereas there was no Minister to be present at the said fast:
Master Darrell prescribed certain prayers to be read out of a Book
entitled the Enemy of security.

Again, for ought that appears in the said Treatise, none read the Prayers
appointed in that Book, but the boy himself: and commonly after he had
read five or six words, he fell into a fit. These points considered, it
being objected to master Darrell, that it is not likely that the Devil
could be dispossessed, by such almost private, slender, interrupted, and
scambling prayers, assisted with the forbearing of one meal: he the said
Master Darrell answers thus: Howsoever the prayers articulated were
interrupted, yet I believe they were available with the fasting that then was
used. Whereby it should seem, that the Devil, wherewith the boy was
possessed, was not any of that kind, whereof our Savior speaks in the
ninth of Mark, that was so hard to be cast out, but rather such an one, as
Thyraeus makes mention of, that by going to the church, or by some little
check, might easily be ouer-ruled.

But peradventure master Darrell in his answer, has further relation then
to the fasting and prayer, that was used at Caldwall, where Darling was. For in
the said printed Book, the Devil forsooth, is made to have uttered these
words by the boys tongue, in one of his fits. Brother Glassap we cannot
prevail, his faith is so strong, and they fast and pray, and a preacher
prays as fast as they. And by the preacher master Darrell says (as elsewhere
to another purpose it has been noted) that he believes he himself was
intended and meant. Besides, in the end of the said book, the pretended
dispossessing of the boy, seems to be chiefly ascribed unto M. Darrell: he
had the chief commendation of it, insomuch, as when the seven in Lancashire
were to be dealt with, M. Dees Butler told M. Starkie what a fellow this
Darrell was, and what he had been a means of, at Burton.

It being furthermore objected as a fault to M. Darrell, in that having taken
order for the said fast, and being very earnestly entreated to be present the
next day at it, and like-wise knowing, that except he stayed, no Minister was
likely to be there: Yet he would not be entreated, but made this answer, (as
it is set down in the said book of his own perusal) viz. My assistance in
prayer and fasting you shall have: but not my presence: His answer hereunto is
thus: M. Darr. ad art. 5. page 15.
Where it is expressed in the printed book, that I promised my assistance in
prayer, and fasting: it is not true: Howbeit, being reexamined hereof, about
three or four months after, he made this answer, viz. I believe that I said
unto them, that I would not be unmindful of them, and of that which they had
in hand, in my prayers. But (says he) being earnestly entreated for my
presence at the fast, I denied the same, and that for these two reasons: viz.
for avoiding the note of vain glory, and that the people might through mine
absence be kept from ascribing any special gift to me in casting out devils.
In which his second reason it may be observed: First, his conceit, that the
devil the next day would be cast out: then it appears that he had used great
vauntes of the dispossession of Katherine Wright, or otherwise, why should he
have suspected any such thing by the people? Again, if this were not a
shifting reason, how came it to pass, that he was present at the dispossessing
of the seven in Lancashire: but especially of William Summers, when his name was
almost at the highest? And touching his first reason of vainglory, it being
objected unto him, that the cogitation thereof, as the case then stood, could
never have entered into a man of a single heart, and that thereby it might be
reckoned for a note of vainglory, for any Minister to be present in such an
action: his answer is, as follows. Albeit, it be not in it self a note of
vainglory, for a Minister to be present at the dispossessing of Satan: Yet
forasmuch as I did fear, that some thought that I did glory somewhat too much
in the action of casting forth devils: I for mine own part, thought it would
be a note of vainglory in me, to have been present at the fast of Darling.
At the time of this examination, he had set down part of his former answer,
thus: Yet, forasmuch as in mine own experience, I did find that some thought
that I did glory too much, etc. But afterward, upon his repetition, he
struck out these words (I did find in mine own experience,) and in place of
them, added these: I did fear that some, etc. Howbeit, if he had been so
careful to have avoided the note of vainglory (as he pretends,) he would
never have suffered the words before mentioned of the devil, touching his
praying, as fast as they did, that were with Darling, to have passed his
hands, for thereby he seems so greedy of some commendation, as rather then
fail, he was contended to receive it from Satan.

CHAP. V. Of Master Darrells shifts and absurdities, concerning the pretended
dispossessing of Thomas Darling.
FOrasmuch as Master Darrell holds this for one of his grounds, that the
party to be dispossessed by fasting and prayer, is more tormented that day,
then at any time before (Satan knowing that he has but a short time in him)
it being demanded of him, the said Darrell, how it came to pass that Thomas
Darlings fits did grow upon the day of his pretended dispossession, to be less
and less (as it is reported in the said book which he perused) this is his
shifting answer: If his fits did grow less toward the end of the day, as the
book reports, I can give no reason of it, except it should be that he was
possessed with two spirits, as the Book does seem to insinuate, and then it
might be (I think) that one being gone out, his fittes might be somewhat the
less troublesome. Master Darrell (we see) is in this point full of
uncertainties: as whether it be true that the Book reports: if it be true,
he can give no reason of it, except the boy had two devils in him: and then
he is furnished, relying upon that which is written in the said book, in
these words. In the end of one of his fits, about two of the clock in the
afternoon, he strained to cast with great vehemency, and got up some fleagme,
and choler, at which time if he were possessed with two spirits (as it is
probable he was,) one of them went out of him. Probable? it is more then
probable, that these are more then palpable fooleryes, some peradventure will
say, ridiculous cosenages. But let us see what became of the second devil.
About six of the clock says the book, the boy being in a fit, began to
heave and lift vehemently at his stomach, and getting up some fleagme and
choler, he said, (poynting with his finger, and following with his eyes)
look, look, see you not the mouse that is gone out of my mouth? and so
poynted after it unto the furthest part of the parlour. Hereof Master Darrell
being interrogate, says: M. Darr. page 153
I believe that the spirit then left Darling, when getting up some fleagme
and choler, he said, look, look, see you not the mouse that is gone out of my
mouth? And therein I am the rather confirmed by mine own experience, in that
it has been so with others at the instant of their dispossession.

It seems that Master Darrell has met still with choleric spirits,
which are so hard of disgestion, as no marvel if his patients from time to
time, have strained themselves to vomit. But upon occasion of his said
answer, it being demanded of him how it came to pass, (if he the said
Darling was dispossessed, when the mouse went from him) that he did not give
GOD thanks for his deliverance, till about an hour after, as the Book does
report, he says thus: Although I believe that Satan went out of the boy,
when he said: Look, where the Mouse goes, yet I will not define it, because
it may be, that he continued longer in him: and for his thanksgiving, I
believe that he did then give thanks to God, when the spirit of God moved him
thereunto. This fellow, his faith is as it seems, of a strange quality, that
can believe the devil was gone, when for ought he knew, he might remain
still in him. Besides, it was usual with Darling to give God thanks presently,
at the end of every fit, (Satan remaining in him,) which makes it the more
strange, that being cast out of him he should remain so unthankful by the
space of an hour. But the impostor will have an answer for every thing, be it
never so unlearned or foolish. He, the said Darrel, being here further
demanded, how (he believing that the boy was dispossessed, when the said
mouse went forth of him) it came to pass, that an hour after, he had (as the
Book reports) two fits or trances more? this is his answer: I can not give
the cause of it, but I think that Satan being without him, might cast him
into the said trances. It had bin more probable, if he had said, that the boy
was so weakened in strayning to get Satan out of his stomach, as it could not
be chosen, but that he should afterward have diverse sore pangs and gripes.

Moreover, whereas it appears by the said Book, that Thomas Darling did not
take himself to be (forsooth) possessed, nor his friends that were present,
until after his last trance: wherein these words were heard to proceed from
him: viz. My son, rise up and walk: the evil spirit is gone from thee.
Forasmuch, as M. Darrell affirms, that the boy was dispossessed an hour
before, when the mouse went from him, it was asked of him, who it was that
uttered those words: and he answered in this sort. I am fully persuaded, M
Darrel ad art. 14. page 154.
that the said Words were not Darlings words: but were delivered either by a
wicked spirit, or by an holy Angel. Whereunto, I rather incline. It is much,
that there should be such an affinity betwixt the devil, and holy Angels, as
that they so hardly be distinguished. But it was well, that he rather inclines
to the holy Angel: for otherwise it might have bin suspected, that his patient
had bin the child of Satan: in that the voice said: My son, rise up and
walk. If M. Darrell had considered better of the said Book when he perused
it, he would have prevented the occasions of these shifts. For the incountering
whereof, we find nothing in the premises of any certainety but within. Here
is nothing but, within him: without him: I believe I am the rather confirmed:
it may be: I cannot give the cause of it: I will not define either this or that,
I rather incline: If a man had been hired of purpose, to have marred a good
matter, he could not have managed it possibly worse: so skillful a Catte is
Master Darrell in hunting after Darlinges mouse.

Again, M. Darrell is of opinion, that the only certain means of discerning
one to be possessed, M. Darrell ad art. 16 pa. 144
are the signs mentioned in the scriptures, vz. the crying of the spirit, his
renting sore of the party, and the said parties lying as if he were dead.
which signs because they are not mentioned in the said book, and for that M.
Darrell himself was not present to see, whether the said signs did appear in
the boy or not, upon the day of the fast, it was demanded of him how he knew,
or is yet assured, that he the said boy was then, or is yet dispossessed? and
thus he answers. I am fully persuaded that the signs of possession appeared
in the boy that day, and I verily think, in that the said signs of
dispossession are not mentioned in the said Book, it did proceed from the
^gnorance of those that were present, or of the penner of it, or of both.

And being afterward further interrogated: upon what ground his said full
persuasion was builte: he answers: the reasons that move me to think that
the said signs were showed, vz. all three, or at the least one of them is,
for that I am fully persuaded, that Darling is dispossessed. And that my
persuasion of his dispossession is confirmed. First, by his continuance so long
well: Secondly, by his sensible perceiving of the egresse of Satan in the
likeness of a mouse, and by his very cherefull and hearty thanksgiving to God
for his deliverance. Note by the way, that one of these signs is sufficient to
show one to be dispossessed: If the party do but cry: M. Darrell can
discern that the devil is departed. It was here further objected to M.
Darrell: that Darlings continuance so long well, could be no certain argument
unto him the said Darrel, that the boy is yet dispossessed, considering how
he held: that Satan may lurk in one that is possessed, without making
signs of his being in him for a long time: as he has often affirmed of William
Summers. And hereunto, M, Darr. ad art. 17 pa^ 144.
he shapeth an answer in these words: Satan is contented to lie hid, whilst
according to his desire, it goes with the party and others, that do not
acknowledge the work of God in their said parties dispossession: but do
deny and gainesay the same: but in as much as it falls out otherwise in
Darlings case, he justifying the work of God in his own deliverance, and
praising him for the same, and others likewise praising God for that work of
his, and indeuoring to profit by i^: it cannot be, but if Satan were in
Darling, he would show himself in vexing of him.

You may remember what has been noted of these kinds of iuglers in the last
chapter of the first book: how by their own rules, they seek to prevent the
detection of their cosenages: Summers being dispossessed (as it was pretended)
in November 1597. and having now continued well above a year and a half, yet
forsooth Satan lies lurking in him, because he has confessed his
dissimulation. Nay, here we see that Darlinges friends maintaining that he was
dispossessed, is made an argument that Satan does not lurk in him. Howbeit if
Darling were at all possessed, it is very likely, for ought that hitherto M.
Darrell has said, that so he continues still: for he is neither certain
when Satan departed from him, nor has any assurance, otherwise then by
conjecture, that there appeared upon the day of the said fast, so much as the
signs of his dispossession. Such unskillful Exorcistes deserve no great reward.

CHAP. IIII. Of M. Darrels further practices with Darling to pretend, that
Satan sought to reenter into him, and of some other his untrue assertions,
concerning the boys fittes, and of his cunning dealing likewise with him, that
he should never confess his dissimulation.
THe third or fourth day after the pretended dispossession of Darling, (he the
said Darling remaining very well without any show of trouble) M. Darrel came
to the place of his abode: and after some other communication, entered
cunningly into speech with him, concerning one of his slender grounds, vz. how
it was the custom of Satan when he had been cast out of any, to seek by all
his skill, that he might again reenter: and thereunto added, that for a
certainty, he would so deal with him, the said Darling. M, Darrell ad art. 10
pa. 141
This in effect M. Darrell confesses in these words. The monday after the
dispossessing of Darling, I came unto him, and told him apart out of the xii.
of S. Mat. that the devil would seek to repossesse him: and therefore
counseled him to watch over himself, and to resist him. A godly pretense to
cover a slight with. If he had put no such thing into the boys head, he had
never dreamed of any such matter.

Again, for the boys further instruction (as it may be judged), when M.
Darrell had beaten it into him, that the devil would seek to repossesse him,
he added (as he was charged) that peradventure in so doing he would appear unto
him in the likeness of a friend, and use all the means he could devise to
persuade him to some evil, that so he might catch him and reenter. M, Darr. ad
art 11. pa. 142.
This M. Darrel denies: but Darling deposes it in these words. M. Darrell
coming unto me said, that peradventure the Devil, in seeking to reenter into
me, would appear in the likeness of a friend, and use all the means he could
to persuade me to some evil. And about seven or eight days after these
speeches of Master Darrell, thus used unto him: he the said Darling having
continued perfectly well in the mean time, and being then at the school, did
fall newly again into his former course, and pretended himself to have that
day and the next, seauenteene or eightteene fits, as perceiving by M. Darrell,
that if he meant not to be reckoned a dissembler, in that he had done before,
he must also pretend that the devil was seeking to repossesse him.

Upon the second day, after the undertaking of this new dissimulation: Satan
so withstoode, (as the said book pretends) by the strength of the boys
faith, that he durst assail him no longer: insomuch, as a voice was then
heard, but uttered with his tongue, saying: the Lord thy God has tied thy
enemies fast in a chain: unless thou fall again, he shall never attempt
thee: and thereuppon the Boy (as the Book reports), was well both in mind
and body, and so has ever since remained. This was a quick dispatch: too
hasty a great deal, if that which the book says be true. M. Darrell ad art.
14 pa. 143.
For although M Darrel affirms: that he verily belieueth, that the said
Darling was never repossessed: yet there it is said, that the first night of
his pretending that Satan was seeking to reenter into him, a voice was heard
from him as uttered by the Devil, and saying: he fell, and I caught him. And
also the next morning, the like words in effect are reported to have been
uttered, as in the person of God: thou did fall, and he caught thee.

Besides his friends supposing (as it seems by the book) that the devil
had caught him again: they fell again to their prayers, for the removing of
that heavy displeasure of God. And there appears nothing in the printed
book, whereby it might be denied, that he is not still repossessed: but the
said words pretended to be spoken by the Dove, viz. the Lord thy God has tied
thy enemy fast in a chain: which words M. Darrell ascribed to the Devil, M.
Darrell, art. 15. pa. 154.
Moreover, Iesse Be coming from London, and finding the boy in these kinds of
fits, says thereof thus: I verily thought, that he was as much possessed then,
as he was before, and still I see no reason why I should think otherwise. In
deed therein he says truly: for a dissembling knauish boy he was before,
and so he then showed himself, by the cunning instruction of that Impostor his
master: to whom he was not yet so much beholden, in that he allowed such
things in the said book, as does argue as much the certainty of his
repossession, as of any thing else that therein is reported.

Furthermore, whereas M. Darrell did never see Darling in any fit but once, M
Darr. ad art. 5, pa. 50 and 152. ad art. 5 and 7.
and cannot say much of the manner of his pretended trouble, but by hearesay:
yet he is confident, that in all his fittes, as well before his supposed
dispossessio^, as in those that followed after: he the said Darling was
altogether senseless, having neither memory, nor understanding of any thing he
either the^ did or spoke. It shall not be needful to repeat his words, because
he affirms as much of all that have come under his hands: it being one of
his false general grounds, whereupon the chief part of his iugling
consists. The untruth whereof (as it has been showed in the discourse of
his dealing with Summers) so will it most manifestly appear in the actions and
proceedings of Darling: as they are set out in the said book, that he himself
approved to be fit for the press, and to be published: and as the boy
himself has confessed, and some also have deposed.

Above six weeks after the boy began his tricks, he had upon the fifteenth
of April, three several fittes in effect together: wherein he had a Dialogue
or discourse (as is pretended) with Satan: which fittes being ended, the book
reports thus: He told them that stood by, that if Satan came again, The
book page 10.
he would ask him many questions, and charge him with many things: for he
remembered what he had spoken as well as any that was present. Likewise after
some other dialogues had with Satan by the boy, as it is pretended, M.
Eccarshal Parson of Burton persuaded him (as the book says) that if Satan
spoke to him again, he should not answer him. Whereupon, he being
overthrown into four several fits, one after another, (the last whereof was
most intolerable) it seemed by the boys looks and gestures, that the evil
spirit spoke: but because of M. Eccarshals advise, he kept a discontented
silence, as afterward he told his mother. Again, the said book proceeds to
diverse other particulars which do ensue: when in his fittes he was deprived of
the use of speech, he would make signs of praying with folded hands: page 5.
sometimes lifting them up, and sometimes striking them upon his breast. And
being asked if he could remember what he did, when he made such signs, he
answered, that sometimes he prayed.

page 6.
Again, being asked at the end of one of his fits, wherein he did scritch
pitifully, the reason thereof: he answered: that the pain which he endured
was very grievous, like the pricking with daggers, or stinging with Bees, which
caused his crying. Again, after an other fit, he was asked what he saw: he
answered, a green Catte: and then, pa 15
oh (quoth he) this has been a grievous torment unto me.

Likewise at the end of an other fit, he said, pa. 21,
that a thing spoke unto him with a voice small and shrill: Again, being asked
what he had seen in some other conflictes: he answered, many and fearful
things, and called to mind a thing that spoke to him. The same question being
also demanded of him after an other fit: he said, a great Bear came roaring
upon him: Again in his extreamitie, page 27.
he made signs to the standers by to pray: and himself by folded hands and
other gestures, gave testimony, that the spirit of God was mightily laboring
against his infirmities, etc. he said, pray, pray, etc. he desired the standers
by to sing the sixth Psalm: page 28.
and so they did, he singing with them very cheerfully etc. he sweat
exceedingly and dried his face, as though he had not been in a fit. Diverse
other things in the said book to this effect are here omitted: these being
sufficient to control M. Darrels folly, he himself justifying so confidently
the book to be true. But if they will not serve him, let Darling himself be
heard.

In all those Dialogues (says the boy) wherein I did as it were dispute and
answer Satan, I think I had my memory, Darling page 73.
as I had the use of my tongue. Again, I confess, that in all my fittes
generally, I felt my self to be inwardly sore tormented and troubled: and as
they asked me when my sit was done, of the torments and grief I had endured:
so I told them more or less how I was troubled.

And Iesse Be, the author of the said book deposes: ibid.
that he verily thinks the boys sits were mere illusions: that the boy was
very willing to fall into his fittes, because thereby he might show the graces
of God in himself, by resisting of Satan, as he did in some of his Dialogues
with the Devil: that he thinks that Darling, being well, did know he should
have the use of his memory, when he fell into his fits: that he might have
avoided many of his said fits, if he had listed: that he did of himself
willingly cast himself into some fits, when the devil did not enforce him
thereunto: that he did willingly so cast himself into diverse fits of purpose,
that when the word of God was read, those who were present might thereby the
better be brought to think that the devil could not abide it* and so have a
more due and godly regard afterward of it. And further (says the said Iesse
Be) I confess that finding Darling so willing to cast himself into his
fittes, I did also often read unto him for the same cause (last before
mentioned) and used the words as they are in the book, of provoking him to
battle with Satan: for thereby I well perceived, that diverse that were
present, and had been before of profane life, were very much terrified, and
have ever since much more regarded the word of God. Besides, my practice was,
when at the reading of the word of God, Darling did seem to the beholders, to
have been cast into a fit by Satan, then to desire those which were present
carefully to mark what force the word of God had. And again: as I saw
occasion, by reason of some licentious persons then present, and was thereupon
willing that Darling should fall into any fit: I in reading would give some
verse that I thought to contain substantial matter, an especial twinge: that
is, I read it more earnestly, and with a sharp voice: and then presently the
boy would fall into a fit. This course he confesses he held with the boy,
whilst he the said Darling continued at Burton. And the chief matters of the
book penned by him, do contain the great wonders that were wrought in those
fittes, to set out (forsooth) the force and power of the word of God.

By reason of sundry the testimonies before mentioned, and some other cross
interrogatories ministered to M. Darrell touching this point, he was driven
greatly to the wall, by mincing the matter after this seely sort. I believe
(says he) that Thomas Darling had not his senses or memory in his fittes: but
I think that Satan might so order the matter, as that he either had, or
might have had his senses in his said fittes. The reason why I think he had
not his senses or memory, is for that in my experience I have seen it so in
others. But concerning Thomas Darling, I have no certain knowledge, whether he
was always without his senses in his fittes, because I have not searched nor
inquired into it. And thus having oftentimes resolutely affirmed at Nottingham,
and in sundry of his examinations: that the boy of Burton was senceles as well
in such fits as he had before his pretended dispossession, as also in the
other whilst Satan was seeking his reentrance: Now he confesses, that he
never searched nor inquired into that point, to know the truth: and besides
shakes his false ground in that behalf, in that he says: that satan may so
order the matter, as those who are possessed may have their senses in their
fits.

Moreover, as M. Darrel has presumptuously and falsely affirmed, that Darling
was senceles in all his fits: M. Darrel, ad art. 4 page 152. ad art. 12. page
142. and ad art. 1.151
so has he as grossly and gracelessely maintained, that whatsoever he the
said Darling seemed to do or speak in any of his said fits, it was not he but
satan, that both did it, and spoke it. And thus he says particularly of
certain dialogues (where it seems that sometimes Satan, and sometimes the
boy should speak): M. Darrel ad art. 1. page 151. Dar. ad art. 5. page 50.
I think (says he) that it was satan only that used the words in those
dialogues mentioned in the said book: he the said Satan transforming himself
into an Angel of light, at such times when he seemed to speak godlily. And in
an other place speaking of Darling and others he says: that the devil at such
times did use their members and parts of their bodies, without their knowledge
or understanding. For the disproofe of which bold untruths, that which has
been set down of the boys senses, understanding, knowledge and memory, is
very material, and much more may be added.

Darling ad art 5. page 108.
Thomas Darling, who should be the fittest judge in this matter deposes thus:
I do not believe that what I did or spoke in my fits, was done or spoken
always by satan: for that diverse things were uttered and spoken by me
through the assistance of Gods spirit, Darling ad art. 6 page 120.
in the time of my fits. And again, as I know at this present for a certainty,
that I have the spirit of God within me: so do I with the like certainty
believe, that in my dialogues with Satan, when I alleged sundry places of
scripture, to withstand the temptations he assaulted we with: I had the spirit
of God in me, and by that spirit resisted Satan at those times, by alleging
the scriptures to confound him. True it is, that he the said Darling (about a
month, or 5. weeks after his depositions last mentioned) having learned as it
seems, that M. Darrel was peremptory, that it was the devil who uttered all
the words in the said dialogues: and being again upon occasion examined
touching that point, he deposes in another sort. viz. I believe (says he)
that Satan did speak and utter such Godly speeches, as were used in those
dialogues, and that they were not spoken by me, through any assistance of Gods
spirit. This contrariety does arise from the boys affection to Darrel, being
so bewitched with a false opinion of his holiness, as he supposes he may say or
do any thing that he would have him. As for a further example; He the said
Darling, Thomas Darling page 51.
being asked whether if M. Darell and the rest of his adherents should now say,
that they took all his former fits to be fooleries and deceits, and that they
think he was not possessed, he would not now think that he was not possessed:
His answer is thus: Yes I would think that I was not at all possessed. Again,
being asked whether if M. Darrel and the rest of his fellows should then at
that very instant: tell him that he had fits, and that he were at that instant
possessed, he would at the same instant think he were possessed: he said yes:
I would so believe and think.

The said Iesse Be understanding what Darling had lastly deposed, of the
devils uttering all that was spoken in the said Dialogues: and that it would
thereby follow that the devil moved the standers by to pray and sing psalms,
as it is in one of the said dialogues, and that he and diverse others, when they
did sing and pray accordingly, did therein accompany Satan, and not Thomas
Darling: says upon his examination touching this point. I do verily believe,
that whosoever affirms, that it was the devil that moved us then to pray and
sing Psalms, he says not truly, Iesse Be page 148.
but does lie in so affirming. Again, both I and the rest of the boys
friends (as I believe) did verily think and were persuaded, that when Thomas
Darling did seem to use the godly speeches mentioned in the Dialogues* he
himself did use them, being directed by the spirit of God: neither did we once
imagine or suspect, that the said speeches were uttered by Satan: and I do
still believe, that they were uttered by the assistance of Gods spirit, and not
in any sort by the devil. And again, if it be held for a certain ground,
that whosoever is possessed, is so far in Satan's bondage whilst he is in his
fittes, as that whatsoever he says it is not he, but Satan that speaks it:
I do then fully believe that Thobas Darling was not possessed, and that he
says untruly, if he affirm that he was possessed.

Furthermore, whereas it appears by the said book, that Th. Darling and all
his friends were of opinion, that all the godly speeches in show therein
mentioned, to have been uttered by the boy in his fits, were spoken by him the
said Darling through the assistance of Gods spirit: and that likewise the
principal scope of the book does tend to the magnifying of the boys faith,
and his wonderful constancy in his combats with Satan: M. Darrell being
demanded why he suffered the said book to pass his hands with that great
error, considering his own judgment, that all those things and speeches,
which the boys friends rejoiced in, proceeded from Satan: he the said
Darrell answers thus: I do think that the boy, the Author of the Book, M.
Darrell ad art 12. page 142.
and the boys friends, were of such mind and opinion as is here mentioned:
and for the Book, I suffered it to pass to the press, having read it over at
that time cursorilie: and I was then of opinion, that a great part of the
speeches mentioned in the said dialogues, were uttered by the assistance of
Gods spirit, or by the ministry of an holy Angel. Howbeit, since upon
better aduisement, as I think, I am persuaded that all the said speeches were
uttered by Satan transforming himself into an Angel of light. If any man
will take the pains to peruse those speeches, which Iesse Be has fathered
upon the boy in the said dialogues: he shall find them to be such, as will
hardly be found again in any story (that ever was written) to be ascribed to
satan. But peradventure M. Darrel may have some conceit: that the boy being
supposed to have two devils in him, one of the^ had finished the time of his
torments, and so was become a faithful spirit, ready to be translated from
hell into heaven, as some in that behalf have moralized.

Lastly, it is to be observed, that Darling after he had continued a while in
his first pretended fits, many supposed and gave it out, that he was but a
dissembler, as it may appear by the depositions following. Iesse Be page 148.
Whilst Darling was troubled, ( says Iesse Be) many did think and affirm
it, that he dissembled: and one of their reasons was, for that he did pretend
that the devil spoke unto him, when none else did hear him that were present:
at which times they heard Thomas Darling pretend as though he answered him.
Edw, Baker page 179.
And Edward Baker: I believe (says he) that the boy did dissemble, and I
using these words to his mother: I pray God he do not dissemble: she said,
that I had no faith. This opinion of the boys counterfeyting being held by
many, it was feared (as it seems) least he should be induced by some means,
at one time or other to confess his dissimulation, and thereupon some of his
friends did encourage him to take heed thereof, and to continue constant in
affirming, that he had been possessed, and was dispossessed. Some thing to
this purpose Darling acknowledges in these words. Darling pa. 73
I confess that since the time of my supposed dispossession, my uncle Toone
told me, that although it should be said, that I had but dissembled: yet I
should not be discouraged by their words. And M. Darrell being charged, that
since the time of the pretended dispossession of Darling, he had cherished,
entertained and lodged the boy at his house: and that least his own packing
and dissimulation might happen to be detected as well as the boys: he did use
this, or the like persuasion in effect unto him: vz. that he should continue
constant, and not suffer himself by any allurement to be drawn to say, that
he had dissembled in his former fittes, and that he was never possessed with
any wicked spirit. And his answer is thus: ad ar. 15. pa. 143.
One night I entertained the said Darling in my house at Ashbye: and the rest
he denies: but Darling himself has deposed it. T. Darling. page 77.
I have been with M. Darrell (says he) diverse times, sometimes at Burton,
once at Apleby, once at Packington at several exercises: from whence I went
home with M. Darrell to Ashby, and supped that night with M. Hyldersham, M.
Darrell, two other Ministers, and Mrs. Ireton, at M. Hyldershams house, and I
did lie that night at M. Darrels. Also I confess that Master Darrell has had
some communication with me, and has willed me at some times that I should be
constant, and stick to the truth, meaning, that I should not suffer my self
to be drawn to affirm that I was not possessed: but that I had dissembled in
all my said fittes; and so consequently, that God had not delivered me from
the possession of Satan.

CHAP. V. How Darling confesses his own dissimulation.
THomas Darling being sent for by virtue of her Majesty's Commission for causes
ecclesiastical: was examined, concerning his pretended possession, and
dispossession, and afterward again was dismissed. Of which dismission, the
author of the brief Narration says thus. When they perceived that the power
of God in the boy, was stronger then the malice of Satan, they let him go.
His meaning is, that the boy could not be removed from justifying his own, and
Master Darrels proceedings with him. It may please you therefore to consider,
what the boy deposed, before he went. Inprimis, (says he) I do
voluntarily of myself confess, that whatsoever Master Darrel did say about
my supposed possession, or about prayer for my dispossession, or about my
fittes before or after my dispossession: I did all either of ignorance, or to
get my self a glory thereby. Item I confess that I verily think, that if
I may speak with M. Darrell, I can persuade him never to take any more such
courses, nor to take upon him any such power, to be able to cast out a devil.
Item I confess, as that I think, if my Lord will deal favorably with Master
Darrell, and be good Lord unto him, he will of himself confess the truth,
vz. that he did think me never to have been possessed, and that he will
promise never to enter into any such practice again. Item I confess, that I
felt indeed at first some prickings in my legs: and that at the first I
vomited, and was somewhat evil at ease: but as for all and singular the fittes
mentioned in the Book, and the dialogues with Satan, viz. my saying of
sentences out of the scriptures to Satan, his supposed saying to me, as also
all those supposed apparitions of a Catte, a Dragon, a Bear, Lightnings,
Thundering, a Lamb, a Dove, a Woman, and so of all the several visions and
torments set down in the printed book, I confess they be all untruths,
and no credit to be given to them, or any of them.

And again: the special occasion he says, that first drew him on more
apparently to the said fictions, was this conceit put into his head: that
the Devil could not abide the word of God: that therefore when the word of
God was read, he did willingly at the hearing of some especial points, cast
himself into many fittes: that in the same he used sondrie godly speeches:
that the Standers-by thereuppon observed the power of the word: and that
having little discretion, partly for his own praise, and partly because he
thought the word of God thereby would be better reverenced, he did proceed
in his dissimulaton, as in the said book is more at larged expressed.

Being then further asked, why after his pretended dispossession, he fell
again to his former course: his answer is: that having heard of Master
Darrel, that Satan was accustomed to seek to reenter into those, out of whom
he had been cast: he thought it meet for the better crediting of his former
dealing, to take upon him, as though Satan had sought to have again
repossessed him.

Much more he has set down to the effect specified, and has thus subscribed
unto it with his own hand. This my confession being read over by the L. Bishop
of London in my hearing, I do acknowledge to be true, and this I do affirm
without fear or constraint, very willingly, by the virtue of my oath taken to
deliver the truth in those points, whereof I should be examined concerning my
pretended possession. Howbeit, true it is, that within a fortnight after he was
set at liberty, and had conferred with M. Darrell in the Gatehouse, and with
some others, he writ a letter to the Bishop of London: affirming that he had
been drawn on by subtilties to make the said confession: and adds these
words: what is all this to the purpose? If I of frailty should say, that all
was dissembling, was it therefore? If I say that this paper is black, is it so
therefore? Those articles which I was sworn unto before, I will stand unto
them, and justify them: but concerning the other, I will never consent unto
them: It must be even as the apt scholar of M. Darrels list: a more proud
and desperate forsworn boy, has not lightly fallen into any man's examination.
His answers, that he says he will justify, are those which have been
mentioned in the former Chapter: which are in effect as much as is included in
this his aforesaid voluntary confession. And this may suffice touching this
matter, as well of the boy of Burtons dissimulation, as of M. Darrels practices
with him.

CHAP. VI. A brief of Katherine Wrights confession, touching the beginning of
her dissimulation, and of the reasons that moved her so to do.
THe first beginning of M. Darrels glory, did proceed from his practices with
Katherine Wright: and he has enjoyed the fruit thereof, now about thirteen or
fourteen years. The general cause it self, touching the late attempts of
casting out diuelies, is of great importance: otherwise it is not usual, that
matters so long past should be searched into. Neither had this been dealt
with, but that Master Darrell has in all his practices, with the rest of his
Demoniackes, still insisted upon his experience in the pretended dispossessing
of this poor woman. She therefore, the said Katherine Wright, being
examined, confesses upon her oath, Katherine Wright. pa. 1.
that which will not please Master Darrell. For she says: That in all the
course of her pretended possession and dispossession, and of her fits both
before and since, whatsoever she did that seemde to be extraordinary, it was
all dissembled. And yielding some reasons of the beginning of this her
dissimulation, she says, That her father in law one John Mekin, did for
sundry years use her hardly, in beating and brusing of her very sore, that
she grew therewith to some weakness, and for want of sleep to be
idle-headed: that being in this case, and going one morning for water to a
well, she imagined she saw a child without feet, and that being therewith
greatly afraid, she began to be more and more troubled in her fancy,
supposing that she saw diverse shapes and apparitions.

Furthermore, he affirms, that about the time of her foresaid weakness (she
being then about the age of seventeen years) she began to be troubled with
a kind of swelling in her body, occasioned (as since she has learned) by
some stopping of humors, not unknown to diverse women: that upon signification
unto her father in law, and to her mother of her foresaid sight of the
feetelesse child, and what shapes she saw at sundry times, and also in
respect of her said swelling, he her said father in law made much of her: that
she finding this alteration in her said fathers usage toward her, thereuppon
grew to be indifferently well, saving that her said swelling would often
rise, yet she did still pretend to be troubled with her former kind of
fancies and apparitions, and in her fits of swelling, did voluntarily make her
self to seem worse then indeed she was by scriching, casting her arms
abroad, starting up suddenly from the place where she sat, and sometimes by
falling down, as though she had swouned.

And this course she confesses, she has held from the time she began it,
until the time almost of this her examination, viz. about thirteen or
fourteen years: partly because she was by that occasion much made of, and
for that she feared, that if she had showed her self to have been perfectly
well for any long season, her father in law would have fallen to his former
hard usage of her. But when she was examined, she professed, That thenceforth
she would become a new woman, and leave all her former dissimulation.

CHAP. VII. Of Master Darrels proceedings with Katherine Wright, for her
pretended dispossession.
IT seems that after K. Wright had continued a while in her aforesaid
dissimulatio^, a brute thereof was spread abroad, and diverse came to see her.
Amongst whom, M. Beresford. page 9.
one master Beresford resorting to her, and being moved in compassion toward
her, took her away from her fathers, and carried her home to his own house,
because, (as he says) her said fathers house was no fit place to give
entertainment, to any that should come to help her. At master Beresfords
house she continued about a month, and then (as he says) he sent her to
Mansfielde, to be comforted or cured of her infirmity, because he had heard
master Beckingham to be a man of note, and master Darrel, dwelling then in
Mansfield, a man of hope, for the releeuing of those which were distressed in
that sort. At this time master Darrell was not above three or four and twenty
years old: but young it pricketh that will be a thorn.

The said Katherine Wright coming to Mansfielde upon the Thursday, Master
Darrell had dispatched the devil out of her, by the Saturday at noone next
following, and in this manner, as he himself confesses. Upon the Saturday in
the morning, M. Darrell accompanied with his own wife, the goodman of the
house, named Edward Loades, and the rest he remembers not, undertook this
work. He began (he says) to pray about four of the clock in the morning,
and continued in a manner til about twelve, at what time she was delivered. The
prayers which he used, were partly described, and partly conceived by himself.
One of the prescribed prayers, he read out of the book entitled The enemy of
^ecuritie. Being here demanded whether the five his associats did continue
with him all the while that he prayed, he answered thus: It is likely that some
did stay with me all the while, and that some of the family, viz. the
householders, did not continue theirs all the while without departure, as happily
not being so devout, that they would forbear all worldly business to attend
that holy exercise. By which his answer, it is likely, that the whole burden
for Katherine Wrights dispossession, did rely upon the shoulders of M. Darrell
and his wife. A devil could not well be cast out with less trouble, if this
had been all: but there was another engine used, as Katherine Wright has
deposed in these words. Ka. Wright page 5.
One fashion of Master Darrell in my pretended dispossession at Mansfield, was
to lie upon my belly, saying that he would by so lying, press the devil out
of me. When this strange fashion was objected to Master Darrell: Ah (quoth
he) I looked for this, and then framed his answer unto it in this sort: M.
Darr. art. 7. page 40.
I having read in the scriptures, how Elias and Saint Paul did stretch
themselves along on some that were dead, in their recovery to life, and being
a young student in divinity, not past four or 25. years of age, I did in a
blind zeal (as I think) lie upon the said Katherine Wright as it is
objected. Afterward this his said answer being repeated (as the manner is,)
he did thus amend it. viz. I did lie upon the said Katherine Wright, but not
upon her belly, as I believe. This his qualification being allowed of, he
desired about three days after, a second reuiew* and then for the discharge of
his conscience (as he said) in delivering the truth, he setle down his
mind in this sort: Whereas, being examined upon the sudden of a fact done
twelve years past, I have said that I did the same, as there it is expressed
in a blind zeal, meaning a foolish and indiscreete imitation of the Prophet
and the Apostle: I do now protest, that having called my self better to mind,
by conferring with my wife, (who was then present) and by better deliberation
upon the same, that I verily believe, I did not the said fact, to the end
there specified: loath for that I never dreamed at that time of working any
miracle, neither did look for her deliverance from Satan: but she being at
that time very unruly, I did it to keep her down, there being also at that
time, another upon some part of her, and upon me, that we might the rather
keep her down. And thus at the length you have his perfect answer: wherein
it is to be feared, that he has made bold with his oath. For whereas at the
third time, he says he was taken upon the sudden, when he made his first
answer, that seems not to be true, for that his said lying upon her was no
sooner mentioned unto him, but he affirmed that he looked for it, and had two
examples ready for his excuse therein. But the chief matter he feared, that
would have been inferred of his first answer, was this, viz. that thereby it
would have been collected, he had a purpose to have wrought a miracle, which
he (forsooth) by no means can endure to hear of. You may term his casting
out of devils, a strange, a wonderful, and a myraculous work (as his friends
have done in their writings, with his good liking) but not a miracle.

Furthermore, M. Dar. ad art. 71. page. 39.
as touching the effecting of this myraculous work, master Darrell
affirms, that although he inclined to think, that Katherine Wright was
possessed when he took her in hand: yet he was not fully persuaded of it,
till after her dispossession. Howebeit, Katherine Wright says thus: Master
Darrell as soon as he saw we, said he was of opinion, that I was
possessed of a devil, but master Beckingham thought otherwise: and master
Darrell was the first that ever I heard say, that I had any devil in me. But
upon his own said speeches, he being demanded why he continued so long in
prayer upon the Saturday, being not fully persuaded that she was possessed, he
answers after this manner. I was then fully persuaded that she was vexed with
Satan, either within or without her, and knowing that faithful prayer is the
best means to withstand satan, etc. I did join and continue in prayer so
long with her. But being here interrogated, that forasmuch as prayers must be
made without wavering, whether he had not hope by his prayer, to deliver her
from Satan's molestation, whilst he continued therein so long: I do not think
(says he) I am bound to answer hereunto. So as here was a devil cast out by
chance. Master Darrell meant somewhat that satan could not endure, and
therefore he departed.

M Darrell ad art. 10. pa. 152,
Moreover, forasmuch as Master Darrel holds that Christ did ordain fasting
and prayer to be the ordinary means to continue in the Church for casting out
devils: and that the duty of the party to be dispossessed, is to dispose
himself before to prayer and fasting, and to perform the same if satan do
not hinder him: he being again demanded, why he did not appoint a fast, as
well as use prayer for the dispossessing of Katharine Wright, this is his
answer: M, Darr. ad art 6. pa. 40.
I was not then of the opinion mentioned, and as now I am, and therefore I did
but only use prayer. But whether I my self purposed to fast, or advised
Katherine Wright so to do, I do not now remember: but I believe that I did
not make mention of any fasting to the rest of the company. This is a loose
shift if it be looked into. For if he were not then of the said opinion, why
does he forget why he purposed to fast or not? he would not be thought at
that time, to have had any needelesse purpose. But be it as he list, yet
there we see, that Katherine Wright was dispossessed, but not by the ordinary
means that Christ has appointed: and so he must be driven to confess that
he wrought a miracle.

Again, it being objected to master Darrell, by her majesty's Commissioners,
that he knowing the said Katherine Wright to dissemble in her pretended fits
at Mansfield, had private conference with her, and taught her how to order her
self in the manner of her counterfeiting, whereby he encouraged her in that her
lewd course: M. Darrell, ad art. 8. pa. 31.
he does deny it, but thereof Katherine Wright deposes thus. M. Darrell
after his coming to me at Mansfielde, did tell and teach me alone, Ka.
Wright page 4.
how to use and order my self in my fittes.

Likewise master Darrell being charged to have had private speech with
Katherine Wright, before her pretended dispossession, and in the same to have
told her, that she had sundry devils in her, that he heard them speak, and
one of them call another by the name of Midlecub, and diverse other names, he
answers thus: M. Darr. ad art. 9, p. 40,
I with some others did hear from within her the said Katherine Wright,
(being in a trance) the morning of her dispossession, an intercourse of
certain speeches dialogue-wise, of which speeches, I do not now remember any
thing. A strange matter that devils should talk together in M. Darrels hearing,
and yet that their communication upon his first acquaintance with him, should
make no deeper impression in his memory. Some others (he says) heard the said
speeches, meaning of likelihood his wife: for having but 5. with him, Ka.
wright. page 4.
and they of the household applying their worldly business, many could not hear
them. But consider what Kathr Wright has hereof deposed. M. Darr. told me
once alone that I had devils in me: and I said I knew I had none: but he told
me yes, saying, that he heard them speak in me: that were strange (quoth I)
seeing I my self do not hear them. Why (quoth he) I heard them call themselves
in thee, Midlecub, and other names which I cannot remember. Now least any
should doubt how these devils came into her, M. Darrell so contrived it, as
they were sent thither by one Margaret Roper, a witch. M. Dar. ad art. 24. p
42.
Hereof master Darrell says thus: When Katherine Wright came first to
Mansfielde, I demanded of her when and how her fittes began she answered,
that they began shortly after that she had denied to give something unto an
old woman, John Meekin pa 20.
one Margaret Roper of Eckington. Whereupon (says John Meekin, the maids
Father in law, Master Darrell presently affirmed, that the said Margaret was
a witch, and had bewitched her. Many other things happened no doubt betwixt
master Darrell and his patient, the first three days before her pretended
dipossession, but these are sufficient to show, how being but a nouice in that
trade, he bestirred himself in so short a time.

Again, it being objected to master Darrell, that he did falsely pretend the
said Katherine Wright to be dispossessed, in that she departed from him, as she
came to him, and continued presently afterward, when she was carried back to
master Berisfords, to be as she was before, he answers thus: M. Dar. ad
art. 11. pa 40,
I do verily believe that she was dispossessed, and that she continued well
after, for the space of six or eight weeks: saving that three or four times,
whilst she was at Mansfield, the devil seeking to reenter, did trouble her a
little for some quarter of an hour, or an hour, whom she for that time did
res^st, and I did assist her therein. And whilst she remained at master
Berisford^, she was not troubled with any fit. But Katherine Wright deposes
thus: I remember that M. Darrell said he had cast a devil out of me,
notwithstanding that I neither perceived nor thought any such matter but was
when I parted from him in the very same case, when that he came to Mansfield:
that is, I was somewhat held with my swelling, and the rest I did willingly
act of my self. M. Beresford.
And Master Beresford. I remember that Master Darrell brought Katherine
Wright from Mansfielde to my house, and told me that he had recovered her.
Howbeit, I finding her shortly after to be as evil as before, discharged my
self of her, and sent her home to her brothers house at Whittington. Likewise
Thomas Wright. Master Beresford told me, Thomas Wright, pa. 21.
that my Sister Katherine Wright having been with one Master Darrell, was not
amended, and so willed me to take her home with me, which I did accordingly.
John Meekin, pa. 19.
And John Meekin. Katherine Wright being returned to Master Beresfords house,
I came unto her, and carefully observed to see what change was in her, and
found her after her woonted manner, according to her former fittes, nothing
bettered by her being at Mansfield. It is to be observed that Katherine Wright
went to Mansfielde about Easter, and remaining there a month, was carried
back again to Master Beresfords, and from thence to Thomas Wrights, about
the Whitsontide after. By which conference of the time, it appears directly,
that master Darrell is herein greatly deceived, and that Katherine Wright was
not at all in any sort relieved by him.

Within a fortnight or three weeks (as it seems) after Katherine Wright was
with her brother at Whittington, she continuing her former practices, master
Darrell was again sent for to come unto her, by the direction of M. Beresford
(as Thomas Wright affirms) and upon his first sight of her he presently
affirmed, that she was repossessed. This M. Darrell confesses in these words.
M. (...).
As soon as I came and saw her, I affirmed to those that were present, that
she was again repossessed, but I am uncertain whether I so said when I was
in her presence. If there were nothing else but this to charge M. Darrell with,
yet were it sufficient to show either his childish rashness, or that he is an
Impostor: it being impossible for any man upon the sudden to pronounce any to
be repossessed, except he had the gift of discerning of spirits, which M.
More says, is now abolished. But according to this beginning, so he did
proceed. First he affirmed that she was in her fits altogether senseless: and
that whatsoever she either did or spoke, it was not she, but the Devil in her
that did both. Which two points being objected unto him: he answers thus: I
do not believe that I affirmed her to be in her fittes altogether senseless:
M. Darrel ad art. 17. page 41.
but I doubt it might be that I said, that whatsoever she either spoke or did
in her fittes, it was not she but Satan. Whether he said then she was
senseless or not, it is not material: seeing he has so affirmed many
hundredth times since: but how untruly concerning them both, these depositions
following will declare.

Ka. Wright page 3.
M. Darrel at his coming to me to Whittington, told the standers by that I was
senceles, notwithstanding that I well knew every one of my acquaintance there
present, and heard him every word what he said, and could answer readily and
directly to any that asked any questions of me. It was M. Darrels manner (says
Th. Wright) to affirm that she was senceles, and that it was the devil in her
that answered him: Th. Wright page 21,
notwithstanding that both I and all others present (as I think) judged that
she had the commandment of her own senses, and knew what she spoke, because at
all times she understood any questions made unto her, and would answer roundly
and aptly to the same. M. Beresford. pa. 10
And M. Beresford. At the time of her second pretended dispossession, I and
others did ask her in her fits some questions, which she answered sensibly.

Furthermore, as touching the ordinary means of casting out Devils by fasting
and prayer, according to M. Darrels own rules, he being charged not to have
used the same, and yet after some interrupted prayers, to have affirmed, that
she the said Katherine Wright was again dispossessed: he confesses, that he
so affirmed, and for the other point says thus. There was no fast appointed:
M. Darrel art. 19. page 41.
but I for my part did fast, and I think I did move Katherine Wright to do the
like. How likely this is to be true (considering he was not then of opinion,
that fasting was necessary in this case) may easily be gessed. The day of his
own pretended fast was upon the Sunday: and thereof M. Beresford deposes in
this sort. M. Darrell coming to my house, we went together unto Whittington
upon a Sunday after dinner. By which words, it seems that they dined
together that day: and then Master Darrels was but a curtolde fast.

Before M. Darrels coming to Whittington, W. Sherman. pa. 25.
but after it was known that he should come thither, there was a great brute
that a miracle should be done there: as William Sherman deposes: whereupon
he amongst others repairing thither: I found (says he, as I think) four or
five hundred people gathered together, at, and about the house of Thomas
Wright, where the maid lay. To which effect, M. Beresford likewise deposes,
M. Beresford pa. 10.
that when he and M. Darrell came to Whittington, they found a great number
gathered together, to see what would become of the matter. Herevppon we may
not doubt, but that M. Darrell labored to show his skill: and besides, that
which before is expressed, did play indeed sundry pretty tricks to move the
greater admiration. For whilst he was indeuoring to dispossess her, he induced
her by cunning speeches, to lie as though she were senseless, which he termed
a trance. It is true that he denies this: but thereof K. Wright deposes. I
confess that M. Darrell put me in mind to be in a trance, and to lie as though
I were senseless after my violent fits, and that at the time of my pretended
dispossessing at Whittington, when I should have lien as though I had been
dead: I fell fast a sleep, and then when I awaked, Ka. wright. page 4.
I heard master Darrell say to them that stood by, that I had been in a
trance. Another of his feats was this, whilst he was thus working with her to
cast out the devils: (for you must understand that the first had brought 7.
more with him) he fell to show the strength of his faith, in daring to enter
communication with the said spirits, diverse in the mean time trembling and
quaking as feating some hurt to themselves, when they should be cast out. In
this his great show of courage, he commanded the devils to tell him their
names, and one of them (forsooth) saying his name was Roofye: thou lie (quoth
M. Darrell) that name is common to all spirits: and then further urging them,
another (forsooth) said his name was Midlecub, which M. Darrell approved to be
his true name. Unto these particulars M. Darrell answers thus.

M. Darrell ad art. 22. pa. 42.
I confess, that I charged the spirit to tell his name, (which I did then in
ignorance) and that on spirit said, his name was Roofye, in a very great voice,
and in very fierce and cruel manner, and that another said his name was
Midlecub. But Th. Wright deposes of the other circumstances. I well remember
(says he) that at the time when M. Darrell charged the spirit to tell his name,
he answered his name was Roofye, to whom M. Darrell said, Thomas Wright, pa.
23,
that he lied, for that was a common name to all spirits: and then he charged
him again to tell his name, and he gave diverse other names which now I
remember not. Now how it came to pass that Katherine Wright used those names,
she has before signified: when M. Darrell told her at Mansfield, that he heard
the spirits within her, tearming themselves by those names: Ka. Wright page 4.
which names (says she) I remembered, when Master Darrell asked the supposed
devils their names: and so did answer him in the person of the diuelles,
according to the names that I had learned of him. Besides, it would be
considered what evil luck M. Darrell has in his depositions. For whereas he
says, that the spirit Roofye told his name in a very great voice, and in very
fierce and cruel manner: William Sherman deposes, Will. Sherman. p. 26.
That he heard a voice, which he thought to be no other, then the maids
voice, she lying under a covering. Th, wright. pa, 21,
And Thomas Wright. The speeches spoken (as Master Darrell said) by the spirit,
were verily taken to be the speeches of Katherine Wright, and ^poken by her
natural voice and none other. Again* he played a third legerdemaine,
aunswerable to any of the former. For whilst he was further laboring in this
matter with the maid, he took upon him to discern when every of the said 8.
spirits departed: saying to those that were present, there goes our one
spirit: and then after a while, there goes out another spirit, and so the
nimble fellow proceeded until as he pretended, 8. devils were gone out of her.
It may be easily conceived, in what a perplexity the people were, when these
eight devils were thought to be flying amongst them. But let master Darrell
speak the best for himself. Upon the sunday, etc. (says he) the said
Katherine Wright showing the signs of dispossession, M, Darr. art 20. and 21,
pa. 41.
as renting sore, crying loud, and lying for dead, I affirmed, that I
believed, that then one of the spirits went out of her: which signs appearing
in her eight several times that day, and the night following, I said she was
possessed of eight wicked spirits, and was also dispossessed of them. The rest
of the premises he denies. But they are deposed by Katherine Wright. Ka
Wright pa. 3.
I heard (says she) M. Darrell affirm: there goes out one spirit, there
goes out another spirit, and so till all were gone: notwithstanding, I knew
well, or at the least thought, that I had none in me.

Furthermore, it being objected to M. Darrell, that upon Katherine Wrights
naming of Midlecub, as is before expressed, he (having learned of the said
Kather. Wright, that she and one Margaret Roper of Eckington were at some
jar, and thereupon had affirmed to Katherine Wright, that she the said
Margaret had bewitched her) did ask the said Midlecub who sent him thither:
and the maid or Middlecub forsooth, answering Margaret Roper, he the said M.
Darrell gave it out publicly, as he had before privately to the said
Katherine: that Margaret Roper was a Witch, and had bewitched the said maid:
and thereupon procured a Constable to carry her with him the said Darrel to one
M. Fouliamb a Justice of the Peace, who disliking his course, threatened to
send him to the Jail. Hereof M. Darrell confesses part, and there are some
depositions for the rest.

M. Darrell, ad art. 25. pa. 43. Io. Meykin, pa. 20.
Upon the occasion mentioned (says M. Darrell) I did procure the said
Margaret to be carried to M. Fouliambe, who would have sent her to the Jail.
But John Meykins thus. At M Darrels instigation, she was carried to one M.
Fouliambe a Justice, and he reproving the said Darrell for accusing the said
woman, told him, that if he so demeaned himself any more, he would send him
to the Jail. Th. Wright pa. 20
And Thomas Wright. M. Fouliambe examining the matter, found no cause in any
sort to touch Margaret Roper, and forthwith discharged her.

Again, M. Darrell was charged to have persuaded Katherine Wright to scratch
Margaret Roper the pretended Witch, till she drew blood of her: saying, that
in so doing she should be cured, and that he accordingly procured the said
Margaret to be brought unto her, and that she the said Katherin did draw blood
of her. These points M. Darrell does after a sort deny, but with some shifting.
Thus he says. M. Darrell ad art. 25. page 43.
I verily think that Margaret Roper would sundry times have confessed her
sself to have bewitched K. Wright, but that still at the instant, when she
should have delivered those words, the devil (as I think) did stay her: A
substantial conceit to be delivered upon his oath. But he proceeds, and
tells us, that he stayed her from the jail, as he remembers. It seems
that this could not have bin forgotten, if it had bin true. But he shows this
reason why he so entreated for her, telling M. Fouliambe this tale, viz. that
the spirit, which had affirmed, that Mar. Roper had sent him to K. Wright,
ibidem.
did likewise affirm, that if the said M. Roper were brought to the said
Katherine, she the said Katherine should smart for it: or words to that effect.
M. Fouliambe is dead, so as this depends upon M. Darrels poor credit. He
could not deny but that the pretended witch was brought to K. Wright, and
therefore as it seems, deuiseth this shift to cover that point objected unto
him in this behalf. But he goes on further saying thus: Mar. Roper being
brought to the said Katherine, M. Dar. ad art. 25. p. 43
etc. some others, I not being amongst them, as I believe, would have had the
said Katherine to have scratched the said Margaret by the face, but as I was
informed, the said Katherine was not able to scratch her, nor did draw any
blood of her as I believe. This scratching of witches, is generally accounted a
thing unlawful, which caused M. Darrell (it may be thought) to pretend this
great uncertainty. Howbeit, though his memory be weak, his faith we see is
strong. But K. Wright affirmed upon her examination, that master Darrell told
her, as is before expressed, and that accordingly, when M. Darrell brought
Margaret Roper unto her, she the said Katherine scratched her, and drew blood
on her. And for the better justifying of her words therein, T. Wright her
brother deposes thus: In my hearing M. Darrell persuaded K. Wright to scratch
Margaret Roper, and to draw blood of her, assuring her that the said Margaret
had bewitched her, and that by drawing of blood from her, she should be
cured. And to that purpose Master Darrell procured the said Margaret to be
brought to my house to Katherine Wright, and accordingly she the said
Katherine did scratch her by the face, and drew blood of her. All which
notwithstanding, the said Katherine received no ease thereby.

Lastly, whereas M. Darrell did pretend that then Katherine Wright was
dispossessed of eight devils, and has since so often bragged of his dealings
with her, both at Burton and in Lancashire, and at Nottingham, and in every
place in effect where he has come, in so much, as some of his friends
thought, he took too much upon him in that behalf: the truth is, as it
appears by sufficient depositions, that he delivered her no more from the
said eight spirits, then he had done before from the first, and that she
received no benefit at all, by his prayer and packing with her, but then left
her again as he found her. To this purpose there are these depositions: Io,
Meekin pa. 19,
M. Darrell continued making of a wonder and a dinne to and with her, (when he
pretended to cast out eight devils of her) but what good he did her thereby, I
could not perceive, neither could I find that she received any ease thereby.
This I certainly know that M. Darrel spent at VVhittington some three days,
and that after his departure, she continued as before in the self same manner of
fits, that formerly she had used. And Th. Wright* I could never find, Th.
wright, pa, 24.
either by mine own judgment or by the opinion of others that were present at
the time of her said dispossessions, or afterward, that the said Darrell had
done any good or ease unto the said Katherine, during her aboade with me.
Which I most certainly do believe, for that the fits which she had before
Darrels coming to her in my house, and at the time of his being with her, and
likewise all the time after, were still alike, without any change or alteration.

And to conclude, Katherine Wright deposes, Katherine Wright pa. 4.
that when in her pretended fittes she scritched, started, striued to seem
strong, feyned to speak in the person of the devil, and to act many such
tricks, she did dissemble, and counterfeyte them all, and acknowledge that in
so doing, she deserves to be grievously punished, both by God and the
Queen, and is heartily sorry, and beggeth pardon for the same. But M. Darrell
will stand to it like a man, that she did not counterfeyte and dissemble: but
was indeed first possessed by one devil, then dispossessed, and afterward
repossessed with eight, and again dispossessed of them all: Ibidem.
Katherine Wright says, that none in the world did know she dissembled, but
M. Darrell, and that he at Whittington did charge her, that what means soever
were used, she should keep her own counsel and his: for if ever she
confessed her dissembling, they were both undone for ever. And she adds,
that she thinks he will never confess, that he practiced with her to
dissemble, by reason of the words he used unto her. But M. Darrell will start
at this, and verefie her opinion. Katherine Wright deposed, says, that since
M. Darrels first dealing with her, she has continued her dissimulation at
times, till within a quarter of a year or thereaboutes, before this her
examination, for the same causes, that first she pretended herself to be
worse then indeed she was: vz. to live at some ease, and to be much made of:
but now promises and auoweth to leave all her former practices, and to become
a new woman, and to live and work orderly and quietly with her mother and
father, as it becomes an honest poor woman to do. But Master Darrell, he
(forsooth) is resolute; that she was repossessed within a short time after he
had left her, and that so she has continued ever since, and so remains at
this Present. True it is, that if he should not so hold, he must be driven
with shame to confess, that all his dealinges with her were vain and
frivolous: which would very much discredit the rest of his wonderful works.

CHAP. VIII. of M. Darrels proceedinges with Mary Cooper the sister of William
Summers.
THe last that M. Darrell had in hand to work his skill upon, was one Mary
Cooper of Nottingham, wife of Robert Cooper the younger. This Mary remaining
with her father in law, had seen her brother and Master Darrelles dealinges
with him, at her said father in laws house, and did herself begin to
practice her brothers tricks: pretending to be troubled as he was presently
after Christmas, 1597. at what time her brother falling again to his old
tricks, was judged by Master Darrell to be repossessed. Of which matter
Master Darrell in his Apology writes vauntingly in this sort. If Summers be
a counterfeyte, and I have taught him, then undoubtedly Mary Cooper his sister
is such, and has also confederated with us herein. For she cannot only do
some of his tricks, as they call them, but besides, for a time began her
fittes, when he had entered his: he in like sort following her, having their
fittes by course. And this they did although they were in several rooms, as I
am able and offer now to prove by a multitude of witnesses. But hereof as she
will clear me, so it has not hitherto been said, that she has any hand in
this counterfeyte action, why then do any charge that upon me? Is it not time
well bestowed to deal with this Impostor? See how in effect he reasons: I
taught not Mary Cooper to counterfeyte: therefore I taught not Summers. And
again, if I have taught Mary Cooper to counterfeyte, then she has
confederated with me and her brother. But because M. Darrell will needs be
so gallant in this matter, it shall appear both what may be, and has been
laid to his charge, together with his answers thereunto.

First, Mary Cooper says thus: Mary Cooper. pa. 203.
many times Master Darrell would call me unto him alone, I being in my fathers
house, and tell me that he doubted, that I would prove in time to be
possessed, and therefore bad me look unto it. M, Darrell ad art. 1. and 2 pa.
211
These points Master Darrell does in effect confess to be true in these
words: I believe that I have had diverse times private speeches with Mary
Cooper: but so as I always did cast to avoid suspicion of incontinencie: and
also that sometimes or other, I have said unto her, that as I thought, she
would prove to be possessed with a wicked spirit. He was never charged with
any suspicion of incontinencie, nor other crime, which did not concern his
casting out of deuilles: so as therein he was too cautious.

Howbeit in that, which here he has confessed, he was not so circumspect.
For his particular speeches with her were nothing else, but a cunning project
to put Mary Cooper in mind, that she might counterfeyt such a matter, and so
she took it. Hereunto also that appertains, which she deposes thus: I
oftentimes heard M. Darrell say before my pretended euilnes, that it was the
deuilles custom, Mary Cooper. Ibidem
when he had possessed one in a Family, to seek to possess more of the same
family likewise. This, (as arguing too plainly his cunning packing) Master
Darrell denies: but it is somewhat strengthened by Summers deposition in this
behalf: Summers page 26.
Before time (says he) that I fell again into this course, meaning his
pretended repossession, I heard M. Darrell tell some that were present, that
except very good heed were taken, the devil would not cease with afflicting of
me: but would also, as he thought, assail some other in my father in laws
family. Of which words, I did not then know the meaning, till afterward,
that my sister did pretend herself to have the like fittes to mind, and then I
did verily suspect that M. Darrell had brought my sister to imitate me. But
afterward I was out of doubt thereof: for I desiring to understand of Master
Darrell, what my sister ayled, he bad me not to fear her: for (quoth he,) she
is but as thou art, and shall do well enough.

Furthermore, whilst the said Mary Cooper was meditating (as it seems) upon
Master Darrels former speeches, it fellout, that a child of hers died a
little before Christmas: which she took so heavily, as it made her (as she
says) indeed and truly evil at ease, and somewhat weak: whereupon certain
women, and others in the town, coming unto me, told me (says she) that I
was worse, then I knew my self to be: and that I would be as evil as my
brother William was. These words added to M. Darrelles former speeches: that
he doubted, she would prove to be possessed, and that Satan was not
content with one in a Family, together with her experience of the signs of
possession; which she had seen in her brother, and often heard of Master
Darrell, made her, (as she says) to do that which she never thought to
have done: that is (as she adds) to tomble and toss, to talk idely, and to
laugh: which laughing, I would sometimes have restrained, but could not by
reason of the peoples foolish speeches that were present. This laughing and
fleering some would think to be but a small matter: but consider what M.
Darrell gathered of it, M. Darrell ad art. 4. page, 211.
I affirmed (says he) in Mary Coopers hearing, that her laughing and fleering
countenance was such, as I had seen in others who were possessed.

Again, the said Mary Cooper being thus deemed to be troubled with Satan, it
fell out, that besides her said grief and weakness, she had also some
swelling in her body: whereby she verily thought her self to be with child.
And otherwise whatsoever she pretended in outward show, she neither had,
suffered nor felt, (as she has deposed) any thing in the world. Against her
opinion of being with child, M. Darrell opposed himself as much as he could.
M. Darrell (says she) labored to bring me from my persuasion of being with
child: by often saying, that it was no child, but such a child, as God bless
every good body from: and such a child as would stick by me, as all there in
Nottingham should see apparently. M. (...)


These words of Mary Coopers being deduced into an article (as they are here
set down) M. Darrell answering unto it, says thus: I have at sometimes
labored to persuade the said Mary, as it is articulated.

Furthermore, notwithstanding that the said Mary Cooper has confessed her
dissimulation, and the reason that moved her thereunto: and moreover also
deposes thus: when I spoke any idle words to the beholders, I knew very well
what I said and did: but made show to speak idly: when I laughed, I knew that
I laughed: and in all my pretended fittes, I heard and saw, and understood as
well as any present: and did answer directly to any thing that the standers by
demanded of me: and when M. Darrell in my pretended fits was vehement and
earnest with me, I laughed at him, and could not but laugh, if one had given me
never so much: yet notwithstanding M. Darrell says in this sort: I confess
that I affirmed, that the strange troubles, M. Darrel ad ar. 7 pa. 212.
which she endured, did either proceed from satan within her, or by his
outward operation: that I believe she was senseless in her fittes, and I have
said, that her laughter in her fittes did proceed from the devil: and I do
likewise believe, that when she spoke, it was not she but Satan. It may hereby
evidently appear, what a garboyle this lewd Impostor would have made in
Nottingham, if he had not been prevented: for upon his said speeches, diverse
of his adherents, specially women, they bestirred themselves in this matter, as
Mary Cooper has deposed.

When mistress Gray (says Mary Cooper) and the rest of her company came about
me, saying and reporting, that I should be delivered of some monstrous thing,
I laughed heartily at their folly: and this my laughing they termed my fit,
and would cry out: now Lord bless her, she is in a sore fit: the which their
foolish wondering made me laugh more and more: and the more I laughed, the more
they cried: Lord have mercy on her, she is in a strange fit. Besides, when I
had laughed till my heart was sore at them, and so was feign of necessity to
lie still, and not stir, because my strength was spent with laughing, then
would the whole company of women, namely Mrs. Gray, and the rest, cry out:
Lord bless her, Lord save her: Lord Jesus have mercy on her, now she is in a
trance.

And whereas M. Darrell in his words before recited out of his Apology, does
offer to prove by a similitude of witnesses, that for a time Marie Cooper began
her fits, when Summers had ended his, and that he in like sort followed her,
having their fits by course, and that this they did, although they were in
several rooms: which he makes a strange matter, and does thereby insinuate,
that they being in diverse rooms, could not know by any ordinary knowledge when
either of their fittes ended, that so the one might begin after the other had
done. Consider what M. Aldridge does here depose. William Summers and his sister
(says he) being troubled together, (as it is pretended) I had very much to do
with them: for I had no sooner done with the one, but presently I was compelled
to go to the other. When I had been a while with Summers, he would break out
of his fit, and cry vehemently unto me: go look to my sister: and accordingly
I still going unto her, found her in her fits. But here it is to be observed,
that there was but a thin wall betwixt both their beds, so as she might
easily hear her brother when he willed me to go unto her. Furthermore, when I
had been in like manner with the said Mary, and that she had continued a space
in her fittes, she would also break out of them, and cry out unto me: go
look to my brother. And still when I came upon her motion to Summers, I found
him in his fittes. Now these words, vz. go look to my brother, go look to my
sister, were spoken by them both so loud, as that they might easily hear one
the other. And in this case they both continued together (as I remember) about
five days, whereby I was very much wearied and troubled. And thus this great
mystery being laid open, Master Darrell needs not to produce his multitude
of witnesses.

Again, it being objected to M. Darrell, that Mary Cooper imparting unto him,
how in her dream she had seen certain sightes, which made her afraid: he
labored to persuade her, that she was in no dream, but that she saw such
things in deed, and willed her to affirm and auow, that in her fitts she had
had such apparitions: his answer thereunto is as follows. Mary Cooper has
diverse times told me, that sundry nights she being broad awake, M. Darrell ad
art 8. page 212.
and not in any dream, has seen diverse shapes appearing unto her, as of
Cattes, Dogs, etc. which I believe were wicked spirits, appearing in such
shapes: and I confess that I have affirmed so much unto others, but cannot
depose that so I have affirmed unto her: howbeit, I believe if I have not
spoken so much unto her, yet I have done it to others in her hearing. But Mary
Cooper deposes thus: The relation which I made before the judges at the
assizes, of my seeing strange sights and apparitions, as the apparition of
cattes and flames of fire, with the rest, I had dreamed of them by night in a
dream only: and when I had told M. Darrell what I had dreamed, he persuaded
me, that it was no dream but a true vision: and bad me say and auowe, that I
had seen those cattes and flames of fire in deed. By this his persuasion I did
so say and auow, and caused it to be belief or a truth.

You hear in this deposition some mention of the Judges: whereupon it is fit
to remember unto you, what a very strange and malicious practice was
undertaken to have procured the death of a poor woman, one Alice Freeman upon
pretense that she was a witch. This Alice Freeman was one of those whom Summers
had named for witches, and is allied to M. Freeman an Alderman and Justice of
peace in Nottingham. This M. Freeman (as it seems) had no liking of M.
Darrelles proceedings with Summers, which stirred up great hatred and malice
against him: which because M. Darrell and his adherentes could not execute upon
him: they thought they would be revenged upon his kinswoman: It is said (but
untruly) by some of M. Darrels friends, that before the detecting of Alice
Freemon for a witch, it was not reported in Nottingham, that Summers was a
dissembler, thereby inferring, that the offense taken by her detection, was the
cause that raised up a slander (forsooth) of Summers dissimulation: and
therefore no marvel, if M. Darrell and his associates, were greatly inflamed
therewith. Now this Alice Freeman having escaped that imputation in respect of
Summers, for that his bewitching was one while laid upon the Darbishire witch,
and afterward upon the Worcestershire witch, a practice was undertaken to
charge the said poor woman Alice Freeman, to have bewitched to death the
child before mentioned of this Marie Cooper: and that she likewise was the
cause of the said Mary's trouble and vexation, as having bewitched her in like
manner. This conceit being thrust into Marie Coopers head, she charged the
said Alice with that fellonie: her indictment was framed at the next Assizes:
she was arraigned: M. Darrell was one amongst diverse that gave in evidence
against the woman, grounding himself much upon Summers detecting of her for a
witch: and matters were so prosecuted against her, as had not the Judges in
their wisdom discerned somewhat, and rectified their courses to a due issue,
it is verily thought the poor woman (being found guilty by the great enquest)
had been condemned to death. Of these particulars, there are no depositions
(saving what Mary Cooper her self has confessed upon her oath). Howbeit that
the said Alice was so dealt with, it will not be denied. But let us hear Mary
Cooper.

I was procured (says she) by Mistress Gray, George Small and his wife, M.
Power and his wife, to prosecute the matter of indictment, which I preferred
against Alice Freeman, at the Assizes for a witch: and I received money of
mistres Gray, to pay for the bill of indictment: and likewise I received
instructions from amongst them to frame in evidence: and they likewise urged me
to move for the good behavior against Alice Freeman when she was acquitted.
But in my conscience I am persuaded, and was persuaded of the said Alice
Freeman, that she was never any witch, and I did all that I attempted against
her at the urging of the parties aforesaid. Besides, as soon as Alice Freeman
was acquitted, I went as I was willed before to Mistress Darrell, M. Power and
his wife, and Mistres Aldridge were met together, and stayed for me: and then
and there M. Darrell and the rest were earnest with me, to frame a petition to
my Lord Anderson, and notwithstanding the acquiting aforesaid, to offer to
take it upon my oath, that the said Alice Freeman had bewitched, not only my
child, (for the which before she had been indicted and acquitted) but also my
self, and they framed and gave me a petition accordingly: but my conscience
pricked me not to deliver it.

If his be true which is thus deposed, it is but agreeable unto the violent
humors that reign in that kind of people. But sure, the practice was foul:
and therefore it was feared (as it seems) to be detected. For after that
Summers was in examination at London, the said Mary had a shrewd caution given
her. She deposes thereof in this sort: Master Darrell (says she) and the
rest above named, meaning Mrs. Gray, Master Power and his wife, and Mrs.
Aldridge told me, that I must beware: for if any hole could be espied in my
coat, I should be sent for to London, as my brother William was.

W. Summers page 26.
This Mary Cooper having continued about three or four weeks in her said
dissimulation, she did leave off those practices, as her brother says, without
any assistance of M. Darrell to dispossess her, and has been well ever
since. And M. Aldridge: afterward she grew to be indifferently well, and so
does continue: only she complains, that she has a kind of stirring in her
belly. But in deed (as information is given) the poor woman lives orderly
and well amongst her neighbors, and is not otherwise troubled, then it
happens out upon occasion with other women. Only it seems she is in great
fear of some hard measure to be offered unto her, upon the coming to light of
her examination. For thus she deposes: Mary Cooper. pa, 204,
Now that I have from my conscience told the truth in this matter, I shall be
so pointed at, reviled and abused, in the open streets of the town, as I
shall grow weary of my life. For the meeting with which inconvenience, it is
wished and not doubted, that the Magistrates in Nottingham, will be careful.

Unto these notable exploites of M. Darrels, concerning Mary Cooper, Katherine
Wright, the boy of Burton, and William Summers, something might be added of his
pretended dispossessing the seven, so often mentioned in Lancashire, out of one
Master Mores examination and confession touching that matter. His said
examination is in the Registers office to her Majesty's Commissioners, for
causes ecclesiastical: where all the rest of the aforesaid examinations do
remain. And if any will take the pains to peruse it, he shall find, that M.
Darrel and M. Mores course held with those in Lancashire, was as vain and
ridiculous, as with any of the other. The author of the Brief Narration,
after he has taken his pleasure against the proceedinges of her Majesty's
Commissioners, and such as they deputed for the better examination of these
causes, as disdaining and scorning them, he writes (iudgeing other men of
likelihood by his own corrupt conscience) in this sort: What goodly stuff
they have returned, time and malice will make known unto us. The stuff such
as it is (vile in deed) his Maistershippe may be pleased now to peruse: and
thereby reap some profit, if he read it with no greater malice then it was
written.

The gentleman concludes this Narration (as it has been before mentioned) in
some choler, when alluding to those that cannot believe Master Darrels
wonders, he says: Let him that is filthy be filthy still: And thereunto
adds, that do Satan what he can, wisdom shall be justified of her
children: meaning (if he apply the place with any sense) that Master Darrell
and his proceedings shall be defended and justified.

Howbeit peradventure, when he has better considered the contents of this
treatise, he will not be so peremptory. Otherwise, he has here matter
sufficient to show his skill in, for the justification of it.

The Contents of the First Book.
THe number of such persons as are said to have been dispossessed by M.
Darrels means. Chap. 1. page 1. The occasion why M. Darrels dealing with
Summers was called into question at Lambeth. Chap. 2. page 4. How M. Darrels
friends have set out the pretended dispossessing of William Summers Chap. 3.
page 15. How M. Darrell is made a fitter instrument to cast out Devils then
many other. Chap. 4. page 19. How M. Darrell knew William Summers and the rest
to be possessed. Chap. 5. page 27. Of M. Darrels knowledge, who sent the
Devil into Summers, and the rest. Chap. 6. page 36. Of the Causes pretended,
why men are possessed. Chap. 7. page 39. Of the means alleged by M. Darrell
and others, whereby men are dispossessed. Chap. 8. page 42. Of the signs
whereby M. Darrell and others do discern (as they say) when Satan is
expelled. Chap. 9. page 51. Of M. Darrel, and M. Mores conceit: that Satan
being cast out of one, does presently after seek to repossesse him. Chap. 10.
page 55. How those that took upon them to cast out devils, do get themselves
work, and of their devises to cover their lewdnes. Chap. 11. page 59.
The Contents of the Second Book.
Of M. Darrels intercourse with Summers by startes at Ashbye, from about the
year 1592. until 1597. for his instruction how to dissemble himself to be
possessed. Ca. 1. pa. 78. of M. Darrels private directions to Summers, whilst
he was at Nottingham with him, how he should from time to time behave himself
in his counterfeyting. Chap, 2 page 98. Of M. Darrels instructing of Summers by
speaking to others in his hearing, those things which he meant that he should
practice from the 5. of Nouem. when he came unto him, until the seventh of the
same, being the day of his pretended dispossession. Chap. 3. page 106. Of M.
Darrels cunning instructing of Summers, by speaking to others in his hearing of
Satan's seeking to repossesse him, and of the acting of certain tricks under
a couerlet, from the seventh of November, until about the xxi. of the same.
Chap. 4. page 127. Of M. Darrels cunning instructing of Summers, by speaking to
others in his hearing such things, as he meant he should practice in the
detecting of Witches, from about the xxi. of November, until about the vii. of
December. Chap. 5. page 137. Of M. Darrels course, from about the vii. of
December, until the xiiii. of January, whilst Summers refused to dissemble any
longer. Chap. 6. page 144. How Summers about the xiiii. of January fell again
to the acting of certain fits, wherein he continued at times, til about the
xxiiii. of February, and how M. Darrell pretended that he was repossessed.
Chap. 7. page 148.
The Contents of the Third Book.
How Summers confessed his dissimulation at S. John's in Nottingham, as soon as
he was out of M. Darrels disposition. Chap. 1. page 177. How M. Darrell dealt
with Summers, for the reuocation of his said confession, that he had dissembled.
Chap. 2 page 184. How M. Darrell devised two or three shifts to have avoided
Summers confession that he had dissembled. Ca. 3. page 187. How M. Darrel and
his friends to discredit Summers confession did falsely report, that he was
induced thereunto by promises, threatninges, and enchantments. Chap. 4. page
190. How M. Darrels ridiculous pretense, that Summers was induced by the devil
in form of a black dog and an Ass, to say he had dissembled. Chap. 5. page
195. How M. Darrell has falsely affirmed. that. W. Summers was induced to say he
had dissembled, for fear of hanging: whereas he falling into his fits before
Commissioners at Nottingham, (upon a former Compact) the fear of hanging was
one of the chiefest causes, that he then affirmed, that he had not dissembled.
Chap. 6. page 198. How Summers was persuaded by threatninges, and promises to
have continued his dissimulation, after he had been before the Commissioners at
Nottingham, until M. Darrel might again dispossess him. Chap. 7. page 204 Of
the depositions taken in M. Darrels behalf, at Not. and how upon the
reexamination of his own witnesses, it falls out: that the bodily actions of
Summers in his fits, were not extraordinary, as they have been misreported.
Chap. 8. pa. 207.
The Contents of the Fourth Book.
How M. Darrell labored from time to time, to make those things that Summers
did, (and were but very toys) to be thought both strange and extraordinary.
Chap. 1. page 219. How M. Darrell would not suffer, (as near as he could) any
to deal with Summers in his fittes, to try whether he were senseles or
dissembled. Chap. 2. page 225. How M. Darrel endeavored to excuse Summers, when
he was taken short, and did such toys as did argue him sufficiently to be
but a counterfeyte. Chap. 3. page 230. How contrary to M. Darrels assertion,
Summers had his senses and understanding in his fits. Chap. 4. page 235. Of the
motions and knockinges which were heard and seen about Summers in his fittes,
that they were done and made by himself, and were not as M. Darrell has
reported, extraordinary or supernatural. Chap. 5. page 238. How Summers casting
himself into the fire, was voluntary, and no extraordinary matter, as M.
Darrell has pretended. Chap. 6. page 242. Of Summers pretended strength and
weight in his fits, that contrary to M. Darrels, and his friends reports, there
was nothing extraordinary in them. Chap. 7 page 244. Summers knowledge in his
fits was not extraodinary, as M. Darrell and his friends have falsely pretended:
neither could he speak Greek, Hebrew or Latin, otherwise then he had
learned. Chap. 8. page 247. There was no impossibility in Summers fits, as
master Darrell and his friends have falsely pretended. Chap. 9. page 255. How
contrary to M. Darrels and his friends assertions. W. Summers was accounted by
many in Nottingham, or a dissembler, from the time that he began his
practices there, until he confessed the same himself. Cap. 10. pa. 258.
The Contents of the Fifth Book.
How M. Darrels credit touching his dealing with the boy of Burton, does rely
upon a false and foolish book, that was published of the said boys pretended
possession and dispossession, Chap. 1. page 265. Of M. Darrels rashness in
affirming Thomas Darling to be possessed, and of his cunning instructing him,
how to behave himself upon the day of his pretended dispossession. Chap. 2.
page 270. Of M. Darrels shifts and absurdities, concerning the pretended
dispossessing of Thomas Darling. Chap. 3. page 278. Of M. Darrels further
practices with Darling to pretend that Satan sought to reenter into him, and
of some other his untrue assertions, concerning the boys fittes, and of his
cunning dealing likewise with him, that he should never confess his
dissimulation. Chap. 4. page 283. How Darling confesses his own
dissimulation. Ca. 5. p. 294 A brief of Katherine Wrightes Confession,
touching the beginning of her dissimulation, and of the reasons that moved her
so to do. Chap. 6. page 297. Of M. Darrels proceedinges with Katherine Wright,
for her pretended dispossession. Chap. 7. page 299. Of M. Darrels proceedinges
with Mary Cooper, the sister of William Summers. Chap. 8. page 314.
FINIS.

