A DISCOVERSIVE PROBLEM concerning Prophesies, How far they are to be valued,
or credited, according to the surest rules, and directions in Divinity,
Philosophy, Astrology, and other learning:

Devised especially in abatement of the terrible threatenings, and menaces,
peremptorily denounced against the kingdoms, and states of the world, this
present famous year, 1588, supposed the Greatwoonderfull, and Fatal year of
our Age.

By I. H. Physician.

Printed at London, by John Iackson, for Richard Watkins.

1588

The disposition, or Method of the Tract following.
THE first Part, or Section, generally entreats and discourses of, and
against all supposed oracles, pretended prophesies, counterfeit predictions,
fabulous traditions, forged devises, superstitious tales, vain rumors, idle
surmizes, and all such erroneous, or frivolous testimonies whatsoever, either
fraudulently and imposturally, or at least conceitedly and fantastically given
out to the world, within the term or compass of this last age, since which
all true or credible prophesies have surceased, and nothing uttered by way of
prediction, remains of authority or credence, but only such testimonies and
judgments, as are learnedly and skilfully grounded upon lawful art, or
certainly and assuredly approved by actual experience.

THE second Part, or Section, specially argues and examineth the probability
of the special prophecy, particularly devised, and notoriously published of
the present famous year, 1588. with sufficient declaration unto the world,
that the same supposed prophecy imports not any such matter either of
necessary, or contingent truth, as should in any artificial consideration, or
other reasonable respect, deserve any favorable intertainment, or credence
with the learned, wise, or godly: either according to the grounds and rules of
Humanity, or Divinity.

To the Right Honorable especial good Lord, Sir CHRISTOPHER HATTON Knight,
Lordhigh Chancellor of England.
RIght Honorable very good Lord, there is scarsly any forward Graduate, or
student in either University; or any reasonable fauorer and welwiller of
learning, either in city or country, far or near, throughout England; that
has not often heard sufficient report, together with many Honorable
commendations as well of your good Lordships especial regard, and continual
recourse to all kinds of liberal, and fruitful learning; as also of your
bountiful, and in truth magnificent favor to all sorts of learned men, any way
well reputed in their several faculties, and professions. The very actual
event it self, and so many right worthy, and notable effects of wise and well
advised proceeding, not a year, or two, but even these many years together
from time to time continued, still and still importing so prosperous, and happy
success; declare abundantly unto the world, that the very original grounds,
and principal foundations of so exceeding worshipful, and honorable
buildings, were, and are, as soundly and substantially laid on your behalf, as
either any good learning could advise at first, or any good wisdom might
devise at last. So that partly your yoonger studies at Common Law, and arts of
humanity: partly your riper studies of Ciuil-law, the Mathematiques, Ethiques,
Politiques, histories as well foreign, as domestical, and other most notable
both general and special instructions, of private, and public government:
partly your elder and final studies about Courtly affairs, matters of State,
the actual service of your Prince, and Country (wherein continually appeered
sundry visible, and infallible proofs of your Honorable industry, and wisdom)
have finally bred that absolute perfect experience, and that deep sound
judgment in your Lordship for all matters and occurrences of whatsoever
weight, or importance; that becomes so great a Lord of the state, so high an
Officer of the Realm, so dear a Counselor of her most excellent Majesty,
and so mighty a Judge or Praetor of this whole kingdom, and commonwealth, as
now at last, thorough the gracious especial favor of God, and Prince, you are
woorthily proved: even as woorthily by the common voice of the people, and
universal assent and consent of all degrees (which some have termed Gods own
verdict; some the very suffrage of nature; some the definitive sentence of
virtue hix self) as any your praedecessors, advanced to the same dignity in
our memory; notwithstanding any their especial desert, or appropriate meetnes
for that place and preeminence. Insomuch, that the whole realm universally;
every estate particularly; and in manner every person singularly, does
congratulate this your late so very high praeferment, and authority, as most
woorthily conferred upon a most worthy person: whose approved Honorable
wisdom, and assured manifold sufficiency, even for the weilding and ordring of
greatest matters, has long sithence so evidently and fully appeered to every
clear cie, not wilfully bleared or dimmed, that generally every one, but
specially the wiser, and discreeter sort deemeth your L. at all points
correspondently prepared, and furnished for the best discharging and perfectest
accomplishing of so weighty a function, (as well in the Queens most gracious
and high Court of Chancerie, as otherwise, wheresoever, or howsoever the
laudable administration, and execution of that most Honorable office, is
required,) with universal good credit, public reputation, general
applause, and as it were even a common Recognizance, or praesentment of al
intier reverence, and true honor, whereunto God has specially framed, and
inhabled your Lordship. Mine own poor self, as one of the last, and least,
albeit depending upon respects, and remaining a good space in doubt, thorough
due consideration of my vnwoorthines, and insufficiency, (which regard
hitherto withdrew me, from praesenting either my self, or any my simple doing
to the view of so honorably wise, and grave a person:) nevertheless at length
resolved, not to ouerslip that small opportunity of particular co^gratulation,
which heretofore with good succes I had used, by reason of convenient occasion
co^petently ministered thereunto, even with your Honorable predecessor, my very
especial singlar good L. whilst he lived. I have already mentioned your
bounteous long approved favor toward learning, and the professors thereof;
neither can I forget in general so assured an argument, and praegnant
testimony, as so many famous Dedications, Inscriptions, Praefaces, Titles,
Directions, and Letters missiue, extant in your Right Worshipful, and Right
Honorable most renowned name, do continually suggest and afford: neither am I
ignorant in special, what inward, and outward affection your Honor has carried
as well to the Mathematiques, as to other the wisest, and auaileablest Civil
faculties: whereof no man has either gathered more worshipful flowers, or
reaped more Honorable fruits, than your considerate wisdom, evermore
accompanied with sound, and effectual judgment: and finally, I could name
even particular men, that have been favorably entertained and accepted of your
noble Honor, in the foresaid respects, and therefore remain very deeply, and
affectionately bounden unto your good Lordship: amongst whom namely my eldest
brother has long sithence recounted himself, and will over acoordingly make
the same most dutiful reckoning. These, and such like arguments of
encouragement, have now after some deliberation, so forcibly praeuailed with
me, and so effectually imboldened me, that by means thereof, I have advisedly
praesumed above my simple quality, to offer unto your worthy L. by way of
humble, and officious Dedication, my Annual Calendar, or brief Almanacke, for
the famous praedestined year following; together with the Astronomicall
Diarie, the compendious discourse upon the Eclipses, and the short
Astrologicall Prognostication, thereunto appending. A slender Pamphlet, and
trifle in effect: yet such, as first, (not fully five years expired) M.
Justice Meade, my very especial good Countryman, and right Worshipful dear
friend; then (upon the credit of his courteous recommendation) the late Lord
Chancellor, your antecessor, my Right Honorable singular good Lord (the worthy
memory of both which, I am always accordingly to reverence and honor)
vouchsafed to accept in as favorable manner of allowance, and defense, as my
self in reason could wish, or in affection should desire. May it likewise
please your excellent Lordship, Right Honorable Sir, of your accustomed Noble
goodness, to deigne me like favor, in accepting this Schollerly exercise, of
long practiced and still allowed use; as I am respectively to esteem of your
Lordship, as of a greater, and more conspicuous person, than the better of
them, (be it uttered without any note of praeiudice, or derogation to the
better of them, either directly or indirectly:) so I shall account my self more
streighly charged, and more extraordinarily bounden in all possible duties and
services unto your magnificent good L. than ever I was unto either of them: to
whom notwithstanding I must needs in good reason; and ought always in good
duty; and will gladly in good affection, reknowledge my self very deeply, and
entirely beholding. I dare not profess, nor cannot challenge any great
special, or extraordinary skill, either Theoricall, or Practical, either in
the Mathematiques, or otherwise, in any profound science, either Contemplative,
or Active: but whatsoever my small ability is, either in matter of learning,
or any other serviceable way; or howsoever it may happily prove thorough the
gracious favor of God, and mine own studious diligence; it is, and shall always
be ready in most dutiful, and careful manner, to attend your most Honorable
pleasure: so far as it may like, or content the same, by way of probation or
otherwise, to vouchsafe me any portion of the favor, as to command any my
study, industry, travel, or service, even to the uttermost extent of my
whole possibility anyway whatsoever. Which I must not stand to enlarge, or
amplify at this praesent, but am to refer, and (may I respectively be so bold,
under correction, and upon humble petition) to recommend the entire proof and
trial of any such serviceable duty, to the only consideration, and
appointment of your deep wisdom: fearing least I have already praesumed
overmuch, in troubling your L. ouerfar, and humbly craving pardon for
interrupting your other most serious and weighty affairs; I beseech God, long
continue your good Lordship in perfect health, and steadfast honor, to the
assured and inestimable use, both of her sovereign Majesty particularly, and
universally of the whole Realm: which never more, than at this instant, needed
the careful, provident, circumspect, and intierly sound assistance of such
wise trusty Counselors, and Nobles, as her gracious Highness, and this
peaceable government have effectually found your worthy Lordship; unto whom
not only I, but infinite other of all degrees, and estates, most heartily, and
unfeignedly wish all felicity. At Kingslynn in Norfolk: This xx. of August.
1587.

Your good Lordships most dutiful, and affectionate: JOHN HARVEY.

To the same Right Honorable very good Lord, Sir CHRISTOPHER HATTON Knight,
Lord high Chancellor of England.
Having lately in the Epistle to my former Dedication, Right Honorable very
good Sir, alleged sufficient causes, and encouragements of my presuming to
direct that slender Pamphlet unto your worthy Lordship: I suppose it shall not
now again seem greatly needful, either to repeat the same causes, or to
annexe any other thereunto: albeit in modest hope of like Honorable favor, I
continue the like boldness in presenting your Lordship with a Treatise, not much
unlike either for quantity, or quality: Saving only, that the very present
Argument, as well in some general considerations, as in regard of certain
special circumstances, both public and private, may respectively minister
some reasonable occasion, if not of more favorable acceptance, yet happily of
more inward liking. No man either knows better, or can deeplier consider,
than your Lordship, how notoriously and perilously the world has continually
from time to time been abused, and in sort cosened with supposed prophesies,
and counterfeit soothsayings, devised either for unknown, or for ungracious,
and lewd causes: intending at least Comicall sturs, but commonly fostering
tragical commotions. Not only foreign histories, both old and new, in all
languages, as well learned, as vulgar: but also our own British and English
Chronicles (as your Lordship best remembers;) beside a number of other famous
books, and many old smokie paperbookes, are very copious, and over plentiful in
affoording examples of this couenous, and imposturall kind. Amongst which
notwithstanding, no examples ever were, or are more dangerous, and ieoperdous,
than those, which daily experience both in England, and in every other state or
Commonwealth of the world, eftsoons suggesteth; upon every new occasion,
strange accident, perilous exigence, or whatsoever other notable occurrence,
again and again revived, by way of fresh, and current matter to serve present
turns, and to feed the working humor of busy and tumultuous heads,
continually affecting some innovation, or other. But of all the residue, what
comparable to the terrible pretended prophecy, even now notoriously in Esse,
concerning the imagined mighty, and wonderful casualties and hurliburlies of
the present year 1588? In which respect of so universal fame, I was earnestly
moved, and importuned by certain worshipful Gentlemen, and diverse other my
familiar friends, to undertake some little travel in examining the natural
causes, and artificial reasons of the said supposed prophecy, so far as any
my reading, or understanding might extend, to furnish any such schollerly
insight, or inquitie thereinto. Whereupon at last I was rather ouerruled, than
persuaded, to yield unto that motion; partly acknowledging mine own
insufficiency, partly considering, that I could not any way (to mine own
contentment) discuss that one particular, without some reasonable conference
of many other semblable particulars, and even some general Tract upon the
whole Argument of such putatiue, and imaginatiue Prophesies. Which very Tract
being also at length by them extorted, and by me dispatched, as my present
leisure would permit: I am now no less instantly requested and solicited, not
only by the said first motioners, but also by certain other of equal
calling, that have sithence had the perusal thereof in writing, to publish the
same with all convenient expedition: as a Treatise of much public, and
private use at this instant. Which albeit my self am not any way to
acknowledge, otherwise than in affectionate desire to work what possible good
I may, even with the meaner and baser sort: yet in case your Right Honorable
wisdom shall likewise either in whole, or in part admit thereof: I am in all
duty and reverence, humbly to submit, and wholly to commit the same unto your
only allowance, or disallowance, to be either published, or suppressed at your
Honorable pleasure. A matter in it self nothing worthy so noble, and grave
consideration: but as per accident it may happen to stay the wisdoms of some
busy, and troublesome persons, not so well disposed, or so discreetly advised,
as might in common respects be wished. Howbeit I am also wholly to refer every
such circumstance unto your most Honorable determination: whereon I finally
rely, as the only definitive sentence of life, or death unto this small
Treatise. Which accordingly awaiteth your good Lordships pleasure and
appointment: as also my self, to the uttermost of my poor ability, am ever
to attend your Honorable commandment: even so for this instant taking my
humble leave, with dutiful recommendation of your Lordship unto the accustomed
favor of God, who long preserve your most Honorable estate.

At Kings Lin in Norfolk: this xiiij. of January. 1588.

Your good Lordships most humble in all duty, John Haruey.

A DISCOVRSIVE PROBLEM, concerning Prophesies, HOW FAR THEY ARE TO BE
VAlued, or credited according to the surest rules, and principles as well of
Divinity, as of Philosophy, and other Humanity.
The first part, or Section: discoursing in general, of, and against supposed
Prophesies, with all such pretended Traditions.
COnsidering that not only the common people talks much of many common
prophesies, and makes great adooe about the grievous terrors, perils, and
calamities threatened thereby: but also even the learneder, and wiser sort
oftentimes discourses upon such Accidents and Consequents, not without some
appearance of credulity, and some signification of fear: I presume it a matter
neither unprofitable to the one, nor unacceptable unto the other, to utter some
reasonable part of my reading, and conceit touching such points: especially
concerning later notorious predictions, and supposed prophesies, whose terrible
effects and events are consequently looked for, of many thousands in the world.
With what assurance, or probability, I can hardly auow, or conjecture; with
what slender warrant of proof, or likelihood, let themselves deem upon
further consideration, and better examination of such indifferent reasons and
authorities, as the cause it self shall materially suggest, and any reasonable
man may formally allege. I love not to wander at adventure, or to range at
randon; the particulars are famously known, the matters often canuassed;
sundry threatenings and terrors more vehemently, and more passionately
aggrauated, than percase needs: the solemn, and autenticall word of
Prophecy, and Prophesies, overmuch used, and abused: liplabor enough, and
enough: still more and more dread, suspicion, jealousy, horror, I wot not
what: full much adoo, and full little help: great stur, to small purpose:
miserable expectations of what, and what imminent dangers and calamities? The
effects are terribly feared: are the causes as certainly dreadful? You tell me
of a woeful and horrible conclusion: are the premises undoubtedly necessary,
and peremptory? Can so heavy Consequents proceed from so light Antecedents? Can
there not be raning, and fantastical sayings, but there must needs follow
outrageous, and tragical doings? Was there never lie found in such mouths?
Did the world, or the devil, ever want impostors, falsaries, coseners,
hypocrites, or false prophets? Is it so difficult, or impossible a matter to
cast mists before the eyes of the simple sort, and ignorant people? Nay, is any
devise easier, or any practice readier, than to forge a blind prophecy, or to
coin a counterfeit tale, or to foist in a new found old said saw, or to set
countenance upon some stale poetical fragment, or other antique record, or to
play upon the advantage of some old memorandum, without rhyme or reason; or to
gloze, and iuggle with knacks of the maker, where they may pass, and repasse
for current payment; or finally, to revive some forlorn Merlin, or Pierce
Plowman, or Nostradame, or the like supposed prophet? Alas, is this wise world
so simple, to believe so foolish toys, devised to mock apes, and delude
children? Were it not more manly, and more godly wisdom, either not to be
moved at all; or else to be moved with more effectual arguments, and more
forcible persuasions? If you credit words, or writings, or records, or
prophesies, or whatsoever else, tell me directly why you credit them, and for
what weighty or likely cause? Is it not fond credulity and simplicity, to
believe rashly, and without aduisement, or respect? Or if you know whom, and
what, and how, and wherefore you believe; how happens it there appears no
cleerer evidence, or sounder proof either of the authors, or of the matters,
or of other formal circumstances, or finally of the sovereign good ends,
whereunto such terrible caueats and forewarnings should tend? Is God, or any
godly man the author? Is the author worth the naming being known, or worth
the knowing being named? May not the author commonly, and for the greater part
be justly registered, and enrolled in the famous Epistles Obscurorum virorum? I
have read many prophesies, and heard more, yet how few authors thereof named?
Scarcely three, of threescore: and those three scarcely to be recounted in the
catalog, either of the learneder, or of the wiser, or of the godlier sort. Set
down their names, peruse their writings, suruiew their doings, and examine
their qualities; and what indifferent man will say, or can think otherwise
than I have said? Shall I yet deal more roundly, and plainly? Are they, or were
they either good artists, or good philosophers, or good astronomers, or good
physicians, or good divines, or good prophets, or any good thing else, upon
whom such stuff is fathered? Was it ordinary learning, or extraordinary
inspiration, whereby they attained their marvelous and terrible knowledge? Can
there any sound or substantial reason be alleged, why either in the one, or
in the other, they should surpass, and exceed other notable men in all
faculties, and professions, never surmizing, or dreaming upon any such matters?
Are we to conceive, or imagine that wonderful effects could proceed but from
wonderful efficientes? Might wooden trees bring forth golden fruits? Was
every Saul to thrust in amongst the prophets? Must we needs reknowledge
Baalams ass, or rather Aesops ass the only oracle of the world? I would
gladly learn what excellent nature, what cunning or profound art, what active
exercise, or what other general or special means of perfection should breed
in them any such prophetical spirit, or appropriate habit of prediction. Were
not their natural gifts simple enough; or did it ever appear, that they were
endued with any extraordinary, or supernatural instinct, surmounting above the
common capacity, and sensible reach of other reasonable creatures? Could they
ever challenge any personal privilege, or sovereign prerogative of particular
illumination, or special revelation, or any other divine, or humane
singularity? Dare any man once surmize, that they were either spiritually, or
corporally rapt and exalted into the Empyreall, or Chrystalline heavens? Did
the holy Ghost descend miraculously upon them in the likeness of fire, or other
visible shape? Is not the date of such divine mysteries, and heavenly miracles
expired many hundred years ago? Were extraordinary, and irregular operations
ever durable? Are we still to make account of supernatural, or seraphicall
illuminations, and rauishments of spirit? Will either sound Divinity, or
discreet Humanity bear any such doctrine, either at these dates, or by the
time of our ancestors? Are not Oracles utterly ceased, as well by the
theological judgment of best Divines, as by the philosophical position not
only of Tullie in his second book De Diuinatione, or of Plutarch in his
discourse De Abolitione oraculorum; but also of Pliny in the thirtith book of
his Natural history: of Porphirie in his Inuectiue Contra religionem
Christianorum, and of sundry other later philosophers? Are not the preests of
Vrim long ago dead? Or were not the prophetical informations by the secret and
divine virtues of the twelve precious stones therein comprised, altogether
antiquated, and extinct, at least 200. years before Josephus, as himself
auoweth in his Judicial Antiquities? Mystical men pretend diverse, and sundry
mystical causes; but you must be feign to pardon many sensible and reasonable
personages, of good reckoning, and sharp conceit, accompanied with discreet
consideration and judgment, that will not easily be induced to believe more,
than either humane reason shall probably persuade, or divine authority
canonically enforce. I see not any natural, or supernatural excellency:
neither am I so melancholique, or furious, as to attribute much unto
melancholy, or fury, howsoever some against Moral and Natural reason account
of these moodie, and rauing passions, as Delphicall, or Sybilline properties;
proceeding in truth of very bad and distempered constitutions, both of body
and mind; as elsewhere I am to discourse more at large both physically, and
otherwise. But peradventure for art they might be incomparable: for what art?
Sacred, or civil: philosophical, mathematical, or other: theoricall or
practical: lawful or unlawful: white or black? There never wanted many
professors, and vaunters of many arts; but how few perfect, or sufficient
artists, actually and infallibly approved by their excellent artificial
works? And amongst those pettyprophets, what one in manner of any singular, or
especial reckoning in any deep and profound feate of art? The greater part,
God knows, full silly and sorry artists in any kind, especially in the
sound Theorie, and effectual practice of the woorthiest, and noblest sciences,
mathematical, philoso^phicall, and other of like auailable effect. Lift up your
eyes, and look into the Divinity Schools: were Saint Augustine, S. Ierom, S.
Ambrose, S. Gregory, or any notable Divine, either ancient or modern, coiners
or fosterers of prophesies? Descend to the Mathematical Schools, hear you
any such matter from the mouths of Ptolomie, Copernicus, Rheniholdus,
Iofrancus, Offusius, or any singular Mathematician? Proceed to the
Philosophical chair: and will Aristotle, Pliny, Cardane, Scalliger, Ramus,
or any excellent philosopher, busy your brains with any such rauing, and
senseless conceits? You may well pass by the Physique and Law lectures: where
I warrant you is some thing else to do, than to mispend their golden time, or
waste their vital breath, about idle and vain fantasies, credulously termed
prophesies. I could never yet learn that Galen, or Justinian, or any good
Galenist, or Iustinianist did greatly lend his ear, or bend his mind unto any
such trifles. And as for the famous professors of other liberal sciences and
faculties, how far are they from musing, or buzzing upon those melancholy
imaginations? Even such, as otherwise have been deepliest plunged, and almost
drowned in the profoundest Acroamatiques, and Metaphysiques, yea and Magiques,
and Negromantiques to, yet have little, or nothing regarded these
phantastiques. Have recourse to all ages, and consider their notablest, and
woorthiest wits; and does it not manifestly appear as well by histories, and
chronicles in all languages, as otherwise by other credible writings, and
records, that few, or none of the learned were ever addicted to the
maintaining, fostering, or favoring of any such paultry; as matters commonly
repugnant and opposite to all good learning, and to the very grounds of Art?
The smaller skill, the greater credulity: the lesser knowledge, the more
passion: Ignorance in many cases the moother of Deuction: Simplicity is soon
persuaded, and beguiled: nothing more easy, than to blind the rude multitude:
most cosenage, where least suspicion: light men, light of belief: want of
understanding, causes want of judgment: alas, blind men are feign oftentimes
to swallow down flies; and poor souls make as much of homely porrage, as
other do of finer, and daintier fare. It is needles to dwell in this point, and
happily their actual experience, exercise, and practice shows it self even
as great as their learning. Most what solitary, and forlorn men: melancholy
men: Saturnine men: cloystermen: peevish, and wayward men: mere Theoristes,
and phantastes, only delighted in themselves, and offended with all the world
besides: unfit for any civil company: and unmeet for any practicable action:
whose whole action, nothing but contemplation: whose exercise, idleness: whose
practice, vanity: whose final experience, what but selfe-conceite, and
selfe-liking with contempt of all things else, and defiance of all men else:
whose sovereign repose, and felicity in their own private speculation, and
others public confusion: whose total study, and travel to cosen the world,
to terrify the credulous, to fill men's mouths, and ears with lamentable, and
horrible rumors, to breed continual matters of dreadful suspicions,
ielousies, vndermininges, commotions, agonies, vexations, and tribulations of
all sorts. Mad companions and mates of strange and monstrous disposition: but
such, and such has been the very nature, and quality of our common
melancholique, and Saturnine prophets, wherewith the world has a long space
been perilously seduced, and disguised, till now at last, it begins to be
somewhat quicker sented, and to smell out the sophistical and hypocritical
practices of these terrible skar-crowes, and bul-beggers, that meant still, and
still to play their furious parts on the stage, and like Demiapolloes, or
rather like Elphes and Goblins to affright, and distraught simple creatures. Do
I mistake the matter or manner of their proceedings? I speak but under
correction of my betters, and am content to submit my slender opinion to every
sounder judgment: neither dare I peremptorily, or affirmatively auow every
part of the premises, but only assay problematically, and as our schoolmen
term it, disputatiuely, what may therein appear most probable. My intention
is not to teach, but to learn: neither do I affect the credit of a deep
Artist, but am content to be reputed a reasonable Questionist. I would be loath
to misuse any person, or disguise any matter in terms: and therefore will not
presume any farther, but to put the case, and like a tractable Peripatecian, or
rather Academique, by demanding, and arguing, to proceed tentatiuely, and
discoursiuely, as the foresaid schoolmen use to call it. If percase your Pro
weigh down my Contra, I am soon answered; and will not greatly travel to
trouble, or entangle you with intricate replies, or reioinders: but am ready
enough to yield without the least obstinacy, and to confess in all
philosophical, and christian humility, Errare possum, haereticus esse nolo. In
the mean time, give me leave to doubt of the skillful understanding, and
sincere dealing of such authors, and fautors, as have usually from time to time
scattered abroad such idle, and counterfeit wares: which nevertheless I am not
to account either idle, or counterfeit, in case they ever happen to be proved
otherwise. Until which time, may I not also partly gather the authority by the
author, the testimony by the witness, the prophecy by the prophet? Are the best
of them above exception, either for perfect science, or for upright conscience?
alas, what are the woorst? Measure, and esteem them, on gods name, according
to the rate and proportion of their woorthiest gifts: do them justice, but do
us no injury: regard them according to their best deserts, and demerits; but
make not too childishly much of their painted sheathes. I cannot now stand
upon discussing every particular, or in sifting every circumstance: and I was
long sithence taught by Rodulph Agricola in his notable books, de Inuentione
Dialecticae, to dispute rather ad Rem, than ad Hominem: howsoever Aristotle in
his Topiques has trained Sophisters to such Crypticall shifts, and sleights
other whiles. Wherein if peradventure I have already erred secundum magis, aut
minus: I crave pardon accordingly, and so consequently proceed to the matters
themselves. I take it needles, and booteles to make over deep, or scrupulous
enquiry into every most ancient, and obsolete antiquity: I presuppose it
sufficient to peruse, and examine the most famous, and most autentique supposed
prophesies, that have currantest passage, and repassage in most mouths, and
books: considering how easily every indifferent man may proportionably make
estimation of the worse, by the better, and ratably value the one by the other.

Is therefore any more renowned, or more credible than that great famous
prophecy touching the Tripartite distinction of ages, a whole continuance, or
endurance of the world, Cabalistically given out by tradition, from one Rabbi
Elias, an odd obscure Jew in comparison, howbeit lately coequalled in a manner
with the very prophet Eliah himself? yet how renowned, or wherefore credible?
was that, or the like ever enrolled in holy Bible, or otherwise Canonically
recorded? Is it consonant to any sound text in divinity? or warrantable by any
clear allegation, or profounde collection either out of the old, or new
Testament? Nay is it not rather flatly repugnant, and clean contradictory
thereunto, whilst over scrupulously, and presumptuously it inquireth into the
deepest secrets of the divine providence, and strives to reveal the highest
and most inscrutable mysteries of God himself, the only wise, and
incomprehensible Jehovah? Wherefore let Polycarpe, Lactantius, Hilarie,
Ambrose, and Rabbi Isaac; let Melancthon, Praedyn, Pewcer, Cornel. Gemma,
Leonitius, Rhaeticus, Reslyn, Postellus, or any other whether divine, or
philosopher, whether ancient, or modern; yea let S. Augustine himself make
what private account he lists, of that notorious pretended oracle; let him,
or them say, or write, or allege, what he, or they may, or can, indefence,
and credit thereof: let them all or any of them build what, and what
mystical conclusions they may, or can devise, upon the foundation and ground
of those Jewish premises, and when all is most gloriously said, or done,
shall not Cretensis still remain Cretensis, a Jew continue a Jew; and a
counterfeit ape go for an ape, although he wears a purple or golden coat?
Does not as well every error, as every vice ever find some patrones and
favorers, as Seneca said? Are they all saints which have been registered, or
canonized for saints? Are all prophets, which were, or are so reputed? Nay,
have not a number of putatiue prophets, been egregious seducers, fraudulent
imposters, and blasphemous heretics? Does Barnard himself see, or foresee
all? or may not good Homer be blinded? or was not learned Aristotle other
whiles deceived? Is there any point, or article either so erroneous in
divinity, or absurd in philosophy, or vain in other arts of humanity, which
has not been maintained, and defended by some divines, philosophers, and
humanitians? Non quid Aristoteles, or if happily you list,

Non quid Rabbi Isaac, vel quiuis dicat, eorum
Dicta nihil moror, Avero cum forte recedant:
Magni sape viri mendacia magna loquuntur.
Is it not the surer way, and sounder wisdom, in cases not necessarily
ouerruled; Nullius addictus iurare in verba magistri? Were Dagon, Ashtaroth,
Chemosh, Mylcom, Tameram, or Bell true gods, and not false devils, because the
Philistines, Sydonians, Moabytes, Ammonytes, Indians, and Babylonians esteemed
them so? Shall we regard Mahomet for a right prophet, because the Sarracens,
and Turks (a populous, and puissant generation) have rewarded them with that
honorable title; auowing that he in his glorious majesty (indeed counterfeit,
and suborned forgerie) was Sic resplendescens apud homines, tanquam sol in rota
circuli sui, aut luna in nocte plenilunij? They believe, that if percase all
the men in the world, and the devils in hell should universally meet
together, and help one another with their mutual consultations, and
conferences, toward the compiling and effecting

antique robes, and foreine mantles, wherewith they first were, and still are
clad in the Jewish Thalmudicall book Sanhedrin, Chap. 2. displaieng
themselves, as feloweth, in the treatise or section, entitled Hauoda Zara.
Cap. 1. Accipe Iudaeum insidias, and crimine ab vno
Disce omnes.


See now here their most autentique tenor of the prophecy it self, and by
view of one, make estimate of the residue, according to divine, and humane
reason. Tana abe Elihau seseth alaphim sana have Haolam.

Seen alaphim Tohu: vsne alaphim thora: vsne alaphim iemoth hamas sihi vba
hauenothema serabu iashu meon Mascias.



Which being plainly translated into latin, imports thus much in effect:
Dixerunt silij seu discipuli Heliae: 6000. Annorum mundus: 2000. Annis inane:
2000. Lex: 2000. dies Messiae: and propter peccata nostra quae multa sunt,
praeterierunt de eis quae praeterierunt. It may simply be englished after this
manner: Thus said the sons, or disciples of Elias, The world consists of
6000. years: 2000. years void: 2000. the law: 2000. the Messiah, or Christ:
but for our sins which are many, those years of that number are ouerpassed,
which are ouerpassed. Thus much the Thalmudistes themselves: neither have we to
this day any more autenticall proof, or certain assurance of any other former
form or tenor of that prophecy, than these Rabynes afford us: from whom
only, and not otherwise (that ever I could hitherto understand) we have
received the whole mystery, and knowledge thereof. Which in truth moved me at
first to misdoubt, and still persuades me to suspect, or rather to believe,
that the true Canonical Eliah is but the supposed, or suborned, or pretended
author of the premises: and consequently that there is no such assured
credence, or authority to be necessarily, or probably assigned thereunto, as
some (for the names sake only as should appear) have supersticiously, and
vainly surmised. Besides, the very letter of the text it self expressly
declares, that even the Rabynes and Thalmudistes themselves derived the
matter, or subject of this prediction, rather from the tradition of the
famulistes, or domestical scholars of that Elias, whatsoever he was; than
from any other autentique, or ancient monument of proof, or from the very
prescript word of any such prophet. But leaving this a while, let us
reasonably, and historically examine the several, and particular branches of
the prediction it self, and with equal indifferency consider, whither
otherwise of it self it deserves any such credence, or admiration, as is
yielded thereunto by sundry favorers thereof: for what skilleth it to
purpose, who made the medicine, so the receipt be actually good, and the patient
effectually recured thereby: or what matter who were the deviser, so the work
be advised. If the final event fall out correspondent to the sense of the
prediction, shall a real truth be despised, or neglected for the authors, or
fautors sake? Does not knowledge and Prudence hirselfe eftsoons lurk under a
threadbare coat, or sordid cloak? May not we happily, as Virgil did out of old
Ennius, Colligere aurum ex stercore Thalmudistarum? Or may not Olitor loqui
opportuna, as Horace writes, although not ordinarily or usually, yet
incidently, and sometimes? Wherefore it remains that we in sort release the
efficient, and convent the matter and form, or the effect it self thereof
consisting, before the judicial seat, or tribunal of reason and truth: and
so proceeding ab efficiente ad effectum, or ab artifice adopus ipsum, measure
the name, and value of the author or agent, by the woorthines and assurance of
his saiengs, or actions. Is therefore the very chronology, or computation of
this prophecy undoubtedly true in every part, and consequently in the whole?
Was the world just 2000. years void, or vain, or in the first infancy, and
primitive simplicity, or vacuitie, or without law given from God to man, as
the Hebrew interpreters, and Chaldee paraphrastes expound it? Is the matter
touched even to the quick? Or is all farther addition or substraction utterly
needless touching this point? May we build upon it, as upon a most infallible
theoreme, or necessary axiom? Have not the great Thalmudistes, or Cabalistes,
or both deceived us, and themselves, with a flieng tale of their own
surmounting and ouerreaching conceit? Is there no fallence of any artificial,
or inartificiall argument, no sophistication of time, or Elenchus adiuncti, no
dregs of error, no relics of superstition, no spice of vanity, no froth of
forgery, or sent of guile in their mouths or pens?

The beginning of the law must necessarily be derived either from the time of
Abraham, or of Moses; suppose it were from Abraham (which some hold to be the
trner doctrine, considering that the conenant of Circumcision, the very root
and groundwork of the old law, was made originally unto him:) are they not
then sufficiently confuted by their own best approved chronologies, which
from Adam to the Deluge, reckon but 1556. years, and from the slud to Abraham
292. years: by which account there are 152. years deficient of their 2000.
Tohu, or Vacuum? Or if percase we draw the beginning of the law from Moses, as
in truth we ought according to the more justifiable opinion, does not then the
infallible proof of soundest computation, besides their own accounts,
condemn them on the other side, which from the creation of the world to the
constitution, or promulgation of the law by Moses, truly summeth or
recounteth 2453. years, that is, 453. years more than their 2000. Tohu can
amount unto? So that whether they reckon the primitive age of the law from
Abraham, or from Moses, their reckoning proves but a misreckoning in the
sum: and their Chronicall arithmetique grossly fails them. Well then, is not
there likewise almost 500. years difference between 2000. years, and the
space of time from the enacting, or promulgation of the Mosaycall law unto the
nativity of Christ? Or does the time of the vocation of Abraham until the
time of the incarnation of Christ, iumpe with the term of their 2000. Lex? But
neither shall we here also need to urge any other Chronologicall compute
against them than their own; for in searching their chronicles, and ransacking
their antiquities, we shall find that themselves reckon but 3508. years from
Adam unto Christ: and are not then their 2000. Anni Tohu, and 2000. Lex
suddenly abridged and curtailed of 492. years? Now as for their last 2000.
years (vz. the distance of time from Christ's first coming in the flesh, or in
the humility of his humanity; unto his second coming in fire, or in the
majesty of his divinity:) which they in their Hebrew phrase term Dies
Messiae, how can we problably surmise that they should so skilfully foreknow
the one, which so wilfully refused to acknowledge the other? Is it likely, that
the Lord of the vineyard will so favorably entertain those wicked husbandmen
of his priuiest counsel, which so cruelly killed his own dear son, and only
heir? Or is it credible that God the son will so manifestly reveal that
unto his persecutors, which he so covertly concealeth from his elect? Nay is it
not most incredible, that the Jewish perverse crew, which is lest of all
nations in Gods favor, by desert; should be made acquainted with that sacred
inscrutable mystery, by I know not what instinct, which is hidden and locked
up even from his nearest ministers, and purest spirits, the blessed Angels, and
Archangels of heaven?

But suppose that as well that foresaid Jewish reckoning of 3508. years, as
likewise that part of Elias oracle 2000. Annis dies Messiae were sound and
autenticall: should not then also the world have been at an end above 80.
years ago, when the whole number of 2000. years was fully accomplished from
the said 3508. which year ab orb condito our Savior was borne according to
the chronologies of the Jews?

Wherefore I conceive small sense or reason, why we should attribute, or assign
any greater credit unto this glozing prophecy, than unto any other portion of
their Thalmudical, or Cabalisticall doctrine being primarily, and principally
grounded (so far as I could ever gather by reading) upon that ancient
dogmaticall decree, and resolute supposition of the Hebraicall discipline,
which affirmed that by the six days of Creation, mentioned in the first
chapter of Genesis, 6000. years of the world were mystically, and
allegorically shadowed, to be interpreted, or deciphered in such sort, that the
first days work should import, or prefigure a certain resemblance, or
assured type of such future matters, and events, as were performed in the first
thousand years of the world; the second days work, of such as should
consequently happen in the second thousand years; and so forth of the
residue, even to the accomplishment of 6000. years, at which period the
eternal Requies, or Sabbath of the Lord should finally ensue, and gloriously
appear; even as after six days work he stayed, or rested at the first, and
as sithence our Sabbath (which is a reverend figure of that great everlasting
Sabbath) after every six days, successively approaches. Now what is this, I
pray you, to make the most, or best of it, but a plain Allegorical, or
Typical allusion to that Opus sex dierum, as also to the words of the kingly
prophet David, (Psalm. 90. 4.) and of the blessed Apostle Peter, (Epist. 2. Cap.
3. 8.) Vnus dies apud Dominum perinde vt 1000. anni, and 1000. anni, vt dies
vnus: or what but a probable surmize, and opinitiue collection, coniecturally
drawn from the literal pretext, of those texts? Which in my simple conceit
cannot sufficiently be warranted, by any sound and clear judgment: but may
rather be deemed fantastical.

So that whatsoever Moses Gerundinensis, or any other Thalmudist, or Cabalist,
or Rabin, yea or S. Jerome himself, or Osiander, or Melancthon, or any other
later Divine, or Humanitian, has hitherto published by way of subscription, or
maintenance to this effect; I well may for ought I see, or hear, or can learn
to the contrary, be resolutely persuaded, that this was originally devised but
as a coniecturall fancy; and is presently to be regarded but as a mere
Cabalisticall tradition, and uncertain collection of man's invention, without
any further divine instinct, angelical illumination, or prophetical gift of
foreknowledge, either mediate, or immediate, either sensible, or intellectual.
Had it been the prophecy of the true Seer of God Eliah the Tishbite; as I am
verily persuaded, that it would then have fallen out more certain in
Consequence, without any further difference in time, or difficulty of sense;
so am I as undoubtedly assured, that we should not have wanted some other
autentique records, and testimonials thereof, than from those obscure Rabines,
or rather Rapines, which the blind Thalmudists have fantastically set abroach,
amongst other dregs, and lees of that superstitious brewing. And does not their
own weary continual expectation of the Messiah even to this day, as though he
were not yet come into the world, too too sensibly, and palpably confute either
the prediction it self, or at least confound their own prejudicial opinion,
and conceit thereof? Howheit they have also imagined a new figment, and
sithence that first, have eftsoons harped upon another, and another string:
but alas, what became of those wonderful changes, and huge alterations, which
their fained counterfeit Messiah should afterward have wrought, Sub ducentesimo
Cyolo Solari? Is not their conceited estimation of their said Solary Cycle, as
true as the Consequent? Or has not the final event here likewise miserably
frustrated their forlorn, and wretched expectations? Does there yet remain
any other great reason, or weighty authority, to move or persuade such, as
first conceived so great opinion of this petty Elias, and so resolutely
embraced his conceit, as deuoid of al deceit, or error? If they esteemed it but
as a probable collection, I would peradventure not greatly resist; or if they
regarded it only as a sensible, or reasonable likelihood, I could happily in
sort yield unto them: but whiles they recount it above exception, and value it
as most precious and infallible, where is their Canonical warrantize, or
invincible Demonstration? This me seems I may auerre, that the final
concordance, harmony, and mutual consent, which some will needs enforce
between it and holy writ (as if for sooth it were first gleaned out of that
sacred field, or derived from that pure fountain, or at least justifiable by
that sure warrant) is not only not equal and sound, but erroneous, and
somewhat too superstitious: for touching the last part, or clause of this
prophecy, which some have thus englished, But for our sins which are many,
and marvelous, some years which are wanting shall not be expired: and so
comparatively alluded unto those words of Christ in the 24. chapt. of Matthew,
And except those days were shortened all flesh should perish, but for the
Elects sake they shall be cut off: (which words in their opinion is a
sufficient establishment of that doctrine, as in manner it were if the presumed
translation were autenticall) it is a manifest clear case, that their
interpretation is not only discrepant from the intention of the Rabines
themselves: but repugnant even to the true letter, and legitimate sense of
their Hebrew Ideome: which as it was before declared, sounds thus, and no
otherwise in our vulgar tongue: But for our sins which are many, those years
are already passed, which are passed. Which sense may likewise be probably
insinuated by this circumstance, that as well the Hierosolimitan, as Babylonian
Thalmud wherein this oracle is recorded, as also a thousand fables semblably
inserted, were first entitled of the Thalmudists themselves (according to
their own supputations, compared with our Christian Epoch) the one 300.
years, the other 400. years after the time of Christ's crucifixion, at which
time, perceiving manifestly that their date was expired, and imagining that
there came no such savior, or redeemer according to their expectation grounded
upon this prediction; with a kind of penitent, and solemn confession after
their manner they complained thereof in this clause, and imputed the mishap, or
miscasualtie unto the multitude of their own transgressions and trespasses. To
which construction or exposition subscribeth the most excellent philosopher,
and reputed Phoenix of Europe, or at least of Italy, Ioannes Picus Mirandula,
besides Pollustius, I. F. and sundry other of special reckoning in philosophy
and other learning.

Lo then the authority and credit as well of the thing published, as of the
publishers, or rather Publicans themselves. Lo the effects of such causes; and
the fruits of such trees. Howbeit in truth we cannot accuse their Doctors of
mere falsehood, whilst they allege for their reason and excuse, that the
Messiah came not because of their manifold offenses and sins, for neither
came he indeed unto them which acknowledged him not, neither shall he be a
professed Messiah, or Savior unto those, which confessed him not. Nay shall
not his coming, and going, be as coals of consuming fire upon their heads,
which received not their own, when he came and dwelt amongst them, but refused
the head stone of the corner, misused and punished the innocent, and immaculate
blood as a thief, or murderer, or notorious felon, and most traitorously and
villanously crucified their own king upon the cross? Wherefore many shall
come from the east and from the west, and from all nations under the sun, and
sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven, when the
children of the kingdom shall be expulsed, and thrust out into utter darkness,
where shall be lamentable weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

Now concerning the credit, estimation, and authority of the ancient fathers,
and other learned Divines at first mentioned, which some happily may, and will no
doubt cast in my dish, as mighty supporters of this Jewish monument (whose
affirmative censures have already persuaded diverse, and shall doubtless still
prevail, and pass for current verities amongst many, without any further or
deeper inquiry either into their Chronologicall reckonings, or Theological
expositions:) albeit otherwise for their other notable learning, profound
judgment, renowned works, and Christian pains worthy eternal memory, I
must reverence their names, and honor their spiritual gifts, yet in this one
point I cannot in reason, or conscience according to science, but as well
suspect their Divinity, as mislike their chronology: the first being in sort
as contradictorie to the prescript word of the Gospel according to Saint
Mark, (Cap. 13, verse. 33.) Watch, and pray, for ye know not when the time
shall be: as the other is varying, and dissonant from that account, which is
now Vnanimi consensu received for the surest, and truest computation. They will
needs soueraignly allow of the prophecy of Elias, and what a gods name but
that, or who but he? The world, this whole world must needsly end at, or before
6000. years: why man, does not he which is not wont to lie, does not the
great prophet, does not Elias himself say so? Indeed it were a sufficient
argument of divine authority, if they could substantially prove that the very
Canonical Eliah had spoken or written it: but in the mean while peruse some
of their own writings, research their antiquities, compare their chronologies,
examine their records and registers: and shall you not find according to the
historical Computes even of sundry these favorites, that there are already
passed above 6000. years, yea and according to other some of their adherents,
above 7000. years, sithence the worlds creation to these days wherein we
live? How such reckonings and summings hang together, let them consider which
ascribe so much unto antique names, and make so high account of the outward
superficial bark of forged words; but what needs any further inuectiue, or
refutation? Is not the sentence of their own mouth a sufficient proof against
them? If the prophecy of Elias be undoubtedly true, these reckonings must
doubtless be false: but if these reckonings be certainly false, shall
therefore the prophecy of Elias be certainly true? That follows not by any
divine, or humane rule of reasonable consequence: but therefore they are both
false, because they as well swerve from the right compass of approved
allowance in humanity: as also because they cannot endure the infallible touch
stone of divinity: being only phantastically builded upon the sandy
foundation of man's conceit, whose essential substance is ignorance, and whose
inseparable accident is error: Quis enim non fallitur? For who is not
misaduised, or deceived otherwhiles? Or who assuredly knows what shall befall
him under the Sun?

Then as concerning the answer of the angel Vriell unto that profound
question, and mystical Problem of Esdras; Whether there were more quantity of
time to come than was past, or more quantity of time past than was to come,
(which text is imagined to be a perfect proof, and invincible confirmation of
the assertion, or position of Eliah) whereby should appeer that the time future
after Esdras, was not likely to be comparable unto that which had passed before
him. As I may probably, and lawfully doubt with S. Hierome, and other notable
divines, whether the doctrine it self be Canonical, and above all exception
wholly irreprehensible: so I no less reasonably persuade my self that it
cannot be so warrantably alleged in maintenance of Elias tradition, as some
to that purpose have quoted it: for although it may likewise appear thereby
that the world is now in the decaying, or decrepit years, and even almost at
the last cast (as they say) (which by the founder doctrine of the Evangelists,
and Apostles themselves is also ratified:) yet for so much as there is here a
general verdict given out, and that only by way of question, and indefinite
comparison; not any farther special sentence pronounced by way of decision, or
definitive judgment; how shall this interrogatiue affirmation, and irresolute
resolution be auerred to confirm, or determine that certain number, and
express continuance of 6000. years? Nay if we precisely respect the just
degree of comparison, and right proportion of the Analogy, which argues as
much difference, or distance between the time past, and the time to come, as
is between a great water, and a little; or between a great fire, and a
little; shall we not by chronologicall subduction infer a far more discrepant
conclusion, and in truth a far greater confusion, than is yet mentioned?

But there is also another Apocriphal revelation touching the worlds
durabilitie, which God himself is reported to have declared and intimated unto
the said Esdras out of a bush in this form, or tenor of words: The world has
lost his youth: and the times, or ages are waxen old: for the world is divided
into twelve parts, and ten parts are gone thereof already, and half of the
tenth part also: and there remains only that which is after the half of the
tenth part; therefore set thy house in order, and so forth. Go to now: is
there any greater concordance, or Synchronisme, between the prophecy of Elias
and this text, than is argued between the same, and the former? Or rather
shall we not find a greater discrepance, and incongruence, if we search the
matter to the quick? Let the division of those twelve parts be made according
to the number of the years of Elias, (as it needs must, in case that be the
certain number of the worlds age) and shall not every part contain just 500.
years? Of which if we take away ten parts, that is ten times 500. and half
the tenth part, that is half 500. which is 200. and 50 should there not remain
from the time of that revelation to Esdras, unto the perfect consummation of
this world, above 700. and 50. years? Which being added to 3500. years, about
which time Ab orb condito, Esdras flourished, do they produce any more in the
total sum than 4250. years? At which periode, the extreme and final
conflagration should have kindled, had this prophecy of Esdras, and that of
Elias been agreeably consonant, and uniform? Wherefore the gross, and
notorious difference of 1030. years, which is already passed between them,
must of necessity condemn the one, but unto which the more credit is to be
yielded, let other judge: one of the two must needesly be granted, either that
the Jewish Elias was no true prophet; or that he, who instructed Esdras was no
true God. The resolution I leave as well to the private consideration of every
christian conceit, as to the public determination of the church.

Other circumstances, and appendences might be probably interlaced touching
this pretended oracle: in effect nothing differing from the like imagination of
Orpheus, as it is recited by Plato, and why not to be valued, as that heathen
Poetical Sonet? But enough in reason, may seem sufficient in proof; and in
dutiful modesty, I am to presume the less, because it is a point which has
not been hitherto particularly confuted, or specially discussed by the pen of
any man, that ever yet came to my view: albeit otherwise it has a long time
passed, and repassed in the world, as being either generally liked of all, and
plausibly embraced of the most, for a certain truth; or at least suspected of
few, and rejected of none, as an uncertain counterfeit. In which consideration,
notwithstanding all the premises, with other incident appurtenances, I am
respectively to conclude with this protestation, that if any man of the
learneder sort, can allege more sufficient reasons, and more forcible
arguments in defense of the same, than I have addressed in confutation thereof:
I will willingly give over my former position, and resolve wholly on their later
information, as grounded on better and surer judgment.

What shall we now conceive, or esteem of other semblable predictions? Do
they, or any of them enforce any greater credence or assurance? Or is there any
special instigation of reason to move, or excite us to intertaine any those
other imaginations, and forlorn conceits, touching the continuance, and
final destinies of the world? Is not the presumptuous, and fantastical
tradition of Leo Haebreus like unto the former? Or rather more unlike the
sacred truth? He iumpeth in sort with Rabbi Elias in the foresaid number of
6000. years, but otherwise what is his singular opinion? Forsooth, that in the
circuit of every such several period (vz. 6000. years) there should only
happen a vicissitudinall conversion, or temporal transformation of the
elementarie or terrestrial globe of this world: but not any final dissolution
of the whole frame, and mass thereof: and so consequently that there should
every 7000. year, ensue a certain subalternall time of peaceable calmenes,
and transitory rest, only after a temporanie fashion, or intercourse, not
otherwise, until the whole sum of 49000. years fully determining after this
manner, the 50000. year of the world, bring on the fatal overthrow, and utter
subversion as well of celestial orbs, as terrestrial bodies, and so finally
accomplish the great and mighty Iubilee of eternal rest. O egregious figment,
worthy the woorthines of so profounde a Kabyne! O strange, and monstrous
Metamorphosis! O queint, and fantastique invention! O wyzardly dream of
dreams! What? From 6000. to 6. and almost half 6. times 6000? Marry sir a
few such leapes will soon amount In infinitum aeternum, and Infernum to, and
whither not? But Lord from whence is this od farfeiched Babylonian devise
borrowed? Is it not likewise collectiuely, and extensiuely wroong from the said
Mosaicall history of the 6. days creation, and the 7. days rest? (Howbeit
with what congruence of Analogy, or proportion let reason decide:) or at least
from some other like imaginatiue speculation of that clymacterical number of 7?
Even as also Elias his Allegorical prognosticate was, howsoever they strangely
disagree in circumstance of time? Indeed every scholar in manner knows that
Tully In Somnio Scipionis auoweth, Septimum numerum omnium fere nodum esse:
that Hippocrates supposes, Hominum aetates septenario dierum numero constare:
that sundry as well divines as philosophers, and other philologers, have made
very special account of this number, as a very special number of most notable
consideration: for besides Tully, Hippocrates, Censorius, Gellius, Boaetius,
Philo Iudaeus, Albertus, Macrobius, Marsilius Ficinus, Tritemius, Cornel.
Agrippa, Syluius, Rauzouius, and diverse other of like note for humanity, and
philosophy: is it not manifest, that even the chief fathers and doctors of the
church to, as S. Hierome, S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, Arnobius, Eusebius,
Christome, Egidius, Remigius, and our venerable M. Beade with infinite other
schoolmen, and modernistes, have also made such wonderful reckonings of the
deep mysteries thereof, that they have not spared to term it a holy, and
sacred number; aprecious and divine number; a typical, and mystical number?
(Howsoever we now run altogether upon 8. and 8. and what but 88?) The 7. day
God rested, and hallowed the same: also the 7. month he ordained the
celebration, or solenmization of three principal feasts, vz. the feast of
Trumpets, the feast of Reconciliation, and the feast of Tabernacles. Also every
7. year he inioined the children of Israel to observe as a Sabbath, or year
of repose, or rest, in the land allotted unto them: Noah was commanded to take
into the Arc of every clean beast, by seauens: so Elisha willed Naaman to
wash himself 7. times in the river Iordaine, whereupon he was cured of his
leprosy: and the apostles appointed the office of Deaconship unto 7. chosen
men of special meetnes for that function. Item the 7. golden candlestickes;
the 7. spirits which are before the throne: the 7. seals of the book: the 7.
horns and the 7. eyes of the lamb: the 7. angels, with their 7. trumpets: the
7. thunders, with their 7. voices: the 7. angels having the 7. last plagues:
the 7. golden vyals full of the wrath of God, with other like notable seauens,
do they not seem to imply some extraordinary, or appropriate quality of that
number? And what incomprehensible mysteries appeered unto John when the said 7.
seal was opened? When the seventh angel blew his trumpet? when the seventh
angel powered out the seventh vial into the air? And so forth. Which texts,
with sundry like verses of holy scripture namely expressing that number, do
they not figuratively contain great miracles, and deep mysteries? But of what
nature or property, or how they are precisely to be interpreted without
further scruple, as I may modestly doubt, whether it rests in the certain
intelligence, or definite skill of man to determine; so it evidently appears,
that the abouesaid famous authors have rather mentioned that number, with
plausible terms of admiration; than measured it with any sensible or
intelligible rule of understanding.

Wherefore to return again unto the great Iubileal year 50000. (wherein the
foresaid Leo Haebreus includes the fatal destiny of the world) may it not be
deemed, that even himself never plunged into the depth of his own conceit, or
otherwise, that he was a false heretic, or Apostata? For if his prediction be
fundamentally drawn from the recited mystery of the number 7. and withal
that position be presupposed true, that every 7000. year should bring forth a
temporal Requiem, until 6. times 6000. years being ouerpassed, the final
7000. should bring out the eternal Requiem: then must the 49000. year it
self (which is also the great Climactericall, Hebdomaticall, Scalary,
Decretoriall year) consisting of 7. times 7. and amounting of the od 1000. to
succeed every 6000. years, be esteemed the mighty graund Iubileall year, and
not the 50000. year, which indeed remains in account the first 1000. of a
new reckoning, or other 6000. years. But be it granted that in the said number
of 50000. years he had relation unto the Quinquagenarie, or 50. year, which
with the ceremonies and solemnities thereof is described, Leuitic. 25. and
termed the year of Iubilee, which in the Hebrew letter signifies as much as
Buccina in Latin, quod sz. ille Annus buccina significandus erat, at que
gloriose celebrandus, (the first year of which compute was the year of
Ingression into the land of Chanaan, the 5. year of Iosue, and the 2493. year
of the world:) does not as well the first voice of the crier in the wilderness,
as the later preachings of Peter and Paul, yea does not the whole Evangelical
and Apostolic doctrine confute, and confound them both, to wit; as well the
49000. as 50000. years? Is any thing more assuredly certain in the whole
sacred volume of the Bible, than that Christ was manifested in the flesh not in
the first, or middle ages, but in the last times of the world? That his
kingdom was at hand even in those days, or that it, cannot now be deferred,
or prolonged any great space, although no man exactly, or precisely knows the
very certain period? But how may it be said, either that he came in the latter
age of the world, or that his kingdom draws nigh (according to all true
Canonical Texts, and Orthodoxall Constructions) if the same world should hold
out more than 10. times so long after his coming, as it did before? So that we
are finally to esteem the 49000. or rather the 50000. years of Leo Hebreus, no
truer in conclusion than the imaginary conceit of Mahomet in his Alcaron, who
there circumscribeth the extreme period of the latter day or great day of
judgment within the compass, or Terminatio^ of the same space, vz. the space
of 50000. years.

Therefore may we not justly affirm, that vain, and frivolous, and erroneous,
and wicked, and in effect damnable, and devilish are the figments and comments
of mortal wits, and rauing spirits, touching this high and incomprehensible
mystery of the worlds durabilitie? Would not that worthy Moral sentence of
Socrates be again and again, and always remembered: Quae supranos, nihil ad
nos? Neither can the great composition of Ptolomie, nor the Sphaeroidica of
Archimedes, nor the subtle Acroamaticall Physiques of Aristotle, nor the
divine enigmaticall Metaphysiques of Plato; nor Pythagoras mystical lot, nor
any manticall, or magical, or mathematical Hypotheses whatsoever sufficiently
direct, or inform us in this supereminent point of inscrutable knowledge: no
Geometrical, or Arithmeticall proportions, no Astronomicall, or
philosophical, or supernatural Diuinations: no Opticall, or Speculatorie
Theories: no Cabalisticall, or Traditionall Suppositions: no dreaming
Revelations, or Onirocriticall conjectures; no furious rauings, or deep vapors
of Melancholy: no liberal, or Mechanical; Contemplative, or Active; lawful,
or unlawful experiments: nor any secret part, or particle either of Natural
or Ceremonial Magique in one kind, or other: nor any possible intelligence, or
imaginatiue conceit, or extraordinary, and Seraphicall rauishment of spirit,
can definitiuely determine the certain, and sure issue of that abstruse, and
unsearchable secrecy: no Sphinx, or Oedipus, no Amphiaraus, or Mopsus, or
Amphilocus; no Homericall calchas, or Liuian Vates Martius, or Vmbrian
Tomasutius; or any Memphiticall Oracler, howsoever distraught, or elevated
above the reach of humane capacity; or any rauing and raging Sybill any thing
worth in effect, to resolve that insoluble Argument, or to explicate that
implicit proposition. Zohar may fantastically imagine one universal
consummation, Dum senarius in 1000. and in 100. and in 10. and in 1. inesse
fuerit: and Plato may dream of a great, great maine year, when 36000 years
are expired, and so, and so infinite other: but when they have all said, and
written what they possibly can, is the best of their conceits or devises, any
otherwise to be valued, or regarded, than as a dream when one awaketh? For
like as the ground is appointed for the wood, and the sea for his fluds, so
they that dwell upon earth, can understand nothing but that which is upon
earth: and they which are in the heavens, the things that are above the height
of the heavens. (2. Esdras 4, 21. Isaiah 55, 8. John 3, 31. 1. Cor. 2, 13.)

Will you therefore know the vain opinions, and resolutions of philosophers,
and philologers, touching the consistence and continuance of the world? That
thereby it may more evidently appear, what mortal wits have performed in the
narrow seas of that intricate point, or how far the profoundest possible skill,
and uttermost extent of humane knowledge may wade in the depth of that mistical
secret of secrets? Plato in Tymaeo confesses a certain divine (...), that the
world had a beginning from God; but denies that it shall ever have any final
dissolution, or overthrow, otherwise then the author, and architect thereof God
himself? Of which mind by some records were also Orpheus, Hesiodus, and
other the most ancient divine poets. Empedocles, and Heraclitus deemed that it
was in matter, and form so composed, and formed, that it should
interchangeably one while decay, another while flourish again, and so
interpolatis vicibus, or alternatim, infinito tempore, nunc gigni nunc
interire. Democritus supposed that as it had once a beginning like other
natural bodies, so after their example, and manner, it should once likewise be
utterly destroyed, and never be repaired, or restored again. But Aristotle
lib. 1. de caelo: lib. 1. de natura, and other his physical Commentaries,
refelling the former opinions, introduces a new assertion, and contendeth for
life to prove that it neither had any original beginning at the first, nor
should sustain any final overthrow at the last: but that forsooth it is
infinite, euerduring, and eternal. Of which opinion, or rather heresy, were
likewise Zenophanes, Auerroes, Pomponatius, together with the whole
Peripatecian, Aristotelian, and scholasticall rablement; also a greater than
any of them, Pliny himself, as appears Lib. 2. Cap. 1. of his Natural
History, where that learned writer unlearnedly terms the world, Numen
aeternum, immensum, neque genitum, neque interiturum vnquam. O ignorant, and
fond conceits of so famous philosophers! O Plato what is become of thy renowned
divinity? O Aristotle where is thy logical and physical Acumen? O Plinic,
would God thou had here stayed thy wisdom, and not bewraied so palpable
Atheism either touching the Immortality of the world, or concerning the
Mortality of the soul? But mark yet another pretty fancy; Pythagoras and
with him the Stoiks affirmed, that the world was framed originally by the first
Cause, and that some parts thereof may be consumed, but not the whole: to which
assertion yielded also Thales Milesius, the first wise Grecian by the oracle of
Apollo: item Anaxagoras, Auicenna, Philo Iudaeus, and some other of good
reckoning in the Schools. Lo now the sophistical paradoxes, and absurd
imaginations of profane philosophers? Behold how their eyes dasel; how their
feet slide; how their common sense fails: nay, how their whole intelligence
and understanding quaileth at the depth of this profound divine mystery? Is
not the best, or learnedest, or wisest of them, as the blind man that shoots
at the crow? Or is not the veriest Idiot, or simpliest fool in a country, as
deeply wise in this point as the cheifest of them? Is not this the Lords own
mighty doing, who has revealed that unto the babe, and suckling of these
times amongst Christians, which he concealed from the greatest Doctors, and
wisest masters amongst the heathen in former ages? Does not he, whosoever
ventureth to aspire, or climb on high without the scale of direct and lawful
knowledge, fall into the dark dungeon, and bottomless pit of gross errors?
Or does not he, whosoever presumes to pass the surging seas of divine
mysteries, without the anchor of spiritual direction, plunge and drown
himself in the raging gulf of most profane and impious heresies? Si Christum
nescis, nihil est, si caetera discis: They do but rave, or at least roue,
whosoever ween, or strive to cast beyond the moon, in preternatural, or
supernatural secrecies: The deepest humane science is not comparable to the
divine Alphabet: The philosopher in discourse of reason may propose, and each
man in heat of affection purpose, what himself likes, but it is another that
in conclusion, and in effect disposes and transposeth what himself lists:
whose mighty and wonderful proceedings no Poligrapher can express, or
Steganographer decipher. O the marvelous deepnes of the riches and treasures
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God? How unsearchable are his judgments,
and his ways past finding out? For who has known the mind of the Lord? Or
who was ever entertained as his secretary, or privy counselor? Of whom, and
through whom, and for whom all things are whatsoever are. Romans 11. 33. Isaiah.
40. 13. Job. 41. 2. But what needs Job, Isaiah, or Paul confute them? Does
not the breath of their own mouth, and the common Theorems, and Problems of
their own invention, confound them? Why should the world be everlasting, and
why should it not sustain corruption? Because we cannot perceive whether the
eg or the bird were first engendered; seeing it is impossible that an eg should
be laid without a bird, or that a bird should be hatched without an eg? As some
of them have argued, and taught. O frail conceit of natural skill, not
worthy any serious confutation of a Christian understanding? But in the
meanewhile they presume that this point of philosophy is Scientificall: and
does it indeed Sub scientiam cadere, as they presuppose? Themselves define
Scire, to be, Rem per causas cognoscere: and how then can they devise, or
imagine a science of that, whose causes are concealed, and hidden from them?
Besides, they give out for a principle, or Axiom; that there is, Nihil in
intellectu, quod non prius fuerit in sensu: and how then may such things as
were never comprehended within the limits of sense, or any sensual faculty,
be deprehended within the precinct of understanding, or any intellectual
power? Or if Quiduis non fit e quolibet: and Veritas latet in profundo domersa,
as one of themselves professed, how can any such divine, and Metaphysicall
mystery be directly, or indirectly intimated by any natural or artificial
intelligence? So that we may as well conclude with Democritus, Metrodorus,
Lucretius, and the ridiculous Epicure that there are innumerable, or infinite
worlds, not only one world: as believe with any of the former philosophers and
Sophisters, that there is but one world, howbeit the same infinite,
indissoluble, and euer-during.

Now (to proceed somdeale nearer unto our present intention) are their
conceited fantasies, and imaginations, De anno magno, vel potius maximo, of
any greater effect, or importance than the premises, or seem they any whit
more conformable unto the truth, than the former erroneous paradoxes? Must we
not account it either a part of light credulity in humanity, or a spice of some
fantastical heresy in divinity, to attribute any credit, or reputation
either unto the 10984. years of Dion: or unto the 100800. years of
Heraclitus: or unto the 110155. years of Diogenes: or the 2484. years of
Aristarchus: or the 5452. years of Dyrrhacinus: or Macrobius his 15000.
years: or the 7377. years of any other? For alas, I will not say how
certainly, or surely, but how warrantably, or probably have any of them
prophesied? Yet no doubt every one of these, and sundry like, had some proper,
and selfe-bosome reasons, or motives, to induce them to their peculiar
resolutions: Sed somnia sunt, non vaticinia, phantasmata, non oracula, quae ad
istum modum de mundi interitu concipiuntur. Which I understand not only of
the foresaid sophistical assumptions, or rather presumptions De anno magno,
but also of all other fictions, and delusions whatsoever, and of whomsoever,
touching the worlds dissolution. Howbeit I nothing doubt, that there was ever
any opinion, or imagination invented, or devised so oddely fantastical, or
absurd touching this matter, which has not soon been entertained, and
easily believed of some, or other. But amongst all the residue of Heathens, or
Ethnickes, even above the cunningest philosophers, or profoundest magicians,
Tully in my judgment seems to have shot nearest the white, whilst In Somnio
Scipionis mentioning this great terrible Vertical year, he ingenuously
concludes: In quo vix dicere andeo quam multa saecula hominum teneantur. As
for us Christians unto whom it has pleased the special goodness of God to
reveal greater measure of his truth, by his erpresse word, and Canonical
Gospel: like as we assuredly know that the world had once his extreme (...),
or watrie winter, at Noahes flood; so do we no less steadfastly believe that
there shall once like wise be (...), whereby it shall feel as extreme a fiery
summer with burning flames, and brimstone from heaven, utterly consuming, and
wasting every part, and parcel thereof, as is also rather prophetically, than
poetically delivered in those serious and grave verses;

Esse quoque in fatis reminiscitur, affore tempus,
Quo mare, quo tellus, correptaque regia caeli
Ardeat, and mundi moles operosa laboret.
But in what minute, in what hour, in what day, in what week, in what month,
quarter, or year, this final conflagration, and universal fireworke shall
happen, no man under the cope of heaven knows, no not the very angels, or
archangels of heaven; or if percase they do, as some in the subtlety of their
senses conceive, or rather imagine, yet Ad reuelandum, they know not; Et sibi
solis, non nobis sapiunt; being a point of most unsearchable, and inscrutable
wisdom, even above, and beyond the capacity of all wisdom, save only
divine, and incomprehensible wisdom. Which neither the obscure, and disguised
amphibologies of cosening oraclers could ever insinuate: or the phantastique
imaginations of melancholy Saturnistes conceive: or the superstitious
inuocatio^s of spritish Exorcistes discover: or the glosing interpretation of
Ecstaticall dreamers disclose: or the subtle queint inventions of foisting
inglers, and cogging Magicians unfold: or the cunningest sophistications of
wizardly impostors decipher: or the mystical secrecies of the profoundest
Cabalistes reveal: or any Mathematical, or Mantical, or Seraphicall, or
Daemonicall Theories expressly intimate, either by way of Categorical
demonstration, or Hypotheticall supposition. A sensible man, soon perceives a
sensible cause: a reasonable man, soon conceiueth a reasonable matter: a
cunning man, soon receives the cunningest form of most things: but there is
no sense so sharp, or quick: no reason so ripe, or sound: nor any
understanding so deeply, or profoundly grounded, which is not ouermatched,
confounded, and astonished at the wonderful exceeding height, and depth of
that most ineffable sapience. O Lord, Lord! Who can learn, or know this thing,
but he that has not his dwelling amongst men? (Esdras 2. cap. 5. 38.) For as
concerning the often recited mystery of the 6. days creation: the time,
times, and half a time mentioned in the 7. and 12. chap. of Daniell: and in
the 12. of the Apocalypse: the 1260. days rehearsed in the 11. chap. preceding:
the 70. weeks revealed unto Daniell, by the angel Gabriell: the 1290. days,
and the 1335. days disclosed to Daniell by the man clothed in linen which was
upon the waters of the river: Item the answer of the angel Vriell unto Esdras
touching things past, and things to come: and the voice out of the bush unto
the same Esdras concerning the 12. parts of the world above repeated: Item the
parable of Christ himself touching the kingdom of heaven in the 20. chap. of
Matthew: and the tokens, or signs of the end of the world manifested to his
disciples in the 24. chap. of Matthew with such like: in the small reach of my
simple skill by reading, they only imply, or presignifie a certain final
dissolution, or general consummation of all things, whenever it happens:
not any certain demonstratiue, or definite knowledge thereof, which in very
deed even by divine testimony were not expedient, or convenient for mankind
to be more particularly made acquainted withal. Esdras being very inquisitiue
after a curious and scrupulous manner, to know at Gods hands, what the division
of times or ages should be, or when should be the end of the first, and the
beginning of it that followed: God replieth in this dark historical speech,
not appliable to the purpose, or otherwise conceiueable without the help of
Tropologicall resolution: From Abraham unto Isaac, when Jacob and Esau were
borne of him, Jacobs hand held first the heel of Esau: for Esau is the end
of this world, and Jacob is the beginning of it that followed: the hand of
man is betwixt the heel and the hand: other things Esdras ask thou not. Also
another time, Vriell answered him, saying: Thine heart has taken too much upon
it in this world, and thou think to comprehend the ways of the highest.
And likewise another time; Hasten not to be above the highest, for thou
laborest in vain to be equal with him; though thou endeavor, or strive never
so much. Again, another time: Thine own things, and such as are grown up
with thee, can thou not know; How should thy vessel then be able to
comprehend the ways of the highest, and now outwardly in the corrupt world,
to understand the corruption, that is evident in my sight? Moreover another
time: Why disquietest thou thy self, seeing thou art corruptible? And Why art
thou moved seeing thou art mortal? Yea even Daniel himself (who above all
other prophets had most special, and singular revelation of such things, and
events, as should behappen the church from the very time that it was in
captivity, until the last days of the world) when he had hard that which
he understood not, touching these fatal matters, and hidden destinies, and
thereupon said: O Lord what shall be the end of these things? It was answered
him, that he should go his way, and content himself, for the words were closed
up, and fast sealed. I might accordingly allege sundry other places of divine
authority, to the instifieng, and assuring of this conclusion: vz. that not
the very prophets of God himself, or the apostles of Christ, could perfectly
digest, or thoroughly understand all such visions, revelations, and mysteries,
as were partly opened, partly shut unto them in this behalf; and then how much
less may we, or any bastard prophets, or putatiue wizardes, or supposed
cunning men, of whatsoever aspiring quality, presumptuously determine thereof?
For the causes and circumstances being totally hidden, and concealed, I cannot
devise, how by any sensible reason, or intelligible conceit, the effects, and
consequents, may, or can be particularly revealed, or declared. Howbeit I am
not ignorant how the forementioned textes, and allegations of holy scriptures,
have been diversely canuassed by diverse, and suddenly enforced by sundry as well
ancient, as neotericall interpreters, to the inferring, and auowing of their
several conclusions, being as they have seemed to imagine, easily enough
determinable, or demonstrable, by natural, or artificial skill: but in fine,
both their chronologicall computations, Theological constructions,
Cabalisticall traditions, and Mathematical speculations fall out much alike,
ambiguous, uncertain, fallible, erroneous, deceitful. I have made some little
trial my self in some kinds of artificial experiments, but howsoever I have
otherwhiles seemed favorably addicted to some men's philosophical, and
astronomicall predictions, (which of the two I esteem far more probable, and
warrantable than these prophetical propositions, and heretical expositions:)
I cannot yet perceive either any assured verity, or coniecturall probability
in any such old said sawes, as still pass, and repasse for current in many
men's, women's, and childrens mouths, not in one, or two odd obscure corners,
but thorough many, and many famous places, and in a manner every where, upon the
smallest occasion of every trifling occurrent, or accident, eftsoons buzzing,
and dreaming of this, and that alteration, of such, and such innovation, of
changes in religion, of subversion of states, of destruction, or desolation of
principalities, kingdoms and monarchies, of the universal confusion, and
dissolution of the universal world: for besides that they are never grounded
upon any sensible, artificial, or substanciall foundation, according to sound
reason, or learning: do they not most-what ever proceed from some odd vain
fantastical, or phreneticall brains, either strangely deluded by some
cogging devil, or extraordinarily possessed with rauing fury, or unnaturally
disguised with melancholy fumes, or at least wilfully disposed to seduce, and
beguile the world with I know not what colorable, and superstitious
flimflams, intended to the aduauncing, or atchieuing of some deep secret
diabolical purposes: which the better to countenance, and as it were to
palliate the matter, they will seem notwithstanding to have borrowed even from
the mouth of mighty love, or the oracle of wise Apollo himself, or
Zenocratically, and Pythagorically to have remained for a time, Instar Sybillae
cuiusdam vaticinantis, furentisque, or like Dionisius Ecstaticus, to have been
plunged in some deep Plotinian, Porphyrian or Metaphysicall trance, or visibly,
and miraculously to have seen some wonderful spiritual vision, or otherwise
to have been either supernaturally inspired, or superartificially instructed.
But what can we make, or think of these lightheaded, and hairebrainde
prophets? Are they (notwithstanding their shifting, and iugling pretenses) any
whit better than the chaplins of Baal, or any whit cunninger indeed than
Balaams ass? Are they not the scholars of Beelzebub; the disciples of Satan,
and the votaries of Lucifer? Are they not quite sequestered, and dismembered from
the body of the true Catholic, and Apostolic Church, being like Elimas the
sorcerer, full of filthiness, guile, hypocrisy, and falsehood? Can we remember
how the words Prophecy and Prophets are taken amongst learned men; or how they
are used in the scripture, and not withal consider, and perceive that there is
no such extraordinary, or miraculous gift to be expected in any man, woman, or
child at these days? Is not true and pure divinity according to the division
of some learned, and reverent autors, either Expositiue, and Interpretatiue: or
else Visionall, and Prophetical? Concerning the former branch, unto whom does
it properly and peculiarly belong, but unto the true Ecclesiastical Doctors
and Pastors, the sincere preachers and ministers of God? whom it specially
appertains, to declare, lay open, and expound his sacred word according to
the several kinds, and manifold uses of Interpretation, wheresoever any Text
beside the chief doctrinall, and moral discourse, requires either one
Etymologicall, or Historical explication, or other artificial resolution, or
percase otherwhiles also a Tropological, or Anagogicall Construction: which in
certain parables, and figurative sentences of the Bible, must needs be
yielded, even by those, that otherwise are not over curiously or
superstitiously bent to Allegorizing. As for that other branch, which either by
Mediate appearance, and revelation of some vision; or by Immediate infusion, and
illumination from God, delivered the very infallible word, and express will or
Testament of his Almighty Majesty, even the pure divine scripture it self:
is it any other especial kind or gift, but that, wherewith the ancient holy
Patriarchs, and anointed Prophets of the old Testament, were miraculously and
appropriately inspired? Are not they the open proclaimers, and dispensers of
his Gospel? Or were not these the mystical and typical reuealers of the
same, as they were primitiuely taught at the first hand? For although our
Divines are commonly named (...) in Greek, of their talking with God, or at
lest of God, as well as they: yet how can we say, that they talk with him
otherwise than mediately, or per accidens, as schoolmen term it, to wit, by
his word: whereas Moses talked with him immediately, and per se, or face to
face: wherein appears a notable difference, or distinction between the one,
and the other. Item every prophet or seer was, and may justly be called an
interpreter, or expositor of Gods law, but not e conuerso. Item the prophets
rightly deserving that title, wers potentes in opere, and sermon, as well
powerable in works, as mighty in words; neither Intended the Lord God any
notable thing, whereof he revealed not the mystery, or priuitie unto his
servants, or secretaries the prophets. (Amos. 3, 7.) Which Ius, or interest in
the participation of divine secrecies, even our woorthiest, or excellentest
divines may not challenge, aut express, aut per consimile, as some of
themselves have duly professed. Howbeit we cannot flatly deny our right
divines to be in their kind true prophets, and that also according to the
sacred phrase of the Bible: for like as Divinity, and divines are either
interpretatiue, or prophetical, as is before distinguished: so the word
Prophet in the word of God, is generally and specially used after two sorts,
either for a shewer, or foreteller of things to come, as Act. 11. 27. etc. Or
else for a preacher, or interpreter of the scripture, as 1. Corinthians. 14. etc.
After which last manner may our divines, or Theologers be termed prophets, but
not otherwise. Now what I beseech you shall become of our counterfeit wizardes,
and bastard prophets? Are they either interpreting divines, or divining
interpreters? May they effectually underly any trial of old or new Testanient
to confirm their title, or justify their proceedings? What sound preachers,
or reverend persons of Ecclesiastical vocation do we read to have cherished
their mad vain, or presumptuous humor? Or what such disguised prophets do we
hear to have embraced the zealous, and discreet disposition of any such godly
pastors? Compare their doings, and saiengs together; oppose them after any
reasonable manner of probation: and shall you not find them far removed from
any understanding in right divinity, farther from true prophecy, and fardest
from that upright conscience, which proceeds both from the one, and the other
divine science. The causes, effects, signs, and testimonies whereof, are
universally, and catholiquely approved: uniform, coherent, and well according
together: received and celebrated in the whole congregation, with one free
consent, and stable perseverance; ratified with miracles, and woonders:
confirmed with all kind of godly devotion, sincerity of doctrine, and
discipline, holiness of conversation, contempt of the world, christian
magnanimity, neither affecting life, nor dreading death, martyrdom, and all
true virtues: finally insealed, and justified with the most sovereign, and
invincible testimony of the most precious, and inestimable dear blood most
graciously, and compassionately shed for us. Now alas, where is any such fruit,
or appearance of any christian inclination, agreement, uniformity, constancy,
or any other virtuous quality, in the runnagate base rablemont of these
cosening, and shifting teltales; or foretellers of fortunes, and future
contingentes: Which presumptuously, and at all auentures breath out such
unlikely, unsavory, and vain fantasies, as are not only repugnant unto the
former or later predictions of some other impudent practisers in like sort, but
also disagreeable amongst themselves, and in themselves, and oftentimes as
contradictorie each one, to each other, as is possible? Which the excellent
greek writer, and wise historian Thucydides very notably observed in the
supposed prophets, and oraclers of his time, perceiving every one of that
mark, to utter, or blow abroad such blastes only at adventure, as the present
quality of the humor abounding, or sudden affection of the rauing passion
suggested, without farther internal consideration, or other external
instruction any certain way. Which might also reasonably move the sententious
Greek poet to say, as he says, That directly, or certainly to foretell future
haps, or contingent casualties, is the property of a God, not the quality of
a man. Hap hazard, is no sure rule in art, or reason: and they that shoot,
as the blind man that shoots at the crow, either by short-shooting, or
ouer-shooting, or shooting awry, may full easily, and do most commonly miss
the mark, and loose their game. The spirit of prophecy, is not like the
spirit of the buttery: it is a divine, and powerable spirit of heavenly
essence, and of supernatural nature, not employed, or set on work by any, but
only his omnipotent Creator; nor used upon any occasion, but very great, and
principally appertaining the glory of his peerless, and ielous Deity, when
the time specially served to work by that extraordinary, and miraculous
mean, as the most forcible and effectual train to win men unto God, and to
reconcile the world unto heaven, in comparison, the only true world. All
times, and places are not alike: neither serve all gifts, for all seasons: but
certain Excellencies have in respect, been appropriate to certain ages: God
only is completely, and absolutely wise; and he alone best knows when, and
where, and upon whom, and how to distribute, or dispense his heavenly graces,
and bountiful blessings, either temporally, or perpetually, as is
conuenientest for his eternal glory, and meetest for our transitory condition.
Every age is not an age of every perfection: nor our time, a time of
woonderments: the limited and needful term of miracles, and myraculous
operations, either by prophecy, or otherwise, many hundred years ago
determined, as already is mentioned, and may inuincibly be approved. It
avails not, to enterprise impossibilities in nature, or to attempt
absurdities in reason, or to build mountains of hope, or fear, upon
irregularities in art, or to experiment vanities, and fooleries in practice.
Every od occurrence of private, or public importance, or every ordinary
event of doubtful contingence, is not every extraordinary way to be resolved,
or decided: we must be content, neither to do, or know more, than we can: our
best possible stay, or repose in cases of exigence, distress, or other
accidental casualty, alteration, or mortality, is the gracious mercy of God,
and our own discreet government, according to christian wisdom, and lawful
policy: we must not in raging, or aspiring affection presume to mount above
the clouds in the highest region of the air, or to pierce the unknown deepes
of the earthly Center. It is a scrupulous, and vain curiosity to busy our
selves, or importune other about any such inquiry, as neither is lawful in
practice, nor assured in use, but both impious in the one, and uncertain in
the other. As many other things, and namely Laws, or Customs, eftsoons
abrogated, and repealed, so prophecy had a time of infallible effect: which
being antiquated, or rather expired in the right, and lawful, and honorable,
and heavenly, and divine kind, or use: alas, what avails apish, or spiritish
imitation? What needs, or booteth so much adoo, and so little help; in the
false, unlawful, abominable, hellish, and devilish kind, or abuse? As good
never a whit, as never the better: I, much better never a whit, then much the
worse: as who is, or has been any whit the better, or not much the worse, by
intangling, or disguising himself with such foul, and detestable vanities,
good for nothing, but to acquaint them with the devil, and hell, before the
time, and to begin the lamentable Tragoedie of those dreadful, and horrible
torments so much the sooner. I must not stand to aggranate matters, or to
amplify by way of Oratorlike persuasion: neither is that my faculty
elsewhere, nor my purpose here. The holy prophets, in respect of the
apprehensiue, and piercing operation, or efficacy of their clear, and pure
understanding, were properly called Vidents, or Seers, pillars of divine
religion, and men of God: are any our counterfeit crankes so qualified, or so
illuminate? Nay, are they not generally, as blind, as moules, or bats, the
very caterpillars of heresy, and the bonslaues or vassals of Beelzebub? We
read the sight or vision of Isaiah, the vision of Ezechiell, the vision of
Jeremiah, the vision of Daniel, with other like celestial visions, and
representations of powerable effect. Is it apparent or credible, that any these
forgers, or coyners of adulterate prophesies, had ever any such divine
extraordinary visions, heavenly spectacles, apparitions, revelations, and other
semblable illuminations from above? I cannot sufficiently enough ask this
question, which has so often been demanded, and not yet once answered.
Themselves in the highest altitude of their aspiring pride, dare not arrogate,
or claim any such appropriate, or singular blessing of divine knowledge, as
infused from above: and as for other special humane learning, or artificial
cunning, gotten by ordinary means, of study, and travel from beneath,
therein can they much less challenge any peculiar interest, or prerogative,
without shameful and intolerable impudency; considering how few, or in
comparison none of them, as is above touched, were ever known or reported to
have greatly excelled in any the notablest Arts or Sciences. What pretense
therefore, or what color can they allege, why reasonable men, without
reasonable cause of approbation or allowance, should yield credit or belief to
such blind unreasonable whimwhams, otherwhiles botched up in Balductum meeter,
otherwhiles bungled together in paultry prose; commonly void of all good rhyme
or reason? If neither Divine instinct, nor Humane knowledge, neither
Theosophia, nor Anthroposophia, makes for them, either Simpliciter, or
Secundum quid (as God wotteth, they savor full little either of the one, or of
the other:) Good Lord bless me from them; and good Lord defend as well all
honest, and faithful true meaning men of whatsoever unskillful condition, or
simple calling, as the learneder, and wiser sort from them; and all their lewd
malicious practices; devised only in bravery, or despite, as delusorie
experiments, and wily sleights to make fools, to mock the world, to occupy
curious or busy heads, and to disturb the private and public quiet of
envied families, and Commonwealths, as hereafter shall more fully be declared
in the more proper place. In the mean, you see how in effect, and in the
gross sum, as well consequent, as precedent matters are to be valued:
notwithstanding both for the cleerer instruction of the ignorant, and fuller
satisfaction of the curious, it shall not happily be amiss to peruse, and
display certain other notorious particulars of semblable choice.

I thought not to have mentioned any Sybilline prophecy, partly for their
greater antiquity, far before my prefixed term, partly because amongst false
prophets or prophetisses, I recount them truest, as some way relying on
Lactantius authority in that respect. Howbeit remembering the late reuiuall of
that famous oracle bearing the name of Sybilla Tiburtina in the title, or
superscription, and magnified with many glorious circumstances, as newly found
by marvelous great chance, within less than these 70. years In Heluetia in
visceribus montis Tauri, solemnly presented to the Popes holiness, deeply
consulted upon by the College of Cardinals, honorably recognized, and
recommended to the Emperor, and Emperial states, and suddenly after a
wonderful strange manner, amazing all Italy, Spain, and Germany with some
other principalities of Europe: I could not altogether suppress or ouerpasse
the same, but am breefly to examine and ventilate the principal contents, or
particularities thereof. Lo therefore the very thing it self, as it was
artificially engraven in an ancient Marble stone, and cunningly devised in a
hawty Latin style, and antique Ideome, purposely affected, the more to
enstrange and disguise the matter. Orietour sydous in Europa soupra Iberos, ad
magnam Septentrionis domum; coius radij orbem terrarum ex improuiso
illoustrabunt. Hoc vero erit tempore desideratissimo, quo mortaleis positeis
armeis pacem onanimeis complectantor. Certabitor quidem varieis per dioutourni
interregni occasionem studieis, coi imperij habenae tradantor. Sed vincet
tandem auiti sanguinis propago, quae cousque armorum vi progredietor, donec
fata contraria fatis obstiterint. Nam eodem fere tempore hoc demerso sydere,
coeuum quoddam eious loumen long ardentioribous Mauortis ignibous exardescens,
Antipodum finibus occludet Imperium. At prius houic soumittet ceruices Gallia.
Ad eious genoua soupplex adnatabit classibus Britannia: Italia aegre ad ardua
sceptra respirans, olli languentem portendet dexteram. Verum hocceiourbar ante
diem ingenti mortalium desyderio se diuum noubibous condet. Quo exincto, post
deiras and sanguinolentas Cometas, igniuomasque caeli facies, nihil amplious
toutum, saloutareue erit, Osque animantibous caeli firmamentum pugnantibousque
planetieis, and contrarieis corsibous labefactabitor; concurrent orbibous
orbeis, fixae cursu anteuertent erraticas, aequabount aequora montes; Haec
omnia denique erunt nox, interitus, rouina, dampnatio, ac aeternai tenebrai.



G. S. G. Now I beseech you, what Oedipus may thoroughly resolve us in the
consequence of this intricate Labyrynthian monument? Or what living wight of
whatsoever quality can infallibly pronounce what this Sybilline sydous, or
woonderous star means? First some imagined that it was most likely to be
understood of that Evangelical star which extraordinarily appeered to the
three wisemen: but how can that seem probable, when it is expressly said, that
it should arise in Europa, and soupra Iberos? Afterward the great philosophers
of Rome, and some other courtly parasites would needs persuade the world that
the emperor Carolus Quintus was the royal, and mighty personage prefigured
thereby, but did not finally the real event as well falsify their exposition,
as frustrate their expectation? Sithence his decease it is lately supposed by
diverse Mathematicians, that the new strange star in Cassiopeia, which appeered,
Anno 1572. was this Tyburtine sydous; but how unequal is that paraphrase to
the phrase of this prophecy? Or how unlike is this description, to the manner,
and effect of that new Phosphorus? Nevertheless I warrant you, the words
themselves are so cunningly, and covertly contrived, that they will
indifferently bear any such literal or allegorical, or any other like,
either simple, or figurative construction. Then, who can so explain, or
decipher that soupra Iberos, as to make the clause annexed, with those
puissant, and admirable effects, accord sensibly there withal? By Iberos the
Spaniardes may be deemed to be understood, whose country Spain is of the
Grecians, and from them of other authors termed Iberia ab Ibero fluuio as
Geographers record. But whereto should these words ad magnam Septentrionis
domum, be rightly or directly said to have relation? Or may not the
prepositions, supra, and ad, be rather thought to insinuate some secret
Analogy, than discover any certain determinate place indeed? Some have made
such a doubt, as also some have suspected other matters; but othersome in
respect of the word Iberos remember forsooth Hyberus one of Gathelus sons
mentioned by Hector Boethius in his Scottish history, but to what present
purpose worthy observation, I can not well perceive. Other again
(peradventure to show their variety of reading) have called in question the
inhabitants of Iberia, a region situate in the confines of Asia, which are
reported in histories, and other writings to be a people very stout in arms,
and passing expert in Martial feats: but what coherence, or congruence is
there in this gloss, or comment, considering that the above recited Sydous
must arise in Europa, not in Asia, Africa, or elsewhere? The Spaniard is over
ready to maintain, and exalt his own glory; as all the world sees: yet what
Spaniarde of value, or name, be he never so proud, or hauty, dares arrogate,
or assume any such mighty, and glorious illustration of the Universal world?
Or what other nation be it never so populous, or valorous, may presume to
entitle, or advance it self unto any such surmounting, and supereminent honor,
either by Martial conquest, or other violent intrusion, or whatsoever puissant
means? Insomuch, that to my reading, hearing, or other intelligence, the
certain Local region, or territory of that Sybilline Sydous lurketh still
undetermined, yea, and vndeterminable to, in my poor conceit. Then as for the
temporal period, or certain time, when that mighty event should fall out,
which is after a fashion described ex adiunctis, and effectis, in these words,
tempore desideratissimo, quo mortaleies positeis armeis pacem onanimeies
amplectantor: Is not the meaning thereof, that this goodly star should appear
at such a season, wherein men shall most desire to live in peace, and embrace
public tranquillity, all conceit of arms, with all preparation of wars,
laid apart? By which description, who I pray you, may precisely define the
assured time of any such effect? Or to what season may it be indifferently, or
universally applied? Or if percase this be not the true, and legitimate
construction thereof, how may that which insueth well hang together, or seem
conformable? Certabitor quidem varieis per dioutourni interregni occasionem
studieis? And who can directly discuss, or particularize the aequiuocation,
and ouer-great generality of Interregni, and Auiti sanguinis propago? Or who
may exactly discourse by the words following, when, or where, or how, the other
co^uum quoddam loumen should arise, or what distance of time, or other
difference shall concur between the first and the last, or finally, when any
of these marvelous things shall happen? Moreover concerning the persons, who
knows, or can possibly learn, who shall prove that universal invincible
conqueror, whither christian prince, or Turk, or some barbarous heathen king,
or who shall live to be partakers, or witnesses of such triumphant victories?
For as for prius houic soummittet ceruices Gallia, notwithstanding the French
league, or confederacy lately contracted by Francis the first, and his
posterity with the Turk, and God knows what casual dependence, or final
issue thereof, may it otherwise appear probable, that he should consequently
prove that martial Coaeuum loumen, or that Brytan, and Italy should submit,
and inuassall themselves unto his dominion: or that any such barbarous fyrant
should so honorably be termed, Hocce Ioubar, or decease in so plausible, and
gracious favor of the world, ingenti mortalium desyderio, or lastly, se diuum
noubibus condere, which is most improbable, and to every faithful christian,
very absurd. Item touching Antipodum finibous occludet imperium, may it not be
understood Allegorically, as the rest, rather of such, as should be diverse
from us in religion, or opposite, and contrary unto us in laws, customs,
rites, s^^tes, manners, or otherwise, then of the right Antipodes, or the
inhabitants of the other side of the earth, so called because they walk
against our feet, or move against our steps? In fine, is not the boisterous
blast, and terrible thunderbolt lastly denounced after so tragical manner, as
inconceivable, or inextricable, as the residue? Or is not al a vain puff of
melancholique, or outrageous wind, or rather of spiritish, and feendish fury?
But what needs any farther inquiry, or scrupulous discovery? Who sees not,
what store and variety of obscure metaphors, and other tropes of continued
Allegories, of doubtful Amphibologies, and such like affected ambiguities is
included within the bowels of this Sybilline oracle? Which in my opinion
pretends even as much credit, truth, and assurance, as an egg has otemeale,
according to the common proverb: yet such a jewel no doubt, as shall
hereafter again, and again upon every light occasion, be eftsoons, and soon
revived, as if it were still, and still to be effected: so pliable and
conuertible is the nature of such pretended prophesies, and so continually
practicable are the imposturall conueiances, and cheuisances of such busy
cheaters, and coseners, as usually play upon the advantage of these
sophistical inventions. I might here repeat a whole Alchraon, or Legend of
like stuff: for to dismiss Sybilla Tyburtina, is not the Nazilographon of
Sybilla Erythraea, Eryphila, and other traditions of Sybilla Delphica, Epyrota,
Phrigia, Babylonica and the rest, together with the fantastical books of
Brigit full fraught with such pseudopropheticall woonderments? But are any of
them either in cause, or in effect, any sounder, or more warrantable than the
former? And were it not then to little, or no purpose, to fill up many leaves
with such mystical forgeries? When as every poreblind eye may now visiblie
epsy light at a little hole, and each sensible conceit can easily esteem the
more, by the less?

presly named in the notorious prophecy of that Franciscan Friar, as it is
reported by Lucas Lossius, Melancthon, and other, even verbatim thus:
Dominabitur Turca in tota Italia, and Germania, Anno Domini, 1600.



May not also the holy inspirations of our late Cassandrae, Brygit,
Hyldegardis, and I know not what french Bardists animate his faint heart, and
incense his cold courage? Which with one accord flatly auow, that the Imperial
seat of the Turkish Monarchy shall one day be translated to Coleyn in Germany?
Mary sir, this were merry tidings indeed, and a gallant triumph for Amurathes
iij. or any his successor, if he, or they might fortune to pierce so deep into
the bowels of Christiandome? As what noble prince, or man of arms would not
hazard a joint, when such Divinity favors him, and warranteth his luckie
proceedings? Well, if this be the staff, or scepter whereupon he leans, is
he not like in fine, (notwithstanding a thousand such gewgawes, vain rumors,
and frustratorie encouragements) to find it little stronger, or surer, than a
weak reed, or rotten post: and consequently to purchase himself the same
dear reward, which befell Croesus, who fondly presuming of Apolloes oracle,
perverted the maine force of his own treasure, even then when he looked to
have subverted the puissant might of his enemies? Yet might not Croesus more
warrantably rely upon the great oracle of Apollo, than this Turk, or any of
that Mahometicall generation, upon Friar Hilten, Brigit, or any like
pettyprophet, or demiprophetisse? Or was not that leaden God of golden memory,
more sacred at those days, or at least as solemnly consecrated after their
ceremonious guise, as any wooden Saint of the silver Legend, amongst whom
these holy ones are recounted? The Lord put a false, or lying spirit into the
mouth of all the prophets of Ahab, and they forsooth prophesied unto him goodly
tidings, that he should conquer Ramoth Gilead, where afterward he was slain,
notwithstanding the contrary warrantie of that presumptuous prophecy, 1.
King. 22. And is there not certain hope, that the great Turk reposing like
trust, or confidence in the like prophets, shall enjoy the like success that
king Ahab had? There continue even to this day, as is credibly reported, and
written, certain furious creatures, or mad rauing wizardes amongst the
Mahometicians, which breath out very strange blastes, and monstrously disguised
in their outrageous humor, run, or stand prattling upon such things, as neither
their Art, nor nature are able to comprehend: which distraught wights, and
hellish impes, are there notwithstanding esteemed for Demigods, and reverenced
as true heavenly prophets? But alas, are they any better then such as God by
Ezechiell (cap. 14. 9.) threatened to send for the ingratitude, and peruersitie
of the people, To seduce or beguyle them that delight in the devils lies,
rather than in his truth, and so to punish sin by sin, after the dreadful rule
of his justice? And does it not also there follow, that he which sent, or
excited them, will finally destroy as well those ungracious prophets, themselves;
as that credulous, and profane people that believes, or trusts them? There
was a secret revealed unto Daniell, and Daniell conceived the matter, and had
understanding of the vision: (Daniel 1. 1.) But whilst such furious madbrains,
and bedlames as these, rave out themselves wot not what, can other sober men
descrie their outcries, or make pure divinity of so vnpure, and gross
humanity? Tully said, that if there were any divination, it was Animi integri,
and not, vitiosi corporis diuinatio: and Saint Paul himself said, that the
spirits of the prophets were in the power of the prophets: (1. Cor. 14.) But
let infidels, and miscreants, and namely the Turks applaud, and rejoice in
their Zidkiiahes, (1. Kin. 22. I hope no christian kingdom, or common wealth,
and namely England will not be misled, or carried away with any such wizardly
impostors, to whom Michaiah, and the right prophet of prophets, even Christ
himself, has expressly preached, and prophesied, saying: Beware of false
prophets which come unto you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravenous
woolues:

Ye shall know, or discern them by their fruits: Do men gather grapes of
thorns? Or figs of thistles?

So every good tree brings forth good fruit: and a corrupt tree brings
forth evil fruit.

A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit; neither can a corrupt tree bring
forth good fruit.

Every tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into
the fire.

Therefore by their fruits ye shall discern them.

Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, but he that performs the will of my father, which is in heaven.

Many will say unto me, in that day: have we not, in, or by thy name
prophesied? and by thy name cast out devils? And by thy name done many great
works?

And then will I profess unto them: I never knew you, depart from me, ye that
work iniquity. etc. (Matthew 7.)



What should we then, as is also premised, look still, and still for more
prophesies? Have we not already Moses, and the prophets? Nay, have we not the
Messiah himself, and his apostles, more worth than all the prophets of all
ages, of all languages, of all countries, of all religions, or of whatsoever
ordinary, or extraordinary quality in the world? Wherefore not Lazarus arising
again from death could move us, if these cannot move us. The eyes of our
hearts, are, or should be opened by the clear bright Gospel of Christ; and
shall the eyes of the body expect any farther sight of miracles? Must we
evermore be fed like young children? Or continually trained up like Infidels,
or Ethniques? If there be any wonders, a wonderful masteries wrought now
adays, are they not performed either by incantations, such as the sorcerers of
Pharao used (which, howsoever they seem glorious in the view of the world, are
odious in the sight of God, and nothing less than wonders indeed, but the
only subtle illusions of the Devil?) or else contrived by the deceitful
legierdemaine, and crafty conueiance of shifting iuglers, and cogging
impostors, such as amongst infinite other of that same foisting crew, namely
Scotto and Feats used, seeming likewise in appearance to have done, and undone
that, which in very truth they could never do, or undo, but made semblance
thereof by the devils sophistry, and their own counterfeit sleights. For
touching natural Magicians, and their cunning practices, such as Archita
Tarentinus, and our Roger Bacon used, are they any better than philosophical
experiments, or mathematical conclusions, and therefore no woonders, or
miracles: seeing every right wonder, such as Moises and Elisaeus used, were
neither fained apparances, or deceptions of sight, nor any natural, or
mathematical experiments, but altogether supernatural, supermathematicall,
and true miracles? Pharaos sorcerers, might incantatiuely turn their rods into
serpents, as Aaron miraculously did, but of so like effects, were not the
causes very unlike, and did not finally Aarons rod devour their rods? (Exodus 7.
12.) Or was not Pharao with his whole Egyptian host, and inchanters
themselves, drowned in the midst of the sea, whereas Moses, and the children of
Israel safely walked thorough upon dry ground? (Exodus 14.) But to ouerpasse
this point, with diverse like matters, (wherein the worshipful gentleman,
master Reginald Scot, has lately deserved good commendations, for his learned
discovery of such palpable collusions:) and to return again unto our former
argument; what better account are we to make of those odd conceited
predictions blown abroad in the name of our famous Karmarden prophet Ambrose
Merlin; are they not likewise as guilfull, and fraudulent as the residue, and
even like to our Karmarden frizes now adays? Or do they not too sensibly
savor of his good moothers condition, who voluntarily vowed unto king
Vortiger, that she never had carnal company with mortal man? As if her young
son forsooth, had been begotten of some demi-god, or some incarnate spirit,
or Incubus, or without corporal copulation, or after I wot not what strange,
and woonderous manner. Indeed if we will believe Thomas Aquinas, Danaeus,
Hyperius, Monsieur Bodyne, with sundry other, (as full well we may no doubt)
they prove very rare and singular fellows, which are so begotten, (for where
was there ever any such certainty known?) So that in this respect it was a
cunning practice of Adhan (as well to insinuate an extraordinary opinion of her
son unto the king, as otherwise to cover her own shame, and dishonesty, who
even that day went still for a virgin) to use the pretended cloak of Incubus,
or such like glozing blindation: but how little credit is to be assigned
either to the one, or to the other, what reasonable man of any sensible
capacity deuoid of superstition, and blind credulity, understands not? My
self have as well purposely, as incidently run over many prophesies fathered
upon Merlin, yea, more, I dare say, than ever that counterfeit wrote, some in
verse, othersome in prose; some in latin, othersome in english; some written,
some imprinted: some in common letters, othersome in newfounde Alphabets, and
mystical characters; whereof amongst many of the same stamp, behold one trim
Hexameter relic which a certain unlearned empirical imposter first showed
me, Anno 1580. for a very special deep secret, and profound mathematical
monument, as he supposed, being raggedly scrawled in od disguised manner of
Astrologicall characters, as insueth:

The Title, or Inscription.
.

The Prophecy it self.
",
":
",
":
":
":
",
"
",
":
",
",
",
".
A wonderful hidden, and abstruse Hyeroglyphical mystery I warrant you: such
a one doubtless, as no mean fool may easily be made acquainted withal: in
truth amongst a capcase full of such forgeries, and mockeries, as it is one of
the briefest, and someway notablest, so it seemed unto me even the most apert,
simple, and sensible, being once stripped out of the counterfeit masking
liuerie: which I therefore the rather here inserted, being loath to trouble the
reader, or offend any religious eye with the longest, or vainest comments in
this bootles kind, when the shortest, and very best I doubt, may happily seem
ouertedious unto some both learned and wise; nevertheless reputing it such an
one, as full easily might and no doubt did proceed from the fantastical, or
pragmatical conjectures of some busy discoursing deviser, and not from any
other prophetical instinct, or farther extraordinary influence, wherewith
Merlyn was deemed, and still of many is supposed to have been supernaturally
inspired. Howbeit to the intent the thing might appeer the more autentical, and
as it were radical, abhibuit latebram obscuritatis, as Tully iesteth at one of
Sibilles commeners, setting a strange countenance on the matter, and facing it
out with a certain learned tincture, that should require as well a
Steganographicall decipherer, as a logical, or philosophical interpreter. O
marvelous cunning! O goodly sophistication! But lo the poor silly cosenage
familiarly detected, in a few simple lattin verses, or rather rimes, smelling
of that rude unlearned age.

Vna ex selectissimis Prophetijs Ambrosij Merlini.
Anglia te prodit tua gens, quia quaelibet odit:
Te circumfodit gens Scotia: Gallia rodit:
Wallia minatur: Hybernicus insidiatur:
Ecce repentina validis mors atque ruina
Te cito prosternit, nec gens tua talia cernit:
Pax simulata fluet: pax haec pax falsa probatur:
Pax clam namque ruet, grauior quae poena paratur.
Which verses since my first view thereof, in that painted vizard, I have more
than once, or twice seen written in an ancient secretary hand, but with
legible vulgar letters, as is now explained: but which of them were the
original record of the maker, or fantastical exemplification of the writer,
as it is to little purpose to know, so it needs not either here to be
discussed, or elsewhere determined. Of both, the manner in appearance may seem
worse than the matter it self, which being advisedly, and without malice, or
other fraud applied, may in some reasonable construction be supposed to
contain a gentle forewarning, or friendly Caveat, to England, by way of
affectionate, or compassionate admonition, to provide and beware in time:
howbeit I doubt whether the first coyner thereof had any such charitable
intention, or friendly purpose: In our natural tongue (being at an idle hour
by me translated, or rather paraphrased) they implie thus much in effect:

O England, thy country betraies thee, as each other hates thee:
The Scot incrocheth: the Frenchman gapes for a vantage:
Wales threatens kindness: wild Irish lurketh in ambush:
Behold thy captains dispatched all on a sudden:
And Ruin hudled up, when thou think lest of a mischief:
Peace fostred for a time, shall finally prove to be fained
Which breaking unawares, shall bring on greeuousser horror.
But as for the certainty, or vanity of this forethreatening, let every man
in discretion judge, as himself sees best cause: truly my self can no
otherwise conceive thereof in any necessary, or probable reason, than of the
residue of the same marvelous counterfeit, whose religion was correspondent to
the supposed manner of his birth: whose writings as true as his belief: and
whose whole institution, or course of life, suitable to the disposition of his
pretended Sire: namely, impious, monstrous, and hellish. For what a Gods name
can we think of his other couenous, and sophistical devises, or rather
diabolical practices; wherewith he, or the devil in him, deluded and beguiled
the simpler sort; as amongst the rest of his strange and monstrous Bore having
an head of a white Lions heart; of his Lamb having feet of Lead, a head of
brass, the heart of an Otter, and a swines skin: of his Dragon with a Goats
beard: of his Goat with silver horns, and beard of silver: of his Eagle with
fetters of gold, and I wot not what of like, and unlike nature? Or what
reckoning is indeed to be made of his Irish Lions, hideous woolues, despituous
Antilops, griphins, bulls, bears, foxes, moldwarps, swans, bussards, cranes,
cocks, owls, and other fierce or tame creatures; are they not mere gewgawes
to delight children, and very toyish cranks to mock Apes? Wherefore, when I
see the hot Bathes become cold as other water: when I be hold the four chief
rivers, or fluds in England streaming with blood, and brains: when you show me
Seuerne dried up with dead bodies: a dead man arising out of his grave, and
taking sword in hand to play the mighty Conqueror: trees growing in market
places, and Judicial courts: or headless men pitching a field of victory: or
when I see a bear blowing a trumpet: or hear a cock crowing out of the
region of the Moon; or understand a white raven talking to a greyhound; then,
and in those days will I also per buon company begin to esteem Merlin for a
great prophet, and regard his writings for true prophesies. Until which time
Merlin and all Merlinists must be feign either to pardon such incredulous
persons, as I am, or else to yield sounder proof of their monsterous
Heraldicall blazonings, than yet appears. Are you therefore desirous to have
likewise my opinion of such other fabulous traditions, and vain rumors,
founded and builded only upon like colorable, and deceiuable prophesies? Must
I not say to all, as I have said to one? Is either, Hic iacet Arturus, Rex
quondam, Rexque futurus:
Or the Lion named Edward twice crowned in England, and once in Rome: or He
that before was dead, and buried twice:
To receive his crown again shall truly arise:
Or the Moon bearing the sway, but at last loosing her light for presuming
above the Sun: Or the Dragons head at Charing Cross, his tail being not
come to Westchester: or the Dragons tail in Ireland, his head being in
Stanford: or the Dragons head in Troy, his tail being in Leicester: or

Troy untrue shall tremble and quake:
For fear of him that many men dreads:
When a dead man shall arise and speak:
Then xxiiij. Aldermen shall loose their heads.
Or, Lincoln was: London is: York shall be.

Or, Hoc magnum studium, quod nunc est ad vada Boum Tempore venturo,
celebrabitur ad vada saxi.


Or any our Chronicall, or other traditionall prophecy, any thing better? The
persons are almost innumerable, and the practices almost infinite: but mark a
few, and note all: behold (for examples sake) Robert Blake, John Vprobert,
Patrike, Edward Alauantreuor, Thomas de Guino, Bannestur, David Vpan, alias
Vpanthony, William Greffit, Edward Apowell, Thomas Alchin, David Treuar, and
Sir George Amagdauill, twelve good men and true as ever carried such fardels
about the country? Lo here some of their finest wares, and trimmest knacks:
as I have found them packed and vnpacked in the secret paper-bookes of certain
English Antiquaries: Robert Blake. A dead man that no man saw borne, nor no man
shall see buried, shall be king over vj. kingdoms, and he shall be generated
out of the sea, by the strength and nature of a dun cow; and this Lion shall
be gone where few shall find him for the space of 22. months, and od days,
and after 22. months and od days, he shall come again, and execute judgment
in his fathers house, and that which is dark he shall make light, and shall
make a way to the holy Cross.

John Vprobert. The son of man shall kill his mother, and yet have her
blessing, and the blessing of God, and of the Britains: and he shall make glad
the people that be outcast, in those days: and he shall make labor to see the
seat of the Eagle: and shall not see it, nor no man after him: and he shall
make swift inquiring for the shepherds he left behind him in his first estate,
and shall restore every man unto his own living again: and shall stablish his
laws throughout al Britain, and after 1559. he shall plant true religion in
kingdoms, and make an universal peace, etc.

Patrike. H. shall stand up but a small time: then the right shall not be in
the right seat: A. H. A. W. and A. B. shall knit their tails together; and
bring into prosperity, which shall be Muelos, she shall undo the door, and put
out the fox in her park, and make him ruler over her dear, and she shall
take counsel of the fox, which she shall highly esteem above all other, etc.

Edward Alauantreuor. What time 52. Summers shall fall in one year, then shall
not set by neither Monk, nor Friar; nor yet regular helped by their prayer.
Ever {:::} is best of the dice, when it gets up {:::} is paradise: then shall
the name of England spring when {:^:} and {^} and {::} shall be set aside: yet
{^.} shall rise up, and {.} shall sit under, the^ the dead man shall rise and all
the world shall wonder, then red rose and the flower de-luce the fetter lock
shall undo, and yet {:::} shall bear the price, and {^} shall help to this
counsel, for between {::} and {:^:} is mystical understanding, many shall be
undone by sea and by land, and a black cow shall arise next the blood of
Calwallider, a noble knight shall he be, blessed of God, and a true flower
de-luce, etc.

Thomas de Guino. When it is 1565. then the third flud shall flow over England,
and then all heresies shall be destroyed: when you see in England men with
short coats, and weapons with great pride; and breeches like unto a bear and
small in the midst, and their arses like a barrel; then after that be you sure
does begin for the faith, and the churches sake, etc.

Bannestur. R. Shall up, and P. shall under, the deadman shall rise there will
be great wonder, God send us good luck the sea shall rore, and flow up sooner
than we are ware, when the sea rules all the land, sarewell the mirth of merry
England. The mare shall break her halter, etc.

David Vpan, alias Vpanthony. To tell the truth many a one would wonder
Charing shall be broken a sunder: then R. shall reach: P. shall preach: S. shall
stand stiff; H. and T. shall make maidens tumble under; at midsommer shall be a
new moon, and cuckoo time shall come as soon. {^} shall up, {:::} shall under,
{:^:} shall rise from death to life, to make a maiden tumble under, etc.



But pause there a while, if it pleases you: or were it not best to spare
those that remain, and by one or two imposters, to judge of their fellows,
coveting to be reputed new Merlins, and affecting the title, or style of
prophets? Are not these think you goodly wizards, and mighty prophets of the
right hair indeed? Knew they not as well what they said, as the grand
archprophet Mahomet did, when he vowed, that every day in Paradise was 1000.
years long, and every year there as much as 40000. of our years? Or could
not they as certainly foresee what should be done on earth, as he could see
what was done in heaven? May you not likewise perceive by the learned phrase,
and artificial tenor of their style, how profound doctors they were, as
deeply cunning no doubt, as the great learned clarke, which cried out in an
open assembly, and public disputation, Ostende mihi qualis est corpus, qualis
est corpus? And even as full of prophecy as David George was, when he fore
told that in the third year after his burial, he should arise again: but ere
two years were fully finished, he was taken up, and with his coffin hanged on
a pair of gallows. Was not this a trusty prophet, or was he not a notable
knave, or rather was he not a notorious heretic? And may not the residue of
this cogging crew be rightly termed his companions, or Merlins disciples, or
foisting mates of that order? For mine own part, I will as soon believe that
salvation came by David George, which that blasphemous villain auowed of
himself, as I can be persuaded that he, or any such Impostor could truly, and
infallibly divine of any such public future events. Or when I see any one of
them stand their king, or other superior magistrate in any such steed, as
Elisha did the king of Israel, who revealed and disclosed unto him, whatsoever
his enemy the king of Syria secretly spoke, or contrived in his privy chamber.
(2. Kings. 6. 12.) Or when I can prove that the authority of any such is a
sufficient warrant to anoint kings: or his courage maintainable to control,
or confront the greatest princes: or when I hear any certain report that
Monarchs and mightiest governors have crowched unto him, and called themselves
his sons and servants, as the kings of the old Testament did reverence and
honor the prophets of Israel: then (not before) will I also say unto such an
one, as the woman of Zarephath said unto Eliah: Now I know verily, that thou
art a prophet of God, and that the word of the Lord in thy mouth, is true. In
the mean space what should I look for heavenly mysteries in the homely ambry,
and gross press of such rude and base understanding, and undermining? Or what
wise man, or reasonable creature will regard their forged traditions and
devises, any more than vain fables, or idel rumors, or sond toys, or lewd
practices or blasphemous heresies? What though some one runnagate (which some
happily will object) has once or twice chanced to hit the nail on the head, is
that sufficient to inthronish him in the spiritual chair of prophetical
divinity? Does not every bungling archer sometime strike the white asunder, or
does not every roauing Emperike ease the patient otherwhiles? Quis est qui
totum diem iaculans, non aliquando collimet? Neque tanta est infoelicit as
aruspicum (says Tully in his second book De Diuinatione) vt ne casu quidem
nunquam fiat, quod futurum illi esse dixerint? Nay, is it not the devils usual
policy to thrust in some one or two ambiguous truths, amongst every heap of
forgeries and lies, to the intent that under that cloak, he may the more easily
insinuate himself, and purchase the greater credit against other times? Or
does not even the Lord himself sometimes cause the sign or wonder which the
false prophet foretells, to come accordingly to pass, thereby to try and
approve the zealous, or cold love and devotion of his people toward him, in
following, or not following such a vain vpstart? (Deuteronomy. 13. 3.) Quod in
omnibus recte fit, omnes ad artem referunt: quod autem in vno, aut in duobus,
non ad artem sed ad fortunam, aut casum; quoth Galen in his ninth book De
placitis Hippocratis, and Platonis. Whose bare assertion I am to prefer above,
and before all the contradictions of such Balaam impostors. Set now your little
children and young striplings abroad in the streets to mock or flout these
counterfets, I warrant you, they shall never be harmed, or touched with bears
for that fact, wherewith the 42. children that mocked Elisha were suddenly
dispatched? (2. King: 2. 24.) What speak I of gibing boys, or children? Would
not even Balaams ass, were he now living, not only forbid, but deride the
foolish lewdnes, and lewd foolishnes of such wizards; prophets, without profit;
wels, without water; clouds, without rain; and trees without fruit, as Saint
Peter speaks of such hypocrites? They have been meetly well scoffed, and
laughed at from time to time, especially amongst the learned and wise: yet see
the notable folly of the base multitude, which still and still continues to
embrace such palpable fooleries. Which alas, is the more lamentable,
considering what bright and shining lights of all learning, have lately been
kindled, to clear the world of such gross and foggie mists, darkened with all
kind of ignorance, simplicity, and folly. But to take my farewell, as it
were, with one of their highest and deepest inventions, mark I beseech you the
Alphabeticall devise following, of some Glossers, or Copiersout, entitled
HEMME, of some HEMP, a doughtie matter questionles, both worthy the scanning,
and of no small fools coimng, I dare assure you, as may appear by the Greek
Ortography, and learned characters: (...).



Had not this sad English prophet, this merry Greek, this worthy Polygrapher
learned his De profundis clamaui, think you, before he could boult out such
terrible thunderclaps? Jesus, how woonderously it lightened, when he prophesied!
Lord what a cunning man was he, that could foresee, and foretell such strange
casualties! Had he not, trow you, some secret conference with some such nimble
intelligencer, as Cornel. Agrippa had of his spritish characteristicall cur?
God knows, it was a full heavy, and woeful speech, wherewith he discharged
that fiendish helhound: Abi a me perdita bestia, quae me miserum perdidisti:
but is it not in a manner as pitiful, and lamentable a case, to consider how
the weaker sort have been diversely carried away, and some most miserably
brought to their ends, by the villainous fetches, and devilish practices of such
prophesieng companions, the dogged scholars, and vassals of Agrippaes dog, and
the damnable coheires of his so horrible inheritance, not unlike, or rather
sybb for all the world to Agoraeus that profane abominable idol of Mercury,
out of whom the devils, and the furies of hell raued? Alas, what fond and vain
expectation has a long time rested in the minds not of one or two, or a few,
but of great multitudes of the simpler sort in England about king Edward the
sixth, as though they were sure either of his arising from death, or his return
from I know not what Jerusalem, or other strange land: A mad conceit, yet
whereupon grounded, but only upon the silly devises of such copesmates? And
what counterfeit suborned merchants of base parentage, have sithence ranged
abroad in the country, presuming to term themselves by the royal name of
king Edward? Such is the rash and blind credulity of the common people, and
such is the desperate insolency of some brainsicke presumptuous runnagates.
There is not any naughty pack, they say, which finds not a partner: and
hereby most evidently it appears, how facile or easy a matter it is to
delude, and mistead the Comminaltie, or greater part of any Commonwealth, with
a tale of the maker: They knew it full well, and over well, which first
adventured to publish such absurd fantasies, amongst the vulgar sort; but woe,
and woe, and again woe unto them, by whom the simple souls of the sons and
daughters of men otherwise innocent, and well meaning, are thus rufully cast
away. For how easily might I here repeat almost infinite examples of villainous
attempts, pernicious vprores, horrible mischeefes, slaughters, blasphemies,
heresies, and all other indignities, and outrages, desperately committed, and
perpetrated through means of such inueterate, and new broched forgeries: but
what histories, chronicles, or politic discourses are not copious, and
plentiful in this kind?

Hinc semper Ulysses
Criminibus terrere nouis; hinc spargere voces
In vulgum ambiguas; and quaerere conscius arma:
Nec requieuit erim, donec Chalcante ministro.
The very Donec of our like Vlyssean policies, and the final effect of such
predestined causes: wherewith the world has continually been so perilously
encumbered, and so pestilently misused, as is universally too notorious. Neither
shall I therefore need to ransacke Pierce Plowmans satchell; nor to descant upon
fortunes, newly collected out of the old shepherds Calendar: nor to tell you of
a day, when a Bush in Essex shall be worth a Castle in Kent (which percase
was fulfilled many hundred years ago:) nor in regard of fresh occurrents, to
renew the like old soothsaying: France, and Flanders shall play at the base:
And Spain shall make enter in that space:
nor otherwise to fable of the lion of Flanders: or the red lion of Scotland:
or the lilly of France: or the black raven of Wales: or the widow of
Calaber: or the rose female in the land of the Moon: or I know not what
green Christmas, and red Harvest: or fair Winter, and blooddy Lent: nor to
find your toongs occupied with rimes dogrell of Eagles, and Beagels; Cats, and
Rats: Dogs, and Hogs: Crows, and Bows: Stones and dead men's Bones: country
hobs, and lobs: clowted shoon, and midsommer moon: or such like homely, and
clownish stuff: nor to fill your ears with I wot not what popular, and kettish
sermons, made forsooth upon some reverend theme, in meeter; or sage ditty, of
some Scoggins, or Skeltons coining, given out by way of prophecy, at the
least: nor to toss and turn our British, English, Irish, and Welsh
Chronicles, (as namely the whole fourth book of Galfridus Monemutensis,
expressly entitled, De Prophetijs Merlini:) the better to supply all such
domestical antiquities, or novelties: nor much less to run thorough foreign
histories, either ecclesiastical, politic, or mixed: either Judicial,
Christian, Turkish, or Heathen; either old, new, or of a middle age: either in
Hebrew, Greek, Latin, or other language: nor final to range, and straie
abroad in poets, philosophers, polihistors, antiquaries, philologers,
schoolmen, and other learned discoursers: for Apollines, Themides, Thetydes,
Hermetes, Trismegisti; Sybillae, Magi, Chaldaei, Gymnosophistae, Druides,
Hetrusci, Tyresiae, Chalcantes, Cassandrae, Amphiarai, Amphilochi, Tomasutij,
Mopsi, Polibij; Promethei Aquila, Hesiodi Pandora, Pythagorae Mercurius,
Socratis Daemonium, Stoicorum Pronoia, Sertorij Hinnulus, Apollonij Tianaei
Eudaemon, id est, Cacodaemon, Mahometis Angelus Gabriel, Sancti Antonij
Heremitae, Speculum futuri; veneficaru^ feles, bufones, muscae, apes; alij
aliorum familiares spiritus partim Geomantici, partim Hydromantici, partim
Aeromantici, partim denique Pyromantici; or such like famous presidents, and
worthy patterns, of our later pseudopropheticall inventions. Every age, every
country, and every tongue, howsoever barbarous, or civil, affoordeth enough,
and enough examples, both of the learneder, and vnlearneder stamp: but of what
better credit, or more value, than the tales of Robin hood, or the fables of
Robin goodfelow, and the Fairies, or the woonderous arts of Howleglasse, or the
wizardly fortunetellings of the runnagate counterfeit Egyptians, commonly
termed Gypsies? And therefore questionles as easily confuted by all
principles, and directions both of divine, and humane learning, as they were
first grounded upon neither of them, and as certainly reproved ex manifestis
caussis, as they were ever uncertainly proved ex dubijs effectibus, or vainly
alleged, ex corruptis affectibus. Quorum certa demonstratio non habetux,
eorum non habetur certa cognitio: quoth Galen in his treatise de natural,
facult, substantia: and His, quae non secundum rationem siunt, non est
fidendum, neque, vt diuturna sint, sperandum: quoth Cardane Segment. 1.
aphoris. 5. As also many like reasonable sentences, rules, and axioms are
every where interlaced in the Natural, and Moral discourses of Plato,
Aristotle, Tully, Plinny, Seneca, and all other excellent writers, in any such
philosophical subject. Now I beseech you, are not natural things, naturally
to be examined: supernatural things, supernaturally to be considered: moral
things, morally to be resolved? As necessary causes, produce necessary effects:
and powerable means have commonly powerable issues: even so no doubt
Contingent, or Accidental causes, bring forth Contingent, or Accidental
effects? And have not weak, and impotent means, as commonly weak, and
impotent issues? Can any man better foresee politic events, or rightlier
prognosticate public casualties (matters of mere politic contingence, not
of necessary consequence) than a sound Politician, or wise counselor, of deep
insight, and provident foresight, in such affairs? Must we resort to wizardes,
or southsaiers, or sorcerers, or cuniurers, or witches, or gypsies, or
shepherds, or any like private prophets of basest condition, and silliest
intelligence, in highest occurrences of state, or the sequel of public
accidents, depending ordinarily upon Civil causes, circumstances, and
actions, wherewith they are least acquainted? Or if happily we refer all unto
divine Providence, (which no doubt is the predominant, and most principal
ouerruling cause of causes, using al other whatsoever causes, superior, or
inferior, but as serviceable means, and instruments, attendant upon the
execution of those soueraign, and inviolable ordinances, decreed from above:)
what sharper or profounder inspection, can those wooful damnable creatures, and
wretched caitifes have therein, than so many other, not only godlier, or
better disposed persons, but far wiser, learneder, and woorthier men, in all
respects of due consideration? What should I argue the case any farther, which
is so evidently clear: or heap up more particularities, and specialties,
which are so infinitely innumerable? Enough, they say, is as good as a feast:
and verbum sapientibus sat, or at least, multa paucis. Wherefore hitherto
sufficiently for this instant, conterning the general disauory, and discredit
of such special Matters; whereof notwithstanding at more leisure, I may
perchance, upon any like occasion, entreat more at large.

Now it remains, that I breefely, and as it were cursorily touch the Manner,
or Form of the foresaid, and such other goodly matters: and then proceeding to
the Scope, or End thereof, so conclude the first part, or section of my present
discourse.

Does it not therefore manifestly appear, as well by the view of the
premises, as by the conference of a thousand like counterfets, partly
couenously, partly fantastically spread abroad in the world, how base, and
barbarous a style, these forgers used for the most part? Or is any thing extant
more harsh, crabbed, perplexed, or intricate, than many of their cunningest
fetches? Or who laugheth not at some of their balde, pelting, and curtald
fragments? At their piperly versicles, and other beggarly trumperie? Or cannot
every petty scholar of the University, and in a manner every grammar boy of
any towardnes, readily descry their Grammar congruities, and Rhetorique
figures? Have I not sufficiently mentioned some gewgawes, pricked up in rhyme
dogrell, and balductum meeter: some flimflams packed up in pedlers prose: some
patcheries bungled up in an vplandish Ideotisme; without any good rhyme or
reason: all, or most of all botched up either after a rude, and dunsicall sort,
or at least after a forlorn, and disguised guise? Were it not a needles, or
booteles labor, to make a special Analysis, either of their Abcedary and
Alphabeticall Spells, or of their Characteristicall, and Polygraphical
suttelties, or of their Acrostique, and Anagrammatistique devises, or of their
Steganographicall, and Hieroglyphicall mysteries, or of their hyperbolicall
metaphors, fantastical allegories, and heraldicall illusions, or of their
ambiguous aequiuocations, interdeux amphibologies, and aenigmaticall ridles, or
finally of any their other colorable glosses, and hypocritical subornations,
in some like prestigiatory, and sophistical beine? What more ludicrous, or
ridiculous spectacle can you imagine, than to see a wretched company of such
woofull wights, and miserable creatures, scarsely worth the ground they tread
upon, and hardly deserving their daily bread: suddenly presented on a Theater,
or comicall stage, in their thredbare liueries, and stale gaberdines, of
antique shape, and forlorn fashion? Is not their whole habit, and gesture too
notorious? Does not every child perceive in what humor they abound? I must
not stand to paint out particulars? How were these cosening, and shifting
whimwhams proclaimed, or published, but evermore after an od, palting, and
peevish manner? Given out, and scattered abroad obscurely, and by stealth,
either incerto authore, or for more credit, fathered upon some counterfeit
author of some fame? Craftily hidden in some old stony wall, or under some
altar, or in some ancient window, or in some dark cave, or deep dungeon, or
fabulous hills, or famous mount, or high turret, or in some like solemn place?
And there forsooth casually found by some strange accident, unlooked for? First
devised, and then laid up, and afterward diuulged, or published, not bona fide,
but dolo malo? Even like other fraudulent impostures, and delusions in the
foresaid, and such like captious circumstances, and in every other notable
respect? Lo then the goodly manner of such godly matter? But may we not marvel,
why they should use such dark, and close intricate proceedings? Were they
afraid of the sun, or could they not abide the clear light of the day? Or
possibly were they in Tyberius Caesar's vein, who is reported to have seen
better in darkness, than in light? They set down mystical, or rather mystie
positions, and articles, whereof we have neither science in universality, nor
explanation in particularitie: such as neither of our selves we immediately
conceive, or have any other mediator, or interpretor to notify unto us: but
must be feign to content our selves with that good plain answer of Aristotle
in his Elenches, (...), I understand not your meaning, or as we commonly say:
Your eloquence passes my intelligence. An old schoole-point of Cryptical and
Acroamaticall Sophistry, learned even from Apollo himself, of his doubtful
and perplexed obscurity, surnamed Loxias, or rather from the very devil
himself, the prince of darkness, and archenimie of light. But to what purpose
or intent should they busy themselves, or trouble other with unknown riddles,
and inexplicable propositions? Marry forsooth because they favor and tender
their posterity, they advertise, or admonish them of such events and
destinies, as they cannot easily or possibly conceive: how then do they
admonish them? Is it not as if a Physician should counsel his patient, to take
that, which he neither knows, nor can any way come by? And what good, I pray
you, shall that counsel do his patient? Should not a plain Englishman be much
edified by a Latin, or Greek, or Hebrew sermon? Or were it not of great
effect, to tell him a long tale in a newfound language, of the speakers own
invention? To what purpose had Nature made gold, silver, iron, lead, or any
other natural metals, or minerals, if withal she had not taught men to find
out their secret veins in the earth, and how also to prepare and work them
being found? Or what benefit should the flowers, seeds, berries, fruits, gums,
or other parture of trees or shrubs, or such other fruits of the earth have
yielded unto man, in case Nature, together with Art and Exercise, had not
acquainted him with the usage, tillage, and condition thereof? Things without
life which give a sound, whether it be a pipe, or an harp, except they make a
distinction in the sounds, how shall it be known what is piped, or harped?
quoth Saint Paul to the Corinthians.

And also if the trumpet give out an uncertain sound, who shall prepare
himself to battle?

Except ye utter words which have signification, how shall we understand what
is spoken? For ye shall speak in the air.

Except I know the power of the voice, I shall be unto him that speaks a
barbarian, and he that speaks shall be a barbarian unto me.

If I pray in a strange tongue, my spirit prays, but mine understanding is
without fruit.



The place has been often scanned, and is famously known. How then? May we
not now justly demand with Chrysippus, Diogenes, and Antipater; Haec si Deorum
signa sunt, cur essent obscura? Or rather conclude with Christ's own proverb;
Qui male agunt, oderunt lucem? As also with the common adage, Cessator quaerit
angulos. The spiritual and deadly enemy is said in scripture to have sown
his tares in the night time, when the air was darkest, and the laborers
taking their rest: and are not these close companions, these not so mystical,
as mistie prophets; the right chaplins or hirelings, of such a Sower? Compare
their sayings with his doings; their doctrine with his discipline; their gloss
with his text; and shall you discern any great difference in effect? Have they
not taken the readiest and cunningest way to cosen, delude, and as it were
intoxicate the weak senses of the simpler sort: "Omnia enim stolidi magis
admirantur, amantque
"Inuersis quae sub verbis latitantia cernunt.
as both that poet rightly noted, and ouerlong experience of ouercredulous and
superstitious conceits touching the premises, has too manifestly confirmed.
The higher time now to give over, and abandon such od stale fillyfollies. And
thus much, or rather thus little, concerning the jolly manner, and formal
circumstances of the aboue-rehearsed, and such like doughtie devises.

Now touching the Final why; or the general and special ends thereof, were
not these extrauagant prophesies, most-what invented and published to some such
great holy effect as the tales of Hobgoblin, Robin Goodfellow, Hogmagog,
Queen Grogorton, king Arthur, Beuis of Southhampton, Lancelot du Lake, Sir
Tristram, Thomas of Lancaster, John a Gaunt, Guy of Warwike, Orlando furioso,
Amadis du Gaul, Robin Hood and little John, Friar Tuck and maid Marian, with a
thousand such Legendaries, in all languages; vz. to busy the minds of the
vulgar sort, or to set their heads aworke withal, and to auert their conceits
from the consideration of serious, and grauer matters, by feeding their humors,
and delighting their fancies with such fabulous and ludicrous toys. For was it
not the graund policy of that age, wherein those counterfeit prophesiers
chiefly flourished, to occupy and carry away the commons with od rumors, by
flimflams, wily cranks, and sleightie knacks of the maker, even with all
possible indenors and underminings, fearing least they might otherwise
overmuch, or over deeply intend other actions, and negotiations of greaten
importance, private or public affairs of higher value, matters of state or
religion, politic or ecclesiastical government: which from time to time they
kept secret and covert, as mystical priuities, and sacred intendiments, to be
merely handled, and disposed by the clergy, or other professed in learning;
thinking thereby to maintain themselves, and uphold al their proceedings in the
greater credit, authority, and admiration amongst the people? It was a trim
work indeed, and a gay world no doubt, for some idle Cloistermen, mad merry
Friars, and lusty Abbey-lubbers, when themselves were well whitled, and their
panches pretily stuffed, otherwhiles to fall a prophesieng of the woeful
dearths, famines, plagues, wars, and most wretched, lamentable and horrible
Tragoedies of the dangerous days imminent: other whiles when happily they had
little else to do, or less to suffer, to tell the world a lewd tale, or some
notable miracle, as namely of Saint Francis, how he turned water into wine;
walked dry footed upon the waters, forbad the swallows to sing: and how good
S. Francis made all creatures reasonable and unreasonable to obey his devout
commandments: or of S. Margaret, how she conquered and killed the devil with
the sign of the holy: how she was saluted by an Angel from heaven, in the
likeness of a dove, and called by the name of Christ's own Spouse, and so forth
in the same miraculous vein. Lo, I beseech you (as an ancient poet said of
soothsaiers) how, Sui quaestus causafictas suscitant sententias: and to
increase their own private ease, liberty, and wealth, with public
reputation and reverence; how they trouble all the world besides, and procure
the perpetual servitude, bondage and confusion of infinite good simple souls?
I wis Elisha refused the presents and gifts of Naaman (2. King. 5. 16.) And the
Apostles, when Ioses the Leuite with sundry other well disposed persons, had
sold their possessions, and bringing the money tendered it, or laid it down at
their feet, did not greedily bag it up, or play the wantons there withal, but
distributed unto every man according to his present want. Whereas contrariwise
our wizardly Elishaes and Apostles were all for money and maintenance; and what
skilled it how other silly creatures were pinched or impouerished, so they were
thoroughly cherished and enriched? I touch not alone any one only calling,
degree, or quality: has not every vocation, profession and estate yielded
some such counterprophets, and pennyfathers, very gromelgainers, selflouers,
libertines, epicures, Lucianists, perpetual incrochers, ingrosers, and
aspirers, public forestallers, and regrators of al public commodities and
honors, libellers, factioners, troublers of al waters, saving their own,
hearty friends to themselves only, and deadly foes to all the world besides.
These, even these were the first ringleaders of so manifold mischiefs, as
heerevpon have ensued, to all countries and states: and such, and such were the
malicious intentions of their hypocritical hearts, howsoever cunningly
dissembled, or cloked otherwise. And what were the other pettyfoggers, and
hucksters after them, whereof some are above mentioned? Were they not the right
apprentices of so vnrightful masters? And the true imps of such false rotten
stocks? Or rather were they not meet chapmen, and retailers of such precious
wares, and noble merchandises?

Non sunt enim ij, aut scientia, aut art diuini:
Sed superstitiosivates, impudentesque harioli:
Aut inertes, aut insani, aut quibus egestas imperat:
Qui sibi semitam non sapiunt, alteri monstrant viam:
Quibus diuitias pollicentur, ab his drachmas ipsi petunt;
De his diuitijs sibi deducant drachmam, reddant caetera.
As the good old Ennius long ago uttered his affection toward such bribing
copesinates, and incroching Bisogniers. The anointed prophets of the old
testament, and apostles of the new; prophesied, and wrought miracles: why? To
confirm the sacred will of God: to strengthen the true faith of the upright
Israelites: and to open, or mollify the obdurate hearts of the Egyptians: to
give a light to lighten the Gentiles: and to convert all nations, or all people
unto Christ: now alas, have you ever seen, or heard of any such fruits, or
issues proceeding from these counterfeit prophesiers, Qui re omissa, nomen
tantum tenent? Or from these traitorous Iudasses, which stick not to sell such
kisses, and even their own souls, for lucre, and money. Why then, or to what
end, or ends, have they breathed out so loud, boisterous, and troublefull
blasts? Why, but to terrify, and afray the world, to skar simple folk, to
bring men into a fools paradise, to raise matter of common fearfulnes, and
dreadfulnes: to find idle heads, and busy brains occupied: to keep the
world in continual awe, and to their appropriate purposes, in good quiet
order: to breed doubts, and quandaries in other, that themselves might only
enjoy the fuller, and deeper security, Hypocritical and Pharisaicall ends,
sophistical purposes, speculatiue conceits, which either being mistaken, and
misconstrued, or else too much credited and esteemed, how easily may they
occasion, and engender troublesome sturs, tumults, vprores, seditions,
mutinies, garboiles, commotions, insurrections, rebellions, private myseries,
common mischiefs, public calamities, and desolations? Such final ends as
commonly overthrow, and destroy the best established states, and at length
bring most flourishing kingdoms, principalities, and commonwealthes to their
final ends, even most woofull, most doleful, and most horrible ends; such in
effect, and in conclusion, or rather in confusion, are the ends of such
wretched, and wicked prophesies, the very prophesies of the devil, to undo,
and destroy the world. Which our noble, and well affected princes of England
well knowing, and accordingly considering have purposely ordained, and enacted
penal statutes to bridle the unruly, and presumptuous insolency of such
inposturall prophets: (as namely 5. Elizabeth. 15.) Neither would our elder, or
later laws, and ordinances have proceeded so peremptorily against them, had
not their devises been found in trial not only very dangerous, and perilous
practices, but also very pernicious, and intolerable criminal villainies. How
directly also, and resolutely have the Civil and Canon laws dealt with such
cosening malefactors, and such unlawful diuinations, especially in the proper
titles, De Maleficis, and Mathematicis, and coeteris similibus, and de
Sortilegis? I pass over Paulus Grillandus notable tract De sortilegijs: where
notwithstanding it would not be forgotten, that by the civil law,
sortilegium, sihaeresim sapiat, vt haeresis punitur, si haere sim non sapiat,
imponitur poena mortis: sieve sortilegium sit ad diuinandum, sieve amoris causa
commissum. Neither do I stand upon the ancient Roman law of the xij. tables;
where nevertheless it was thus decreed: Qui malum carmen, incantasset: and qui
fruges excantasset, and so forth, coercetor: which law is more fully, and
expressly declared by Balduin, a french Ciuilian, in his commentary, Ad leges
xij. Tabularum. Much less will I urge, or prosecute any philosophical, or
theoreticall law of Plato, albeit in his xj. dialogue De Legibus, he appoints
them to suffer death, or at least to endure some grievous arbitrary penalty,
that shall play the Aruspices, or interpreters of prodigia, or shall be
convicted, to have prepared, or furnished themselves, by knots, inductions,
incantations, or other impoisonings, and venefices, to harm, endamage, or hurt
any other. But of al laws, I must not omit the sacred law of Moses, or rather
of God himself, wherein all such lawles, and godles impostors, malefactors,
inchaunters, sorcerers, necromancers, pythonistes, southsayers, or whatsoever
like diuiners, are put to perpetual silence; Quoniam eorum diuinationes,
fabulae seductoriae sunt: and again, Quoniam propter has abominationes Deus
eradicauit Chaldaeos a facie sua, as appears in the 18. chap of Deuteronomy* nec
maleficos patieris viuere, as also is inioined in the 22. of Exodus. Howbeit,
in respect of brevity, I am only by quotation, and reference, to transmit you
without farther discourse, not only to the said 22. of Exodus, or 18. of
Deuteronomy; but also to the 13. and 19. of Deuteronomy: to the 13. and 22. of
Ezechiel: to the 3. of Micah: to the 23. of Jeremy: to the 3. of Zephoniah: as
likewise to the 7. of Matthew: to the second chapter of Peter's 2. Epistle: and
finally to all other concordant places of the holy Bible: wherein the wretched,
and damnable condition of such caytife prophets is notably described, together
with the due plagues, and just vengeance of God, which accordingly awaiteth
them. Neither are our new fellows, and later wizards specially priuileged, or
any way exempted, whatsoever countenance, or surface they either stoutly, or
suttelly set on the matter. Ulysses in the crafty drift of his policy, may
colourably pretend the reverend skill of Calchas, and sophistically allege,
non causam pro causa: but may not also his cunning be descried even by a woman
of reasonable capacity, or does not Andromache tendering the safety of her
young son Astyanax, hit the nail right on the head, where she pittiously
cries out in that rufull tragedy,

O Machinator fraudis, O scelerum artifex,
Virtute cuius bellica nemo occidit:
Dolis, and astu maleficae mentis, iacent
Etiam Pelasgi: vatem, and insontes Deos praetendis?
Hoc est pectoris facinus tui
Nocturne miles, fortis in pueri necem.
I before mentioned the like Vlissean policy: and nothing doubt, but some of
Achytophels mighty oracles sauored of the same humor: as more lately some of
Machiauels politic resolutions, and practices have pretily tasted, and
relised thereof. In former times, and in a simpler age, it was no difficult
matter, to shift out with good plain rude cloisterly stuff: now lateward,
sithence those frierlie skarcrowes, and moonkish dumps began to be less
dreaded, or regarded, there have not wanted jolly fine pragmaticall wares, of
the maker, whereby no small intendiments, or base enterprises have been
attempted in most kingdoms, and principalities through out Christiandome.
Forsooth loosers must have their words: and beggars will needs be somewaies
bulbeggers. I cannot stand to make any curious division; howbeit some of them
would be noted for terrible Elphes, and Goblines: some other of them can be
contented to insinuate themselves, like Robin goodfellows, and friar Tuckes.
Amongst whom can we better compare the former, than unto such pedlers, tinkers,
and sturdy roges, as were wont to carry about with them their fierce mastiues,
and terrible bandogs, to serve their knauish, and villainous turns, upon
advantage given? As for the rest, notwithstanding the sweet, and plausible
home in their mouths, have they not also spiteful, and pestilent stings in
their tails? The world never more complained of Achitophels, Vlyssees, and
Machiauels, than of late years: but take away, or contemn all malicious
suborning of calumnies, libels, and prophesies: and shall they not hurt or
prevail much less, as well in public, as in private, notwithstanding their
other wiliest conueiances, and suttellest practices? Were it not over great
pity, that any such knack of knauerie, or couenous cheuisance, or hipocritical
policy, or Mercuriall strategeme, either by false libelling, or false
prophesieng, or other falsifieng of matters, and manners, should peremptorily
overthrow, or traitorously undermine any well governed, or well established
state? God, they say, sends commonly a cursed cow short horns: and does not
the devil, I say, in the winde-vpall, and in fine, oftener play wily beguile
him self, and crucify his own wretched lims, then atchieue his mischievous,
and malicious purposes, howsoever craftily conveyed, or feately packed, either
in one fraudulent sort, or other? The world now wants not a nose, as Erasmus
speaks in Latin; but has, or might have, or at least should have over sharp
a sent, to be defrauded, beguiled, or deluded with any such od prancks, and
cosening tricks: very poor shifts, God woteth, with the wiser sort, and very
silly means either of public, or private revenge: whereat nevertheless many
of them chiefly aim, that shoot abroad these libelling, and prophesieng
boults: hoping thereby at last to compass their grand intendiments, and as well
to advance themselves, as to dispatch their enemies. Cunning fellows no doubt,
and mighty politiques, that ween through sophistry to attain tyranny: and
attempt by Comical sturs, and private undermines, to enforce Tragical
calamities, and public ruins. Many great matters they threaten, Pro, and
Contra: one while,

Shall one rise against another,
And fare as men that were wood:
And the brother kill his brother,
That the streets of Troy shall run blood.
with sundry such dreadful battles, and terrible sights: another while, God at
the last shall us help every way,
And all shall be in godly concord, and stay.


Mary still our happiest Comoedie must again be tempered with this Tragical
Interim, or caveat. But till these signs be seen, and these deeds done,
Rancor shall reign, and rule under the sun.
I pretermit their excessive and Hyperbolicall amplifications on both sides, as
too unreasonably and moustrously swelling with huge affectation: and when they
have ouerreached never so far, either one way or other; neither is their best
felicity, any better than a Fools paradise: nor their woorst misery, any
worse than a Poets purgatory. At least have I not reasonable cause so to
persuade my self, though I should not altogether train other to the same
opinion? It is good, they say, to be merry and wise: and is it not as good to
be cunning and honest? Hoc est nescire, sine Christo plurima scire: and alas,
what is all science without conscience: or divination without divinity: or the
whole world without heaven? Wherefore seeing these abominable and devilish
forgeries are so odious in the sight of God, so unlawful in the view of the
world, so pernicious to the practitioners themselves, and so perilous to all
other, as well friends as foes thereof: does it not nearly behooue and concern
us (as Saint Paul exhorted Timothy) To cast away such profane old wives
tales, or doting fables, and to exercise or practice our selves in godliness,
and more godly studies? Is it not high time? Alas, is it not more than time to
give over all forbidden arts, to forsake counterfeit impostures, to defy
villainous practices, to abolish the memory of iugling, cosening, libelling,
fabling, prophesieng, charming, and coniuring knaueries? To abandon whatsoever
impious, profane, idolatrous, atheous, or any way diabolical suggestions: and
contrariwise to follow and embrace those only sciences, arts, studies,
experiments, and exercises, which before God and the world, according to all
divine and humane ordinances, are generally allowed, and specially approved
for lawful, needful, commendable, good, and godly: and so finally to rely on
that only great and mighty prophet of prophets, whom God by his prophet
Moses, and the rest of his prophets (the only true and infallible prophets of
the age, wherein they flourished) promised to raise up in due time: and whom we
assuredly believe, to have sithence been borne, crucified, dead, and buried
for our sake, even for our only sake: to whom therefore we remain infinitely
bounden for ever and ever. Cui omnis laus, omnis diuinae sapientiae in omne
aeuum: cui omnis honos omnis reconditae scientiae rerum futurarum. For it is
notably said in the Text of the Canon Law, Cap. Quod autem. 26. quaest. 5. as I
have heard it expressly quoted, and verbatim alleged by some lawyers of good
learning: Futura praescire solius Dei est, qui in sui contemplatione etiam
Angelos praescire facit illa. vnde Esaias ait; Priora, and nouissima annunciate
mihi, and dicam, quod Dij estis.

The Conclusion, or Epilog of the former Section.
NOtwithstanding the premises, or any like arguments and authorities,
wheresoever alleged to the former scope and effect; I am to conclude with this
protestation, that my meaning or intention is not to continue, or enlarge
Agrippaes inuectiue Declamation, De vanitate scientiarum: or to confute, or any
way disallow any laudable practice, or profitable exercise of any lawful and
warrantable Art, learnedly and honestly proceeding to a provident foresight,
or foreknowledge of future things and events, inquirable by legitimate skill,
or otherwise searchable by assured experience. I am not ignorant; what partly
may be soundly auowed, or what partly has been effectually performed in such
cases of justifiable providence: neither do I greatly fear either that
general objection of many learned men, Vituperatio artis, testis est
ignorantiae: or that special proverb of Solomon, Prius intellige, and tunc
increpa: As also I neither will, nor can deny, but Moises, Daniell, and some
other of those most worthy, and admirable divine prophets, were notably
instructed with the profoundest sciences, and whole discipline of the
Egyptians and Chaldaeans; and thereof reaped exceeding great fruit, even to
their very best and godliest uses. Wherefore as I am in reason and conscience
to reprove that, which I find amiss, and reprehensible in the foresaid
subject, or argument of later prophesies; so God forbid but I should maintain
and commend that, which I find both allowable in cause, and auailable in
effect, as being either warranted by lawful art, or approved by actual
experience: and no way condemned either by the sacred word of God, or by the
sovereign law of man. I dare not simply defend, or altogether justify those
famous predictions, whereby princes, or other mighty potentates, and noble
personages have been truly admonished, and certainly forewarned of their death
imminent: as when Socrates foretold the death of Crito: Calanus the Indian, the
death of Alexander the great: Spurina the death of Julius Caesar: Sulla the
death of Caligula: the Chaldaeans, the death of Agrippina the Emperesse by her
own son Nero, when he should be Emperor: Ascletarion the death of Domitian,
the last of Suetonius twelve Caesar's, as also his own death: and sundry other
later philosophers, mathematicians, astrologers, and physicians, the certain
deaths of diverse other princes and great persons: as appears by infinite
examples of credible authority, in all histories both new and old. Howbeit who
in learning can deny the lawful and warrantable use of philosophy, the
mathematiques, astrology and physique, even in such prenotions and
premonitions, so far, as with modest discretion, and without curious search
above their natural, artificial, or practicable reach, they may prouidently
and reasonably foresee the consequence of Natural or Moral effects, by deep
and due consideration of the antecedent causes, or apparent signs, either
Natural or Moral. Neither are we in modesty, or good reason so
preiudicially, or peremptorily to discredit so excellent histories, as either
not to believe any such narration, but to pass it lightly over, as incredible
and fabulons: or by and by to affirm that unlawfully and impiously done, which
we for want of like skill, imagine to be very difficult or impossible to be
done, without forbidden and profane means: howsoever there reported, as done
by the only help and direction of lawful and commendable learning.
Nevertheless I am wholly to refer the determinate resolution upon this point,
concerning the certain or uncertain prediction of such deaths, unto men of
greater and deeper judgment, especially in soundest Divinity, whereunto I
humbly submit whatsoever humanity, or other learning is already, or shall
hereafter be here alleged. But he understands little, that knows not what
notable Accidents have been foreshewed by the furtherance of Natural
philosophy, and sharp insight in physical causes, effects, subjects,
appurtenances, and other agreeable or disagreeable simple, or comparatiue
Arguments and instruments of nature. As for example, did not thereby Anaximander
foretell the Lacedaemonians of a dangerous and grievous earthquake imminent,
aduising them to prevent the peril and terror thereof, by forsaking their
houses, and avoiding the city: which earthquake shortly after burst out in so
violent manner, that the whole city was utterly ruinated, and a great part of
the mount Taygetus horribly overwhelmed? Or did not thereby Pherecides,
Pythagoras master, and Callisthenes the philosopher make semblable proof of
their artificial providence, through natural skilfulnes? Or did not thereby
the prince of our physicians Hippocrates, foresee a mortal plague and
pestilence amongst the Grecians? Or did not thereby Thales Milesius enrich
himself, forespying a great scarcity, or dearth of Olives in the Milesian
fields, and territories adjacent? Or did not thereby Democritus, and Sixtius a
Roman philosopher, as Pliny testifies, play upon the same advantage? Or did
not thereby many other learned men in all ages prognosticate diverse strange
events, and casualties in the world, sometime e terrae motu, aut hiatu:
sometime, Ex inundatione maris; aut puteorum aquis cruentis, aut amnium cursu
inhibito: sometime, Ex armorum sonitu, and crepitu in aere, aut ex cantu
funestarum auium, vt bubonum, noctuarum, strigum: sometime, Ex apparentia
Cometarum, aut crebrorum fulgurum, aut defectu solis: sometime from other
natural signs and accidents, as might particularly and plentifully be
exemplified out of Plinies Natural History, besides sundry Politic
histories, incidently mentioning and approouing such presentions? Look into
the Semeioticall or presignificatiue judgments of physicians; into the
Aeromanticall rules and directions of nauigators: into the Georgical,
Meteorologicall and Astrological prognosticatio^s of good husbandmen; and
cunningest tillers of the ground: or into many like artificial and practicable
experiments, drawn from natural observation: and can you condemn, or gainsay
all foreknowledge, of future consequents? I must not stay upon particularities:
have not, or may not many strange and almost incredible conclusions, as well in
the Diuinatorie, as Prognostical kind, as otherwise, be cunningly
experimented, and actually wrought by the right use, and skillful application
either of the Mathematiques, or of mere Natural Magique, as it is lawful, and
allowable before God, and man, without any corruption, or mixture of
demonicall, or supernatural Magique? Scholars are not ignorant, what precious
account diverse learned men have made of the true, and right Natural Magique,
as the supreme science, and perfect consummation of philosophy, and as the
worker of many very notable, and most worthy feats, of especial, and singular
use, upon manifold occasions, as well public as private. Which point our
countriman Roger Bacon, a man deeply seen in such Magical, and Mathematical
experiments, has plentifully discoursed in his Apologeticall tract, De
mirabili potestate Artis, and Naturae: and John Dee, a man sufficiently known
for his long study, and skill in such matters, has effectually confirmed, in
his Speculum vnitatis, and Apology of Bacons profound cunning in philosophy, as
himself not many years since professed unto me. But what needs farther
proof, in defense, or auerment of any such foresight, by natural philosophy;
seeing as Tully says, Sagae anus dictae, quia multa praescire volunt, and
sagaces canes, quia acute sentiunt: and Praesagire, which signifies, Futura
ante sentire, is not only appropriate unto man, but in sort also granted unto
beasts and creatures deuoid of reason, as by induction of examples, might
largely be specified. Do not Bees Speculari aquas, and nubila coeli; as Virgill
writes? Nay, do they not Praediuinare ventos, and imbres, as both Pliny in his
12. book, and Aristotle in Historia Animalium reports? Do not also. Corui
singultu quodam latrantes, seque concutientes, si continuabunt, ventos: si
carptim vocem resorbebunt, ventosum imbrem praenunciare, as the same Pliny
witnesses? And what fairer sign of fair weather, or serenity, or of a calm
and nauigable sea, then Nidificatio Alcedonum, as likewise Pliny testifies in
more then one, or two places, but namely in his 18. book, where is also a
notable trial of Democritus Meteorologicall, and Prognosticall skill, thus
expressed: Praesagia tempestatum placuisse Virgilio magnopere video; siquide^
in ipsam messem saepe concurrere praelia ventorum, damnosa imperitis refert:
Tradunt enim Democritum, metente fratre eius Damaso, ardentissimo aestu orasse,
vt reliquae segetiparceret, raperetque desectam sub tectum: paucis mox horis,
saeuo imbre vaticinatione approbata: where the words of Praesagia, and
Vaticinatio would not be ouerslipped without note. But to return to the
reasonable foreknowledge of the foresaid unreasonable creatures, and to knit up
all in brief, what say you to those riming verses of doctor Record, a man
famous as well for his Arithmetique, Geometry, and Cosmography, as for his
Physic, and Philosophy?

The Fox in crafty wit exceeds most men:
A Dog in smelling has not his peer:
To foresight of weather if you look then
Many beasts excel, as appears clear.
The wittines of Elephants does letters attain:
But what cunning does there in the Be remain?
The Emmet foreseeing the hardness of winter,
Provides vittailes in the time of Summer.
The Nightingall, the Linnet, the Thrush, the Lark,
In musical harmony pass many a clarke.
The Hedgehog of Astronomy seems to know,
And stops his cave where the wind does blow.
The Spider in weauing such Art does show,
None can him amend, or follow I trow.
When a house will fall, the Mice right quick
Flee thence before: who can do the like.
May we not as lawfully attribute unto reasonable men, foresight of weather,
provision of requisite commodities, prevention by Astronomy, and precaution by
flight, or otherwise, as unto unreasonable beasts, Emmets, Hedghogs, Mice, or
such like poor creatures? I am enforced to ouerskip many Natural experiments,
furthering prediction: and must hasten to the consideration of certain Moral
and Politic presentions. Might not therefore the Asiatticall Magicians, by
means of some probable tokens, or Politic occurrences, easily foresee, how
terrible and pernicious a piece Alexander should prove unto Asia? Or might not
Solon in like manner as reasonably presage, what tyranny was to assault the
Athenian commonwealth, before either Pisistratus, or their other tyrants began
to display the presumptuous banners of their aspiring cruelty? Or might not
Berosus in like manner prouidently forewarne them of sundry perils, and terrors
ensuing? Or might not Epimenides in like manner justly foretell the time, and
success of the Persian, and Barbarian wars against the foresaid Athenians? Or
might not Sylla, or Cato in like manner, give out this politic caveat and
watchword of Caesar: Cauete apuero male praecincto? Or might not Aelius in like
manner probably preconiecture, that Adrian should be crowned Emperor? Or to
approach nearer our time, might not Guido Bonatus as well in like civil manner,
as by concordance of Astrologicall judicials, preconceiue the woofull
calamity, and exile, that awaited Simon Mestaguerre, notwithstanding his
former flourishing and princely bravery at Forliuium? Or might not the same
Guido another time, preserve his said natural country Forliuium, from the
intended usurpation, and tyranny of Martin the fourth pope of that name, as
well by his politic circumspection, as by his other Mathematical, and
Astrologicall instructions? Examples are infinite, both of later, and elder
memory: is not Prudentia diuinatio quaedam, as Tully says, so termed a
Prouidendo, as he also notes: and is not Prouidentia futurorum, one special
part, or branch of Prudence? Has not God given unto man, as well Sensual, and
Intellectual, as Natural, or Vital powers, fantasy, cogitation, reason,
understanding, and a discoursiue faculty, apt to resolve, and determine in
most cases, whereby he may as well in Moral, as Natural matters, Ex certis
causis, and signis, praecurrentibus certis rebus, probably aim at things
thoroughly intended, and Ex praeteritis, and praesentibus, sensibly, and
reasonably Praecolligere futura? Are we not still to maintain that ancient
opinion of Socrates, Zeno, Cratippus, with Democritus, Lucretius, and diverse
other famous philosophers, as well Academiques, and Peripatecians, as Stoickes,
and the rest, that there always were, now are, and ever shall be many prudent,
or witty presagitions, and some wise foreknowledge of future contingents, both
by Moral, and Natural means, discreetely, and learnedly applied? Are we not
taught by visible, and daily experience, how infinite dangers and mischiefs
have from time, to time been continually prevented, and effectually withstood,
by vigilant circumspection, and provident foresight, which no doubt otherwise
might, and would very grievously, and miserably have oppressed us? Lord, what
were states, or commonwealths, without the politic regiment of princes, the
wise direction of counselors, the discreet government of magistrates, the
cunning stratagems of captains, the militar discipline of armies, and such like
both Civil, and Martial complements, evermore prepared, and provided against
all future occasions, or whatsoever exigence, either of peaceable, or warly
affairs, either domestical or foreign? Yea, what were families, or private
wealths, without Oeconomicall provision, husbandly furniture, expert trading,
thriftie frugalitie, and careful foresight, to store up such necessaries, as
belong to houshoulders, with other requisite implements, and seemly ornaments,
becoming every civil house? Is it not a point of wisdom, as they say, to
provide against a dear year, or to lay up against a hard winter? Alas, what
were the noblest, richest, or valiantest man, without forecast, and providence?
Is it not better counsel, and the surer way, to be rather a Prometheus, than
an Epimetheus? Or is it not a wiser part, to beware a week or a month too
soon, than to complain a day, or an hour after the mischief? Or is it not a
point of common discretion, To look, ere you leap? Or is it not an unadvised
speech, and one property of a fool, to say, Had I wist? Or is not Civil
praecaution, or prevention, as good a figure in Policy, as an oratorie
Praeoccupation in Rhetorique? May not much good be attained, and much evil
eschewed, by wary, and respective heedfulnes? Have not many considerate and
deep heads, cunningly foreseen in former times, what world should shortly
ensue, by inward observation, skillful examination, and politic conference of
the public, and private manners, hauiours, vsages, guises, and humors of the
age present? Can not wise men epsy light at a little hole? Or does not the
least ouerture suffice a quick and pregnant conceit? Or may not the simplest of
a number, easily discern Leonem ex vnguibus, and Herculem ex claua; as is
commonly said in these, and sundry like proverbs? This were doubtless a notable
Commonplace, if I might accordingly dwell therein, especially In specie, and
In specialibus exemplis, whereof diverse good histories, and politic
discourses afford rich, and goodly plenty. But all cannot be uttered in one
place; and it concerns me at this instant, to dispatch with greater speed.
Consider now, what has been directly alleged, and what may thereof be
consequently implied, or insinuated: and then by my simple advise, yield so
much, and no more unto predictions of whatsoever nature, or howsoever
countenanced, and suborned, as good Reason shall admit, good Art justify, and
good Experience approve. He no doubt might seem wonderful in this
prognosticall kind, that could certainly, exactly, and infallibly express the
right Natural, and Moral causes of Natural and Moral effects: and being
thoroughly acquainted with the whole state and quality of superior and
inferior bodies, of Heaven and Earth, and finally of Nature her self, as well
in every particular faculty, as in her universal power, could absolutely
declare the whole Concordance, or Discordance of the one with the other, and as
it were make a perfect Analysis, or rather a perfect Anatomy of Nature in her
true, and entire likeness. Which Tully in part seems to have conceived, in
making so very special great account to understand Certum ordinem, seriemque
causarum, tanquam ex omni aeternitate fluentem veritatem sempiternam. But
neither Tully, nor any other Latin, or Greek philosopher, either more
sufficiently with brevity, or more breefly with sufficiency declares my
meaning, than the Poet in that famous verse: Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere
causas. Without which felicity, neither Persian Magician, nor Indian
Gymnosophist, nor Egyptian priest, nor Assyrian or Babylonian Chaldeest, nor
French Druyde or Bardist, nor Sicilian Galeot, nor Athenian Mantist, nor
Lacedaemonian Augurer, nor Memphiticall Oracler, nor Cabalisticall prophet, nor
Hetrurian Aruspex, nor finally any Greek philosopher, or Latin wizard, or
other learned man whatsoever (albeit he should otherwise be reputed equal unto
Budda, or Hyarchus, or Zoroaster, or even Hermes Trismegistus himself, as well
in their diuinatorie faculties, as in their other profound Magique,) shall ever
pass with me for a prophet. Signs, and tokens, are commonly but accidental,
and fallible arguments; our very soundest, and substantiallest, and most
essential proofs, or reasons, are the very Internal, and External causes
themselves: wherein I would to God, either our knowledge were greater, or our
presumption less, especially for this high matter of prophetical divination.
Something we may assuredly foresee: and something probably conjecture: as
appears throughout this Conclusion: but in comparison either of divine
prophesies, or of our own humane ignorances, and defects otherwise: alas, Hoc
aliquid, nihilest. Schoolmen may phantastically dream, or philosophically
discourse of new Adams, Salomons, and diverse putatiue wisemen, even in that
omniscious, and omnisufficient vein: but I wis such black Swans are very rare
birds: and true prophets in the rightest, purest, and diuinest kind, even full
as rare, or percase rarer, than they: as may happily be discussed more fully, and
exactly, at more convenient leisure.

Now I am instantly required, and importuned, to hasten immediately unto that
most notorious supposed prophecy, so terribly denounced against this present
famous year, 1588. even now the only prophecy of the world, and great
specialtie of specialties in this Prognosticall vein.

THE SECOND PART, OR SECTION: specially examining and discussing the special
Prophecy of this famous year, 1588.
Having hitherto summarily, and generally to speak of, but in very truth
hastily, and perfunctorily declared, and reproved the Authors, the Material
contents, the Formal styles, and the Final ends, that is the four Causes of
our later supposed prophesies, together with all such pretended traditions, or
forged rumors, (by which discourse every sensible and reasonable man may easily
perceive what slender account we are to make of so slender reckonings, as well
in the particulars, as in the total sum:) I am now at the earnest and urgent
request of certain worshipful Gentlemen, and diverse other my familiar
friends; more specially and severally to labor, and examine one more special
notorious prophecy, touching this long expected wonderful year, 1588. A
prophecy not so seldom as once or twice termed of the said Gentlemen, the
only particularitie of particularities, and specialtie of specialties in this
later prophetical kind. I shall not need to express mine own several
considerations, moving me likewise to the dutiful undertaking of the same
argument: howbeit I cannot deny, but this whole Treatise was originally
occasioned by that only famous prophecy, as also thereat it finally aims.
God knows with what good success: I assure you with good intent, as well in
public, as private respects. Therefore presuming so much the more of
courteous favor, I hope no indifferent Reader, or reasonable man, being not
disguised with a contradictorie and ouerthwarting spirit, nor disposed to
altercate, or cavil without cause, will greatly doubt of the truth, or at
least the probability of the former allegations; considering there neither
have, nor may any better than fantastical, vain, or troublesome conclusions
be inferred, or enforced from the premises of such fantastical, vain, and
troublesome oracles, or prophesies; and consequently of all other
extraordinary and irregular visions, fantasies, traunces, dreams,
Anabaptisticall revelations, Seraphicall illuminations, Metaphysicall ecstasies,
Enthusiasticall furies, rauishments, and excesses of spirit, fascinations,
inuocations, incantations, adiurations, exorcisines, suspensions, alligations,
characters, seals, rings, pertacles, images, balmes, consecrations, periapts,
amulets, sacrifices, suffumigations, purifications, lotteries, orizons,
collects, ceremonies, and such like superstitious and diabolical implements,
together with their semblable Aequiuocations, Amphibologies, Allegories,
Anagogies, Hyperboles, Mysteries, Mystagogies, Metamorphoses, and other
whatsoever spritish Sophistry, or hellish Rhetorique. But touching the
substance, and circumstance of the peremptory dismal prophecy, of 88. as in
phrase and style it seems more directly simple, plain, and sensible than the
rest, and in fame surpasses them all; being commonly handled, and canuassed
even amongst the best, in most places of Europe: so it is universally more
feared, or at least suspected and doubted, than any of them, or than all they
together, as being more credibly, or probably grounded upon some surer
foundation of lawful Art, or profound science, or autentique experience, or I
wot not what other ancient approbation; and not to be deemed any idle fancy,
vain speculation, or forged invention: as some even of the learnedest sort
have not only imaginatiuely presupposed, but also resolutely believed:
insomuch, that thereupon they have nothing doubted to publish their censures,
and like letters patents, or commendatorie Testimonials, to commit the same
unto the common view, and perusal of the world. Which censures or testimonies,
how reasonable they are in effect; or how warrantable by sound and infallible
grounds of lawful art, or assured knowledge, let us equally and directly
consider, without any particular affection to any one, or private emulation to
any other. But first, lo the very platform it self, in the original Latin,
together with the later Dutch, and English Translations.

The famous Prophecy of 88. vulgarly fathered upon Ioannes Regiomontanus; but
woorthily suspected by some learnedermen, never to have proceeded from that
excellent Mathematician, or any like notable Scholar.
Post mill expletos a partu virginis annos,
Et post quingentos rursus ab orb datos:
Octogesimus octauus mirabilis annus
Ingruet, is secum tristia fata feret.
Si non hoc Anno totus malus occidet orbis:
Si non in nihilum terra, fretumqueruet:
Cuncta tamen mundi fursum ibunt atque retrorsum
Imperia, and luctus vndique grandis erit. The Dutch Translation.
Tausent fiinffhundert achzig acht,
Das is it iar das ich betracht,
Geht inudem die meltnicht under
Sogschicht doch sonst grosz mercklich wunder.


My English Paraphrase.
After a thousand years from Christ's nativity accounted:
And five hundred more to the computation added,
The eight year, succeeding fowerscore, will approach very strangely;
Afflicting mankind with woeful destiny afrighted:
If then wretched world be not utterly wasted in horror;
If heavens, lands, and seas consume not finally to naught:
At least most kingdoms ouerhurlde with tragical outrage,
Shall power out dreadful complaints, and pitiful outcries.


Iwis that messenger, or Nuntio, or (if happily it pleases you so to term him,
for honors sake) that prophet, or wizard, shall not greatly need to hire him
post horses, for speedier delivery, and dispatch of such happy news, but may
well enough come and go soon enough, or rather ouersoone on foot, that shall
carry such blessed tidings in his mouth, or in letters missiue, certifieng any
like joyful occurrents. But I beseech you, what may be either the great
mighty causes, in effecting; or the violent inforcements, in constraining; or
the pithie reasons, in proouing; or the cunning insinuations, in persuading the
necessary sequel, or credible contingence of so great wonderful casualties,
and dreadful terrors?

Forsooth, Helisaeus Reslyn, a mathematician and philosopher of good fame in
our age, propounding the foresaid Germanical translation of Staephlerine in his
Theorianouacaelestium Meteoran, auoweth, that himself knows not any other
reason, cause, or ground of that famous Prognosticate, than only this, that
some recounting the Synagog of the Jews (touching the space of time, from the
egresse of the children of Israel, unto the abolition and deuastation of the
temple made under the reign of Vespasian by the rage of his son Titus) to
have continued just so many years, as are now passed sithence Christ; and
withal affirming that Mosaicall Synagog to be a true type or figure of his
Church; will needs from hence, as they imagine, probably conclude, that some
great alteration, or notorious mighty Accident is now likewise imminent,
whilst the same number of years is again accomplished.

Which computation, or Chronology, how incongruous and erroneous it is, as the
learned nothing doubt, so I think few of the unlearned to be so blinded in our
days, as to applaude to this Jewish Cabalisticall reason, or mystical
application thereof; had the account it self been found never so exactly, or
precisely true.

But as it falls out, if you either take the true continuance of the Synagog
of the old Testament, (which is but 1580. years by some former computes) and
begin to reckon at the time of Christ's passion, or coming of the holy Ghost,
when the beginning of the primitive Christian Church was founded; shall the
said number be expired in the new Testament, before the year 1614. or 1613. at
the soonest, which is almost 30. years hence? Or if you follow the newest
computation of the learned Cosmographer, and Chronologer, Gerardus Mercator,
was not the same date, or term of years of the Jewish Synagog finished, Anno
1520. that is 67. years ago?

And yet this, even this silly devise, seems to be the strongest and
forciblest argument, that a cunning Astronomer, and erpert Meteorologician
could allege in defense and maintenance of that notorious prediction.

Whereby (to begin with Reslins censure) it may partly appear at the very
first entrance, that there are no such great ordinary or extraordinary causes
of any such universal dangers, or general calamities imminent, as is
ouercredulously supposed, and ouertimorously misdoubted: when so sufficient an
Artist, in this very kind of Prognosticall knowledge, has no more variety of
proofs, or no greater proof of certainty to enforce, or insinuate so
weighty and peremptory a resolution.

Therefore to proceed with the opinions of other: Some preferring the shadowed
and imagined fantasies of Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, Porphyrie, and our
later Platonists, touching the excellency and preeminence of Arithmeticall and
Geometrical proportion in numbers; will needs include a deep mystery, and
high secret in the very number 5550. it self; (the present year of the world,
and the 88. of Christ) and thereby even from the only number of years, go
about to enforce I know not what, and what dangerous and lamentable confusion
about that period. But is it credible that the extreme dismal fate of the
world, or any utter casualtie of so mighty consequence should in very deed
depend upon the fickle state of numbers and figures? Or may the Proportionable
quantity of 5. to 50. of 50. to 500. of 500. to 5000. or any such fiuefold, or
tenfold, or Geometrical, or Arithmeticall concord and equality, by the virtue
of I know not what mystical Analogy, square out any such dreadful discords
and inequalities, as are now beyond all number, weight and measure expected? I
cannot reach so high, as many other: but in my simple knowledge there is no
such matter of proof, or Demonstration. I am not ignorant, that Plato and
Aristotle in the summitie of their Ethicall, Oeconomicall, Politic, and
Metaphysicall Idees, have displaied some such philosophical quiddities, and in
a manner panegyrically extolled like Harmonicall resemblances; but discuss the
subject it self, and consider their figurative manner of handling, and shall
you find any more sufficient matter in them for auailable direction to any
such Superplatonicall Intelligence, or Superaristotelicall intendiment, than
rests in Pythagoras lot, or any like Cabalisticall tradition? Howbeit neither
will I, nor can I in truth deny, but that there lurketh (as it were) a kind of
Hieroglyphical interpretation, and hidden or mystical understanding in sundry
Arithmeticall and Geometrical Analogies: but as I cannot conceive how, or why
the final destiny of this whole Universality, or any other most notable
change, or chance by wonderful innovation or confusion, should be comprised
therein, or comprehended thereby; (howsoever the heretical Arithmeticians,
Marcus Magus, and Valentinus have blasphemously babled to like purpose) so
particularly for the present year 5550. I am well assured there is no such
exquisite Arithmeticall, or exact Geometrical proportion in the figures and
numbers thereof, as shall be in the year 5555. approaching 5. years after;
which by soundest proportion, and Harmonical equality of numbers (if they
prevail any whit to the effecting of such terrible and lamentable alterations)
should express more deep and peremptory impressions than this, in regard of
any such Pythagoricall, or Arithmanticall Theorie.

Wherefore by the reason and Analogy of this reckoning, (the sounder of the
two) it is the 93. not the 88. year of the Christian Epoch, that must prove
the dismal period, and fatal year of lamentations.

But to ouerpasse so slight an argument without any longer stay, let such
finally as build so much upon the prerogative of 5550. remember by the way,
that howsoever we esteem the 88. year of Christ for that year of the world:
there are by the Chronological reckonings of the Hebrews above 5000. and 600.
years: by the reckonings of Paulus Orosius, Beda, Eusebius, Tritemius, and
their sectaries, above 6000. and 700. years: by the reckonings of the first
fathers, and Doctors of the Church, above 7000. years: and by the compute of
the most noble Mathematician, king Alphonsus, above 8000. and 500. years
already passed, and fully complete sithence the time of the original creation
thereof. Is it therefore impossible, or unlike that any of those should see as
far into Decretoriall numbers, or future ieoperdies, and public casualties,
as any of late memory? Nay, were not they generally more deeply grounded, and
better exercised in such mysteries, and priuities both of Nature, and Art, than
we are now a days? Yet can we not find that any of them ever assigned any
such efficacy, or virtue to the present equality of numbers; or if percase
they did, is not their date long ago expired without any such events? Why then
should we misdoubt but that even this surmised Mirabilis Annus will also pass
as other years have done heretofore, and like as these famous authors,
according to their chronologies, supposed this same to have already passed,
without any mention of any such terrible sturs and garboils.

There are othersome which suspect this year the rather, because forsooth, as
they allege, it is A Climacterical, Critical, or Decretoriall year of the
world, and therefore the liker to bring on some great manifest alteration with
it, as they consequently conclude. And what now if I should freely grant it to
be such a Climactericall year indeed, (which notwithstanding they have only
said, and cannot of likelihood prove:) is not every 7. year of the world such
an one? And have not many hundred such years already determined without any
such monstrous issues, or terrible calamities, as are now threatened? Or what
though some of the woorthiest, and most famous men that ever lived, died in
some such year of their age, must therefore the same years of necessity be
fatal to the universal frame of the world, which in regard of a few
observations, are reputed dismal to particular men? Yet have there no doubt as
many, and more, and as notable persons every way departed in other years of
their ages, as ever did in Climacterical, Enneatical, or great Climactericall
Enneaticall years, howsoever in respect of some Mathematical considerations,
and Physical circumstances, we may otherwise attribute sundry extraordinary
contingences thereunto. Or if happily all the premises were undoubtedly certain,
why should this, in any such contemplation, be more dreaded than any other of
the same note, already passed, or future hereafter, as is before touched? It
seems unto me that in the appearance of that reason, the year of Christ 87. or
of the world 49. last past, should rather have proved so terrible a year,
than this present, for so much as that was not only a Climactericall year,
according to their own reputation, and computation; but also a Climacterical
Hebdomaticall, or great Critical year, arising of 7. times 7. as is elsewhere
Obiter declared, whereunto this kind of Calculators in their Empiricall
obseruances, assigns much more credit, and authority, than unto any other
simple year of that sort.

Wherefore by this reason, and this reckoning, the last year 87. (and that even
according to their own Empirical maxims and grounds) should have proved the
great maine year whereupon they talk so much, and not 88. as is blown abroad.

What then? Shall we yield any greater credit unto these busy deuisers, than
unto the tales of some old superstitious, and some yoonger apish creatures, who
esteeming every Bissextile, or leap year more unlucky, and unfortunate than
the usual common years, imagine that this year may, and is like, in the
reach of their skill, to be dismal, and ominous, the rather even for that
cause? O ridiculous conceit, and more then rude blindness, unworthy the trial
of Truths touchstone!

There are also which will have 88. an intolerable wretched year, because it
is the 19. year, ab Anno 1570: and why may it not as well be a quiet, and
peaceable year, because it is the 20. year, ab Anno 69? Neither is it in
truth the 19. year Exclusive, or from it, as the words import; but Inclusiue,
or with it, there being but 17. years interposed between these 2. numbers. But
lo their great impregnable frame of Argumentation, and mighty Canon of their
credulous assertion.

When the number of the years of our Redemption, does comprehend the Golden
number of the same year, or e conuerso (to wit Quo ad numeru^ digitorum) in
all such years so long as this agreement houldeth, and in the 19. year after
the first equality (which number is the highest of the Golden, decemnouenall,
or Lunarie circle) there shall then per Consequent fall out many woofull
calamities, and horrible effects in the world:

But Anno 1570. there was such an agreement between the years of our Lord,
and the Golden number, (for 1. 5. and 7. make 13. which was the Golden number
of that year) and this 88. is the 19. year from that first concordance:

Ergo this year 88. there shall consequently fall out many woofull calamities,
and horrible effects in the world.

A learned and profound Syllogism, I warrant you: but albeit I see no
coherence of Art, reason, or sense in the substance of the Mayor proposition it
self: yet suppose by putting case, I would ascribe thereunto, as unto some
unknown, and secret mystery of Metaphysicall nature; and shall not the real
consequent of the event sufficiently confute both this Uerball consequent, and
antecedent, and their whole imaginatiue position? For what such dreadful
matters came there to pass in the years, 1570. 71. 72. 73. 74. 75. 76. and
the rest, when the very same agreement was most sensible, and evident indeed?
And shall they now be feared, or must they now necessarily be dreaded in
respect of a by circumstance annexed to that agreement, being in truth be sides
or beyond the compass of the essential Sympathy, and very platform it self?
Qui ea profert, quae nunqua^ experientia liceat co^probare, falsus est, and
ambitiosus: He which utters such judicials either in Astronomy, or any other
Art, as may not underly the trial or verdict of experience, is a false, and
ambitious fellow, as Cardane says (Seg. 5. Aph. 51.) Then shall not these be
registered in the Catalogue of vain falsaries, and aspirers, which set abroach
so causeles, and senseles conceits?

Besides the Minor proposition, or Assumption howsoever it may of it self
seem true, and certain in respect of the usual, and common Compute, yet in
case you consider the original causes, and final uses of the Golden number,
shall you not find the said esteemed number of that year vnapliable to any
such purposes, or intents, as Meton the son of Pausanias in Athens first
devised and published it? Or as it has sithence been accustomably used in the
Calendar? And how then, Ex falsis possint quae nisi falsa sequi. Of false, and
counterfeit simples, what will arise but false, and counterfeit compositions? I
may assure you to, that Meton himself never understood any such mystical
force, or concealed efficacy in his Golden Cycle, or Rule; as is here assigned
thereunto: for would he not think you, for his own special credit, and the
general benefit of other, have easily revealed so high a mystery, and greatly
triumphed therein, if himself had any way conceived it?

But what needs any farther inuectiue against so palpable a forgerie? Or what
are these cunning Syllogizers, or any like Sophistical concluders, but even
mere Cabalisticall coiners, and impostural wringers, making at their own
pleasure Quidlibet ex quolibet, numbers of ciphers, bodies of Atoms, or sun
motes, something of nothing? Sibb to the fantastical monk Rabanus, or the
conceited woman Valeria Proba, who gleaning sundry verses out of Virgils
heathen poetry, would needs bring together on an heap a goodly sheafe of
heavenly Divinity, and cunningly describe even Christ himself, with his most
sacred Evangelical mysteries, in Virgils own Heroicks, who never understood,
or once dreamed of any such Christian significations. A fond work of an idle
woman: but O fonder conclusions of these phantastique, and couenous workers of
mortal confusions!

Will you likewise hear the Prognosticall opinion of the old renowned
Leopoldus Austriacus, slain of the Heluetians, Ann. 1386. touching this same
year? Which some also allege for one doughtie argument of these pretended
sturs, and imagined alterations? When the 1. Call. of January (quoth he)
falls upon the day of the Moon (as very now it does) the winter that year
shall be indifferent: the spring temperate: summer hot: there shall be mighty
inundations, or ouerflowes by rage of waters in sundry places: many
infirmities shall reign, but such as shall especially sweep away the viler and
more popular sort: there shall arise much bickering, and contention amongst
women: the beginnings of many innouations and alterations shall appear:
matrones shall moorne: kings and princes shall perish: there shall be many
slaughters, and massacres with bloody dint of sword: much icie and pruinous
cold to be expected: Autumnall fruits shall be neither plentiful, nor sound:
and there shall be a great death of Bees.

Is not this perpetual Prognosticon think you, somewhat too durable, and over
general to be universally true? Or is there any proper reason according to
this common reason, why 88. should bring with it any other more terrible
effects, than the years 1554. 1560. 1565. 1571. 1582. etc. already passed,
seeing those years were in the selfsame state, or did accordingly fall out
even as this does now? Or should not every 5. or 6. year hereafter ensuing, if
the Intercalation of the Bissextile, or leap day ouerslip it not otherwhiles,
be such a wonderful year, by the same reckoning? O noble Leopold, thy
meaning (I doubt not) was simple and good, although thy rule other whiles
fails? But thy corrupt interpreters and commenters are undoubtedly false and
naught, seeking, or rather traveling to dismay, discomfort, and disorder the
world without cause?

But behold another jolly devise, touching the falling of Newyeeres day: When
Newyeeres day (quoth they) falls on a Monday, there insueth a winter somewhat
uncomfortable: a temperate summer: no plenty of fruit: many fantasies,
surmizes, and fables shall that year be opened: Agues shall reign: kings,
princes, and many other shall die: marriages shall be contracted, and hudled up
in most places: and a common fall of noblemen and gentlemen shall ensue.
Doubtless, these were cunning fellows, and perilous hoorsons indeed, else
could they never have hitten the nail so just on the head; for when were there
so many fancies, surmizes, and fables opened (according to their saying) as are
already, and shall hereafter appear to have been opened of, and in this
year? And I beseech you, did there ever any year pass wherein agues rained
not more, or less? Some kings, princes, nobles, gentlemen, and many other died
not? Or wherein many marriages were not contracted, celebrated, and sometimes
hudled up? Lo then the learned resolutions, and profound practices of these
opinitiue and contemplative masters, which notwithstanding their want of skill
and experience in such negotiations, will in their kind be meddling and
intermedling in affairs of grandest consequence, as well and as soon as the
wisest or deepest Politic, even in despite of the crow, according to the
proverb, or rather even in contempt of all good order and Civil discipline.

Peruse yet, for varieties sake, another of their perpetual, euerduring,
infinite, and Catholicall rules: they hold it for a Canonical and everlasting
certainty: that if Christmas day comes whilst the moon decreaseth, there
shall follow a hard and naughty year: and the nearer the latter end of the
moon that it comes, the woorser and harder shall the year prove, and so
contrariwise.

Rejoice then, O ye Coridons: Rest you merry, O ye Colin clowtes: Clap your
hands, O ye Lobilins. For lo a most plentiful and happy year awaiteth you:
seeing this last Christmas day falls whilst the moon increases, yea before
she reaches to the first quarter, which is all the luckier, and merrier by
your traditionall December marks? And sufficient to make 88. a prosperous and
gladsome year, if you credit the most autenticall records of your own
currantest soothsayings.

The good old Errans Pater, Erra Pater I should have said, with sundry like
ancient surebies, and old sokers, have set down many other such wholesome
rules, and goodly Maxims, in part appliable to 88. as truly no doubt, and as
necessarily to be effected that year, as the strange Calabrian news of the
reverend Astronomer and doughtie clarke, John Dolteta, Doleta I would say, were
accomplished in the year 87 immediately preceding.

But to leave such forlorn said sawes, and trifling gewgawes, and to wade a
little further into the profound deepes of this bottomless pit, and intricate
Labyrinth: where is the sound Divinity, or learned Humanity, from whence
these prophetical tidings, either Theologically, or Artificially may seem to
be derived? Or what else, what a Gods name is it, that should thus exceedingly,
and monstrously disquiet, and vex, and disguise, and plague, and crucify, and
torment the world this 88? May it be deemed either by ordinary learning, or
other extraordinary reason, that any higher power, or Secundeian godhead, or
superior Intelligence, or mighty spirit, or ouerruling angel presently
menaceth any such heinous mischeefes, tragical myseries, horrible hurly
burlies, huge desolations, dreadful, and insufferable, and hellish horrors, as
are strongly imagined? Why? Are we not even now (as verily I take it) according
to the mystical, and sound doctrine of Abbat Triteme (howsoever himself
mistaketh the matter, being overtaken with false Epochaes, and erroneous
Chronologies) under the government of Anael, the mild, and amiable spirit of
gentle Venus? Who began his third Regiment in the year of the world, 5315. the
31. day of January; and shall continue the same dominion until the year,
5669. and four months? Then is it like, that so loving, and sweet a spirit,
as that of Venus who was never so deified, or rather hominified as she is now a
days, will in the flower and pride of her brauest years, and as it were in
the perfect type, and highest degree of her sovereign gracious preeminence
over the world as well christened, as unchristened; suffer her angel so
spitefully, and cruelly to destroy, or afflict her gentle, and lovely creatures
in all nations, even her very tenderest ones, and dearest darlings, and
sweetest hearts, and lustiest bloods, and most courageous amarous knights, that
ever loved, or lived on earth? Or if peradventure her angel rules her, and
not she her angel, is it credible that he can find in his pure heart, to offer
the sweetest heart alive, and his daintiest charge of credit such open wrong,
and egregious indignity, as to assault her with extreme violence, or
interrupt her with any excessive rigor in the midst of the delicatest disports,
and deepest pleasures that ever she inioied from the beginning? Tantaene animis
caelestibus irae? Such festered rancor do Saints caelestiall harbor?


But to passover such pastimes, and to forget all such dalliances, (which
nevertheless shall never be forgotten in Venus regiment:) suppose we would
make a right serious, and earnest matter indeed of this Spiritual, or
Intelligentiall kind of Secundeian dominion: and Ex causis praeteritorum eadem
methodo futurorum interpretari, (according to the manner of our best
philosophers, and namely of Ioannes Stadius in his Conuersionum Chronologia)
what events may we now expect in this third government of Anael, which were not
by the same reason to be achieved in his first, and second regiment? And what
I pray you, or of what quality, and quantity were those precedent effects? Or
what notable events happened in the world, as namely in Europe, under those
prefixed times, and periods? Lo the express words, or very Text, of Tritemius
himself, upon the first reign, or dominion of this angel. Secundus mundi
gubernator Anael spiritus veneris, post Orifielem regere coepit, Anno mundi
354. Die 24 Iunij, and mundum similiter gubernauit annis 354. cum mensibus 4.
vz. vsque ad annum orbis conditi 780. Sub huius regimine Anaelis homines
coeperunt esse cultiores, domusque constituere, and vrbes, arts inuenire
manuales, opus textcinum, lanificium, hisque similia: carnis quoque
voluptatibus peramplius indulgere, vxoresque sibi pulchras assumere: Deum
obliuisci, and a naturali simplicitate in multis recedere, ludosque and
cantilenas inuenixe, cythera canere, and quicquid ad veneris pertinet rationem,
and cultum excogitare: durauitque ista in hominibus lasciuia vitae ad diluuium,
sumens argumentum prauitatis suae. That is (a little to help the unlearned
sort:)

The second governor of the world Anael the spirit of Venus began to rule after
Orifiel the angel of Saturn, in the year of the world 354. the 24. day of
June, and did likewise rule the world 354, years, and 4. months, namely until
the year of the worlds creation 780. under the regiment of this Anael, men
began to be more neat, and gallant; to build houses, and cities: to find out
manual arts, as spinning, weauing, clothworking, and such like. Item more
freely, and sensually to embrace the pleasures of the flesh: to take unto them
fair wives: to forget God: and to pass their natural simplicity in many
points: to invent pastimes, and songs; to play on instruments: and to devise
whatsoever might furnish, or increase venery: which wantonness, and
lasciuiousnes of life continued unto the flood, a worthy reward of such folly,
and wickedness.

Do you now find any such peremptory, or tragical Catastrophes in the course
of that first predominancy, as this prophecy of 88. menaceth under this third
dominion? Yet can we not deny but the world is even at this present affected
generally, (albeit in some more glorious, and exquisite manner) as hereby should
appear it was in those days. But behold also the mundane affairs, actions,
practices, enormities, and other contingences of the second government?

Nono autem ordine mundum rursus gubernare inchoauit Anael spiritus veneris,
Die 29. Nouembris, anno creationis coeli, and terrae, 2834. and praefuit annis
354. mensibus 4. vz. vsque ad annum mundi 3189. His temporibus, homines Deum
verum obliuioni tradentes, mortuos, and eorum statuas, pro Deocolere, and
honorare coeperunt, (qui error plusquam 2000. Annis mundum occupauit)
introducentes curiosos corporis ornatus, and varia genera musicalium
instrumentorum, homines rursus libidinem, and voluptatem carnis nimium
prosequuti sunt: statuas quoque and templa dijs suis homines hisce temporibus
instituentes, and dicantes. Incantationes, and maleficia temporibus istis
fuerunt excogitata per Zoroastrem Bactrianorum regem primum (and alios
diuersos) quem Ninus rex Assyriorum in bello superauit.

In the ninth course or order, Anael the spirit of Venus began his second
reign over the world, the 29. day of November, in the year from the creation
of heaven and earth, 2834. and reigned 354. years, and 4. months, to

now likewise have an end in the end of the said Trigon: When also the very son
of God himself, Jesus Christ our Lord, took upon him our humane nature, and
was incarnated. For 6. years before his most glorious nativity, there was the
very same kind of copulation in the extremity of Pisces, and beginning of
Aries. Neither has the like congresse sithence that time happened but once,
namely, during the empire of Chatlemaine, in the 789. year of our redemption.
And now the same conjunction again ensuing, does out of all doubt premonstrate
the second coming of the son of God and man in the majesty of his glory,
when we must render an account of our lives, and whole conversation. And
immediately after it follows: But under the government or empire of Charles
the great, the world could not be consummated, because not so much as 5000.
years were then expired: whereas now the influence and operations of this
present conjunction still continuing, the number of 6000. shall draw on apace,
which accords with the divine prophecy of Elias, affirming that the world
should persist, or endure 6000. years, of which sum the son of God shall
detract somewhat, who has promised that the later days should be abbreuiated,
or shortened for the elects sake. But if there remained yet another such
graund, or maine conjunction of the former planets to be expected, there should
almost 800. years more be required thereunto, which being added to the time of
this congresse would produce 6000. and almost 400. years, which were
manifestly repugnant to that prophecy.

Hitherto Leouitius; whereby appears what extraordinary effects, and
wonderful mystery that famous Mathematician ascribed to the forementioned
Planeticall copulation.

But before we take any farther, or perfecter view of the depth, or height of
his imaginatiue speculation, lo also the prejudicial, and peremptory censures
of another or two, as renowned for their profound skill these ways as the
former.

Gul. Postellus in his philosophical, mathematical, and theological
discourse of the new star 72. mentioning the 6* like great Conjunctions which
preceded that we have now in handling, according to his mystical learning
says, that Enoch was a great sign, or effect of the First: Noah in the
universal deluge of the Second: of the Third Dardanus the founder of Dardania,
as also Moises when with 600000* men he departed out of Egypt into Syria: of
the Fourth, the passage of the 10. tribes of Israel out of the holy land into
Samaria, with other like: of the Fifth, Christ the Messiah: and of the 6.
Charlmaine the emperor. But now (quoth Postell there) when the 7. Conjunction
comes, which at this present is scarcely 13. years differing from the
certain periode: Sabbatum profecto naturae faciet summopere impijs
formidandum, It shall certainly finish the Sabbath of nature, exceedingly of
the wicked to be dreaded.

A very resolute conclusion, and by his favor, ouerrash to determine so mighty
a case: besides some error, and uncertainty in the chronologies themselves.

Howbeit Helisaeus Reslyn remembering likewise those former conjunctions in the
24. Proposition of his new Meteorological Theory concludes also thus
difinitiuely, or rather peremptorily of this, as being in order the seventh:
Septima igitur cum nunc immineat, fiatque ex aequeo Trigono in igneum impijs
formidandum, pijs autem omnibus optatum permutatio; iudicandum certe illud
septimum, and vltimum Apocalypseos te^pus instare, quo Christus gladio
bicipiti, and spirituoris bestiam cum pseudopropheta interfecturus, Ecclesiam
suam liberabit, and breui Sabbatum naturae facturus est. Wherefore seeing the
7. conjunction is now imminent, and that there is shortly ensuing a shifting of
the watrie Trigon into the fiery, a change to be greatly feared of the
impious, and embraced of the godly: it is surely to be judged that seventh,
and last time of the Apocalypse to be at hand, wherein Christ with the two
edged sword, and spirit of his mouth, being to destroy the beast with the
pseudoprophet, shall deliver his church, and shortly dispatch, and accomplish
the Sabbath of nature.

Item in the very next Proposition he adds moreover, that for so much as
always Analogically under the watrie Triangle, sects, factions, and scismes
have been raised, as before Christ that of the Jews; and before Charlmaine
that of the Sarracens: like as in the fiery Trigon the truth has been
transplanted, and the former seminaries punished, as in the third Triplicitie
from hence the Jewish kingdom defaced, and Christ's kingdom founded: in the
other the Oriental church subverted, and this Occidentall established: it
remains greatly to be dreaded, that even the Occidentall church shall now
likewise, during the same cause, be woofully scourged, and plagued with like
terrible changes, and alterations, and the Gospel happily, yea happily to (as he
says) be translated into the barbarous Northeren nations, heretofore least
acquainted therewithal.

I might furthermore allege diverse other semblable authorities, or rather
opinions, touching the same point, as of Messahalah in his book De
Coniunctionibus planetarum Cap. 10. of Albumasar lib. 2. different. 9. and lib.
4. diff. 12. and lib. 6. diff. 12. De coniunctionibus magnis: Item in his Tract
De floribus in the chapter De scientiabellorum, and guerrae: Also of Alboazen
Haly Cap. 7. Part. 7. and cap. 4. Partis 8. of Guido Bonatus Part. 4. cap. 57.
of Ptolomey in the 63. Aphorism of his Centiloquium: likewise of
Regiomontanus, of Pontanus, of Stophlerinus, of Cardane, of Schonerus, of
Iunctinus, of Trapezuntius, of Garcaeus, of Dasypodius, of sundry other
neotericall mathematicians and modernists; in their Astrologicall works, and
other philosophical writings: but to what auailable intent, or purpose should
they be particularly, or expressly propounded? We need no more such dismal
wizards, I trow, or such terrible prophesieng creatures? For have not
Leouitius, Postellus, and Raeslyn said enough, and enough already? Nay, have
they not uttered too much, and threatened more a great deal than is either
actually to be feared of us, or substantially to be confirmed by themselves? Is
the shifting of a Trygon so perilous, and dangerous a matter, which ordinarily
falls out every 198 year, and a little more, to wit, less than half a
quarter of one year, howsoever there are commonly, but erroniously 240. years
ascribed thereunto? Or is the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter so heinous a
meeting, which happens usually every 19. year, 315. days, and 19. hours?
Or to descend to the very point it self, is their congresse in the end of the
watrie, and beginning of the fiery Trigon so ominous, and fatal, which
happens not preternaturally, or supernaturally, but according to the natural
course once every 800. years and somewhat less, and has already Six times
escaped, without any such universal unnatural myseries, or imperial
confusions?

What then were the best and soundest Astrologicall doctrine, to follow in
traveling, and discussing the true effect of this whole matter? Is not that of
Ptolomey in the 63. of his 100. Aphoristicall Sentences, or Maxims, the surest
or infalliblest way, being also accordingly approved, and observed of other
the cunningest dealers in this kind? Lotherfore the express counsel, and
direction of Ptolomey: Quum Saturnus and Jupiter coniunguntur, etc. When the
planets Saturn and Jupiter are conjoined, look which of them is superior at
the time of that conjunction, and pronounce thereof according to the quality,
and disposition of his nature. Of which Aphorism, what is the very meaning, or
resolution? Is it any other, than this, that if happily the fortunate planet
which is Jupiter be superior or mightier, you must in respect of that
superiority, or predominancie, pronounce fortunate events; like as if the
unfortunate planet Saturn be superior, you must in regard of his greater
puissance, pronounce unfortunate detriments? Well, go to then. Shall not now
the good sanguine Jupiter resiant in Pisces, even in his own mansion, command
Saturn his melancholique guest, and being master, or lord of the house dispose
his ungracious stranger, or soiourner at his own gracious pleasure? Or in a
manner like a courageous cock lustily crow over him in his own walk or
circuit? They define that in such a Corporal union he is superior who has
most essential prerogatives in the place of the Conjunction: and must not then
Jupiter needs here be extolled, and preferred above Saturn, who at that
instant is Peregrine, and out of all his essential dignities, or royal robes?
Marry peradventure you will object the authority of Alboazen Haly, that an
evil or mischeeuous planet when he is Peregrine is most unhappily, and woorst
of all disposed. Be it so indeed, yet Vltra posse, non est esse; and howsoever
he is inclined or affected to do mischief, if his power be not answerable to
his will, we need not greatly recke, or care for his maleuolous intention, or
affection. Besides the very same Haly too in another place (Cap. 4. part. 8.)
affirms, that Jupiter coupled with Saturn asswageth his malice, and
confounds his rancorous disposition: which although some will percase allege
to be generally spoken, yet is it not every way as particular, direct, and
artificial as the other opposed verdict?

But forsooth Haly Heben Rodoan, Trapezuntius, and Pontane in their
Commentaries upon Ptolomeis Centiloquium, in their exposition, or declaration
of the foresaid Aphorism have propounded another rule, and manner of
proceeding, according all in this point, that the superiority descried in that
63. sentence, should in this case be ascribed unto the planet, which at that
moment shall be highest elevated in his Epycicle, or in the nearest proximitie
to the Apogaeon, or summitie thereof: And how then may we deem, or judge of
this congres? That is a new question indeed, and by that interpretation we must
yield the preeminence unto Saturn, for was not he nearer the degree of his Aux
than Jupiter? And consequently Secundum Augem extolled above him. I cannot
tell, but in my simple skill, for so much as they likewise affirm, that a planet
the nearer he approaches unto the earth, the deeper are his impressions, and
rages more forcible, or powerable on earth: I see little reason why that planet
in this concourse should prevail most in operation, who is farthest removed
from the state of strongest influence; and effectual operation even this way
too, but especially in the forementioned manner. Besides, is not the corporal
presence it self of Jupiter one of the chief helps, and fortitudes which
Saturn has, and shall not he which augmenteth, or increases another might,
be still the mightier, according to the common Axiom, Quod efficit tale?
Howbeit there remains yet a third kind of Elevation, or superiority noted of
Guido Bonatus, and many other Astrologians, yea of all most commonly observed,
and most usually respected, which is by them referred unto the present
Latitudes of the planets so conioined, after this manner; that if it fortune
their Latitudes to be both Septentrionall, he whose Latitude is greatest, to be
the cheifest, or most sovereign: but if their Latitudes be both Meridionall,
then he to be preferred whose Latitude is least of the twain, etc. Which sort
of exaltation, Ioannes Ganiuetus seems only, or at least principally to have
respected, in his book entitled Amicus Medicorum, Cap. 1. different. 3. where
making mention of the great Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in the 13. grade
of Scorpio, Anno 1425. Ganiuetus affirms, that Saturn was then elevated
above Jupiter: why? Because as he there alleges:

Mayor fuit illius latitudo versus Septentrionem; His latitude was greater
toward the North: And shall not Jupiter now by the self same reason be
exalted above Saturn, because his Latitude is lesser Versus Meridiem, or
toward the South? Wherefore as Ganiuetus concluded, that much unwonted
trouble, and unaccustomed mischief should follow to the clergy by that
preeminence, may not we as well, and as truly by this prerogative pronounce on
the other side, some extraordinary prosperity and happy success, or
gladsome tidings to the said Ecclesiastical estate, or spiritual vocation? I
might still allege two or three other kinds of planetarie Elevation, used
amongst all Astrologers: but enough in proof, may seem sufficient in art; and
I nothing doubt, but that I may at length in regard of the premises boldly
determine, that Jupiter in the prefixed copulation was far more preualent or
predominant than Saturn, and consequently, that the consequents thereof are
principally to be derived from him; whose nature as it is generally right
bountiful, and very good, and his influence fortunate and luckie, so they are
at this time specially to be so reputed and esteemed, considering that himself
is so strongly configured, and so favorably disposed, as now all respects and
circumstances truly waied, he appears to be. What then follows? vz. that
this Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter is so far from working or enforcing any
such horrors, as this 88. prophecy pretends, that of all likelihood it
should seem rather (in case it has any notable significations at all) to
presignifie much final good, and great joy, or happiness in conclusion:
howsoever Saturn in the mean while may now, and then according to his small
power, and pro suo debili posse, begin or attempt petty treasons,
underminings, trecheries, practices, and other spiteful villainies, somedeale
agreeable to his pestilent, and rancorous nature.

Which judicial may otherwise also be verefied, and in part confirmed: for
touching the other moderators of that Conjunction, had not good loving Venus as
much to do therein as bad cholerique Mars? Who is as well lady of the great
Orb, as the other is Deuisor of the year? Or has not she as many, or rather
more essential prerogatives in the very place of Conjunction than he has?
Wherefore, neither in this respect, can there any great evils be feared, or
expected, when likewise the other fortune if not ouermatcheth, at least equally
matcheth, and counteruaileth the other infortune in strength, power, and value.

Wherefore to ouerslip this point: and to return unto the former censures of
Leouitius, Reslyn, Postell, and their adherents: I cannot sufficiently marvel
what moved so famous learned men in this faculty, to ascribe, or attribute so
exceeding much unto that silly Conjunction? As if there must necessarily ensue
either a final dissolution of the world, or at least I cannot tell what
strange innovation of laws, or translation of kingdoms, as occasioned, or
enforced thereby? But mark well the argument of Leouitius, which doubtless was
also the principal reason that persuaded the other: If (says he) there were
yet another Conjunction like this to be expected, then the prophecy of Elias
should be falsified, which undoubtedly is most true, and infallible: Ergo the
world must needs either be utterly dissolved, or woonderously disordered, under
the present Conjunction.

Which argument how artificial it is, being barely testimonial, or how
necessarily true, being founded upon a fallible sandy ground, it may
sufficiently appear by the former section, where the said pretended prophecy
of the suborned Elias, is both evidently, as I take it, detected, and as well
effectually, as plentifully confuted. Howbeit here by the way how apparent it
is, what notable errors, vanities, forgeries, and cosenages that one authorized
tradition of Elias has wrought, and how many, yea of the learneder sort have
been overtaken and beguiled therewith in respect of the reverend name, and
honorable antiquity: which has a long time been a continual stumbling block
to al Astronomicall, and Philosophical conjectures: for should he not have
seemed to cast beyond the moon, that would once have undertaken to speak, or
write any thing of a farther period than his putatiue Oracle prescribes?

But to return again, from whence I have a little digressed: touching the
decay, and ruin of the Roman monarchy, or Occidentall empire, whereof
Leouitius dreameth, how can he make Idem causam generationis and corruptionis
eiusdem? And is there not likewise another physical Axiom, that Quicquid
corrumpitur, a contrario patitur? As also that Simile a simili conseruatur, and
alitur? And as for the most glorious, and supernatural nativity of Jesus
Christ, which he containing himself within the compass of his profession,
seems to make an effect of the like natural Conjunction happening in the end
of the watrie, and beginning of the fiery Trigon, about 6. years before his
said incarnation: as I esteem this for a plain superstitious assertion, and
altogether irreligious: so I see as slender warrantie of reason, or authority,
why his church should be translated from the East unto the West, or his Gospel
otherwise transplanted, or his second coming determined, in respect of any
such astrologicall conjecture, when the science it self being Humane, and
Natural, has not any ascertained intelligence, or experience of such divine,
and supernatural unsearchable mysteries, which being only enrolled in the
great volume of Gods own secrets, cannot possibly by any secundary causes, or

pass, remitting the studious reader in this kind unto his foresaid
Commentaries.

Finally, such violent mutations, or mortal wars, and slaughters as
Leouitius and other have inferred, are they not the proper acts and effects of
Mars rather than of Saturn, as Messahalah says? Or is there at all any
Astrologicall science, or assured prediction of such Martial sturs and
garboils, which even Cardane himself (a great protector otherwise of this
prognosticall art) durst never auow? (Segment. 7. Aphor. 120.) Why then need
we fear any such sudden hurliburlies or confusions, from this Conjunction of
Saturn and Jupiter, where Mars has little to do in respect, who must play
such bloody and deadly feats? Or if he had never so much to do, why should we
be dismayed or discomforted thereby, when this art cannot any way determine of
such military and Martial events, being in this behalf no less uncertain,
Quam ipsi incerti bellorum exitus?

What then? May it be still imagined that the Conjunction of Saturn and
Jupiter was originally, or may consequently be reputed the true foundation of
this prophecy? Or that it is the liker to be true or credible, because that
concurreth therewith in effect? Neither is that, in any my knowledge, expressed
either by Leouitius, or any other favorer of that threatening said saw; so
that if there were indeed any such terrible coincidents to be ascribed or
imputed unto that congresse, we have yet no undoubted or assured proof, that
they should take place rather in 88. the year of this oracle; than in 87. or
in 89. or in any former or later year. Cardane in his Commentaries upon
Ptolomeys second Apotelesmaticall book, Cap. 9. Text. 54. writes, that the
effects of such a Conjunction take place, and hold out until another
Conjunction, or at least until such time as the said planets shall be in
Opposition; but he makes no certain difference, or distinction of years; and
Leopoldus Austriacus affirms, that the year it self shall be the worse
wherein the Conjunction appears: but Albumazar (2. diff. tract. 1.) auoweth,
that the significations of this Conjunction happening in the watrie Trigon, are
procrastinated or prolonged until after six Conjunctions immediately ensuing.
How then by any of these observations, or other like determinations, shall the
consequents of the Conjunction 83. be appropriately and singularly reduced, or
particularized to the year 88?

Besides, the present prophecy threateneth either an universal consummation,
and final dissolution of the world, or at least a general subversion and
alteration of principalities, kingdoms, monarchies, and empires; whereas not the
greatest Conjunction of superior, or inferior planets that ever did, or shall
happen, can by any artificial argument, or intelligible conceit, extend the
force, or prevail any farther than such places only, and such territories as
are under the subjection of the sign of the Copulation, or at the uttermost
under the partition of that Quadrangle, whereof the sign of the Conjunction is
presently recounted. Wherefore neither that way can 88. be so terrible a year
because of the Conjunction, as the prophecy specifieth; nor the Conjunction at
any time so terrible in works, as the prophecy in words appears to be. Which
either in respect of the Annual Progression thereof, or the consent it has
with the Reuolutions of this year, or with Eclypses hereafter mentioned (which
kind of natural Accidents (Eclipses I mean) are by the sounder doctrine of
Ptolomey, the principal effecters, or abrogaters of the Consequents of such
Conjunctions) or any like present circumstance, or coincident consideration; as
it is unlike extraordinarily, or excessiuely to afflict this year, unless
peradventure now and then with some unaccustomed cold, and decay in the fruit
of the earth; so needs it not (in my simple opinion) to be finally regarded,
or commonly feared as any notable, or powerable author of the pretended
Martial calamities thereof.

How then? Are there yet remaining any other farther causes, or artificial
likelihoods of such imminent calamities? Be there any forcible or notable
Eclipses, or fiery Comets to be seen, or the sights thereof being already
passed, are there any such to take deep root, or mighty effect this year?
To which alone, as to the most natural causes, or most effectual Arguments of
future horrors, Ptolomey, and with him the soundest Mathematicians ascribe most
certain, and actual significations? Indeed there was an Eclipse of the Moon
the last year 87. the sixth day of September being Wednesday, about 38. Minutes
after 8. a clock at night: but what? Can that work any such consequents,
being but a Partile not a Total Eclipse? Or are not the effects thereof
already in a manner consummated? Besides, who is chief governor, or disposer
thereof? Was it not Jupiter? And what, I pray you, are his significations, when
he so rules? Peruse the 8. chap. of Ptolomeys 2. Apotelesmaticall book, and
shall you not there find that Jupiter deliquij assequutus dominium generaliter
rerum omnium incrementa contribuit: sed peculiariter hominibus largitur
gloriam, corporis salubritatem, animorum tranquillitatem, gaudia, pacem,
bonorum copiosa subsidia; with such like wished prosperities and blessings? And
what may be deemed more ioifull, fortunate, or happy, than these Iouiall
contributions and bounties? Howbeit some will still object, that the unlucky
Mars was partaker with him in this government, in respect that he was lord of
the Term and Decane, wherein the Eclipse happened: but what if he were
principal governor too, so he hurt, or annoy us not? And how can he hurt, or
annoy us this way, when the date of the force or operation of the Eclipse it
self is already worn out? Or alas, how silly should the effects of any such
Defect have been in comparison of the grievous and huge terrors of this
prophecy; albeit Mars or Saturn himself had been sole disposer thereof, and
his most malicious, despitefull, and rancorous actions continued most part of
the whole year? Wherefore it is not this Lunarie, or a far greater Eclipse
that so mightily must do the deed, or verify this prophecy. But pawse there
awhile: I hope you cannot gainsay but that it may notwithstanding help somewhat
toward the working of such a Tragedy. Neither are you yet thoroughly entered
into the very depth of the matter: for lo in the selfsame year 88. three other
eclypses also imminent: Yea, that which is more, you shall have two of them in
one month: and what is, or may rightly be said more fearful, or tragical
than such a reckoning? The Sun shall be eclipsed the 16. day of February at
the change; and shortly after, at the very nextfull, namely the second day of
March there shall follow a Total Eclipse of the Moon: and does not the famous
Messahalah (Libello de coniunctionibus planetarum, and rebus Eclipsium, Cap.
7.) give general judgment; Quod in Eclipsi Solis non poterit fieri quin
significetur magnum aliquod accidens in mundo: That it cannot choose, but there
must needs follow some great accident in the world after an Eclipse of the
Sun? And does not the most ancient, and renowned Hermes Trismegistus awarde
this particular peremptory definitive sentence, (Aphoris. Centiloquij 53)
Plurima in mundo fient incommoda, quando in vno mense accidet vtriusque
luminaris Eclipsis? There ensue manifold incombrances, or mischiefs in the
world when the luminaries, that is the Sun, and Moon, are both eclipsed in one
month? What say you now to these judicials, or how dare you contradict, or
gainsay such threatenings? Indeed it is very true, there are three Eclypses to
happen in this year, and two of them within the space of one month: neither
can I deny but Messahalah, and Hermes, have written as is before specified;
whereunto also accords Pliny in the second book of his Natural History,
Cap. 30. and even Virgill to in his Georgiques, as notably, and significantly,
as any of the former, where amongst sundry other apparances, signs, or
prognostications of humane affairs, he reckons Solis defectum, for one,
after this manner expressly, worth the noting:

Sol tibi signa dabit, Solemn quis dicere falsum
Audeat? Ille etiam caecos instare tumultus,
Saepe monet; fraudemque, and operta tumescere bella.
that is by my hasty translation:

The Sun yields signs: who dares falsify the Sun? He notes blind tumults;
and foretells fraudulent attempts, With fostred garboils, before they swel to
their outrage. But now pause you a while: for does not Messahalah himself in
that very place above recited, add moreover, by way of distinction, Secundum
quantitatem ipsius eclipsis, hoc est, vt sit ex quarta corporis solis, vel
supra? That the event of the said Solarie defect shall be but according to the
quantity of the

even those effects too which it shall utter, shall not be set abroach until
toward the very later end of the year, being then, and about the beginning of
the next year 89. especially and cheesly to prevail; by which time the date
of the wonderful propheste shall be welnigh determined.

Finally, to conclude this point with the saying, or rather Axiom, and
principle of Cardane (Seg. 7. Apho. 121.) Nulla Eclipsis, etc. No Eclipse
(howsoever total or universal) can portend universal calamities, or threaten
the whole world with general future mischeefs: whose consequents regularly are
always to inure, or take place in such only regions, territories, and cities,
as are obnoxious, or subject Deliquij ipsius signo, vel tetragano, vel
diametro: as is generally agreed upon, by the best Mathematicians, and
cunningest Professors in this faculty.

Wherefore, we must yet look farther about us, and inquire after sounder
proofs, for the establishing of this Oracle, if we would have it allowable,
and justifiable by Scientificall Arguments, or any artificial collections.

Then, to come once again to the right Astronomicall doctrine of Ptolomey: he
in the 98. of his 100. Aphoristicall sentences directed unto his brother Syrus;
assigns the second place of tragical significations unto Comets, or blazing
stars: what? Are there any such sterie exhalations to be kindled this 88? Or
must we be daily expectants of new Comets? Surely formine own part, as I see
not any ordinary or extraordinary, natural or preternaturall causes,
Meteorologicall or Astronomicall, concurring toward the present working, or
furnishing of any such sterie apparition this year: nor indeed any such
probable likelihoods, as might in some years immediately passed, have
artificially been alleged, to presume upon such a matter: so neither is there
in my knowledge by reading, or otherwise; any like Meteore already passed,
still remaining to be effected: for albeit I should favorably allow of their
counsel, which have advised a continual observation of every Critical year
from the strange new star which appeered in Cassiopeia, Anno 1572. as though in
every such year there were still some notable unaccustomed Accidents to be
expected; yet for so much as 88. cannot be reputed any such Critical year from
that star; as there is therefore no singular, or special note to be taken
thereof, so are there not any singular, or special effects of any such cause
to be seriously looked for therein. What? What then I beseech you, is it, or at
least what may it seem to be, that should thus, and thus maruellously disguise
the world this 88? Is there no apparent natural, or philosophical argument to
confirm our affiance, or rather presumption, reposed in this oracle? Is it
credible, that it was either privately framed, without reason, or commonly
published without warrantize of some worthy testimonies, Divine, or Humane?
But alas Divine we can allege none either directly, or indirectly in this
behalf, as is sufficiently declared in the former Section: why then? Must
there not yet of necessity lurk some secret abstruse physical causes, or
mathematical inclinations, as they term them? For, Si effectus est, and causa
praecessit? As every man's logique, and philosophy can readily tell you.

How now? Is there happily any commutation of the great Orb? Or is there any
concourse, or congresse of the 8. and 9. supernall Orbs? Or is there the
shifting of any Absis from one sign into another, which are indeed of great
and memorable consequence, as Cardane testifies? Or perhaps are the superior
planets conioined in the first Term of Aries, whereof Guido Bonatus makes so
very especial reckoning? Or is the Sun in his greatest, or least
Excentricitie, or is the Center of his Eccentrick come Adalterutrum quadrantem,
terminumque mediocrem, which both Ioachimus Rhaeticus, in his first Narration
of Copernicus Reuolutions, and Cornelius Gemma eftsoons stands so exceeding
much upon? As if forsooth the Periods of states, monarchies, and kingdoms, yea
of the whole universal world it self, depended upon the course of that little
Circle, as the very true, and right wheel of fortune? Or is it peradventure
to be supposed, that the Vertical, Perpendicular, or Topicall stars have now
conspired together to desolate, or oppress the several regions which they
aspect? Or what other graund astrologicall, natural, or supernatural
consideration remains? Or finally what other peremptory judgment, or
Neronian tyranny are we to underly? Or Quid tandem magni monstri alit, qui tam
horrendas canit ambages, antraque remugit? For as for these later
circumstances, observations, and censures of Cardane, Bonatus, Rhaeticus,
Gemma, and other their sectaries; as I know not any of them to enure, or to be
expected; so if percase they were presently in Esse, neither could any of them,
(notwithstanding all their greatness, or mightines) work any such great maine
universal terrors, as the prophecy portendeth.

And what then should we esteem of particular Configurations, or peculiar
Caelestiall theames, which Ptolomey wishes us to observe in Annual
Reuolutions, or at the several times of the Suns entrance into any
Aequinoctiall, or Solstitiall point? Does not the face of the heavens vary with
the region, and by consequent, the significations, and prognosticates? Marry
but what say you by this, that the full Moon immediately preceding the Suns
ingresse into Aries (which Ptolomey also wills to be observed) is there
eclipsed: does not even the said Ptolomey himself make a special great matter
of such an Accident? I deny it not: nevertheless what is that to 88. it self,
when the Eclipse takes no place, as is before showed? Besides, we may remember
the same event too, to have often happened without any such strange news, or
woonderous tidings, as are now blown abroad: as of late years, Anno 1569. the
third day of March there was an Universal Eclipse of the Moon at the
Praeuention next before the Suns recourse into Aries: Item Anno 1579. (which is
somewhat more dreadful) there was a great Eclipse of the Sun at the Change
immediately going before his ingredience into the said Aequinoctiall point: but
what such rufull, or marvelous matters insued either of these? Wherefore it
must of necessity be a more strange and wonderful accident than this, that
should atcheeue, or bring forth such mighty Consequents.

Well, but is there not yet a more perlous doubt behind? For is not frowning
and froward Saturn lord of the year, and (which makes all the worse) is he
not seated in a Fixed sign of the earthly Triplicitie, and direct in an Angle?
Which by the opinion of the worthy Messahalah (lib. de Reuolutione Annorum
mundi, Cap. 48.) presignifieth great contention and wars, with a murrian and
rot amongst cattle? Also by the censure of Almansor (Propositionum ad
Sarracenorum regem, 42.) a grievous mortality amongst men, and very small
increase or prosperity in the fruits of the earth? What though I confess all this to be true? Is Saturn Genius localis, or Demon Topicus omnibus gentibus?
Or is he lord of the year universally over, or in, or throughout al countries?
Or does he work in all places alike even where his dominion extends? Which
dominion or power, as it follows in the forementioned book, and chapt. of
Messahalah is only, In ea terra, in cuius signo proprie fuerit: Wherefore as
all his, or any other mischeeuous significations, prefigured by the present
celestial position, are wholly to be effected in such nations, territories, and
cities, as are under the government of Taurus and Aries; so even there also
shall they chiefly prevail over such creatures, as are of the more popular and
baser sort, amongst whom not only penury and dearth, but also the plague, and
sundry other grievous infirmities may fortune to reign; and peradventure some
peevish, or rusticall murmurings, treasons, rebellions, and trecheries be set
abroach, which notwithstanding shall be as like to procure any graund
innovation, by disordering kingdoms, and turning principalities topsie turuie;
as such mean obscure persons, and silly creatures are like to prove kings,
princes, lords, or honorable counselors of royal majesty. I am not ignorant,
that some ascribe the preeminence of the celestial figure, and government of
this year unto bloody Mars; suppose it so indeed, at least by putting case,
(albeit I see no Astrologicall reason or authority of that resolution) yet if
his present state be duly considered, and his whole ability truly examined
according to the grounds of their Judicial proceedings; shall you not find his
violent affection to be brideled and qualified in such sort, that he is greatly
unlike to infect, terrify, or astonish the world with any such sanguinarie, or
horrible garboiles, as other whiles he portendeth? Where thorough his unlucky
configuration he may cruelly play his bloody part? I appeal to themselves,
that have at all adventures appointed him lord of the year, if his woonted
fiercenes and rage be not (even according to their own learning) so assuaged,
and abated, that he cannot execute the fury of his cruel nature, or enforce
his Potentiam in actum.

I might discourse upon diverse other configurations, and sundry
constellations, under the Reuolutions of this year: but for so much as they are
either to prevail only in the air, (whose unseasonable disposition, and
lamentable distemperature, I more suspect and fear, than five or ten such
prophesies:) or to work in other foreign nations, rather than in our
country: or not at all to take any root or impression this year; or to touch
the meaner and baser sort, rather than the higher powers: or to make work
rather for physicians and chirurgians, than for soldiers or captains; as also
for sailers by sea, rather than for travelers by land: or to bring forth
private suspicions, ielousies, grudgings, and murmurings, not public
mutinies, bickerings, skirmishes, or battles: or finally, rather to raise vain
rumors, and counterfeit shadows of horrors, than any violent expeditions, or
maine garboiles indeed; and therefore nothing powerable, or not half forcible
enough, to verify or enact the wonderful dependences of the notorious
oracle; I take it best and meetest, to omit them, as no more in effect
hastening, or importuning any such universal, or national Tragedy this year,
than those fantastique prophetical Constellations of Ambrose Merlin, as
appliable in a manner to every year, as to any year, or rather to none as to one:

Splendour Solis Electro Mercurij languebit, and erit horror inspicientibus:
Mutabit clypeum Stylbon Arcadiae: vocabit Venerem galea Martis:
Galea Martis vmbram conficiet: and transibit terminos furor Mercurij:
Nudabit ensem Orion ferreus: vexabit nubes Phoebus aequoreus:
Exibit Jupiter licitas semitas: and Venus deseres statutas lineas:
Saturni syder is liuor pluendo corruet, and falce recurua mortales perimet:
Bissenus numerus domorum syderum destebit hospites, ita transcurrere omittent:
Gemini complexus solitos and vrnam in fontes prouocabunt:
Pensa Librae oblique pendebunt donec Aries recurua sua cornua supponat:
Cauda Scorpionis procreabit fulgura: and Cancer cum Sole litigabit:
Ascendet Virgo dorsum Sagittarij: and flores Virgineos offuscabit:
Currus Lunae turbabit Zodiacum: and in fletum prorumpent Pleiades:
Officio iam nulla redibunt: sed clausa ianua in crepidinibus Ariadne delitebit:
In ictu radij exurgent aequora: and puluis veterum renouabitur:
Confligent venti diro sufflamine: and sonitum inter sydera conficient.
I, but what say you now to certain other correspondent interpretations, and
deep collections in a more Theological, or rather Metaphysicall vein, namely
to that of Gul. Postellus, who taking upon him to expound, and define the
Time, Times, and half a Time mentioned by Daniell the prophet, and John the
Divine, makes up the mouth of this prophesier, and fitteth his turn so iumpe
with 5550. years, that in case we would entertain either the Text of the one,
or the Gloss of the other as auerrable; we should consequently believe,
(notwithstanding all the premises) this very year to be that Fatal, yea
that Final year indeed, which so preiudicately it is supposed to be? Wherein
can you either justly improoue his Divinity, or truly falsify his
Chronology?

Touching his Divinity, as he is no Divine by profession, or faculty, so
alas, both here and elsewhere we might happily doubt whether he deserve the
reputation of an upright, and sound christian or no? But what is his
Chronology? vz. that by the Time are signified 1656. years: by the two Times
1547. years of the Law, and 1547. years of Christ, by the half Time, half
the first Time, or 800. years.

Well concerning the Time, as it is, and may lawfully be called in question,
whether the space of 1656. years, Ab orb condito, ad inchoationem diluuij: be
the determinate, and precise time of Daniels prophetical, and John's
Apocalypticall meaning; or whether some secret period not so easily
conceiueable, or determinable, be understood: so touching the first of the two
Times which he compriseth under the Law, containing 1547. years, is it not
differing or disagreeing above 30. years from the true Computation? And who
knows not what years are passed over, and above 1547. fithence the first
Time of Grace by Christ Jesus?

Lastly, concerning the half Time, which Postellus terms half the first
Time, as twice 800. will not make up 1656 years: so if we account the said
half Time from the Deluge to the promulgation of the Law, which is the usual
Chronologicall reckoning of such Paraphrasts; shall we not there too miss so
much of his Compute, as will suffice to frustrate or annihilate his peremptory
conclusion?

Wherefore, how vain, and frivolous are we to repute Postels devise?
Especially being also confuted with the like Theological construction, or
exposition of some other, in the abundance of his own humor: which alleging
the first Adam as a type, or figure of a second Adam; and withal, that Christ
himself the great prophet of prophets foretold in his Gospel, that the
coming of the son of man should fall out, or be, as were the days of Noah;
conclude according to the profound formalitie, and materialitie of their
mystical Theology, that when the same number of years (which was from the
creation of the world when Adam was made, to the universal inundation of Noah's
flood) should be expired after the time of our redemption by Christ: then the
final conflagration, and fiery Deluge of the same world was likewise to
approach: and consequently that even as then, Anno ab orb condito 1656. the
faithful Noah and his family were corporally preserved from that maine
ouerflow, and outrage of waters, all the world beside being drowned: so now
after the like term, or period of years from Christ, the elect and true
christian generation should spiritually receive the definitive sentence of
infinite bliss, the other being cast over into a reprobate sense, and damnable
state, their final judgment of horrible, and endless torments. To which
comparatiue argument in the same kind, if any credence be respectively to be
yielded, (which nevertheless I wholly commit to the consideration of sounder
Divines, than I account these) are there not yet 68. years to be fulfilled
after the date as well of Postels post, as of the period of the 88. oracler?

Othersome, as wisely no doubt, and as theologically imagine, that look how
many usual years Christ walked upon earth at his first coming into the
flesh, so many Iubilaeall years of his spiritual, or mysficall presence in
the church should likewise expire before his second coming to judgment:
recounting then according to this conceited comparison 34. years of Christ's
personal continuance amongst us, as Gerardus Mercator does, and consequently
reckoning so many Iubilaeall, or triumphall years sithenee his coming; shall
you not find the said sum of Iubilaeall years to extend just unto the year
1700? By which Proportion likewise there remain yet 112. years to be
accomplished hereafter, contrary to the mind both of Postell, and the
imposturall prophet, with the superstitious adherents, and credulous favorites
of both?

And when shall Sibilles lamb be generally known, or universally embraced?
When shall there be found but one shepherd, and one sheepefold? When shall
Sauanorolaes great conqueror be conducted over the Alps like unto Cyrus, or
Hannibal, ransacking and vanquishing Italy? When shall the Jews, Turks,
Tartars, and Moors be converted unto the faith, and won unto Christ? Does not
Florence flourish still? Or is not Rome roomeful even at this instant? And are
not these with a 1000. other prophesies of semblable note, to be effected, and
completed, before any final dissolution may actiuely be achieued, or passiuely
felt?

Wherefore well fare the late pope Gregory the 13. that new reformer of the
Calendar: who with his Mathematical, and other Assistants, seems to have
made little, or no account of this 88. prophecy: for in case they had any
thing esteemed thereof, surely they would never so scrupulously have busied
themselves in making the 4900. 5000. 5100. 5300. years after Christ no
Bissextiles: which are almost 4000. year hence; or so religiously have
extended their presupposed perpetual Canons to the 40000. year after Christ,
which so far amounts the date of this silly prophesy, as also of the graund
Oracles of Elias, Orpheus, Hylarie, Lactantius, Policarpe, and the rest, that
they draw on well nigh unto Platoes maine year, and may peradventure be
strained to ratify the most fantastical opinions, and heretical resolutions
of the obstinatest or desperatest Aristotelians, Plinians, Inlianists,
Lucianists, Machiauellifts, Pagans, and Atheists in the world.

Lo here how contrarily the head and feet of the same body are affected? For
who ever from time to time have been so common publishers, or busy aduancers
of this, and such like glozing pretended predictions, as some of those, or
their predecessors, which begin now to write of 35000. years to come? But
this, even this is the assurance, or certainty of such goodly prophesies: and
this, even this is the manner of the jolly proceeding of such doughtie prophets,
bravely disposed to terrify and skar the world with the marvelous travel or
parture of mountains, which in fine bring forth nothing but ridiculous mise,
or apish toies to make sport withal. O mighty Politiques! O venerable and
egregious Doctors! Or rather, O vain Phantasts, and fond Dotterels! Which make
themselves the common proverbs, and public laughing stocks of the world,
whilst every Grammar scholar may skoffingly demand of the best amongst them,
as namely even of this famous 88. oracler: Quid dignum tanto feret hic
promissor hiatu?

I might easily enlarge these matters, and manifoldly eloine this particular
Section, upon 88. but their best and weightiest arguments, collections,
imaginations, and whatsoever allegations or motives, being proved so illusorie
indeed; so ridiculous in show; and so absurd in both; (even much like the
shifting Elenches, and Paralogismes of Sophisters, and namely that old stale
conclusion: Baculus stat in angulo, ergohospes meus est Nebulo:) what
effectual or auailable account is to be made of the woorst and lightest? May
not every reasonable scholar of any reckoning, with no great difficulty add
diverse other material reasons and testimonies, as well Divine and Canonical,
as philosophical, mathematical, and such like of artificial consideration,
both in general discredit, and in particular disgrace of the said imaginatiue
and fantastical terrors? How readily might I, or any other confute this
prophecy, with other prophesies, as namely by conference and examination of
the circumstances of Elias own prophecy (whence notwithstanding it seems
primitiuely derived) and no less specially by sundry, and almost infinite
other pretended prophesies, old said sawes, antique prognosticates, and
shepheardly soothsayings, which are not any farther to be dreamed upon; or any
way, more or less, either to be hoped or feared, in one respect or other, in
case this instant prophecy deserves any heedfull, or behoouefull regard. But
I take it not greatly worth the labor either of meditation, or of writing, to
wade any deeper or farther, in so needless and bootlesse a fancy. For does it
not already sufficiently appear, what private or public credit is in reason
to be assigned unto the said notorious Epigram, or rather poetical Satyr,
and hypocritical Libell, in respect of any natural causes, or preternaturall
speculations, or artificial arguments, or inartificiall authorities, or
whatsoever colorable pretense of divine or humane allowance? Of whose both
general, and special maintenance or patronage, it is utterly destitute before
God and man; and therefore accordingly to be esteemed or valued in the world,
chiefly of the learneder, discreeter, or godlier sort. I shall not need to
repeat or recapitulate any proofs, or testimonies prealledged in the former
part. It is actual impiety and blasphemy, to presume into Gods office, or to
usurp any his propriety, who alone is singularly termed in Scripture (...) as
the only searcher of the heart and raines. Men's intentions, purposes,
enterprises, actions, or exploits, are not so easy, or so possible to be
discovered, or presignified aforehand, as the good simple creatures of the
world, have been stoutly and resolutely born in hand: especially in so cunning,
so pragmaticall, so dissembling, and so hypocritical an age, as this, wherein
one thing is commonly pretended, and nevertheless the clean contrary often
intended: a subtle and wily quality, as it were appropriately noted in
Tiberius the Emperor. Inward drifts and Civil effects are not necessarily,
directly, or properly to be descried, or foreseen by outward signs, or natural
causes. In such Politic matters, and Moral occurrences, I deny not but the
wisest, and deepest politiques may otherwhiles, even with credible, and
warrantable judgment, give a shrewd guess, and go near the mark: but neither
can any man, howsoever prudent, or politic himself, therein or thereof
deliver any sure or infallible doctrine: (at least so far, as I can conceive by
reading Aristotle's politiques, and other correspondent discourses:) or
howsoever possible that may be deemed, it becomes not one of my age,
profession, experience, or other quality, to undertake so great a province, or
to decide so high and doubtful a case: namely, by requisite suruiew, and
curious examination of the universal proceedings of states, and particular
dealings of princes, and their subjects; both amongst themselves, and with
their neighbor borderers; at home, and abroad; in peace, and in their wars; for
and about all affairs, and actions of public or private government:
whereupon any such notable casualties, or woonderful confusions and overthrows
of Commonwelths might possibly seem to depend, in regard either of necessary
assurance, or contingent probability. It belongs unto me in good modesty
and duty, to commit the due consideration, and whole consequence of such
politic Causes and Effects, to professed Politicians, wise Magistrates, and
learned Councellers, accordingly qualified, and furnished for the meet and
sufficient discharge of so honorable emploiment: but chiefly unto God himself,
the high and mighty prince of princes, and governor of governors: by and
through whom kings rule, and kingdoms flourish, as contrariwise without whose
gracious aid and assistance they soon perish, and come to extreme ruin.
Howbeit in the mean time, and by the way, I nothing doubt but princes (of all
other) and such politic personages, as they have nearest about them, are as
thoroughly provided, and strongly furnished to maintain the public weal of
their native countries, and to uphold their own honors; as withal they are
best able to answer for themselves, and to defend their own causes both in
words and deeds. The world was never wiser, or more industrious to provide, or
shift for it self, either by policy, or force, either in procuring good, or
in resisting evil.

It were but folly in my betters, but presumption in me, but vanity in both;
Tam memores monere. No doubt but cunctamundi imperia, will warily, and
circumspectly enough look about them, and take requisite heed unto themselves:
and according to the Lacedaemonian proverb, Suam quisque spartam ornare: as
also according to the common, but serious, and important counsel; Pugnare pro
Patria. Especially her most excellent Majesty, whose not only wise, and
cautelous, but also rich and mighty provision, partly for all kind of
munitions, partly for other necessaries, as well defensiuely, as offensiuely
imployable against whatsoever foreign force, or hostile malice; far passes any
like preparation, or fortification of her most puissant, and royal ancestors:
as expressly appears in an Act of Parliament, made Anno 27. Elizab. c. 29. So
that even in such Civil respects, and Politic considerations, (to speak
thereof in general) we are not greatly to dread any such rufull or tragical
terrors, as are here more horribly threatened, than considerately denounced, or
skilfully awarded: unless peradventure we will needs be More afraid than hurt.

Notwithstanding, I wholly relinquish that actual, and real kind of
confutation, as merely appertaining unto those of higher calling; and
altogether containing my self within my stinted compass, I am only to urge,
and prosecute such arguments, and conclusions, as either Natural,
Mathematical, Theological, or other Doctrinall principles, and observations
may readily afford. Which both severally, and jointly make so exceeding much
against this terrible prophesieng libell, that as by report it was first odly
found in an old stony wall, after the disguised manner and fashion of those
suborned counterfets, mentioned in the former Section, and there forsooth
registered in glass; (a fit metal for the preserving of such brittle, and
fickle stuff:) so it cannot justly but seem a worthy monument, to be
accordingly entertained and esteemed, even no otherwise, than the foresaid
suborned counterfets: which no doubt were either maliciously, and spitefully
contrived; or couenously, and imposturally conveyed; or at least conceitedly,
and phantastically devised, either for pleasure, or displeasure, or some
by-aduantage, or other. Nimirum, Pictoribus atque Poetis (as Horace says)
Quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas. And thus much breefly touching
the threatening and odious Satyr of that terrible prophet, or rather poet,
whosoever he was, that forged the said vain, and frustratorie Epigram.

The conclusion of this latter part.
WHerefore, albeit happily I should yield with Origin, that the beautiful, and
glorious face of the heavens, is as it were an open book, and legible volume,
wherein we may manifoldly read of things past, things present, and things to
come: neither withal can I deny, but must in regard of certain natural, and
artificial directions, and circumstances of special note, affirmatively
grant, that there want not some probable likelihoods indeed, and some apparent
significations, or preparatiues, of a Tragedy ensuing in the world, and that
also even such a one, and so notable a Tragedy for certain furious, and busy
parts; as has not often been played upon this mortal stage, and frail
Theater: yet for mine own simple opinion, I am undoubtedly resolved, and fully
persuaded, according to good warrants of learning, that this 88. shall at the
uttermost prove but the Prologue thereof, howsoever in some other year not
far hence, there may peradventure (by physical, and mathematical conjectures,
rightly drawn from the due observation of certain fearful Eclipses, and
such like Natural causes, hereafter following, which deserve to be accordingly
noted, and regarded after the sounder, and truer doctrine of Ptolomey)
howsoever I say, not many years hence, there may perhaps, some shrewd
Epilogue, or at least some perilous issue of such troublesome and tragical
acts, finally be expected. Howbeit, if we considerately weigh, or respect the
grounds of that Art, which awardeth such judicials, and prognosticateth such
future events, shall they not also be rather discoursiuely talked upon, and
compassionately pitied, then sensibly felt, or passiuely endured amongst us in
England? But whatsoever may casually happen, or shall occasionally befall,
either here, or elsewhere, Si Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos? If God stand on
our side, who shall be able to withstand him, or prevail against us? What man,
or devil shall have power, once to injury, or to hurt us? Hitherto not only
the four Elements, and seven planets (as they say) but also Ipse ether pro
nobis militauit, non contra nos; the very heavens themselves have taken our
part, and have puissantly warred, or fought, not against us, but on our side:
as I beseech God they may hereafter still, and still, even ever and ever
continue our gracious friends, and favorable allies, both in war, and peace; in
camp, and town; in the field, and in our own houses. He is the Lord of
Hosts; and they are his valiant and mighty soldiers, even his invincible and
victorious soldiers: but is not the same Lord of Hosts, also the God of
Sabbath? And are not the same mighty soldiers, also the gentle and loving
Iusticers of his peace, of his most precious and sovereign peace, which
passes all understanding? Now let us all entirely and zealously say Amen, and
Amen unto that peace: and shall we not assuredly and inuiolably enjoy the
sweet felicity of his blessed Sabbath, and our own happy repose; as the
only final, and invincible security of good princes, loiall subjects, and
durable states? What is the conclusion of the foresaid counterfeit prophets
themselves? Say they not one while thus? A treaty of Peace there shall be
taine:
And after fair weather, we shall have rain.
Another while thus after a more ioiful and constant manner? Then truth shall
come, and blow his horn:
And laugh falsehood for ever to scorn.
And finally thus, as it is touched in the former Tract? At the last, God shall
us help every way:
And all shall be in godly concord and stay.


Than which Conclusion, what better or happier can we devise, or desire at Gods
hand? Who as he has hitherto by his singular gracious favor, mightily
preserved us both in private and public: (notwithstanding whatsoever hostile
policies, or forces) so may it please him, continually more and more to extend
the same merciful favor, and effectually to accomplish the said wished
conclusion (if not universally thoroughout the whole Christian world, yet at
least particularly thoroughout this whole Realm:) what need we greatly care
in respect of our own security, or otherwise, than in common charity, Quare,
aut quomodo fremant gentes, Why, or how other nations rage together: or why, or
how other people imagine vain things? He alone, that dwells in Heaven, is a
thousand times, and incomparably mightier, than all the kings and princes that
dwell upon earth.

At Kingslinn in Norfolk, this 12. of December. Anno 1587.
Eiusdem Ioannis Harueij Epiphonematicum votum, ad auertendum quoscunque
euentus, Anni famosi magis, quam mirabilis, 1588.
ALme parens, qui cuncta regis, diuosque, hominesque,
Et caelum, and terram, and quic quid in orb valet.
Qui nutu Antaeum, qui Gorgonis ora gubernas,
Falcigerumque senem, luctiferumque ducem:
Qui solus caelorum iras, vultusque minaces,
Atque truces radios, diraque fata domas:
Aspice, sed placido vultu, pia vota Britannum:
Nec sine terribiles inualuisse faces.
Astrorum, horrificique polifera spicula tunde:
Nec ruat in nostrum saeua procella Caput.
Siste tremiscentis terrae motusque and hiatus:
Atque Comaetarum lurida tela preme.
Pelle procul Saturninos gemitusque, dolosque,
Et martis rabidas, sanguine asque cruces.
Noxia nec Scythici noceant contagia caeli:
Nec teneram inficiat pestilis aer humum.
Nec tempestatum ratio peruersa fatiget,
Peruersis quanquam moribus aequa nimis.
O Deus, haud mores imitentur tempora nostros,
Tempora tam nullo dura ferenda modo.
Hiberna Aestatem nec turbent frigora siccam:
Nec Brumae subeat munera Veris honos.
Autumnus Veris nec vendicet aurea signa:
Ordine sed vigeant cuncta creata suo.
Sydera sunt scriptura Dei, scriptura Britannum:
O praesint Anglis sydera fausta tuis.
O etiam, atque etiam men's sana in corpore sano
Regnet, and in quauis pax benedicta domo.
Sint procul hinc Turcae, procul hinc gens quae que prophana;
Haereticorum omnis turba maligna procul.
Aut si quos Galli, Scotiue, Italiue, Daniue,
Hispaniue astus, insidiasque parent:
Has, atque has absterge Deus; caelique, hominumque,
Et furiarum Iras, and mala quaeque fuga.
Protege nos, Regnumque tuum, regnumque tuorum
Seruorum, and Seruae candida sceptra tuae.
Obscurata nihil noceat Tytania lampas,
Queis Euangelij lumina clara nitent.
Nec caput inuoluens tenebris Latonia Virgo
Obsit eis, quorum pectora luce micant.
Sed neque corda vrat Saturnius ignis little,
Qui sancti fervent Pneumatis igne sacro.
Sed neque corda vrat Mauortius ignis little,
Qui potius pacem, quam coluere facem.
Mart fremente, minasque agitante calescimus illo:
Ast Deus in nobis praelia Martis agat.
Sydera namque licet caelestia, cuncta gubernent
Inferiora, Deus solus at illa mouet.
Tu Deus illa moves, regis inferiora, per illa:
Nos saluos illis effice, qui illa moves.
Respice nos, Anglisque faue; gentemque beatam,
Ancillaeque tuae candida sceptra foue.
Horrendi fremitus, oracla minacia cessent:
Euentu careant turbida fata truci.
Quicquid peccatum est, peccati mole grauatos
Poenitet, atque magis poenitet, atque magis.
Sis bonus O, foelixque tuis; nec sydera, nec vim,
Nec furias vllas, nec mala fata luant.
Sic te Angli aeternum laudent, sic sydera laudent:
Sic totus laudet mundus, ouetque polus.
Sic, sic Omnipotentem extollant omnia saecla,
Horrida qui solus monstra domare potes.
Ecce opus admirandum, aeterno Carmine dignum:
Irrita fatorum quod mala reddat: Amen.
Soli sapienti Deo, sola gloria.
FINIS.

