THE PAGEANT OF POPES, Contayninge the lives of all the Bishops of Rome, from
the beginning of them to the year of Grace 1555. Divided into iii. sorts
bishops, Archbishops, and Popes, whereof the two first are contained in two
books, and the third sort in five. In the which is manifestlye shevved the
beginning of Antichriste and increasing to his fullness, and also the vvayning
of his power again, according to the Prophecye of John in the Apocalips.

Showing many strange, notorious, outrageous and tragical parts, played by
them the like whereof has not else bin heard: both pleasant and profitable
for this age. Written in Latin by Master Bale, and now Englished with sondrye
additions by I.S.

*Behold I come upon thee says the Lord of hosts, and will discover thy
skirts upon thy face, and will show to the Nations thy filthynes, and to the
kingdoms thy shame. I will cast filth upon thee and make the loathsome, and
will fet thee as a gazing stock.

Nahum. 3, Come away from her my people, that ye be not partakers of her
sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. etc. Reward her as she has
rewarded you, and give her doubt according to her works.

Apoca. 18. Anno 1574.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable Lord Thomas Earl of Sussex, Uicount Fitzwalter,
Lord of Egremont and of Burnel, one of the Queens Maiestyes honorable priuye
Counsel, and Lord high Chamberlain of her house, Of the noble order of the
Garter knighte, Justice of Oyer, of the Forests, Parkes, VVarraines and chases
from Trent Southward, and Captain of the Gentlemen Pentioners: Increase of
honor and godly wisdom in Christ Jesus.
Among many worthy sayings of the most eloquent Lactantius (right Honorable)
this one is especially worthy to be noted, which is so often repeated by him:
that No wisdom is to be allowed without (true) Religion. And again that
where Religion is not there is no wisdom. VVherby we are instructed that from
those in who^ wisdom is requisite, religion must in no case be separate. And
again that they in who^ greater fruits of wisdom ought to flourishe (as it
should be in them whose hands GOD has framed to guide ye stern of the common
wealth) must also bear a more fervent zeal toward the true service and
Honor of GOD. So that these twain VVysedome and Religion, are linked and
placed together in ye mind of man, as the eyes thereof to give light to his
whole understanding. And therefore to stay a while in this similitude, as the
one eye of our body is so assisting to the other for the making perfect of our
sight together, that having the use of both we attain thereunto: and otherwise
the one being blinded, the light of the other is somewhat dimmed and shadowed,
and perhaps in the end fades away and leaves us altogether in darcknes: Even
so stands the case between Religion and wisdom, the lights of the mind.
And therefore gross has bin the error of many great estates, who because
they being lifted hie in the view of all men's eyes and therefore desirous to be
accounted wise, have yet in their wisdom made no account of Religion at all,
but set it bie as a thing nothing pertaining to there estate. who though for a
time they have seemed to groape out the channel well, and so by diligence to
sail in safetye, and with one dim eye to see their way perfectly, yet lacking
ye light of Religion they have ever bin blind on the one side and wa^ted the
right and better eye: whereby in the end the eye of their pollicye ever poaring
downward to things on the left band, and not able steadfastly to look up to
heaven nor to abide the glory thereof, has drawn them into such deep
darcknes, that unware they have strayed far from the drift of their devices,
and being not able to walk vprightlye in their own ways without stackering
and stu^bling, have in the end fallen so desperatlye yt they never were able
to rise again: whereby to late they find true that There is no wisdom where
Religion is not. And that whereas they thought themselves to be wise without
it, they never came to the first step thereof, it being as Salomo^ says: that
The fear of the Lord (which such have neglected) is ye beginning of wisdom.
The commandments of ye Lord are pure and give light to the eyes. Again
Psalm. 8.
Thy word O Lord is a lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my paths. And
therefore when soever we leave this light, though the lamp of ma^s brain
burn never so bright, we fall perforce in ye end: For neither the wise head of
Achitophell, nor the fair and flattering face of Absolon that stale from David
the peoples hearts, could prevail in their purposes, so pollitickly attempted
against the rule of Religion, but yt it turned to their own confusion: Matt.
15.
For every plant that the Heavenly father has not planted shall be rooted out*
Yea most miserable and desperate is their case and cursed of Gods own mouth,
that think the care of Religion belongs not to them.

Another sort of me^ there is which being of better judgment proceed a step
farther then these, and yet not so far as they ought in deed. For some
having an inward regard of Religion, do yet think it pollicye, that it should
be hidden and secret to themselves, and not apparent unto other: and in this
point especially they would be esteemed wise. But greatly are these likewise
deceived: for wisdom is no wisdom and not to be accounted of in any, so
long as it is dissembled and not employed, that other men may see good proof
thereof. And Religion is no Religion that shows not it self by his
ple^tifull fruits. Show me thy faith by thy works. etc. Jacob. 2.
And what choice so ever they yt seem wysest or holiest make of religion,
doing it so as other men shall not be able to discern it in them, nor to he
witnesses thereof, they are to be esteemed neither wise nor Religious. Faith if
it have no works is dead in it self. Ia. z.
For who will not account him rather blind or blincking the^ other wise, that
shall say he has his eyes sound, pure and perfect, and yet in the open day
will never show use of them in the presence of men, but continuallye be wimpled
and wear a veale, so that no man ca^ perceive whether he do see or no? Either
such are blind in deed when as they say that they see, or else their meaning
is very deceitful.

And so may we judge of these wilye winkers in Religion, that either they be
blindstockes in deed and lack the light of that Heavenly wisdom, which
they pretend to have, or else their wicked wisdom is but a cloak of
wickedness* and then indeed they doat in their worldly pollicye, not knowinge
that the wysest of all has said: Matt. 5.
Let your light so shine before men yt they may see your good works and
glorify your father which is in Heaven. And yt Every tree that does not bear
good fruit shall be cut down and cast into everlasting fire. Matt. 3.
And therefore these Nicodemites that will visit Christ only in ye darcke and
by night and not openly before men, the Lord will not acknowledge him before
his Heavenly father. Such is ye end of fleshly policy. So that (Right
honorable) only such ar to be held as wise in deed which think that it
lies upon them and especially belongs unto them, to make a constant and open
profession of true Religion. If then to be wise be to profess Religion, it is
worthy to be farther considered how a man may attain to perfection herein.

The heathen that ever measured wysedome^ by civil policy, have accounted
best of those by whose good endeavor their common wealth has bin most vpheld
and strengthened from forain invasions: and that have employed themselves to
break the force of such as would assault it. And so (my very good Lord) they
that have bin the most worthy members of the Church of God, have ever excelled
in this point, to show themselves forward in promoting Religion and suppressing
to their power ye enemies thereof: and especially I say in suppressing the
enemies. For the houlding down of them is the houlding up of ye other.

2. Sam 5.8
So the godly David did both fetch home ye ark of God, and scourged his
enemies the Philistines and Iebusites. So the zealous king Josias both
restored the Law of the Lord, and put down ye wicked Chemerinus that
sacrificed unto Baal. 2. Reg. 23.
So ye noble Cyrus delivered Israel and held Babilo^ captive. Finally so the
worthy Constantine (the son to Helen borne in this Island) brought peace to
ye Church, Eusebius. li. 9 cap. 9. Eccles. hist.
set Christian Religion at liberty, and also overthrew the cruel ennemy and
tyrant Maxe^tius. If these godly examples were ever to be followed in any
place: If this zeal in Religion were ever to be showed in any age, where more
then in this our native country? If this perfect wisdom were ever to be
wished in any governors, of whom rather then of the nobility of England? when
rather then in this our time, against the tyranny of the bishop of Rome? For
what enemy bath made such greedy spoil and wrought such broyle in any
country, as he and his has done continuallye in this little Isle, (as but for
being tedious might be showed) almost in every kings time since ye conquest, as
William Rufus and Henry the first, both were sore combred with Pope Urban ye
second and Paschal the second, through Anselmus bishop of Canterbury. Henry the
second much more with Thomas Becket and Pope Alexander the 3. Richard the first
complained grievously of the Popes shameful polling his Realm and yet could
not redress it. K. John suffered a thousand storms and ye Realm was
myserablye spoiled and made tributarye to ye Pope for ever, by the treachery of
Stephen Langto^ bishop of Canterbury. In the time of Henry the 3. the Pope
ransackt all the Churches in England, and so has he continued with the rest,
vexing by exactio^s, excommunications, or some such means every one. But
because his staff has here bin broken and he throwe^ out of ye doors in this
our time, what means does he dailye leave unproven to work our confusion, as
sturring rebellio^s, moving treasons, seditions and conspiracies within ye
land, cursing and exco^municating both Prince and people, nobilitye and
commons, and yelding us a pray unto him who^ he has assigned by his bulls to
enjoy their lyuings and dignities abroad, who hourelye wait when either by
nature it self or their violent hand, the thread should fail whereon
depends the stay of our estate. Such is the purpose of Antichrist against
us, and yet practiced with color of holiness. So that if ever the blood of
Christ his Church ought ever to be precious in the eyes of men, the time is
now. Now lies it upon every one to show himself a friend to his country, by
withstanding to his power the common enemy thereof: and especially those that
stand in the highest place, both for their own sakes because their fall shall be
the greater, and for charge of Gods people committed unto them, whose blood he
will require at their hands if they leave them to the wolf.

For the which cause (Right honorable) I as a member of that body which is so
assaulted by this Dragon both for the safetye of my self and other, employed
my self a little to discover ye secret traynes of this deceitful enemy: and
because this my enterprise of it self lies open to ye peril of the malicious
mouths of many his partakers, so yt it should not be able to bear out it self
against their force. Therefore necessitye drives me to seek for ye succor of
such a Patron in whom I might assure my self of that perfect wisdom which
Lactancius allows, and find that rescue which this cause requires: that is
one who by power should be able, by wisdom skillful, and in zeal and
affection willing and forward to encounter this aduersarye with any of his
faction: whereof because it is not unknown to me by many private occasions,
that your honor has made proof that this perfect wisdom is planted in you
as it was in David, Josias, Cyrus and Constantine, bearing on your left arm a
target of defense for Religion, and having your right hand armed with a sword
to wound the enemy Antichrist: And again seeing it has not bin so private
but that this zeal has showed it self openly in biddinge battle to the
members of Antichrist, marchinge against them in field and pursuing them out
of the country: I thought your Lorship most meet and I assured my self yt
your honor would be most willing to suffer this my little volume to fight
under your ba^ner in that quarrel against the Pope, wherein your honor has
heretofore personallye proceeded. If therefore the worthiness of the matter
herein contained and written by master Bale, may so excuse the unworthiness of
my simple style in translating it, that your honor vouchsafe to accept the
one with the other and bear with the one for the other, your curtesye shall
the rather confirm all the professors of ye Gospel in that undoubted opinion
which they have iustlye conceived of you, and give them cause still to glorifye
God for such nobility, wishing the good increase and long prosperitye of such:
and I having my travail most happily bestowed, shall acknowledge my duty
always bound unto your honor for it. And thus crauinge pardon of this
tedious volume wherewith I have troubled your Honor over long, I leave you to
the Almightye.

Your honors most humble John Studley.
Put your selves in array against Babylon round about, all ye that bend the
bow shoot at her, spare no arrows, for she has sinned against the Lord.

Iere. 50:

The translatour to the Reader.
IT may be (gentle Reader) that when thou shall in this book read many
monstrous and horrible histories rather to be suppressed the^ put in print,
thou will not think well of my travail. I grant that here are many things
uttered odious to be heard: but yet if any thing offend thy chas^e ears, blame
not me gentle Reader but ye importunitye of ye Papists, who has forced me
thus to displaye their treachery. For where as their doctrine is so on all sides
wounded and foiled by the force of ye Gospel, that they have no shift to
uphold their treachery as men euide^tlye convinced and condemned by law and
justice, now are they compelled to practice some policy, seeing they are
spoiled both of the word and the sword. And for want of better practice their
only shifte is by spreading open other men's infirmities to cover their own,
by lifting up the leude lives of the Protestants to the vewe of all men, to
shadow the horrors of their Church, in so much that their outcryes are grown
so great, that these spiteful speeches are often and daily heard upon every
occasion: Lo these are our Protestants: Such are our Gospellers: to such
miserye and wickedness is the world grown since this new doctrine came among
us: ye may see by their fruit what their Religion is. So outrageous are the
outcryes yt they make against us to discredit not us but our Gospel, as though
the defacing of us by our sinful lives, were a confutacion of our doctrine,
and an approving of their innocencye, and a confirmation of their vnclenlye
dregs to be pure and good. So vehement are their speeches, and yt with such
confidence on their parts, as if both their doctrine were on all sides true,
and that the spirit of God had clean forsaken this age, as if the like
wickedness had never tainted any kind of men so haynously as it does the
professors of the Gospel, and as though sin were but new borne among men
and latelye sprung up with the Gospel: and as though that the tree whereon
their doctrine is grafted (the Church of Rome I mean) had never yielded any
rotten fruit, had never any catterpillers breeding in it, never any cankar
corrupting it, but had ever bin green, fresh and flourishing, pure and perfect
in every leaf, branch and twig. Therefore concerning us and concerning them
I will speak of both.

And first as concerning our selves (God be merciful unto us miserable sinners)
we have al run astray, If we say we have no sin we deceive our selves and
the truth is not in us: There is not one yt does good no not one. And if any
Papist, Turk or infidel charge us to be sinful men although we profess a
pure Gospel, we will acknowledge it, and never like the worse of them for so
saying, nor the better of our own infirmityes. Now concerning the Papists,
if they speak of our sins for that they hate sin in us, they do us no
wrong, we accept it and thancke them for it: But if they lay the rebuke of
our sins upon ye glorious Gospel of Christ which we profess, and if they
mean by defacing us to discredit it (as I have said before) then do they
offer great iniurye to the Majesty of God, when as they say that by our deeds
it appears, as by the fruit yt the tree is not good, that the Gospel which
we profess is not perfect. We cannot and may not suffer it that the perfitnes
of the Law should be tried and condemned by the offense of the giltye: that
the truth of Christ should depend upon the works of sinners, that eternal
heaven should be valued by fading earth, that the most perfect justice and
equitye of the most glorious God, should be measured and esteemed by the
frailtye of corruptible flesh and blood. And therefore as we do not and dare not
presume to confirm the certainty of our doctrine by our good deeds be they
never so perfect, but rather confirm our good deeds to be good by our
doctrine: so should our adversaries deal uprightly with us, not to condemn
our doctrine by our evil deeds, but rather condemn our evil deeds by our
doctrine, which being pure and perfect shall condemn both our wickedness and
theyrs, together with their wicked and detestable doctrine.

God forbid that the trial of true religion should lie either upon our
vprighte conversation or theirs, least if it lay in man's perfection both the
Jew and the Turk might either of them sooner boast of it the^ either of us.
The wisdom of God has not so builded his Church upon sand. If it were
founded upon the works of man, then should his Church never stand neither by
them nor by us. We are but feeble and windshaken pillars unable to underprop
and bear such a weight, and therefore how so ever they build their Church, we
build not ours on our selves, but we build both it and our selves upon that
immovable rock Jesus Christ, and therefore how soever the wind and weather
do shake us and overthrow us through our own weakness, yet our foundation
abides sure, and does neither fall nor flyt away but abides so for ever, yt
we may be still raised and set up on the same again. Deceitful therefore is
their dealing, who to withdraw men from our Church, do unjustly say that when
we fall, our foundation falls also: but most iustlye may we ass^re men that
their Babilonicall building must needs come to decay, being founded on the
sand of Tiber banckes, which is daily washed and eaten away. How can that
foundation stand which is made of earth and claye, dust and ashes, of flesh,
blood and bones: of Popes miters, Cardinals hats, Monks hoodes, Friars cooles,
Nonnes veales, shaven crowns, paxes, beads, tapers and crosses, annoyntings
and greazings, blessings, kisshings, images of metal, wood, glass and
stone, holy oil, holy cream, albes, vestments, palls, coapes, rotchets,
surplices, tippets, coyfes, chrismes, mantel and the ringe, sensinges,
pilgrimages, offerings, creeping to crosses, Wenefreds nedle, the blood of
Hailes, fasting days, holy days, imber days, crogiers, polaxes, dirges,
exorsims, coniurings, masses, trentals, holy water, Purgatory saints relics,
S. Frau^cis breeches, Limbo patru^, s. John shorns boots, the roode of
Chester, our Lady of Walsingam, rotten boones, shrines, and a thousand such
apishe toys, which daily (as they themselves perceive) do putrifye rotte and
consume to nothing. Seeing therefore this foundation will not last to uphold
their Babilonicall buildinges against the assaults of the Gospel, therefore
now they will have the trial of doctrine to lie upon the honesty of men, and
herein they make the world believe that they have a great advantage over us.

Seeing they will needs drive us to this plonge and seek hereby to foil us
and utterly to overthrow our foundation, we will be content herein also to
join issue with them, not as having affiaunce in our own justice (the Lord
amend that which is amiss in us, and blessed be his name for those sparks of
his mercy that have preserved us from being worse then we are) but because we
have such experience of their treacherye, and that we know none shall be
comparable to Antichriste in iniquitye. To set aside therefore all excusing of
our selves in such matters as they do slander us, and grant that we be as
evil as they make us, yet I dare bouldlye auouche that there has not hitherto
nor ever shall (I trust) proceed from us such unmeasurable abundance of
corrupt fruit, as has done from those yt are the best, the most pure and
perfits on their side, even in those who they say cannot err, that are the
most holy vicars of Christ upon earth, namelye the holy fathers Popes and
bishops of Rome. Whose notorious villanyes from time to time swelled to the
full and perfect measure of iniquitye, and so far run beyond our heinous
sins, that supposing they dyed as they lived, I may bouldly warrant them this
preferment, that if an hundredth of the rankest helhounds that ever reigned upon
the earth might be mustred out of hell, fourscore and nineteen of them should
be Popes, perhaps for the last and hundred place, either Wolsey or some other
Cardinal would scuffle in among them.

Whereof that thou may the better judge (gentle Reader) I do here give thee
in this book a little taste of their vnsauorye lives, I have set them all
forth here in one Pageante in such order as they played their Papal parts
both Tragical and Comicall for these Thousand years upon this worldly stage:
wherein I have chosen rather to translate them as they were gathered in Latin
by master Bale most faithfullye, then to follow the parcial and flattering
storye of Platina. In some places also I have added diverse things out of
sondrye authors, not as though I desired to make perfect in all points that
which master Bale omitted: but because in conferringe his alleging of
stories, I found many things that without any combraunce might be added and
were worth the mentioning, especially in ye sixth book of this historye out of
one Theodoricus of Nyem Secretarye to Pope Urban the sixth, and wrote that which
he saw of that miserable and long sciesme that set all the world together by
ye cares the space of xxxix. years, between Urban the sixte, Clement the
seventh, Boniface the ix, Benedict the xiii. otherwise called John Moon, and
other: which book I am sure master Bale never saw, for he would never have
omitted such notable and strange matters as are contained in it, and are here
partlye touched by me.

Also for so much as these prelates do falsely color al their pra^cks under
the authority of S. Peter's name, therefore I have somewhat at large in the
beginning showed, how that though they would have him to play the first part
in this Pageant, yet he is none of their company. But because of the sudden
finishing of this work in ye printers hand, I am forced in this Preface to
leave out many matters which I thought to have uttered, which I could never
find conueniente leisure to be settled in one certain place, in such wise as
I might apply my self to write that which I purposed since this was finished
and came to the hand of the Printer. At this time therefore this only I have
to request of thee (gentle Reader) till God shall give me better oportunitye to
finishe that order which I purposed in publishing this book, to mark as thou
read how the manner of these Prelates do agree to the description of
Antichrist in the Revelation, as I once purposed to have noted unto thee. Mark
whether we that at this day do profess the Gospel, and are so much noted of
their friends to transgress haynouslye in our conversation, are to be compared
with these holy Popes in any kind of enormitye. For what villanye is it
whereof thou shall not find such monstrous examples among them, as the earth
never else bread the like. It were tedious for me here to draw into tables the
examples of their insatiable covetousness, their bribery, polling and pilfringe,
robbing and ryfling, intolerable pride, equal with the ambition of Lucifer,
their vain and unspeakable pomp, their whoredom and rauishinge of diverse,
their incest with their own sisters and daughters, their Sodomityes, treaso^s
practiced against all Princes on ye earth, the rebellions, seditions,
bloodshed, wars, conspiracyes, murtherings, factions, sciesmes, braules,
contentions among them selves, poysoninge Princes, and themselves one another,
even in mynistring the Sacraments, their sorcerye, charms, coniurings,
familiaritye with devils, and honoring of evil spirits: their abusing of
Princes most slauishlye, their giving, transporting, selling, setting up and
deposinge of all estates Empyres and kingdoms, their licensing of all
villanye, as murdering, incest, Sodomitrye, periurye, blasphemye, and an
hundred such like most detestable enormityes, whereof thou shall have plenty
eue^ to the loathing of thy stomach. Which when thou see, then judge
between our fruits and theirs, then learn to discern who is that whore of
Babylon, Apoc. 17.
the woman arrayed in Purple and rose color, and decked with gould, precious
stones and pearls, having the cup of gould in her hand full of abomination
and filthiness. Note what City is like to be that Babilo^ built on seven
hills, and bearing rule over the Nations of the earth, What City is like to
be that Babylon that is become the habitacion of devils, the hole of all foul
spirits, and a cage of all unclean and hateful birds. Note with whom the
kings of the earth have committed fornication, and with the abundance of
whose pleasures the merchants of the earth are become rich. Note who it is
that has bin dronken with the blood of saints, if by these thou find yt
these tokens of Antichrist be in these bishops of Rome, then surely say,
though we wretched sinners be as evil as they make us in deed (which they
speak so much of) yet their holy fathers are far worse, which the Papist
will not confess. Then say that surely Rome is Babylon, and the Pope
Antichriste, and blame not me for detectinge any his loathsome villanyes, but
obey the voice of the Lord against th^s Babylon saying: Apoc. 18.
Come away from her my people that ye be not partakers of her sins, and
that ye receive not of her plagues. etc. but revvard her as she has revvarded
you, And give her double according to her works.

Apoc. 19.
Finallye let us all say Alleluya: Salvation, Glory, Honor and power be
ascribed unto the Lord our GOD, for true and righteous are his Judgments,
for he has judged the great whore which did corrupt the earth with her
fornication. etc. Alleluya.

Farewell.
TO THE MOST VVORthie and learned men master Simond Sulcer, Henry Bullenger,
John Calvin, Philip Melancthon* most faithful ministers of Christ, John Bale
wishes grace and everlasting peace in Christ JESUS.
Although I saw that my former edition of the lives of the Roman bishops
joined to my book called ye Regester of English writers, were safely planted
under the protection of the most noble Electour Lord Henry Otho County
Palatine: Yet notwithstanding I perceived that this Edition being taken and
separated from the greater, being drawn into an abridgemente and enriched with
such additions as are not to be misliked, seeing it is not able sufficientlye to
bear out it self, neither by his own force nor the credit of the writer,
it should need be succored and maintained by some other. And therefore I
thought it good in no wise to turn it out rashlye, naked, unarmed and
unprovided of rescue neither into the hands of freinde nor foe. For such a
meet Patron was to be sought for, who by his wit, doctrine and learning,
should be able to maintain a desperate cause, and receive into his tuition as
it were an Orphane counted giltye and condemned by the preiudicate opinion of
all men, least it being desolate and berefte of all good men's aid having no
tutour left unto it, should together with his father have his dying day. After
I had long debated this with with my self and had vewed all men round about
with an especial and diligent care: you iiii. most excellent prelates of ye
Church came first to my remembrance in whose aid I might safely repose my
self that have oftentimes traueiled in this matter, by long experience have
found out and beaten down the assaults and strokes of our adversaries. So
that the former book joined with our historye sufficiently fortifyed by the
might of the most valiant Prince, and this book being perused with my latter
diligence trustinge upon the learning and judgment of such men, may freelye
with cheerful countenance not be afraid to show it self among the
midst of his enemies. Uerelye I am not ignorant that any one of you is man
good enoughe to encounter any in this divine combat. And I freelye confess
that this my little work is unworthy to be dedicated even unto any one of you:
yet notwithstanding I do not consider what you are able to do, but what I ought
to do: Nether do I esteem the price of the gift, but I regard ye most fervent
zeal toward you all. And though I embrace you one after another, yet I desire
to pleasure you all with this only gift because I have no other, and to declare
ye good will that I bear unto you by this only work. Last of all whom one
Religion, one Faith, one Lord, one Baptism do join, what hinders us that one
Epistle may not couple us together: wherefore I trust that you will accept (as
you ought and as you were accustomed) my boldness and presumption if there be
any, which is sprung through an opinion of your curtesye, and not risen of any
evil will.

But that you may understand the matter which I request and desire to be
defended and cherished, if you separate your minds for a certain season, from
your grave studyes and sacred business, and give dilligent ear to hear that
which I have here purposed to declare, the gift which I bestow upon you is
Papal and Pontifical: And I have declared ye historye from the beginning to
the endinge, and showed their beginnings, the race and the whole Tragedye of
their government dividing ye state of there lives into three books.

The first contains the ancient and holy fathers, not decked with a crogier or
a tripled Miter, but such as were dilligent workers in adorninge the Lords
Uyneyarde, even unto Siluester from the holy Apostles, which with the great
danger of their life did faithfully labor in planting and setting forth the
word of God. These may worthelye be called the stars remaining on the right
hand of Christ Apocal. 1.

The second contains the Mitred Archbishops and Patriarckes from Siluester
the first unto Boniface the third, who although they were not the wickedst and
corruptest, yet with their traditions and human constitutions have made a
plain way to Antichriste. These be the stars yt fell to the earth Apocal. 6.

The third mentions the whole rablement of ye Popes from Boniface the third
to Paul the fourth, the which being the Uicar of Satan is said to have
auctoritye as yet at Rome. These were Antichrists not departinge from the
steps of their fathers in all kind of pride, tyranny, lying and filthiness,
these are the stars truly, as it is described in the 9. Chapter of the
Apocalips which fell to the earth. This third part is divided into five,
neither have we applied them vnaptlye to the Revelation of S. John.

Boniface before mentioned shall possess the first place as he deserved to
Ioane the eight an harlot, in the which part there are contained 40. Popes, and
called them ye kingdom of the great beast sometime named Sodoma sometime
Aegiptus, Apo. 11. From Ioane unto Siluester the deuilish Magician yt vowed and
gave himself unto Satan that he might obtain the Popedom: the kingdom of
the great harlot which sits on the beast does comprehend 40. Popes Apocal.
17. From Siluester which is in the 3. place unto Innocentius the fourth, the
most wicked enemy of our Savior Christ, who did establishe and fasten the
four orders of the begging monks which were newlye made, to the intent that
they might stoutlye and manfullye fight for the maintayning of the kingdom of
Antichrist: signifies the kingdom of the Dragon which is the diuill and
Satan Apocal. 20. And in this part were 40. Popes placed. From this
Innocentius the second yt dreadful warrior and the most cruel destroyer of
Christian men, are nombred 40 Popes. And this is the kingdom of the Locustes
which were under the gouernmente of Abadon the which signifies a destroyer
Apocal. 9. Then Julius in the end of his reign throwinge the keys of S.
Peter into ye river of Tiber, being girded with a rusty sword of Paul did
fight against the French king and other Christians.

And the fifth part contains from this Julius unto the end of the reign of
Paul the fourth 8. Popes, and all the times of their successors unto the
judgment of Christ. And the fall of the kingdom of the Pope shall be without
power or hands, with the only word of God and breath of the divine sp^rite 2.
Thessal. 2.

To conclude I have disposed the whole historye in such sort that I have
compared all the Roman bishops to the 4. horses in the Revelation of S. John.
The godly and ancient fathers to the white horse: The archbishops and the
Patriarckes to the red: The Popes and the Antichrists unto Siluester the
second to the black, and from him to Julius the second and all his company
of monks, friars and massemongers yt which with all their power and strength
did defend the Popes kingdom, I have compared to ye pale horse. I have
propounded this mark and method in my book, in the which I have challenged
nothing to my self, but my labor in gathering, describing and destributi^g.
For I know yt a great part of this work has bin set forth by others, as by
Damasus, Carsulanus, Platina Stella, Vuicelius and others, but oftentimes
dissemblingly and obscurelye, sometimes falsely to please men's ears. To
conclude, very many most dilligent and faithful writers of our time: whom
when I had perused with continual reading I gathered together the dispersed
and disagreeing members to one body, that those things which were scattered
abroad in many places, and were therefore the harder to be found out of the
Readers, might the easier be searched out being gathered together into one
book, and laid out before all men's eyes, the which I rather were performed of
any man then of me, and I had rather taken in hand my contry matters then
foraine business, because I have spent my time in vain. But I would not have
stirred up this hudge puddel of the Roman history, the which twoe Hercules
were not able to clime.

But hearken what occasion enforced me thereto, chiefly the exhortation of my
friends did draw me into this matter, otherwise I refused it, because my other
work in the English tongue, being proper only to English men, and known to
very few, did seem to do small profit to strangers. But this being joined
to it, might be a public commodity, and profitable to the use of all men, and
more provided for in other matters. After this I went to it with a good
courage, and although I did desire that other men which were more fit for this
matter, and more garnished with eloquence, should take this matter in hand. Yet
I thought that an account should be made of my talent, and that I had rather to
stumble a little then that so great wickedness of Antichriste, so great cruelty
and inordinate pleasure more and more breaking out, and filling all things
with the stink thereof, being omitted of all men, should seem to be detected
to few or none.

And if I should seem to any man to speak to freely, let him think yt it does
not proceed of ye heat of affection but through the knowledge of my conscience,
which do not declare things heard or read only, but things known by
experience, who lived. 24. years in that sect, and was present among the^
being no small soldier of the Pope: where what is it that I have not seen,
what that I have not heard, which is unworthy of Christ, Christians, monks,
and also of me^, from whose superstitions at that time I was not free, but I
utterly abhorred their filthiness and mischief. Wherefore seeing yt I perceived
many things which did offend, therefore I am now compelled to be more
diligent in seeking them out, and more sharp in reproving them, seeing they do
not repent. But sith these things be done and have biene done of this flock
in Italy, Sicil, Spain, France, and England, who doubts that sheep will
not follow the shepehearde, or rather hogs their swyneheard, shall we not
know the father by the child, or the Lion by his talentes? when prysons be
full of mischief, shall we think that the Roman court has none? many
things have been hidden in darkness and privy places, the which the Sun
has not seen, but time the mother of truth. The monasteries being put down
in England, has learned to speak and to bewraye them* As for example, the
registers of the kings visitatio^, or as they call it, the abbrigeme^t of
things known by experience in the very congregation and colleges of the
Papists, the which things I saw them to my great fear and terror, but now
I possess them, and keep them to their great ignominy and shame, and have
opened a few of them hereafter, in the Epistle to the Reader. If Ezechiel now
should pearce through the wall, and should be brought into their entries,
halles, and dark chambers, he should not see the Israelites bewail Thamnum,
but gelded me^ unmarried, worthy to be woundred at, for the godly profession,
offering their sacrifice to Baalpeor, Bacchus, and Venus. And sith I know
these things to be certain and true, should I not overthrow them, should I
not make them manifest and openly known to all the world? Truly they will
say that an English man, which is separated from all other nations, does
certainly know what is done at Rome in the secret chambers of the Pope and his
Cardinal. Shall not I openly declare for a truth those things which are
declared in Books, and seen with the eyes of the writer, the which things
not the secret chambers, but the princely court, not the privy corners, but
the open streets, do evidently show, but they deny it not, and yet defend it
with most wicked Books set forth in their own tongue, the which Christian
shamefastnes forbids me to declare. The truth therefore ought to be
expressed, and not covered with visard and disguising, but set forth in his
own kind, not darkened with cloak or sail cloth, but decked finely in his
own colors: for they be gross things and may be groped at with hands. But
so great is the blindness of man, that at noone day he can not see, and in
the clearest Sun his eyes be darkened.

This our miserable Realm of England may be unto us a familiar example, for
whose sake more willinglye I took in hand to write this book, that our
English men may see now at the last what a terrible beast they have received
into their common wealth, what a viper they cherishe in their bosom, whose
hissinge before they could not well abide, do now suffer themselves to be s^ong
with their tributes, to be bitten with their leuying and taking up of money,
and to be entoxicated with their idolatrous poison. Unto whom so many kings,
so many noble men, did not once obey: whom Wickliffe the most godliest of
his time did openly show in writing to be Antichrist. Whom K. Henry the eight
banished, whom Edward the vi. yt most godly king cast forth, together with all
the relics and dregs of their religion. Him Queen Mary received being thrust
in by Cardinal Poole many men little regarding it, many winking at it as
though they saw it not: every man almost allowinge it, or at the least with
diverse affections filthily rejoicing in it. It greeueth me for my country
sake, because they offend God so greatly in forsaking him, and in violatinge
the oath which they made before to their kings: so that now they are compelled
to obey at ye beck to the new monstrous and cruel government of most wicked
Antichriste, under whom they have deserved to be oppressed with an idolatrous
yoke, to be blinded with superstition and deuilish Poperye, and with a small
assault of the enemies to be shamefullye overcome. The which notwithstanding
while Gods Religion flourished, and Poperye wythered and was wasted away, was
neither aflicted with the hand of God, neither assaulted with any external
power, but if it were assaulted, yet at no time could they conquer it. I
speak these things (most reverent fathers) to my great grief, and so much
the more, because I judge the contempt of the word of God, and ye gulf of
Roman filthiness to be the cause of the plagues, and that Christ being trodden
down, we had rather that the Pope (ye witch and Circes of the whole world,
not the servant of all servants but the Lord of all Lords, not ye Uicar of
Christ but the minister of the devil) should tread and skip upon our
shoulders and necks, then we would embrace and kiss the sweet yoke, the
light burden and most pleasant cross of our Savior Jesus Christ. And I
require this at your hands (most godly fathers) that you will think this
present calamity to be no small cause which stirred me up to this matter, and I
desire for the great mercy of our Savior Christ, that you go forward in
that work that you have in hand, and that you will make your prayers for
England, (that cannot pray for it self) that this Pope may be exempted out of
the minds of all Christians, Italians, Spaniardes, Frenchmen and Englishmen,
thruste out of all kingdoms and Churches, broken in two and utterly
destroyed. Pray that the blind may see, the deaf hear, and that those which
be in darcknes and in the shadow of death, may come to the light and
knowledge of the truth. For your prayers shall be of more effect with God, than
all the blessings and cursinges of the detestable Pope.

By these things I trust that you understand what I have taken in hand, and
for what cause. First the desire of my freindes compelled me thereunto.
Secondly my conscience pricked me forward hasting hereunto, yt I might
communicate these things which I have both heard and seen in the whole course
of my life. Last of all, the lamentable state of England called me hereunto,
that for the love which I bear to my brethren I would aid it, and yt the
begi^ning of ye Roman tyra^nye being read and known, and the offspring of all
the Popes, they might seek a new way and amend their lives. Also to restore
the dignitye of the common wealth which was lost, and to the reforminge of the
Church, and to the glory of Jesus Christ the only governor of the earth.

But not without great cause do I dedicate this my book unto you which are in
this our age ye greatest defendours of the Christian faith, which also do bear
this grievous and odious burden, and for that cause do burn with the same fire
of envy which I do. For truly I speak as I think and as I believe, and
because I believe it I cannot hold my peace: If at VVite^berg Luther ye
vpholder of ye Christian faith, at Tigur Zuinglius the invincible defendour of
the pure veritye, and a professor thereof unto the death, at Basil
Occolampadius a light and lamp in ye house of God had not opened the liuelye
springes of the Scripture, and being opened had not defended them against the
boldness of the Philistines, if others in those days in your places had not
sustained this our Religion, if you would not have put to your aid and
helping hands, if God had not left the seed of the truth in those Churches
wherein you are Preside^ts, there had bin no place for Christ on the earth
where he might put his head, there should have bin no refuge for exiles to fly
unto, Christian pietye should find no place in which it might be confirmed
and safelye established. And all those things that I have showed here, were
taught me of your pastors and writers. Therefore it is meet that I should
render some part thereof with gain from whence I had it, neither do I honor
and worship only your Churches as the springes of pure Religion, the which
with priuye passages does flow unto all the corners of the earth, and even to
us beyond the Ocean, but all English peregrins are bound of duty unto you,
for your great benefits bestowed upon them. The which thing I would have
showed at large in the name of all my freindes, if I had not written unto you
to whom we are of duty bound: yet truly to pass all things in silence and
declare none of them I cannot. Therefore I pray you pardon me, and let your
modestye and gentleness give place and pardon mine affections, while yt of so
many I declare a few, to the intent that other men may understand if I had not
a just cause to dedicate this my book to you before al other. The which thing
while I show briefelye as time and order does require, so I will name every
one of you not respecting your dignitye, but doing after the imbecillitye of
memory, and the perspicuitye of the matter.

Therefore that I may declare from the beginning, and ascend from the
farthest unto the nighest, whereto much duty owe we to VVitenberg that most
fair merchandise of all arts, they evidently declare which go thither either
to behold the country, or to give themselves to study, with whose notable
praises many being styrred up would go thither in great companies, if riches
would abou^d as their good will does to go so long a iourneye. For when they
praise other learned, not without grateful testifyinge of many benefits
toward them. Than (O Philip) they do declare thy singular curtesye, marvelous
facilitye, and thy good will always ready to deserve well of al men. Neither
without a cause. For thou prosecutest al me^ at home with all kind of
humanitye, and at home with thy preaching and loving letters do ease the
sorrowful and wavering minds. For it is not unknown what thou have done at the
council of VVesalia in the English men's behalf, who when thou saw to take
pains for Religion sake, and to be greatly moved with the unjust outcryes of
men yt held opinion against the^, thou thoughtest good yt the cause should be
heard without debate or strife, and not to be put out with cry and clapping
of hands: thou saydst that the men were to be retained and relieved, and not to
be vexed and afflicted with any sharp judgment. To this end thou did write
to the maiestrates of Franckford, so that by thy letters which I chanced to
see, I am certified where thou did think it meet that our men purelye
thinkinge of the articles of our Christian faith, and in diverse co^trouersyes
defending their opinion with fervor of zeal according to their nature, to be
taught and not to be oppressed, to be warned with talk not troubled with force,
since that doubtful matters ought to be handled of the adversaries part with
obscure words. Neither do I doubt but that the countries bordring there about
Strasburge, Basil, Arouia, Tiguru^ Geneua, Emdona, being moved with such a
notable testimonye, will receive us more into their favor.

But leuing VVittenberge, I come to Basile, where I will be more parciall, not
because I can not praise him sufficiently enough, but because I am one of them
which have felt and do daily feel the great benevolence of the Senate,
ministers, and the whole people, least I should not seem to be so grateful a
prayser as a deceitful flatterer. Therefore I will say nothing of thee at this
time, most wise and learned Sulcer, nothing of M. VVoulfangus VVisenburge,
that most excellent divine, and worthy governor of the university, nothing
of Martin Borrham, the notable professor of divinity, nothing of learned M.
John Iunius, my faithful companion: nothing of Marcus Bersius, James
Turkenbrot, Conradus Lycosthenes, his dear friend, Huldricus Coccius, Thomas
Gyrenfalck, John Ibelhard, Sebastian Lepusculus, Seuerinus Erimontanus, John
Maeder, John Brandmiller, and other ministers of Gods word, whose beneuole^ce
is daily seen. I omit the griefs which you most willingly suffered, not
without great pains and travail. But this only I will say, that although
the good will of the people and magistrate was sufficiently inflamed, of them
selves toward, yet it did seem to arise and spring for the most part through
your sermons, so that whatsoever benevolence happened unto us at that time, was
through your request and impulsion. But here (as I said before) I desire
brevity, because I am one of them which have experience of you. I will speak
more of Tigur and Geneua.

For Tigur always being a safeguard to such as fly from their countries, and
a most excellent university of learned divines, and a most renoumed schole,
does open unto me a large field, in which this my oration may walk and have
his full course.

Whether I have respect unto, the common profit of al nations, or that, that
is only proper to England, for what a notable oracle there is as it were for
all Christendom, what a notable quire of most learned men. For yt I may say
nothing of thee O Bullinger, who^ so many notable books compiled with such
singular piety and manifold learning, with such variety of all things, and
sentences of ancient writers decked as it were with stars, does praise
enough to the Catholic church, although I hold my peace. But that I may
omit all the other which were borne and bread at Tygur, As Bibliander and
Hippius, which knew all things, Radulph Gualther, the eloquent preacher and
politik writer Co^radus Gesnerus, a notable library as it were of all
disciplines, and my singular friend, Josias Simler, and John Vuolphius, most
learned men also, and my very friends with many other notable professors of
other arts: Good Lord, what notable old men were those learned strangers,
M. Peter Martyr, and Barnardine Ochinus, which you received into your city?
One of the which if some other congregation should have, they should seem to
be blessed, and enriched with a great treasure and orname^t. Happy was England
when she possessed them, miserable when she lost them: of this congregation
sith thou art president most learned Bullinger, I have justly chosen thee to
be my patron, with whose authority the Roman court may be weakened, and my
description be established. Who if thou would call into the field, these
noble captains, stout souldious with their furnished bands, with a
reasonable power thou shall overcome, at the first one onset the whole troops
and bonds of the Papists. But I will omit these things, as common and
known to all men, what he has done to our English men at Tigur, seeing that
is proper to my purpose, and not the other, I will here leave that, and touch
this but briefly. For when I was with you and had tasted thy hospitality O
Bulli^ger, and the humanity of others, I understood the great good will you
did bear to our cou^tremen which were with you. That worthy man John
Parckhurst, and worthy of a better fortune, did declare to me how much bound
he was to thee, to M. Gualter, and to the whole city. It was told me also of
the^ which were at Basil with me, of thy care and fatherly affection toward
them, while they lived with you together in one house, even under the shadow
of your city, being defended from all persecution, with the great consent and
love of your citizens. Also the incredible liberality of your magistrates, the
which freely gave unto them corn and wine sufficient to sustain.xiii.
or.xiiii. men, and when they refused to take it, they were sorry that they had
not opportunity to pleasure them.

But now I haste to Geneua, of which if I should make any long oration, when I
had said all, I should seem scarce to have declared half that which might
be said. In the which I greatly marvel at the notable providence of our God,
which so stirred up the minds of the citizens and magistrates, that they were
not afraid to receive so many thousand strangers into the suburbs of one
city. Again, did so turn the hearts of the strangers, that although they
were more in number, and the superiors, yet would submit them selves under
their power, as though they were the inferiors, in so much that they did not
acknowledge them selves to be Lords and citizens, but private men and
strangers. Let other men feign other miracles, but Geneua seems to me to be
the wonderful miracle of the whole world: so many from all countries come
thither, as it were unto a sanctuary, not to gather riches but to live in
poverty: not to be satisfied, but to be hungry, not to live pleasauntly, but
to live miserably, not to save their goods, but to leese them. Many marchantes
do rushe thither for gaynes, soldiers for spoils, all for their own
profitte. But it seems to be a monsterous and a wonderful miracle, that men
should fly to scarcenes from plenteousnes, to travail from ease, from
plenteousnes of riches, to miserable poverty, Lutetia, London, Franckfort, are
new markets for merchandise, unto the which men come, not for gain, not for
merchandise, not for tauerning, to change heavenly things with earthly things,
yt in steed of humane treasures, they may gather heavenly treasures in heaven.
We have read that consuls have bin taken from the plough to bear rule, but
from florishinge fortune, from great riches and dignities to the plough, to
great labors and travail, from an horse to an ass weeting and knowing it, is
it not a great marvel? Is it not wonderful that Spanyardes, Italians,
Scotts, Englishemen, Frenchemen, Germans, disagreeing in manners, speech
and apparel, sheep and wolves, bulls and bears, being coupled with the
only yoke of Christ, should live so lovingly and friendly, and that Monks,
Laymen, and Nuns, disagreeing both in life and sect should dwell together,
like a spiritual and Christian congregation? using one order, one cloister,
and like ceremonies. Is it not wonderful that so many stout enemies hanging
over them, and looking still to devour them, as Satan and the Pope their
most bitter enemies, they should not only be safe, but also live so long time
in quietness? Thanks be therefore unto God, because he has appointed the
pastor of his scattered and dispersed flock, the captain of ye vanished, to
be ye chief of ye miserable people, with whose counsel government and
wisdom, so great a congregation of people, being not only diverse, but
contrary one to another, has been nourished together under one band of love,
so that now nothing is more loving the^ those enemies, nothing more like, then
their unlikeness, no body more happy, then these miserable men. I thank thee in
this my writing in the name of them all, because when they would purely honor
God in their own country, and can not, it may be lawefull for them to come to
the church and celebrate the congregation, in the which they may freely call
upon their God, sincerely administer the Sacraments, and may fulfill other
rites as they were citizens, with the privilege, and high favor of the
magistrates. Happy is that people who enjoys these things, and have so
worthy a bishop, which gathers together ye dispersed, comfort the broken
in heart, favors exiles, and confirms the weak with example and doctrine.

But perchance I may seem, to have said to much to you and to you all, most
gentle fathers, who are troubled with grauer matters, and have no leisure to
read your praises. And endued with such modesty, that you will scarce
attend unto it. But bear with me while I do but my duty, for I praise not
you but the gifts of God that are of you, and commend the happy state of your
churches unto the faithful, yt they may learn to give thanks and to imitate
you. I would have showen the causes why I inscribed to your name the Papal
history of new Rome, partly to have declared my love toward you, for your
benefits bestowed upon England and other countries. Partly that the learning
which you have spread abroad in these days, may be defended with your aid.
Our Lord Jesus Christ, the prince of sheepeheardes, the master of al truth,
the enemy of Antechriste, strengthen and confirm you, and all your fellow
ministers, with the power of the holy ghost, and preserve you in long health,
to the comfort and joy of the Christian flock, to the overthrowing of
Antichriste, and the amplifying of his name. Amen.

John Bale

John Bale to the Reader.
I Desire thee (Christian Reader) whosoever thou art that delightest in ye
glory of Christ against the malice of Antichriste, and I beseech thee in the
Lord to conster all things to the best, even those matters which seem to be
spoken more bitterly against that monstrous beast and not to deprave them with
slau^derings, as I understand some of late have taken occasion to do by my late
book published of the vvriters of England. Among whom some are not ashamed
untruly to say that I deal unjustly with some Princes that govern the
estates of Christendom. Othersome say that I speak malepertlye and that
against all Christian modestye, that I speak irreverently of Queen Mary of
England, because in one place I have written that Iesabell reigns in
England, and glutteth her self with the blood of Martyrs: where as by that
name I did not mean Queen Mary, but the tyranny of Rome that miserablye
ouerrunneth all England. For the places in Nicolas Grimoald, Traherne, Turner
the Physician, Hooper* Ridley, Rogers, Bradford, Filpot, and other, do
sufficientlye interpret themselves to be spoken of the great Antichriste and
his mitred and scraped tormentours. For as the holy ghost has taught me I
have called that Roman Sinagogge the murderer of Godly men, wicked
Iesabell, the horned beast, the impe of the Dragon, the daughter of the devil,
the spouse of Satan, speaking blasphemies, the purple beast, the mystical
Babylon, the great strumpet with whom the kings of the earth have committed
fornication, which have drunk of the wine of her fornication, the vvoma^
clothed in purple, scarlet, gould, pearls and precious stones, having a
goulden cup full of all filthiness and lusts of the world, the mother of
fornication, and droncke with the blood of the saints of JESUS CHRIST, the
habitatio^ of devils, and the cage of all evil spirits and hateful birds.

The occasion which first moved me hereunto was this, Anno domini 1554. our
Realm of England after the xx. year of her deliverance through the mercy
of God, most shamefullye forsook the holy Gospel of Christ, which is the
power and virtue of God to the health of all beleuers, and made a nevve
profession unto the great enemy of God the Roman devil and wicked
Antichrist. Of the which execrable deed thou shall read more in ye end of
this book. Partlye also the horrible vices which follovv this monster,
whereof the most prudent K. Henry the eight had good proof, when he caused
the houses of the hooded hypocrites, and the colleges of the massemongers in
his kingdom, before their utter destruction which was in the year of our
Lord God 1538. to be visited, by the worshipful doctors of the law, Thomas
Lee, Richard Laiton, Thomas Bedill, Thomas Barthlet the public notarie, and
such others. In the which there were such svvarmes of vvhoremo^gers,
ruffians, filthy parsons, giltye of sin against nature, Ganimedes, and yet
votaries and unmarried all, so that thou would think that there were a
nevve Gomorrha among them. The book of them is called the breuiary of things
found out in abbeyes, assemblies, colleges, etc. Out of the which book I
will show but one or other example, to an unsavory taste thereof. In the
monasterye called Battle abbey in the Diocese of Chichester, these many gilty
of sin against nature were found in the visitation, John the Abbot, Richard
Salchurst, Thomas Cuthberth, William March, John Hasting, Gregory Champio^,
Clement VVestfild, John Cross, Thomas Crambroke, Thomas Basil, John Hamfild,
John Hierome, Clemens Grigge, Richard Touye, and John Austine. These were
incontinente livers, Thomas Lyuet with one married wife and one harlot, Thomas
Cranbroke with the same, and other beside. Lo this is the chaste Religion of
the Pope.

At Canterbury among the Benedictine monks these were gilty of sin against
nature, Richard Godmersham, William Lichfild, Christopher James, John
Goldmistone, Nicolas Clement, William Causton, John Ambrose, Thomas Farlegh,
and Thomas Morton. Whoremongers, Christopher James aforesaid with three
married women, and Nicolas Clement with one harlot. In the Abbey of S.
Augustine these were found unchaste, John the Abbot with one woman, John
Langdan with two, John Langport with one, Richard Compton with one,
William Reynsforth with one, VVillia^ Godmerstone with two, David Franckes
with two, Robart saltvvood one, Laurence Goldstone one, William Holingborne
one, VVillia^ Milton one, John Shrevvsbery one, and Thomas Barha^ gilty of
sin against nature. In the abbey of Bath among many other Richard Lincombe
had vii. harlots, iij. married women, and iiii. singlevvomen and he was giltye
of sin against nature also, William Benushon had xi. harlots, beside diverse
gilty of sin against nature. In the abbey of Monkenferlege in Salisbury
diocese, Lewis the Prior had 9. harlots, Richard the Prior of Maiden Bradley
had v. harlots and six bastardes, William the Abbot of Bristovve had iiij.
harlots, iij. unmarried and one married. Thomas Abbot of Abingto^ beside his
own natural sister of whom he begat two children, had three other harlots,
and this man was the father of many that was gilty of sin against nature. In
the abbey of Sulbred in the diocese of Cicester George Walden Prior had vij.
harlots, John Standney vij. Nicolas duke v. Henry Selvvood two, with many
others. John Blanke Prior of Bermondsey had xi. harlots.

At the castle of VVyndsor Henry VVoodvvard had very many harlots, Nicolas
VVhyden had iiij. George VVhitthorne v. Nicolas Spoke v. Simon Tod one, Nicolas
Walker ij. William Vause one, Robart Dauison vj. Peter Boughe had many, and
so other had others.

In the Cathedral Church at Chichester, John Champion Prebendary of VValtam
had ij. harlots, VVillia^ Cross had one wife, Thomas Parker ij. harlots,
Richard Busteld one of vvho^ he begat a child, Barthelmevv Cokisley i. Robart
hunt had diverse, Tho. Goffe had ij. being other men's wives, John Hill xiij.
harlots, Robart Moore had many, Roger Barham many, John Bedfild many, with
others, among yt which the forsaid Roger Barham and John Champion were gilty
of sin against nature. These were taken out of the foresaid book. Behold
what monsters Popery has nourished throughout England in abbeyes and
colleges. Are not these foul birds most iustlye banished with their most
filthye Pope, the Romish Idol? In all other places as well in congregations
as colleges the like things are committed and done, the which were to long
or rather to shameful thoroughly to declare, for they gate unto them in most
places through this Popish Religion, either the French pockes or the Spanishe
decease. And there were in England more then xl. Abbeyes of diverse kinds of
monks, beside the most wicked nests of the begging friars, of the which
there were almost two hundredth. Unto whom these verses do aptlye agree. It
is not sure a miss that monks should fathers termed be,
Since such swarms of their bastard brats in every place they see.
There is yet a third matter which forced me hereunto, and having seen and
heard these things vehemently moved me to write. This is the precepte of
Christ in the xviij. Chapter of the Revelation of S. John: For a voice came
from heaven from the right hand of the father and the everlasting throne of
Christ, with a great voice sounded in our ears saying. Go from her my people
lest ye be made partakers of her wickedness, and ye receive part of her
punishment. For her sins are gone up to heaven, and God has remembered her
wickedness. And then commandment follovveth which was given against the
beast with seven heads. Revvard her even as she has revvarded you, and give
her double according to her works, and pour in double to her in the same cup
which she filled unto you. And forasmuch as she glorified her self and lived
vvantonly, so much pour you into her of punishment and sorrovve. This is the
word of the Lord declared unto us as well here as in the fiftye Chap. of
Jeremy. That this serpent might perish and all his doings brought to naught.
Yet for all this I do well remember the sayings of S. Paul, that al Princes
ought to be honored although they be wicked and unprofitable for a common
wealth, because they be placed there of God, neither to speak evil of them
being but vvotmes, dust and ashes, Neither dare I murmur against the
providence of God, which is contrary to his holy word. Therefore from the
bottom of my heart I beseech our Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ, that he
would have mercy upon all Kings, Princes and Nations, and so provide that
all nations may be so governed as is most tending to his glory: For whose
reueng he has most stoutly fortifyed me up in this my old age. Not studying
to derogate or take away the honor from any Christian King, but only to
inuey against the Romish beast, the Synagog of Satan, and most wicked
Antichrist, with the vvritings and testimonye of most learned men.

If I shall have said any thing sharper then thou did look for (most gentle
Reader) consider I pray you the hudge tira^ny of this most wicked Viper of the
world, whose destruction according to Gods promises is at hand. Great
Babylon shall fall which has seduced many Nations, and shall be destroyed the
whole world marueylinge thereat. If the vehemencye of my style shall offend
thee, behold the marvelous force of the holy ghost in the Prophet David and
most holy king, who in the Lords cause most stoutlye said: I have hated the
congregation of the wicked, Psalm. 25. He promises also afterward by his
Prophets, that he vvoulde destroy the brothell houses and wicked places.
Ezechi. 16. I will shevve faith the Lord unto all Nations thy nakedness, and to
al kingdoms thy shame Nahum. 3. Thy dishonor and filthiness shall be opened,
and thy reproach shall be seen, I will be revenged, and none shall resist
me, Esaias* 47. VVoe be unto those Kings as many as have worshipped the beast
or have aided her, or have received help of her, or have committed fornication
with her, as many as have served her, and have joined hands against the
Lamb, and vvaged battle for her cause, because their names are not written
in the book of life from the beginning of the world. And the Lamb shall
overcome them at the last like a Lord of Lords, and king of kings, and they
shall go together with the beast to destruction and utter dampnation,
Apocalips 17. GOD therefore give in the hearts of Christians whom the x.
horns do shadovve, that they may faithfully execute this his will and
judgment, that they may make her desolate and leave her naked, that they may
eat her flesh and burn her in fire, that is, let her abide her last
punishment for the sheding of the innocent blood, of so many faithful
Christians. Be it done, Be it done. Amen.

To the Reader. T. R. GENTLEMAN.
THe worthy wits of elder years have traueld sea and land,
To seek and search the wondrous works of naturs skilful hand:
And men's delight has ever bin most ugly things to vewe,
To look on creatures out of kind, as monsters old and new.
If therefore thou as other men my friend affected be,
And do desire ugly things, and monsters strange to see:
Then take the pain to seek and search within this little book,
And here thou shall upon so strange a mongrell monster look:
As never nature bread on earth, whose shape is in this wise,
As I shall partly portrature the same before thine eyes.
It is a little beast that has ten horns, seven heads, and crownets seven,
Who with his tail from clouds to clouds swepes down ye stars of heaven.
Upon whose back in princely pomp, and glistring gold array,
And proudly pranckt in precious pearls, and clad in purple gaye,
The stately strompet sittes, that is the whore of Babylon,
And in her hand a golden cup of fornication.
Wherewith the world she poysond has which dronken with her wine,
Has fallen down flat unto the beast, as to a god divine:
Which forced kings to leave their crowns, and Keiser stoop for awe,
While on his royal neck the beast has said his filthy pawe.
Who has the mighty monarkes made to hold his stirrope low,
And caused them on humble knees to come to kiss his toe:
Who forced great estates to stand barefooted in the streate,
And proudly put the crown on head of princes with his feet.
And made the son and subject both against their king and ^yre,
Often to rebel whose burning breath set all the world on fire:
Who has blasphemd our glorious God, with thousand mischiefs more
Lo to be brief, such is the beast of whom I spoke before.
Which erst discovered was by Bale among the rocks of Rome,
And by the painful pen of S. is into England come.
That every man may know the same, and learn to shone the beast,
Who while she lorked close did spy mankind by East and Weast.
Accept therefore my friends good will, that thus his travel spent,
Praise God for it, and him for pain that this unto thee sent.
FINIS.
THE FIRST BOOK of the Pageant of Popes.
S. Peter not bishop of Rome.
FOR so much as the Bishops of Rome have claimed, and do still claim their
usurped supremacy by right of inheritance and succession from Peter, because he
(as they pretend) was bishop of Rome at the least.xxv. years, and so tied all
this dignity and prerogative (which they fight for) to his chair for ever:
It shall be therefore nedeful to consider, how likely it is to be true, that Peter
continued bishop in Rome according to their boasting. This matter shall be the
better displayed if these three points be laid open to the readers eye: that
is the year that Peter came to Rome, the years that Peter sat at Rome, and the
death of Peter.

Of S. Peter's coming to Rome.
Touching the time of his coming to Rome, their own histories do write so
uncertainly that it seems more certain that he never came there.

First their legendary of saints lives called Passionale, Passionale.
counts that he came not there till the xiii. year of Claudius, and that
should be the 55. year of the incarnacion of Christ, and 22. year after his
death.

Platina says, that in the second year of Claudius, being the xi. year after
the death of Christ, Platina in vita Petri.
Peter came to Rome being the head of the world, partly because he perceived
that this was a seat pontificali dignitati conuenientem, fit for po^tifical
dignity, partly because of Simon Magus. Thus he makes that partly ambicion
and dignity drew Peter to Rome, there to take his ease contrary to the duty
and doing of the poor paynfull and godly Apostle, who as he had in charge by
Jesus Christ, travailed still from place to place, not for the dignity of a
bishop at Rome, but to plant the Gospel throughout the world.

Orosius says he came sooner, even in the beginning of the reign of Claudius:
lib. 7. cap. 6.

Fasciculus temporum says, he came not till the fourth year of Claudius.

Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 13.
Eusebius says, that by Gods especial providence he came to Rome. Euestigio
sub ipso Claudij imperio. Out of hand under Claudius his reign Peter came to
Rome because of Simon Magus.

In Claudio.
Vspergensis says, some report that he came in the beginning of the reign of
Claudius: some say, not till the second year: Other say, that he came not
till the fourth year of his regiment: Again, some think that he came in the
beginning thereof, but took not upon him to be bishop till the fourth year of
Claudius: Other think that he was bishop forthwith as soon as he came.

Ennead. 7. lib. 2.
Sabellicus says, that he came to Rome altero anno regiminis eius (Claudij):
in the second year of Claudius his regiment.

Naucler says, that he came to Rome in the fourth year of Claudius, and began
his bishoprike the same year in Rome: in secunda generatione vol: 2.

It were to long to recite all the opinions of Peter's coming to Rome and his
enstalling: but by these it may appear how the Roman Jury can give no
certain verdit upon such unconstant evidence.

The continuance of Peter in his Bishoprike.
S. Jerome says, he reigned xxvii. years.

Beda says, he sat at Rome xxix. years.

Fasciculus Temporum, hitteth it iump and misseth not one day, saying: he was
martyred by Nero after he had been bishop of Rome xxv. years vii. months and
viii, days.

The most do agree to this account as Vspergensis, Platina, and other, that he
reigned not above xxv. years.

Peter's death.
NIcephorus says, he was buried in the xxxvii. year after the death of
Christ.

Of these premises this is to be gathered that Peter came to Rome at the
furthest in the fourth year of Claudius, and that is, the xiii. year after
the death of Christ, and reigned there xxv. years at the least: and was put
to death there in the last year of Nero, being the 38. year after the death
of Christ. This seems to be most probable, and in taking this time we shall
seem to deal most favorably with the papiste, who would so feign derive this
bastard brau^che of Romain prelates from the holy Apostle: so that if it can be
proved, yt Peter sat not bishop of Rome these xxv. years, then must the Pope
seek out a new petagrewe for his succession falsely fathered upon Peter: his
ancient continuance of hundred years, being disproued by the scripture being
more ancient, can prove nothing for lawful regiment, but rather improve him
of unlawful usurping for so long time. And therefore for the more evident
understanding hereof it shall be most convenient to confer the years of the
Emperors with the years of Christ his incarnation and death, which for the
more ease I have set forth in this table following: wherein appears that our
savior Christ suffered death in the 33. year of his age, in the 18. year of
Tiberius, who reigned in all 23. years, thereof v. years after Christ's death.
The next is Caligula reigning three years x. months viii. days. Then
succeeded Claudius for 13. years 8. months and 28. days. Last was Nero,
continuing 13. years 10. months and 18 days, all which time being added
together does make almost 37. years, which is the time that Peter lived
after the death of our savior: Nicepho. li. 2. cap. 34
as Nicephorus testifies.

The years of Christ's incarnation. The years after Christ's death. The
years of the Emperors. The years after Paul. conversion. 33 Christ died
Tiberins. 18 34 1 19 35 2 20 Paul con. 36 3 21 1 37 4 22 2 38 5 23 3 39 6
Caligula. 4 40 7 2 5 41 8 3 6 42 9 4 7 43 10 Claudius. 8 44 11 2 9 45 12 3 10
46 13 4 11 47 14 5 12 48 15 6 13 49 16 7 14 50 17 8 15 51 18 9 16 52 19 10 17
53 20 11 18 54 21 12 19 55 22 13 20 56 23 14 21 57 24 Nero. 22 58 25 2 23 59 26
3 24 60 27 4 25 61 28 5 26 62 29 6 27 63 30 7 28 64 31 8 29 65 32 9 30 66 33 10
31 67 34 11 22 68 35 12 33 69 36 13 34 70 37 14 35 Galba.

Whether Peter were bishop of Rome before the death of Christ, seeing there is
no question to be made, it needs not to be spoken of: for the time after his
death it follows that for the first year after our redemption Peter went not
to Rome, but continued about Jerusalem (saving once that he went to Samaria
for a season) till the conversion of Paul, Act. 8.
as appears by all the discourse of the Acts of the Apostles, till ye come to
the ninth chapter thereof: which because it is easy there to find, tedious
to be set down at large, and nothing doubted of, I leave it to the diligence
of the reader, who shall plainly perceive, that Peter was still in Judea to
the conversion of Paul, which was in the second year after the death of
Christ, the year of thincarnatio^ 35. for Niceph. says, that he preached 35.
years, lib. 2. cap. 34. and he died in the last year of Nero, being the 70.
year of thincarnacion: from which take 35. and the remain is as much: so
that in the 35. year of Christ Paul was converted.

Peter not at Rome from the year of the incarnation 35. to the year 38.
ANno Domini 37. Pilate (as Eusebius lib. 2. cap. 2. and Vspergensis testify)
wrote his letter to Tiberius, concerning Christ, his doctrine, divine
miracles, death, and resurrection: whereupon the Emperor commanded that
Christ should be placed among the Gods of Rome: If Peter now had been bishop
at Rome or a year before, this had not been so strange news to the Emperor:
Neither had Pilates letter prevailed so much with the Emperor touching
Christ, as the doctrine and miracles, which Peter would (for confirming of the
faith) have done in the name of Jesus.

The year following being the 38. was the third year from the conversion of
Paul, in which year Paul returned to Jerusalem and found Peter there, as
is testified in the first to the Galathians: which coming of Paul is
specefied in the ninth of the Acts.

From the year 38. to the year 46.
AFter Paul had been a while in Jerusalem, he was sent away to Tarsus. Act.
9.
And at that time S. Luke says, that the church had peace throughout all
Judea, Galilye, and Samaria. And that Peter did walk over all those
cou^treies, where they proceaded in the fear of God, the believing multiplied.
How many years Peter spent in these countreies, it is not evident: but
immediately from thence he did ascend to Lydda, and there healed Aeneas, who had
been lame eight years: the fame of which miracle drew thither all the
inhabitours of Lydda and Sarona, who by Peter's preaching were all converted to
the lord: These things do argue that Peter made some abode in Lydda also:
Immediately from thence he went to Ioppa, where he revived Tabitha, and tarried
at Ioppa with Simon the Tanner a long season: From thence he went forthwith to
Cornelius the Centurion at Cesarea, Act. 10.
where he preached, and baptized those that were converted: and there also he
was entreated to tarry for a time. From thence he came to Jerusalem, Act. 11.
where he continued, till he being imprisoned by Herod, was delivered by Gods
Angel, and being set at liberty, Act. 12.
showed him self secretly to the congregation at the house of Mary, and then
conveyed him self away: And this was done as appears by Luke, the same
year that Herod or Agrippa having reigned 7. years, Ieseph. anti. lib. 19.
cap. 7
died afterward at Cesarea, stricken by Gods Angel: who being as Josephus
says, released out of prison, and made king there by Caligula reigned in all
seven years:

Caligula would have restored this Agrippa to his liberty, Joseph. Anti. lib.
18. cap. 8.
as soon as he him self came to the Empier, even the same day that the
solemnity was kept for the burial of his predecessor Tiberius. But (says
Josephus) Antonia the wife of Caligula, gave him counsel that he should noe do
so, but pause a while longer, not because she was loath that Agrippa should be
at liberty, but because the Emperor by delivering of him so spedely, should
be thought that he did it in despite of Tiberius, who had committed him to
prison, and therefore it was deferred for a season, and at length he was
delivered: then the next year Agrippa craved leave of Caligula to go into
Iudaea to his kingdom, which was granted him. So that by this computation it
may easily appear, that whereas Agrippa (as Joseph says) died in the seventh
year of his reign, this seventh year does arise to the fourth year of
Claudius, who did next succeed Caligula. Thus it is apparent that Herod or
Agrippa as Joseph calls him, died in the 46. year of the incarnation, and
that the same year Peter was prisoner at Jerusalem as is said before, and
not bishop at Rome.

Another reason to prove that it should be this year, may be this: S. Luke in
the xii. chapter of the Acts says, that this Herod had conceived displeasure
against the Tirians and Sidonians, which was the cause, that after the same
Easter that Peter was imprisoned, he went down from Jerusalem to Caesarea,
whether the Tirians and Sidonians came unto him, and by the intercession of
Blastus the kings chamberlain they sued for peace at his hand, because
(says Luke) in the 20. verse of the 12. chapter of the Acts, their country
was nourished by the kings country: signifiyng that the provision of king
Agrippa aided their necessity in the time of the famine being then. This
dearth and famine is that, whereof Agabus the prophet did prophecy at Antioch,
which says Luke Acts the xi. came to pass in the reign of Claudius, and as
other authors have noted it was in the fourth year of Claudius, so says Vsper
gensis: Thus we se that yet to this fourth year of Claudius by which time at
the uttermost Peter should not only be at Rome, but begin his regiment over the
church, he is yet at Jerusalem, which is 1600. miles from Rome: But because
that Luke says, after that he was delivered by the Angel out of prison, and
after that he had signified his delivery to Mary, he conuayed him self away
from thence. I will proceed to examine, whether he went not now from Jerusalem
to Rome, and therefore go to the two years that ensued next.

Anno 48: and 49.
ANno domini 49. Peter was at Jerusalem: for this year the counsel was held
at Jerusalem: mentioned in the xv. of the Acts. At which synod Peter was
present, and made an oration as is showed in the vii. verse of the said
chapter. But now it remains to be proved, that this Synod was at this time:
for proof hereof Saint Paul speaking of his coming to this counsel in the
second chapter to the Galathians, says: Then after 14. years I came again
up to Jerusalem, and Barnabas with me etc. by the rest that follows it is
evident that Paul signified his coming to this counsel, and not any other
time of his repairing to Jerusalem: and so also does S. Hierome understand
it, which being xiiii. years after the conversion of Paul, falls out to be
in the year of our Lord 49. and the seventh year of the reign of Claudius, as
may appear by the former table: And yet is Peter still in his Apostelship at
Jerusalem: and not in his pontifical dignity at Rome.

But here it may be fayde, that S. Hierome and diverse other which follow him,
do reckon that this synod was held Anno domini 51. and do ground it upon the
foresaid words of Paul* for where as. Paul speaking of his conversion at
Damasco, says: that after three years he came to Jerusalem, and then after
fourtene years he returned again to Jerusalem: this is to be understood,
not xiiii. years from his conversion, but from his former being at Jerusalem,
and so consequently in the xvii. year of his conversion, which should be also
the ix. year of the reign of Claudius: This is the computation of Hierome:
but this is easily disproued: for in the Orosius, li. 7. cap. 6.
ninth year of Claudius, the Jews were all banished from Rome, because says
Suetonius, they made tumultes, Impulsore Christo, by means of Christ: And at
this time Paul was at Athens, as Vspergensis writes, In Claud. cap. 24.
and it appears like wise by the history of the Acts: for Paul departing
from Athens, went to Corinth, where he met with Aquila and Priscilla, who
(says the text) were lately come from Italy, Act. 18.
because Claudius had commanded that all Jews should depart from Rome: This
being evident that Paul was at this time at Athens, it is further to be
considered whether he might not be at Jerusalem the same year at the counsel
or no. Most certain it is that Paul was at the counsel, and that it was
held before his coming to Athens, and that so long time that the only
consideration thereof might be sufficient to prove, that the same synod was
not held the same year: For those questions being discussed about which they
were assembled, Act. 15.
Paul and Barnaba with certain other returned with letters from Jerusalem to
Antioche, where they stayed, and tarried preaching and teaching for a time, till
at the length Paul agreed with Barnabas to go visit the brethren, in those
cities where they had taught the gospel. So that Paul passed from Antioche to
Syria, and Cilicia, confirming the churches: Afterward he came to Derba and
Lystra, Act. 16.
where he found Timothy, and having circumcized him he took him with him, and
as they passed forth (says Luke) from city to city they gave unto them the
institutions of the Apostles and Elders of of Jerusalem, that they should
observe them, so that the churches were confirmed in faith and increased daily:
Also they walked throughout Phrygia and Galacia, and being forbidden by the
spirit to preach in Asia, they went to Nysia, from thence to Troada, from
thence to Samothracia, then to Neaples, and so to Philippis, and stayed there
certain days, Act. 17.
from thence to Thessalonica, where Paul preached three wekes, from thence he
went to Beraea, and there preached with great fruit, till the Jews came
thither from Thessalonica to disquiet him, and from this Berea Paul was
conveyed to Athens: Now let the diligent reader consider all these iourneies
with other circumstances, as continuance of time, and distance of place, and
Paul's abiding in every place to preach diligently, and then judge whether the
forsayde synod could be held this same year that Paul came to Athens: Waying
also that many more notable cities are in these cou^treies Galacia, Mysia,
Phrigia, and the rest, visited by Paul but not spoken of in the Acts: Again
considering that the Apostle traueled by land all most altogether and that by
leasurable iourneyes on foot, he could not finishe thousands of miles in
short time, but yt it were very hard for him to come to Athens the same year.
Beside all this if it were to be understood as Hierome makes it, then if ye
account it in the table, ye shall find it to be one year further, yt is the
year 52. and it is plain to be more untrue, for then by this time Paul had
continued a year in Corinthe, and so had not been in Jerusalem in two years
before:

The conclusion therefore is, that the said counsel could not be holde^
according to the account made by Hierome* and therefore S. Paul's words must
be understood as I said before, namely of fourtene years after his
conversion: and then it is evident that Peter was yet in Jerusalem in the
year 49.

But to proceed: it may be demanded, where Peter was from the time of his
delivery out of prison at Jerusalem to the time of this synod: that is from
the fourth year of Claudius to the seventh year of his reign. Perhaps Peter
went to Rome at some time between those years. Nicephorus says, that in the
fifth year of Claudius Peter was at Jerusalem, Nicepho. li. 2. cap. 21.
at the death of the virgin Mary. But if we weigh diligently the history of the
scripture, conferring one place with an other, it shall appear that although
it be not specified in the acts, yet Peter was at Antioche in this time. For
Paul in the second to the Gallathians says, that Peter came to Antioche,
which could not be at any time before this time of his delivery out of prison
as may appear by the former part of this discourse. Again diverse reasons
there are, which move me to think that it was before the time of this
counsel: for first Peter being at Antioche Paul says of him self, that he
reproved Peter even to his face, because that he did eat with the Gentiles,
till certain came from James from Jerusalem, and then Peter being afraid to
offend those circumcised, did shrink away from the Gentiles. And the rest of
the Jews yea and Barnabas also fell into the same dissimulation with them.
This dissembling of Peter is one reason to prove that it was before the
counsel, for it seemed to Peter a doubtful matter, whether he might be
conuersaunt with the Gentiles, which if it had been as it was afterward by the
counsel determined, that circumcision was not necessary, then had Peter been
out of doubt what to do therein, and would have dealt plainly according to the
truth which he had known manifestly: Again if it had been after the counsel,
the matter being discussed and agreed upon, Peter should not have had any cause
to dissemble for fear of offending them in that point, that came from James:
neither neded he to have mistrusted that they would mislike of that, which
should have been allowed by the church: neither would Peter have regarded more
their unjust offense, then the decre of the counsel. Last of all in the
beginning of the 15. of the Acts Luke makes mention of such that came from
Jerusalem and troubled the church at Antioche about circumcision, and how
Paul and Barnabas stood against them, and hereupon ensued the said counsel.
And thus it appears that Peter was at Antioch at this time, and hitherto
therefore to the year of the incarnacion 49 he came not within a thousand miles
of Rome.

Anno Domini 50. and 51.
IN the latter year of these twain being the ninth year of Claudius, Oros.
lib. 7 cap. 6.
all the Jews (as is proved before) were vanished from Rome: which
overthrows the establishing of Peter's bishopric for that year.

And as for the former year by their own stories it seems not to be the time
of his coming, for at his first coming Simon Magus as Platina reports, was
in such honor at Rome through the admiration of his sorcery, that he was
honored as a God: for a pillar was set up between two bridges, whereupon it
was written, Simoni sancto Deo, To Simon the holy God: so that Peter had a
great conflict ere he could root out the credit of Simon Magus, and plant the
Gospel and Jesus Christ in the hearts of the Romans, which by the
testimony of Platina he did so effectually ere he left, that in the end Simon
Magus being brought to contempt, Simon Peter was reuere^ced and honored
almost like a God. All this asks more time and leisure to be brought to
pass, then Peter could hitherto obtain in Rome.

Concerning these former two years this may be said briefly. Platina and the
rest of the Roman registers do auoutche that Peter after he left Jerusalem,
went to Antioche and continued there bishop seven years, or as some other
think five years at the least, or he came to Rome. This being allowed of them
for a manifest truth on the one side, and it being evident by the scripture by
the premises, that this bishoprike at Antioche could not be established at the
vttermoste till the years 49. it follows by their account, that it is sure,
that for these years 52. and 53. being within the compass of the forenamed
five years, Peter was not at Rome but at Antioche, nothing nearer to Rome then
is Jerusalem.

Anno 52, 53, and 54.
TOuching the last year of these that is the year 54. and the twelth year of
Claudius, it is evident that Peter was not bishop at Rome, for then Paul wrote
his epistle thither to the Romans, in the sixtenth chapter whereof he ends
his epistle with particular salutacions to xviii. persons by name, beside
private housholdes: and among those xviii. eight or nine were women, and yet
there is no mention made of Peter, surely if Peter had gone thither before the
writing of this epistle, so that Paul might have then thought that he had been
there, Paul would not so have neglected the worthy Apostle among the rest,
unless he should seem to make less account of him in the church then of
women: if therefore the epistle were now written it is probable, Peter was not
now at Rome. But it is apparent enough that the epistle was written at this
time. Paul in the xv. chapter and the 24 verse to the Romans promises that
he would come to Rome, but excuses him self that he came not presently, for
now (says he) I am going to Jerusalem, so that hereby it seems to be
written in his journey at some time going to Jerusalem. But it is needful to
consider at what time especially this was because he went thither five several
times as it appears, first in the ninth, secondly in the twelfth, thirdly in
the xv. fourthly in the xviii. fifthly and last that is mentioned in scripture
in the xxi. chapter of the Acts. And touching the first three times, it could
not be at any of those voiages, because Paul had not yet met with Timothe, for
he found him not as it is showed in the sixtenth of the acts, til after his
third coming from Jerusalem, from the synod: but at the writing of this
epistle Timothy was in his company, for in the end of his epistle he sends
commendacions in the name of Timothy. Roman. 16.
Then of those two ascendings after his acquaintance with Timothy, it is
plain that it could not be that he wrote it at the first time mentioned in the
18 of the Acts, for in the 18. verse of the same chapter, ere Paul returned
to Jerusalem it is said that he departed from Corinthe to Syria, and
Priscilla and Aquila, went with him to Ephesus, where he left them and would
not stay being thereto requested, because he hasted to Jerusalem, whether he
went immediately: At this ascending to Jerusalem, this epistle seems not to be
written, because in the 16. chapter thereof he sends co^mendacio^s to Aquila
and Priscilla, who were with him in the most part of this journey, Act. 18.
and almost two years before continually at Corinthe, who parting from Paul
went not to Rome as he knew, but stayed at Ephesus, where he left them
promising to return thither to them. But if any make this objection, that
because of these salutacions to Aquila and Priscilla this epistle might be
written before they came from Rome, at some time of Paul's going to Jerusalem,
this is answered with that which I have noted before, that it could not be
so, because Paul was not then acquainted with Timothy, with whom he met but
even lately before he came to Corinthe, and went not to Jerusalem, from the
time that he found Timothy till now, that he left Aquila and Priscilla at
Ephesus: the conclusion therefore is, that this epistle was written to Rome at
the last time that Paul went up to Jerusalem, and by that time might Aquila
and Priscilla he returned to Rome: Beside all this, in the 19. of the Acts
and the 20. verse, Luke says that Paul purposed through the spirit after he
had walked through Macedonia and Achaia to go to Jerusalem, saying: after I
have been there I must go to s^ Rome, here he seems to be first (that is
me^cioned) mindful of Rome, and this was at his last going to Jerusalem: But
confer this place with his own words in the xv. chapter and 23. verse of
his epistle, and it will plain appear that the same epistle was written at
this time above named, his words be these: I have longed many years to se
you, when so ever I go into Spain I will come to you etc. But now I go to
Jerusalem to minister to the saints: for it has pleased Macedonia and
Achaia, to imparte somewhat to the poor saints at Jerusalem, etc. As soon
as I have dispatched this etc. I will go from hence into Spain.




Finally Paul mistrusting the cruelty of the Jews against him at this time
more then heretofore, and that truly as it fell out, Acts the 21. desires the
Romans earnestly to pray for him, that God would deliver him from those
rebels which were in Judea. All the which I allege to testify against
the judgment of diverse other that this epistle by most presumpcio^s was
written the last time of Paul's going to Jerusalem, which was in the twelft
year of Claudius, the 54. year of the incarnation: for Luke testifies that
Paul was two year there prisoner before that Foelix the president of Judea
departed, and Festus came in his stead: who was sent thither by Nero in the
beginning of his reign immediately upon the death of Claudius who departed in
the 14. year of his Empier, as Josephus testifies Antiquit. lib. 20. cap. 5.
Again in the same place Josephus shows that in the xi. year of Claudius,
Foelix was made Liuetenaunt of Judea, who as it appears by Tertullus oracion
against Paul, Acts the 24. had been in Judea at the least a year ere Paul
came thither, so that considering he came thither in the xi. year, and tarried
but to the xiiii year of Claudius, and Paul was prisoner two years before
his departure, it falls out that Paul came to Jerusalem about the xii.
year of Claudius, and that the epistle was written to Rome the same year, and
finally that this year Peter had not his prerogative papal at Rome. And of
this judgment is Calvin saying, yt this epistle to the Romans seems to be
written four years before that Paul came to Rome. Instituti. cap. 8.
sectione. 101.

Furthermore S. Ambrose upon the Epistle to the Romans says, that he has
red in certain old books that at the sending of this Epistle Narcissus whom
with his family Paul saluteth, was then the Seniour of the congregation at
Rome: Ergo not Peter.

Anno. 55.56.57.58.
IN the second year of Nero, being the 58. year of the incarnacion, Paul
came to Rome by the testimony of Vspergensis: In Nerone: and Eusebius li. 2.
cap. 21. At which time it is evident that Peter was not bishop according to the
Roman brag: for when Paul came to Rome, Luke being then with him says,
Act. 28.
that the brethren hearing of us came forth to mete us etc. but there is no
mention made of Peter, neither coming nor sending to Paul. The third day
after, Paul sent for the chief of the Jews, reasoning with them about the
faith, who answered him thus. We will hear what thou do think: for we
know that this sect is spoken against every where: When Paul had ended his
sermon, the Jews fell at variaunce about it, for some believed, and some
believed not. This answer and doing of the Jews shows, that they had heard
but little of Christ, till the coming of Paul: nothing so much as they
should have heard and known, if Peter being (by faith and promise their
peculier Apostle) had been bishop in Rome these twelve years since the fourth
of Claudius, or but at any time within these four years since the epistle of
Paul was sent to Rome. Neither can it be excused to say, that he might be
bishop, and yet not meddle with preaching to the Jews, but exercise him self
in converting the Gentiles, this excuse cannot take place, for if Peter had
been in Rome, he ought chiefly to have conferred with the Jews: for as Paul
says in the ninth verse of the second to the Galathians, that by promise
Paul was appointed Apostle to the Gentiles, and Peter to the Jews, and
therefore as we se that Paul discharged his duty in that point to the
Gentiles, so is it to be thought, that Peter did likewise to the circumsized,
as partly appears by his first epistle written namely to the dispersed Jews
in Pontus, Galatia, Capadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, unto the which thing
Eusebius lib. 3. cap. 4. thinks he did wholly addict him self: And therefore
it is not likely that Peter hitherto had any such prerogative in Rome as the
Pope dreameth of.

Anno. 59. and 60.
Act. 28.
IT appears that for these two years Peter came not yet to his dignity, for
Paul coming prisoner to Rome, did continue there as Luke testifies, two
years, all the which time says Nicephorus, he lived by the labor of his
hands, lib. 2. cap. 3. If Peter had been at Rome as Platina would have him in
Pontifical dignity, he would have provided so, that Paul should not have
been in such distress: But it is manifest, that he was not there all this
time: by those epistles that were now written by Paul from Rome: For in those
epistles there is no mencio^ made of Peter's being with him. Galat. 1
In the epistle to the Galathians Paul being compelled to confirm the
authority of his doctrine and Apostleship, which some sought to deface,
speaks much of former acquaintance between him and Peter, how he came to
Jerusalem, Act. 9. to se Peter: And how he reproved him at Antioche etc. And
yet he makes no mention of his being with him at this time, especially when
Peter's testimony by subscripcion or otherwise might most have confirmed Paul's
cause, and have testified his doctrine to be as autenticall, as that which the
other Apostles taught. Which opportunity if Paul should have omitted, when it
might both have stood him in steed, and might best have been obtained, it
should have given greater occasion, to increase the discredit and mistrust of
Paul's function and preaching: And this would the wise and careful Apostle
have considered, who omitted no opportunity to the furtheraunce of the Gospel.
etc.

Again by the latter Epistle to Timothy, written at Paul's latter
imprysonnement in Rome, as Eusebius. li. 2 cap. 21. testifies, it appears
that Peter was not with him at the time of his former captivity by these
words: In my first defense (meaning when he answered for him self first
before Nero) no man assisted me. Timoth. 2. cap. 4.
If Peter had been there, surely Paul should not have had cause thus to
complain, onles Peter's charity had waxen so cold that he would forsake his
fellow Apostle. Which if it had been so (as I dare not imagine it) then would
Paul have noted him by name to Timothy as he did Demas, Hymeneus, and
Philetus. If he had succored him, he would have been mindful to make
thankful report thereof, as he did of Onesimus and diverse other, Aquila and
Priscilla: Furthermore, Tim. 2. 4* Romans 18
ye Epistle to the Colossians was also written at this time as it appears by
mention made of Demas, who now was with Paul, but afterward forsook him, as
appears in the second to Timothy. Beside that by Onesimus, (who was with
Paul onele in his first captivity, and carried these letters to Colossa) it is
plain that it was written at this time, and yet among all other that are there
named Peter is put up in silence.

The Epistle begins, Paul and Timothy, if Peter had been there he had been
added also.

Finally, S. Luke being all this time of imprisonment with Paul, and
continuing his story till the end of Paul's imprisonment, for so he concludes
the history of the Acts, saying that Paul continued two whole years in a
place which he had hired in Rome, receiving all that came in unto him
preaching with all liberty, and teaching those things that were in Christ
Jesus, and no man forbad him. Thus does Luke testify of Paul, and yet he
speaks not one word that Peter should the^ be there, or yt he had been
there at any time, neither that he should come thither at any time after. Thus
are four years of Neroes reign passed, and yet is Peter not reigning to this
time in his diocese whereof he took possession (by the Romish registers)
fourtene years since.

From the year 60. to the year 67.
IN the year of thincarnation 60. Paul as is said, was prisoner at Rome, who
for the time of his abode there, so planted the Gospel, that at his departing
from thence he left great fruit thereof, and such in deed as if Peter had
succeeded Paul within two, three, or four years, and there supplied the room
of a bishop, Cornelius Tacitus speaking of the estate of the Christians in Rome
about the year 67. being but seven years after Paul's departure, should not
have had cause so soon to say as he does, y^ by that time the Christian
Religion was repressed: For Vspergensis says, that in the 67. year, Nero did
set Rome on fire, of the which Cornelius Tacitus writing, lib. 15. Augustae
historiae, says: Ergo abole^do rumori Nero subdidit reos. etc. Therefore Nero
(to stop the rumor of his setting the city on fire) suborned guilty persons,
and executed with strange punishment, those whom the vulgar people detesting
for their wickedness, does call Christians. That mischeuous superstition being
repressed till now, brake out again, etc. Therefore first they were taken that
confessed it, afterward by their accusation an houge multitude, not so much for
that they were gilty of fyreing the city as for hatred, are condemned, and
were put to death with great despite, some encased in the skins of wild
beasts, that they might be torn in pieces with dogs, some crucified, some
were burned to give light in the night time. etc. These are the words of
Tacitus, notwithstanding, as it appears he was a blasphemer of the name of
Christ. By these words of his it appears that now Christianity began to
revive, and that now it was quenched: which argues plain that from the
former time of Paul's departure til this time, Peter had not supplied in Rome
the place of a preaching pastor and dilligent bishop. And seeing this broyle
against the Christians, began now to be so hot not in all places, but
especially in Rome, how could Peter sit quietly in this city as bishop
thereof and not be fyred out with his flock: but they say all that he lived
after this time about three years, for this was done in the eleventh year of
Nero, who reigned almost xiiii. years, and Peter was martyred in the last
year of Nero, as they say all. If this reviving of the Gospel was by Peter's
means, why would Nero spare him being the head: if Peter escaped by flying,
then he showed him self to be an hierling and no true shepeherde that
forsakes his flock when he sees the wolf come.

From the year 67. to the 70. of thincarnation.
Now are we come to the latter time of Nero, in which years if Peter were not
bishop of Rome, then is it certain that he was not bishop there at all. But to
come to the purpose, Naucler. Volu. 2. generat. 2. and the most writers as
Eusebius. lib. 2 cap. 25 Nicephorus li. 2. cap. 34. Sabellicus Ennead. 7. li.
2. agree that Paul died in the year of our Lord 70. the 37. year after the
death of Christ: But it may sone appear yt Peter was not then bishop at
Paul's last coming to Rome, for after Paul was come thither he sent for
Timothy to come unto him, showing that he had need of him to come to him,
because he was now desolate and had none with him, Demas had forsaken him now
and embraced the world, etc. so that if this Epistle were not written at the
first imprisonment of Paul, but at this latter time, then was not Peter yet
estalled in his Diocese, for if he had been in Rome in his pontifical
dignity, I think Paul should not have been driven to send to Ephesus 1000.
miles from Rome for Timothy to bring Mark to come to minister to him. In the
end of this second Epistle to Timothy, Paul sends commendations from
diverse, but none from Peter.

There are xiiii. Epistles whereof Paul and Seneca bear the name, the one
writing to the other at this later imprysonnement, and yet among them all
nothing is said of Peter, and yet by occasion he might easily have been
mentioned in them, if he had been then in Rome. But if by this time Peter were
not yet Pope of Rome, there is no time left for him to come to enjoy it during
the reign of Nero, till whose death this present persecution of the church
endured with all cruelty.

The death of Peter.
TOuching the death of Peter all writers do not agree as it is sufficiently
declared in the Acts and monumentes fol. 56. in these words. They that follow
the common opinion and the Popes decrees say that both Peter and Paul
suffered both in one day and one year, which opinion seems to be taken out
of Dionisius bishop of Corinthe. Hierome in his book De viris illustr.
affirms that they suffered both in one day, but he expresses not the
year, so does Isiodorus and Eusebius. Prudentius in his Peristephano, notes
that they both were put to death upon the same day but not in the same year,
and says that Paul followed Peter a year after. Abdias records that Paul
suffered two years after Peter. Moreover if it be true which Abdias says,
that after the crucifying of Peter, Paul remained in his free custody at Rome,
mentioned in the 28. of the Acts of the Apostles, which was as S. Hierome
witnesses, in the third or fourth year of Nero, then must it be ten years
betwixt the martyrdom of Peter and of Paul, for as much as it is by all
writers confessed that Paul suffered in the xiiii. year, which was the last
year of Nero. Vspergensis says that they were both executed in one year,
but he notes not that they died in one day. Sabellicus says, both in one
year and one day. Some say as Ambrose, that they died together both in one
place. But Dionysius, says otherwise, that the one bad the other farewell when
they were parted asonder going to death. Again, the most writers say that
Nero was the cause thereof: But Linus says, Agrippa commanded that Peter
should be slain, because that by his persuasio^ four of the concubines of
Agrippa refused to live any longer in such unchaste life with the king,
therefore for anger he commanded that Peter should be crucified. Finally S.
Hierome and Lyra, writing upon the 34. verse of the 22. chap. of Mathewe: say
that Peter was put to death at Jerusalem by the Jews, and that Christ
prophesied thereof saying: Lo I send you prophets etc. and some of them ye
shall kill.

Many things might be added to disprove this dotage of Peter's being bishop at
Rome, but because I think this to be sufficient, I let pass diverse necessary
things least I should be over tedious. But if any be desirous to se this
matter more suffitiently handled, let him read Vlrichus Velenus, writing
purposely of this in a little book called Demonstrationes contra Romani Papae
primatus figme^tum. Beside there has been of late set forth in English a
discourse very learnedly and fully entreating hereof, wherein as well the
allegacions of the Papists for Peter's being at Rome substantially confuted, as
reasons brought to improve the same. And therefore had it not been so
necessarely appertinent to the argument of this book, I would rather have
referred the reader to their doings, then have spoken any thing thereof. Now
it remains to leave Peter, and to come to the bishops of Rome.

The order of this history requirth that every bishop should be here placed as
each succeeded other: But there is such confusion among them that write of
them, that no man can certainly tell whom to place first, second, third, nor
fourth. And least it be thought to be spoken rather of affection then
otherwise, I thought good to show out of Vspergensis their own author, what
wrangling and disagreement there is, for those that succeeded Peter, which
though it be somewhat long, yet is it necessary to be showed, that it may
appear what certainty they have of Peter, and those to whom he committed
this universal Popedom. The words of Vsperge^sis in the life of Claudius be
these.

Touching the succession of the Roman bishops, their order, ^and the times,
wherein they reigned from the beginning, diverse men think diversely: whose
opinions I will here briefly set down, etc. Some write whereunto the
ecclesiastical history agrees, that after the death of Peter sitting at Rome
chief of the Church xxv. years. Linus did next take the government upon
him. And when he had ruled xii. years, in the second year of Titus, he left
it to Anacletus, who also after other xii. years gave it to Clement, which
seems to be in the xiii. year of Domician. Clement after nine years suffered
under Traian. After him in the fourth place, came Euaristus, the next was
Alexander, and then Sixtus, and so forth. But other write that Linus and
Cletus, were both under Peter ( as his vicars or curates) and that Peter as
soon as he had taken the Papacy upon him, did appointe Linus in his stead to
govern the church, whereby he him self might the better follow his function
of preaching: and that he departing after twelve years, Peter did substitute
Cletus in his place, who also dying after twelve years, even the same year that
Peter suffered under Nero. Then Peter committed his seat to Clement, giving to
him and his successors power to bind and loose, whom Anacletus succeeded in
the time of Domician, then followed Euaristus, etc. But because these accomptes
do not agree, let us consider wherein they differ, and so try which seems
more credible. Therefore if Linus left Anacletus, and he Clemens, then is
Clement thrust out of the beadroll of Popes, whose reverence is so great among
all Churches, that he is not only mentioned among martyrs, but also in the
Canon of the mass, and in the Letany or procession, is placed between Linus
and Clemens. But if after Linus, Cletus be placed, and then Clemens, then
Euaristus, then Alexander, etc there is no place for Anacletus to get in. And
Beda in his Martyrtologie, that Anacletus was the fourth after Peter, and
suffered under Domician, making Linus first, Cletus second, Clemens third, and
Anacletus fourth. But if Anacletus be placed after Clement, and as Beda says,
died under Domician, then cannot it hold that his predecessor Clemens should
suffer under Traian, because it may evidently be proved that he suffered under
Domician, if his successor Anacletus be not denied to suffer under the same
Emperor. Furthermore, if Linus and Anacletus, as some say, or Linus and
Cletus, as other say: did both rule twelve years a piece after the death of
Peter, dyinge the xiiii. year of Nero, then it arysing to 24. years, it
falls out that the latter of them should suffer in the xii. of Domician, and
so Clemens could not receive power to bind and loose, neither the seat of
Peter. Which opinion also is confirmed of diverse: and to this is added that
Dionysius Areopagita hasting from Athens to Rome against the martyrdom of the
Apostles Peter and Paul, but coming a little to late, and sone after their
deaths, did there find Clemens his scholefellowe bishop of Rome. etc. Who
sent the same Dionysius into France to preach: But it is said that this
Dionysius was martyred Anno domini. 96 which is the xiiii. year of Domician,
and before his death he had continued long, and had done very much in France,
and yet it is said that Clemens who sent him thither, was made bishop but the
twelfth year of Domician. Again, the book of the passion of Pope Alexander
says, that Clemens was ye first after Peter, for so it is there written. In
the fifth place after Peter came Alexander. But if it were the second from
Peter, then it follows that Cletus being before Clement, and Anacletus after
him be pushed out, because Alexander must be the fifte: Namely Peter first,
Linus second, Clement third, Euariste the fourth, and Alexander the fifte:
For otherwise Alexander cannot be the fifth from Peter, because if Linus be the
second from Peter, and Cletus after Anacletus, be placed before Clement,
Alexander shall be the sixth: But if Cletus be before Clement, and Anacletus after
him, then shall Alexander be the seventh, unless Clement be the second after
Peter.

Thus far does Vspergensis wander in this maze: and thus it appears what
certainty the Church of Rome has of her beginning, of Peter's being there,
and of bequeathing his supremacy, to whom neither they, nor any other for them
can tell. But ye se, how many bishops here wrestle for the first place, and
how they are tossed from the first to the second, and an other while hoisted
to the third and fourth place, yea and some time shoued clean out of place. So
hard a thing it is, to find a sure man, that for the beginning of this
history a man may well doubt with whom to begin, but we must be content in
this hurly burly, either to cast lottes to find out the ring leader, or else to
take and set an order among them, though perhap not the same wherein they
lived, yet as if it were the same. And if any of the good bishops lose his
place of senioritie, we must desire him to take it patiently, and to blame the
negligence of their parishioners and successors of Rome, who (because nature
uses not to ascend but to descend) so much regarded them selves, and their
children, with the time present, that they forgot their forefathers (if these
were they) and the time past.

The first face of the Roman church under Heathen Emperors.
FOr the first sort of Romayne bishops, that is from Linus to Syluester, they
lived continually under persecutions. For as Eusebius shows, from the year
of our lord 67. till the time of Constantine, being about three hundred years,
were ten persecutions. The first by Nero, with all rigor and cruelty that
might be, whereof Hierome in his epistle to Cramatius and Heliadorus, says:
that there were five thousand Christians martyred every day in the year saving
the first day of January: For they were persecuted by Nero his commandment
in all places with diverse and strange kind of torments, and reprochefull
villainies not to be mentioned.

The second persecution was moved by the Emperor Domician, Anno. 96. who was
a man so much delighted in killing and murdering, that as the proverb went of
him, he would not have a fly alive with him, for being as he coueted most,
solitary by him self in his pallaice, he used to catch and kill all the flies
that came in his way. Again he was so hawty above measure, that he would
needs be counted a God, and therefore it may easily be judged, what rest the
Christians had in his time.

The third persecution was raised by Traianus Anno 100. so bloudely that even
the Heathen Pliny moved with pity, bewailed it unto the Emperor.

The fourth persecution was styrred Anno. 167. by the Emperor Marcus Antonius,
lasting long under sondrie Emperors unmercifully.

The fifth persecution was caused by Seuerus the Emperor with all severity,
forbidding that any more should be baptized, purposing so to root out the name
of Christians, Anno. 205.

The sixth persecution was enkindled by Maximinus. 237.

The seventh was enflamed by Decius the Emperor, Anno. 250. as terrible as
the rest.

The eight was broched by diverse parsones in diverse places. As by Galerius
Maximus and Paternus, proconsuls in Aphrica, by Emilianus Liuetenaunt in Egypt,
beside diverse other great magistrates in Rome and else where, Anno. 259.

The ninth by the Emperor Aurelianus, Anno. 278.

The tenth and last, as the last act of a tragedy, was brought upon the
church with all kind of saueige cruelty without pity or compassion by the
bloody tyrant Dioclesian, and continued by other till the coming of the noble
Constantine. And this was the state of the church under the Emperors of Rome
for these years. Now let the reader judge of what majesty and countenance
the prelates in this time were like to be, of what wealth and ability to
maintain a po^pous estate. Or what it was, that might move them to make any
such ambicious decrees as have been falsely forged on them. And hereby
discern the after age in the Roman church to this day, how far they
differ from this, as shall appear.

THE FIRST COMPANY OF ROMAN BISHOPS being in number to Syluester the first,
xxxij. all which were godly and faithful pastors, far from all wordly
pomp and glory, either in pride of attier, as miter and pall, or of hawty and
ambicious title of Christ's general vicar, but paynfull preachers of the
Gospel, with all humility and constant martyrs in the end.
1. Linus the first bishop of Rome as some think.
THe first bishop was one Linus, a Thuscane borne, a man of pure and godly
life, according to the example of the Apostles, who for preaching the Gospel,
suffered martyrdom under Saturninus the Consul, while Vespasian reigned.
Diverse fancies are fathered upon this man, as that he decreed by the
commandment of Peter being dead, that no woman should enter into the temple
bareheaded: which cannot be, for there were no temples in Rome til the time of
Constantine the Emperor, for Christian Congregations. And Man^uan Fastor. 1.
testifies that they were feign for fear of the tyrants, to forsake town and
City, and to live in these days in deserts, woods, and mountains, which
may bewraye the dotage of Platina and other who charge these first godly
martyrs with diverse supersticions divised by other long after.

2. Anacletus the first.
ANacletus borne at Athens, by Irenaeus is placed next after Linus. He was of
an excellent and fervent spirit, and of great learning, planted the church of
God with daily labor. He was put to death by Domitia^. Anno. 94. Certain
epistles and decrees stuffed full of falsehoode and untruths joined with
ambicion, touching the ordering and primacie of bishops, are counterfaited in
his name. But Flaccus Illyricus, in the first Centurie, does so rip ye seames
of them that every man may perceive what botched stuff it is. Beside Mantuan
says, that he lived long not in any such estate, to have occasion to write of
such matters, but in caves and dens, among woods.

3. Clement the first.
THe next was Clement a Roman, who advanced the Gospel by continual
preaching and good deeds. They forge of him that he did divide Rome into
parish churches who had scant a lodging in it. Again, they slander him that
he made orders in Rome for confirmation of children, for masses, apparel,
vestures, and popish ceremonies: and yet he sylly man, was of so small power
and authority to establishe these things in Rome, that he was a long time
banished by the Emperor, to hew marble stones, and at the length with an
anchour about his neck, was cast into the sea, Anno. 102. so writes Mantuan
Fasto. 11.

4. Euaristus the first.
EVaristus a Grecian, was especially endewed with the grace of God, whereby in
the time of persecution he ceased not to increase the church of Christ by his
diligent preaching, till he was martyred under Traian. An. 110.

5. Alexander the first.
ALexander a Roman, did travail painfully, both to preach and baptize: He
suffered great torments till he died thereof under one Aurelianus president to
the Emperor. Anno. 121.

6. Sixtus the first.
SIxtus a Roman, did both preach diligently, and did many good works. He
beautified the church with godly deeds, being ever vigilant and careful for
his flock, and died for it Anno. 129.

These three good bishops are slaundered with certain popish decrees, as
touching consecrating of the Clergy, holy water, and holy vessels, but old
verses made of these times, do testify that they were not at such leisure to
furnishe, or rather disguise the church with these supersticious ceremonies.
Thus do some write of these times, Vrbibus antiqui patres fugiere relictis. etc.
The tyrants did our auncetours compel,
To fly to woods and not in towns to dwell.


7. Telesphorus the first.
TElesphorus a Grecian, was a worthy man for learning and godly life: He bare
witness of Christ most faithfully, both by his words and death under the
Emperor Antoninus, who executed him. Anno. 140.

He is slaundered to have decreed that three masses should be said on Christmas
day: And yet at this time the mass was vnhatched, yea the dame thereof
(except Satan the bell sier) was (as a man may say) not yet an egg in the
neaste of that unclean bird. Neither was the superstition of making
difference of days yet crepte into the church being contrary to the doctrine
of Paul, Galath. 4. But such supersticious fasting as afterward choked the
churches, was not divised by this bishop, but rather by Montanus the heretic,
who beside this made it lawful to break wedlock, and to dissolve the band of
matrimony.

8. Higinus the first.
HIginus borne in Athens, being of a Christian philosopher made a bishop,
discharged the duty of a good pastor and painful labourer in the Lords
harvest, and at length was put to death cruelly, Anno. 144. It is reported that
he wrote out of a cave, where he hid him self, an Epistle, touching God, and
the incarnation of the son of God.

9. Pius of Aquilia.
PIus borne in Aquilia, is reported to have done many godly deeds in the church
under Antonius Verus: And in the end watered the church of Christ with his
blood in martyrdom, Anno. 159.

10. Anicetus.
ANicetus a Sirian, was a diligent pastor of the church of Rome till he was
martyred, Anno. 169.

11. Sother.
SOther borne in Campania, as the valiant soldier of Christ Jesus, served
under his spiritual banner in the time of Antonius Co^modus, He employed him
self most diligently to bring the souls of the baptized to salvation in
Christ, both by doctrine and example of life. And in the end confirmed the
Gospel, which he had faithfully preached with his blood in martyrdom, Anno.
177.

12. Eleutherius.
ELeutherius a Grecian, was also a careful and vigilant pastor: in his time
the persecution of the tyrants did somewhat decreace, and many godly writers
bestowed great pains to write sundry learned books against diverse heresies
and heretics which then enfected the church. And among other this
Eleutherius did also defend against Titianus, that no usual trade of life is
to be rejected. But not withstanding that the storms of persecution were
somewhat calmed in his time, because many of the Romayne nobility believed on
Christ, yet Masseus says, he was beheaded, Anno. 191.

13. Victor.
VIctor borne in Aphrica, did succeade Eleutherius. This man was the first that
when the storm of persecution was calmed, usurping authority upon strangers,
sought to have an oar in an other man's boat. In the former bishops (says
Vincelius) the spirit abounded, but in these yt follow the temptacion of
flesh and blood prevailed. Policrates bishop of Ephesus, and Iraeneus bishop
of Lions, did bouldly reprove this Victor, for exempting his brethren in Asia
from the communion, because in keeping Easter day, they followed not the use of
the church of Rome: So that the church was then rent in twain, by means of
his obstinacy, He died Anno. 203.

14. Zepherinus.
ZEpherinus was a Roman borne, a man as writers do testify, more addicted
with all endeavor to the service of God, then to the cure of any worldly
affairs. Where as before his time the wine in the celebrating the communion
was ministered in a cup of wood, he first did alter that, and in stead thereof
brought in cups or chalices of glass: And yet he did not this upon any
supersticion, as thinking wood to be unlawful, or glass to be more holy for
that use, but because the one is more comely and semely, as by experience it
appears then the other. And yet some wooden doultes do dream, that the
wooden cups were changed by him, because that part of ye wine, or as they
thought, the royal blood of Christ, did soake into the wood, and so it can
not be in glass. Surely sooner may wine soake into any wood then any wit
into those winie heads, that thus both deceive them selves, and slander this
Godly martyr. Who in the year of our lord 220. suffered martyrdom under
Aurelius. In the time of this Zepherinus the Artemonites, were a sect of vain
Philosophical divines, who as our late scholemen did corrupt the scripture
with Aristotle and Theophrastus, turning all into curious and subtle questions.

15. Calixtus the first.
CAlixtus borne at Rauenna, when persecution began to wexe hot again, did
like a constant Christian, hide him self with many more in a certain place on
the farther side of Tiber. In these days says Platina, al things were kept
close and hidden, because the persecution was so great every where, yea, their
churches and places of assembly, were in corners and caves for the most part.
But Anno 226. this Calixtus was apprehended by the commandment of Alexander
Seuerus, and was beaten with coodgiels, pent in prison, afterward hurled
headlong out of a wyndowe, and then his body was drowned in a deep pit.

16. Vrbanus.
VRbanus a Roman, lived under that most lascivious wreatche Heliogabalus the
Emperor, and with his sincerity of life, and excellency in learning, he
drew many men on all sides to the Gospel. He was oftentimes banished the
city for the Christian faith, but being secretlye brought in again by the
faithful, he was martyred by commandment of Seuerus, Anno. 233.

17. Pontianus.
POntianus a Roman, in the time of the said Emperor Seuerus, being one of
Christ's ministers, and a distributer of Gods mysteries, suffered both
banishement, and punishment for the Gospel, and the church sake. For when
they ran thick to him to hear him preach ye word, by the princes
commandment, being set on by the Idolatrous priests, he is carried from Rome
to the Isle Sardinia, where after many miseries and sore torments, he was put
to death, Anno. 239.

18. Antheros.
ANtheros was borne in Greece, a man of God if any were: He preached Christ
stoutely, even under the tyranny of Maximinus the Emperor. This bishop
provided first of all that the acts of martyrs should be diligently written by
notaries: least the remembrance of Gods hardy soldiers should be lost with
their lives. This Antheros in the year 243. did with his blood beutifie the
church, which with his word he had fed before.

19. Fabian.
AFter him came Fabius a Romain borne, who (as Eusebius witnesses) as he was
returning home out of the field, and with his contrimen present to elect a
new bishop, there was a pygeon seen standing on his head, and suddenly he was
created pastor of the church, which he looked not for. While he lived, he him
self saw that the records of martyrs should be written, and that burying
places should be prepared for them: who afterward under Decius (that
afterward dealt cruelly with his own brethren) ended his life with most
glorious death, Anno. 150.

20. Cornelius.
Cornelius a Roman, being in the time of Decius, accounted the seventh
persecutour of Christ and his church, had a Godly care over ye safety of his
neighbors. He entertained courteously, and restored to the church, as many as
having denied Christ in torments, did yet repent the^ of their deed
afterward. O the aboo^dant spirit of Christ that was in this bishop. O worthy
minister of the Gospel, for although this man of God Cornelius, was carried away
into banisheme^t, yet he never failed the church of Christ. But as a valiant
champio^ in the maintenau^ce of the truth, did yield his neck unto the sword
of Decius.

21. Lucius.
LVcius a Romain, being a faithful servant in the lords house, and driven into
banishment by Gallus Hostilianus, the persecutour of Christianity, was
comforted of S. Ciprian by his letters. And at the length after Gallus death,
even by Gods will returned to Rome, and enriched ye church with healthful
doctrine, and afterward being purified in the lambs blood, he pierced the
heavenly paradise, being put to death at Valerianus commandment. 255.

22. Stephen.
STephen a Roman borne, a man in all points just and good and one that was
counted worthy to have the ecclesiastical function. Whereupon (as VVicelius
says) the church gave us many worthy examples of Prelates, so long as they
were called but bishops of the city of Rome. While Galienus a wicked Emperor
raged, Steven, Anno 257. after he had converted many of ye Gentiles to the
faith of Christ, loosing his head, was with many other sacrificed to God,
receiving the crown of justice.

23. Sixtus the second.
SIxtus the second was a Grecian, borne in Athens, he being of a worldly
Philosopher, become Christ his disciple, and of an earthly man, made an
heavenly steward, did shine like an ornament of the church, and as an example
worthy to be followed. This man also enstructing the people in Gods holy word,
was slain with many thousands of martyrs, in the persecution of Decius and
Valerius, An. 267. S. Laurence claue unto this holy bishop unseperably, even to
the last torments of his life, of which two the one was slain with swearde,
the other burnt to death. Whereof Mantuan in the 8. of his Fast. says.

These men whose virtues flourished by Decius dire decree,
Were bid with other locked in chains and dungeon dark to be.
In time of this bishop about the year of our lord. 260. one Paul being
terrified with the unmerciful persecution of tyrants, gat him into
wilderness and solitary places, and so became the first Eremite. For at that
time, as Eusebius says, The beginning of Eremities and Monks.
many Christians for fear of death denied their faith. Upon this Monkery had
his beginning, as Hierome shows in the life of the same Paul the Eremite.

24. Dionysius.
Dionysius was a Grecian, whom Pope Damasus calls a Monk. He was a worthy
man in preaching the faith, and a notable encreacer of the Christian church
under Claudius the second. Neither did he want other churches, which with the
doctrine of truth did reform heresies that sprange in those days. As
appears by the church of Antioche, which calling a counsel in the year of
our Lord 273. did convince of error Paulus Samosatenus, notwithstanding he
him self could not be there present, because he was old. Dionysius converted
to Christianity the daughter of the Emperor Decius, and Triphonia her mother,
with 46. thousand other: And at the length was martyred with them and many
other at Salarie gate Anno. 277.

25. Foelix.
Foelix a Romain, being a good man and of perfect conversation, flourished in
preaching the Gospel, at such time as Aurelianus did persecute his brethren:
While this accursed manslear exercised his tyranny, Foelix among other martyrs,
departed most happily unto Christ, that is to say, from death to life. But
to say that this martyrdom (working their glory) caused temples to be made,
and yearly sacrifices to be done therein in their names, it is to open
blasphemy. Who will believe that these holy fathers of the primative church,
would so charely have such regard to keep stocks and stones, or dead men's
bones, in time of so many persecutions, and heresies, as if they had nothing
else to do. But such forgeries use our Romanistes to maintain their idolatry.

26. Eutychianus.
Eutychianus borne in Thuscia, being given wholly to Godlynes, and commended to
the church for his learning and virtue, saved many people by preaching the
Gospel. This man (by report) did bury with his own hands, 342. martyrs, and
appointed an order for the burying of martyrs, and in the end he him self was
made a martyr, Anno. 283. It appears that this man did nothing to establishe
the fantastical toys of our age: but the Papists foarge of him, that he
blessed upon the altar grapes and beans, and that he buried the dead in purple
vestimentes, a deed mete for a Christian martyr.

27. Gaius or Caius.
GAius borne in Dalmatia, cosen to Dioclesian the Emperor, succeeded
Eutychianus in preaching the comfortable Gospel, and was a most worthy
president in the church of God. Carsulanus and Platina, the Popes claw-backes,
report of this man, that he increased the dignity of the Clergy
marueilously, by making difference of degrees among them, so that from one
degree to an other, they should arise to the estate of a bishop. Furthermore
they prattell that he commanded, that a man in holy orders should not be sewed
of profane men, Pagans, or Heretics. But who is so fond to believe that ye
bishops power was so great at Rome at that time, when Pagans them selves bare
all the sway, and executed the civil law? Gaius was in the time of the reign
of the foresaid Dioclesian, under whom cruel persecution continued, so that
for a great time he lurked in caves and hoales under the ground, and had no
pontifical pallaice or stately temple. And in the end being plucked out with
his brother Gabinius a married priest, he was slain with a swoard.

28. Marcellinus.
MArcellinus was a Roman, who in the tenth persecution after Nero, was
cruelly vexed of the tormentours under Dioclesian and Maximinian, being
terrified with fear of the pains, he offered unto the Idols a grain of
frankinsens. In those days, as Gildas writes, the scripture where soever it
was found, was burnt in the streate, and the chosen shepeheardes of Christ's
flock, were slain with their innocent sheep. But Marcellinus immediately after
his deed, remembering him self, reproved Dioclesian to his face, and offered him
self willingly to death for the truth of Christ, and striving valiauntly he
prevailed, receiving the crown of martyrdom, Anno 303. Hereunto agrees
Mantuan in the life of the said Basil.

29. Marcellus.
MArcellus a Roman, was pastor of the church, feading it with wisdom and
doctrine. And (as I may say with the Prophet) a man according to Gods heart,
and full of Christian works. This man admonished Maximianus the Emperor, and
endeavored to remove him from persecuting the saints. But the Emperor being
more hardened, commanded him to be beaten with cogiels, and to be driven out
of the city, wherefore he entered into the house of one Lucina a widow, and
there he kept the Congregation secretly, which the tyrant hearing, made a
stable for cattle of the same house, and committed the kepinge of it to the
bishop Marcellus. After that he governed the church by writing Epistles,
without any other kind of teaching* being condemned to such a vile service:
And being thus daily tormented with stink and noisomeness, at length gave up
the ghost, Anno, 308.

30. Eusebius.
EVsebius a Grecian, being a very Godly man, a doctor and teacher among the
Christians, governed the church in the great storm of persecution. He
trauayled stoutly in the word of the Lord, as well at Rome as else wheare
through his country, in the time of Maxentius that horrible tyrant, until he
were destroyed by martyrdom, as Massaeus writes, Anno 309. whereupon as
Mantuan writes an Angel said to Basil.

Of things that are reueald to me I Will make the understand,
The joyful days of peace draw on, the time is nie at hand
That tyrants rage shall shortened be: er many years be ro^ne,
This cruel kind that joys in blood shall wasted be and done,
Rome has beheld her prelates al e^brewd in their own gore
Three cruel ones yet shall she se: and then shall be no more,
The death of next Melchiades shall end the bloody age,
His karkas being buried, then peace shall all assuage.
31. Melchiades.
MElchiades an Aphrican, being a man very religious, and a leader of the
Christian flock, proceaded in preaching the Gospel, and in the affairs of
the truth so far, until he spent his blood for it under Maximinianus
Galerius: And in the profession thereof died Anno, 314. Read the
Ecclesiastical history of Eusebius bishop of Caesaria, concerning manifold
and unaccustomed cruel deaths of the saints of that time: Cursulanus,
Platina, Stella, and other the Popes flatterers, do falsely father upon these
martyrs whole loades of decrees and lies, that the lewd inventions of their
ceremonies, might be established by the authority of these men. For they are
not afraid, for the advancement of the Popes trone, with these uncleanly dregs
to stain the blood of saints, and defile this beautiful face of the
primative church, being through continual persecution ever agreeable to
Christ the head thereof. But what wise man can think that such simple
ministers and pastors of Gods word as the bishops then were: dwelling in
holes, dens, and corners, and looking for nothing but daily death under
tyrants, should have mind of pontifical pomp, stately buildinges, or
Papisticall solemnities, when as they had neither churches, nor dwelling
houses. The church as yet obtained no peace: they lived not yet in
unprofitable idleness, neither had they the chief pleasures of the world. But
those were ye imaginations which false prophets, according to their custom,
devised for their bellies sake. But Sabellicus speaking of the saluage
persecution of the church under Dioclesian, says (alleging it out of
Eusebius) that the Christian flock was plaged at this time by the judgment of
God, because sin began to grow up in the church above measure, and the
priests seemed now rather to savor of tyranny, and not humility: and
therefore when this persecution came, it was rather a reformation of the
church ( corrupted by ease and peace) then a scattering thereof: Whereby it
seems that even then God giving but a pauze of persecution, and while tyranny
did but stay to breathe it self, they began to decline, and grow crooked:
yet is it not to be thought that they were carried so far away, as yet to new
fashion, and transport with ma^glinges and addicions the Christian religion as
the Papists dream they did. And thus is the popish synagoge grounded on
untruth. But it were a fond matter to believe these scoffs and toys contrived
for priests advantage, as our forefathers have done: we should rather try of
what spirits they be, as S. John commands, whether they be of God or no.
John. 4. For many false prophets have crept into the world. Hitherto the
pastors were stars shining in the firmament of the church, as well in life
and manners, as in doctrine: and preserved in his right hand, who walked in
the midst of the seven candelstickes. Apocal. 1. Hitherto they were counted
Angels, revealing the everlasting will of almighty God, purely without man's
diuices.

32. Syluester the first.
AFter that Melchiades was put to death, Syluester a Roman, succeeded in the
ministry of the word: but because that the tyrant Maximinus continued his
bloody persecution against the Church, Syluester was feign to hide him self,
and to live solitarily in the hille Soracte. But at the length it pleased God
to lay his terrible hand upon the persecutour Maximinus, forcing the tyrant to
reclaim his cruel decrees against the Christians. Touching the death of
Maximinus, who among other tyrants was a Scorpion to the Christians, it is to
be noted that Eusebius writes first in the eight book and 28. chapter of his
ecclesiastical history thus. First in the secret parts of his body arose an
impostume, then in his bowels grew a fistulowe, within the which a great
swarm of woormes and magettes, gnawed and devoured his guts, whereof arose a
noisome stink, so rank that no man could by any means abide it, beside the
ougly and loathsome sight of the soar it self: so that some of his phisicions
not able for the horror of it to endure to dress him, were put to death by his
commandment. Afterward the disease increasing, all his body was swollen and
rankled with it, so that with extremity of his panges and fainting through
honger, he fell down and lay sprawling on the ground. Then all his body by the
hand of God, was terribly enflamed and burned exceadingly odious to behold,
so that the scorched flesh being by little and little eaten away, pyned and
consumed, he was so disfigured and deformed, and his feauter so vaded that a
man could discern no resemblance of his former shape. His ghastly and naked
carcass was even as an image of dry bones. And yet the glowing heat boiled
more fervently, so that the marrowe fried out of his bones, and his eyes (all
moisture being wasted) dropped out of his head. Thus his limbs and members
through scalding heat and rank disease, rotting one from an other, his body
lay miserably as it were a grave to the soul: until the torments thereof
wrested out from his cancred heart to acknowledge Christ Jesus, and to repent
his bloody persecuting the cause of this his woeful end, the last persecutour.
Eusebius lib. 10. cap. 8. Furthermore it pleased the almighty to work so
graciously in the heart of the noble Emperor Constantine, that by his
procurement the church at the length obtained peace universally, so that every
man might safely return to his own country and city, whereupon Syluester
returned to Rome, and was the first Roman bishop that escaped martyrdom.
There are many, some indifferent, but most detestable gross and fond
decrees, falsely fathered upon this Syluester, as halowing of Chrismes, giving
of orders, confirming of children, decking of churches, covering of altars,
making mass priests, annoynting and attiring of them: and of making the
howsell to be God, called deifying the host, of worshipping and preserving it.
Also touching coyfes, hoodes, corporals, albes, mitars, palles, clothes,
churching kerchiefes for women, rochettes, sacrifices, ceremonies, chapels,
anoyling of the sick, with a rablement of diverse other Iewishe and Heathen
ceremonies. Platina, Polidor Virgill, and other the Popes parasites, slander
this Syluester, that he took upon him in stead of a golden crown to wear a
mitar, after the Phrygian fashion. Touching certain miracles which are also
with like credit, said to be done by this Syluester. Mantuan writes thus.
Fast. lib. 12.

Men talk of many miracles that Syluester has wrought
But author yet sufficient has never forth ben brought
Nor witness good to prove the same: therefore I let alone
Such things as fables fondly faind: for our religion
Condemns toys, and doting dreams: and listeneth not to lies. etc.
This Syluester died a confessor, Anno domini. 334.

Mantuan in his third book of the life of S. Blase, brings in an Angel
talking with the said Blase among other martyrs of the Empire of the foresaid
Constantine, and of the estate of the church for the time following, of the
wickedness that should reign, both among the Clergy and the people, and
finally of the vengeance that should ensue. His words are these.

The words of the Angel to Blase, concerning Constantine.
THe tyra^tes being daunted now a gracious prince shall reign
In Romain empier, under who^ the world shall peace obtain,
And worship Idols old no more: the mighty Constantine
Shall keep his court in Thracia, and to the Lord divine
Christ Jesus Italy he leaves, and Rome with mountains seven.
Then shall the cross despised erst advanced be to heaven,
And far excel the Romain mace, the ^cepter, and the crown. etc.
Of the euels to come upon the church.
But even upon this gentle calm there shall alas ensewe
Destruction, such as well thou may with woeful wepings rewe.
And poison rank shall surely from the honey sweet p^ocede,
The sound of ease, the name of peace, are pleasant words in deed:
But out alas more wretchedness, more villainy, and vice,
More grievous wounds, more shame and woe, shall to the church arise
Even of this peace, then did of all the bloody broiles and war,
For ancient virtue shall decline: and pleasure vain shall mar*
And spoil the bodies chaste of me^ through wa^tonesse and wealth,
The lazy mide shall quayle, and droupe, neglecting heavenly health
O leude delights, O wicked guise, O cursed time: I se
The people of their Lord and Christ forgetful quite to be:
I se their unbelieving hearts does tread down and defy
The faith, and hedlong into sin by thousands thick they fly,
I se how men are beasts become, and Rome is now transport
Into a stable. etc.
Of the plagues that follow.
Then shall we heavenly gostes at length most wrathfully be bent
And God shall frown against those lands, when up to him is sent
The show of this their wicked age: heaven shall shut up his grace,
And al relief from earth, whom hell with horror does deface.
At wrath of God the noisome stars shall altogether conspire,
And fling down fearcely from above most fearful flakes of fire.
And heaven shall make his wrath away to daunt and drive to dust,
This saluage kind of faithless folk, and people most unjust.
And me^ with grim and grisely looks, with stern and ghastly mind
To rise up from the Northren poale, shall be by God assind.
The Hunnes, the Goths, the Vandals, Turks rude creatures lacking law,
Of God and man to guide and keep their saluage hearts in awe.
The Christians eke among themselves shall wrangle braule and jar,
And as mad dogs one eat another heart through civil war
The Romans shall destroy the Greeks, the Almaynes waste the French,
With more then deadly hate: that one the others power may quench.
They shall forbear the Saracens and Turks.
And thus much concerning this matter: Now let the reader consider that
which follows, whether it agree not to this that Mantuan has written: If it
be true as Mantuan says, that Blase had this reuelacio^, then the estate of
Rome following this time, was condemned as detestable by the Angel. But if it
be but feigned by Mantuan and other, then we se how they (noting how far
this latter church of Rome in her pomp and royalty swarued from the former
in persecution) judged of it, and yet was Mantuan an Italian Carmelite or white
Friar. Thus has it pleased God, that some of the branches should both
discern and bewray the loathsomeness of this wicked tree.

But it shall not be amiss here to add the saying of Sleidan, talking of this
time of Syluester, in his second book of the iiii. Monarchs. Then (says he)
the bishops of Rome began first to be in safety, for hitherto they were
almost all put to death. From Peter whom they will have to be the first to
this time, they account xxxiii. Their decrees are set down among the general
counsels, but the most of them are such trifles, such toys, and so diverse
from the scripture, that it is credible that they were devised by other that
came long after. But if it were true that they came from these former prelates,
saint Paul's words may be well applied hereunto being veryfied, saying in
prophecy. That lost child and man of sin, did even then begin to work the
mystery of iniquity. Coloss. 2.

Anacletus, as some say, the fourth from Peter, has this decree extant in his
name, That the Church of Rome should by the commandment and institution of
Christ, be the head of other Churches. Also to Alexander is attributed, that he
commanded that water should be hallowed with salt, to purge the people of
sin, and to drive away the snares of the devil. But how much do these
banities differ from the majesty of the Apostles doctrine, and from the
writing of John the Evangelist, who lived almost till the time of these
bishops. These two decrees may suffice for wise men to judge of the rest,
being even of the self same mould, for the most part bearing with them an open
show of ambition. But to return to the purpose, this Constantine, for the
love and zeeale which he bare unto the Church, did endewe the pastors thereof
with many large benefits, riches, and possessions, that they might with better
opportunity addicte them selves to preach the Gospel. But where as he gave
them an inche, some have since stolen an elle, fathering upon him the forged
donacion for their supremacy: But of his liberality toward the church,
Eusebius writes at large. He sommoned the first general counsel at Nicea,
wherein the detestable heresy of Arrius was condemned, though it could not be
with all so utterly quenched, but that it did yet afterward inflame again, so
yt some of the sparcles thereof did alight even in the pontifical seat of Rome
sone after, as shall appear by some of these that follow.

Finis libri primi.
THE SECOND SORT OF ROMAN BIshops, from Syluester to Boniface the third.
These bishops persecution being ceased, began to take estate more upon them
then the former, for Constantine and other Christian princes, began of deuocio^
and zeal to advance the prelates to wealth, and thereupon they living in
wealth and ease, began also to advance themselves in dignity above the former
estate, putting rich myt^rs on their heads, taking upon them the name of
Archebishops. Also they began by little and little to add their own devices to
Gods service, to alter, chop, and change, and make Canons, as liked every ones
fantasy, and so pecemeale began to plant and sow in Rome the seade of
Antichriste, which afterward grew up to so great pride and abomination: Thus
at the first in the church, devotion bredde wealth, but the daughter choked
the mother, and engendered the mo^ster ambition, who also like the cursed impe
of the bastard her morher, did in the end devour her grandmother Religion.

THE PRELATES or Archebishops of Rome.

MArcus a Roman, bestowed a pall upon the bishop of Hostia, who had
consecrate the bishop of Rome before other. He also commanded that the people
and the clergy should on Sondayes after the Gospel were read, singe the
Nicean Creed. He builded churches, and gave many gifts unto them and died a
confessor in the year. 335.

2. Julius the first.
IVlius the first a Roman, appointed that a priest should Anno. 351. Platina
says, that this Pope appointed certain notaries to write the acts of other
men, the which office says he, is yet about the Pope remaining: But these
notaries of our time says he, are such doultes for the most part, that for
want of learning they can not write their own name in Latin: of their manners
I will not speak, because these offices are bestowed on bawdes and flatterers,
unmeet to write the acts of other men.

3. Liberius.
LIberius a Roman, for ambition (as Hierome witnesses) Arrian heresy,
forsook the true faith, and subscribed to Arrius articles. And yet this man
died a confessor also, Anno. 366. though in deed taynted with damnable heresy.

4. Foelix the second.
Foelix the second a Roman, was preferred by the Arrians, Liberius, and
advanced him, because they hoped he agreed with them in opinion. But in the
second year after he was driven from his seat, and Liberius restored: And in
the year of our Lord, 359. He with other spiritual persons, was slain in a
tumulte. This man says Isidorus, made laws for the defense of the Clergy.
Also Sozomenus, lib. 4. ca. 10. Eccle. histor. says, that he being bishop, did
both admit Arrian heretics to the ministry, and also used their communion,
though else he yielded to the counsel of Nice.

5. Damasus.
DAmasus a Spanyarde, being made Pope in a certain faction, and vehemently
accused of adultery, did condemn Liberius his deeds, he builded temples, and
beawtified them with jewels, he gave lands, and bathes to the Clergy, he
increased strange service in the church, he added Confiteor to the service: he
appointed the singing of the Psalms, and allowed Hieroms translation of the
Bible: For then the minds of the Prelates began to be more puffed up with
ambition. Afterward* Damasus (as they say) being a diligent gatherer of
things done in times past, wrote the lives and decrees of his predecessors
the bishops of Rome, enterlacing them with many open and manifest untruths.
And in the year 384. died a confessor.

Socrates, in the eight book of his ecclesiastical history, and the 24.
chapter, says: that when this Damasus was chosen bishop, one Vrsinus a Deacon
of the same church, did stand in suite against Damasus, but when he saw that
Damasus was preferred, for anger he began by all endeavor to gather
congregations to him self, severed from the church. Also he persuaded
certain obscure and abject bishops, to chose him bishop secretly in a corner.
And so he was created not in the church, but in a close place of ye pallaice
called Sicona: Which being done, the people began to wrangle And hereof arose
a bitter contention and deadly sedicion, not touching religion* but whether of
these two Prelates should be bishop. Of this grew so many assemblies, and so
often brawlinges, that in the end the tumulte was so great that many were
slain about it. And therefore Maximinus then liuetenant of the city, did
punish sharply a great number, both the Clergy and layetie, and so
suppressed Vrsinus and his faction. Thus it appears that bloody ambition is
not a new thing in Rome.

6. Siricius.
SIricius a Roman, meddling and making decrees in many Antiphones with the
Psalms, and appointed that orders should be given, some at one time, some at
an other, he died a confessor, Anno 399.

7. Anastasius.
ANastasius a Roman, appointed that while the Gospel Anno. 404.

8. Innocentius.
INnocentius borne in Albania, aduau^ced the sea of Rome Mary Magdalene our
savior Christ that was buried* even as on that day. He devised that at mass
time the Pax should be given about in the church, and commanded that the
church (a wayghty matter) being ones consecrate should never be consecrate any
more. He made certain decrees concerning Jews, Pagans, and Monks, and made
the anoyling of the sick to be a sacrament: And is counted among the dead
confessors, Anno. 416. The year before being the year 415. Alaricus king of
Goths, ouerranne Italy, wan Rome, wasted, spoiled, and burnt it miserably. And
sone after him his cosen Athoulfus, came thither again and spoiled all that he
had left.

9. Sozymus.
SOzymus a Greek, appointed that tapers should be blessed on the holydaye, and
that the Deacons in saying service should have their lefthandes covered. He
forbad that clerks should use tippling in open place, or haunte tauernes, and
that no bondmen should be admitted to be of the Clergy: And died a confessor.
Anno. 420. Also this Sozymus suppressed the Nouacian heretics, which in time
past had borne great swaye in Rome. But now they were kept under, for says
Isocrates, the bishop of Rome, as well as the bishop of Alexandria, had
stretched his power beyond the limittes of priesthood stepping into temporal
authority. Socrat. histor. eccle. lib. 7. cap. 11.

10. Bonifacius.
BOnifacius a Roman, the son of one Iucundus a priest, was chosen Pope, at
such time as there was great sedition among the Clergy. He made decrees that
were very necessary, God grant they prove so: as yt a woman (yet though she
were a hoodded noonne) should not openly touch the altar cloth, nor the holy
vessels, nor smell to the incense: And that none should be made priest till he
were thirty years old. After he had decreed that saints eueninges should be
kept, he died a confessor, Anno. 426.

11. Coelestinus.
Caelestinus borne in Campania, patched the Popish mass up with these
things, Introitum, Graduale, as his own devices. And gave straight charge
that the priests should be perfitte in the Popes decrees. He sent these
bishops, Germanus into England, Palladus into Scotland, and Patricke with a
certain Segetian into Irelande, to root out the Pelagian heresy. He died
Anno. 435. being put in among the number of confessors.

12 Sixtus the third.
SIxtus the third a Roman, called the enricher of churches, S. Mary the
greater after a miracle of snow: and enriched it with great gifts, and
garnished the pallayces with gold. At the persuasion of a woman called
Eudoxia, he did hallowe Peter's chains, and appointed a yearly feast day in
honor of them to be kept at Midsommer. He died a confessor. Anno. 440. and
was buried in the city.

About the year of our Lord. 456. Genesericus came out of Aphrica, into Italy
with a great army against Rome, and coming thither, he finding the city
empty, invaded it. And for the space of xiiii. days continually carried out the
spoil of it, and took away many prisoners.

13 Leo the first.
LEo the first a Thuscane borne, added to the mass these Sanctum sacrificium,
Immaculata^ hostiam, hanc oblationem, An holy sacrifice an unspotted offering
and oblacion.
which cannot be without blaspheming God haynously* He like an Idolatour,
builded a pallayce in the honor of Cornelius a bishop, and appointed clerks
to keep the Apostles sepulchers. He decreed that men should worship the images
of the dead, and allowed the sacrifice of the mass, he died a confessor.
Anno. 462.

14 Hilarious.
Hilarious borne in Sardinia, a man daily exercised in building and beautifying
of churches, decked the post of Christ his cross with gold and precious
stones: He made decrees by synodes, proclayming them to be kept through the
whole world. He made a law that every minister should be put from his
calling, which married either a widow or deuorced woman, and not a maid: He
died a confessor, Anno. 469. In his time Mamertus Claudius, bishop of Vienna,
made the Letanies or procession to be said thrice a weke whereof Mantuan says
Fast. 4.

By Rodanus there stands a town Vienna men it name,
Sorenoied while one Mamertus, was bishop of the same:
And suffered many sturdy storms: for often with fiery flake
Of thonderclap it burnt, and while the tre^bling soil did shake,
The ground did gape as torn in twain, whereby the dangerous dell
With yawning mouth stood open down to glowing goulphe of hell,
Among the dungeons deep of Jove: and ravening wolves vvithall
Were driven to madness, through the haggs of hell that up did crall.
The fra^ticke neat began to murder me^ in field, and town,
VVherevvith men's hearts amazed were, that thus the Lord should frovvne.
And so co^straind they asked aid and succor from above,
And with their humble prayers sought Gods mercy for to move.
And herevppon the Letanye at first devised was,
And afterward it did from thens to other people pass.
In the time of this Pope about the year of Christ 476. Odoacer with an army
of Herula^s and Turcihugians, came from Panonia and wanne Rome and all Italye,
and reigned there xiiii. years. About this time Rome was so terriblie shaken
with earthquakes, that many houses fell down wythall.

15. Simplicius.
SImplicius a Tiburtinian borne, did dedicate Palaces Rauenna like a tyraunte,
and commanded that none of the Clergy should acknowledge, that he held any
Ecclesiastical benefice of a lay man. And this man dyed a confessor. Anno. 484.

16. Foelix the third,
FOElix the third a Roman the son of one Foelix a Agapetus his Pallaice.
He decreed that the Clergy being accused of any matter, should have days
granted to return their answer, and dyed in peace a confessor. Anno. 494.

17. Gelasius.
GElasius an Aphrican son to Valerius a bishop, burned the books of the
Manichies, he made hymmes, Apocrypha from Canonical Scripture: and allowed
married wydowers after they had married their second wife to be priests, if
they took his dispensation. He increased y^ Clergy, he dedicated Pallaices:
and decreed that priests orders should be given four times in the year, he
added to the Mass the conclusions of the prayers Et te igitur: and at length
avouched yt he and his successors should be judged by no body. And dyed a
confessor. Anno. 497.

18. Anastasius the second.
ANastasius the second a Roman, leaned to the Eutichians and Nestorians, he
did communicate with heretics: he excommunicated the Emperor. And in the year
of our Lord 499. on the stool of easemente his bowels issued out of his
bellye. He dyed a confessor, so writes Volaterranus.

19 Symmachus.
SYmmachus borne in Sardinia was chosen bishop with much dissension among the
Clergy. He ordained that virgins which had once professed chastitye, should
never marrye afterward, and that none of the Clergy should keep in house
with any woman, but such a one as were his kinswoman: He builded many
Pallacies even out of ye ground. He brought the mass into fashion, he
commanded to singe Gloria in excelsis upon the birth days of saints. And if
any man may trust Gregoryes Dialogues, he committed to Purgatory the stubborn
soul of one Paschasius a deacon after his death. And yet this man dyed a
confessor. Anno. 514. Vspergensis says that when this Pope was chosen, one
Laurence was also chosen by some, whereupon many slaughters both of the
people and Clergy were made in Rome during the space of iii. years, but
Symachus prevailed.

20. Hormisda.
HOrmisda borne in Campania, did set quietness among the Clergy, he appointed
that the Psalms should be song by course enterchaungeable: He commanded that
the decrees of counsels should be kept, and bestowed many things to y^
furniture of churches, he left a wedge of silver waying a thousand and forty
pounds in saint Peter's church: and commanded that no altar should be
builded without the consent of the bishop. He added ceremonies to public
marriages: and excommunicated Anastasius the Emperous, because he said that it
was an office dew only to the Emperor to command, and not to be at a
bishops commandment: such then was the courage of the spirit of
Antichriste. Justinius the Emperor, as Isiodorus writes, made this Hormisda a
Patriarch of Rome being before but an Archbishop: who died a confessor, Anno.
523. From the time of Syluester, the Roman prelates were Archebishops, for
the space of two hundredth years, that is from the year 320. until this
year 520. at what time they were first made Patriarchs by the Emperor
Justinius. I declare this more diligently, whereby the attentive reader may
know by what degrees the Romain bishops crept up to the Popedom it self, and
what craft the devil wrought in them before the great Antechriste came, and
was revealed to the full. So that as ye see the bishops of Rome. Here again
altered their name the second time, to title of greater dignity, that is from
Archbishops to Patriarchs, and so the rest following for a season were called.

21. John the first.
John the first a Thuscane, whom Theodoricus king of Justinius the Emperor.
This bishop being the worthiest man of all this latter company, gave a
testimony of his pure life, by suftring patiently undeserved death. He
decreed, and that very godly, that if any man were robbed of any thing, he
should have all restored again. But I take it to be false that he should
restore three churcheyardes, enriched the churches with gifts or decked the
altars with gold, silver, or precious stones, as Platina and other write,
least he should seem nothing to have increased the kingdom of Antichriste.
There is to be seen comfortable Epistles of his to the bishops of Italy,
whereby he warns them, that they should not shrink from their purpose, but
stand to it stoutly, although that the said king Theodoricus, fowly tainted
with the Arrian heresy, had threatened to destroy them and all Italy. For the
which at the tyrannous commandment of Theodoricus, Anno 527. he perished at
Rauenna through famine, stink, and noysomnes in the prison. As touching
Arrius, thus Mantuan writes of him.

This Arrius even the deadly bayne infecting mankind,
And borne to break Gods law, and quench the faith of Christian mind,
Had venomd sundry nations infecting all the world.
22. Foelix the fourth.
Foelix the fourth was borne in Samia, being not very careful in his
pastoral charge, and casting of the office of preaching, builded the church
of Cosma and Damianus, he restored Saturninus temple, and repaired other
temples of the dead. He commanded that mass should be said only in hallowed
places. He made a partition between the Clergy and the people in the church.
He excommunicated the Patriarch of Constantinople, misdemed of heresy: he
commanded that if a priest died, another should succeade him two days after,
and commanded precisely that they that lie a bying, should be anointed, with
hallowed oil, and died a confessor, Anno. 530.

23. Boniface the second.
BOniface the second a Roman, was made bishop, when Foelix, did sever the
Clergy from the layetie, by making the quier in the church, and that for
double policy, the one was, that by this means he might at length take from
the people both their place, and their voice, which they had in choosing the
bishops, and that it might not be lawefull for any of them to sewe a bishop, or
any of the Clergy in any cause, civil or criminal, before a temporal
magistrate. But mark what happened these wretches through their pride, as I
think, While even like the Pharisees they will be counted holier then other,
with their shaven heads, their anointed fingers, and severed chauncelles,
dividing them selves from the faithful, that were redeemed with the blood of
Christ.

It is to be feared, least hereby they become the Goats that in the last day
shall be divided from the lambs. Math. 25 as not pertaining to the mystical
body of Christ. It is easy to judge how much these men swerve from Peter the
Apostle, of whom they boaste so much, to whom it was not lawefull in the
tenth of the Acts, to decree of Cornelius, that he should be either a layeman,
or a profane person: Boniface died a confessor, Anno. 532.

24. John the second.
John the second was a Roman, who otherwise for his Mercury or Iuppiter,
his ambassador. Iustinianus the Emperor, sent unto this man a cup of gold,
of six pound waighte beset with precious stones, and two silver cups of
seven pound weight, and two silver chalices, waying fiftene pounds, for a
present from Constantinople, after he had condemned Athenius the Patriarch of
heresy, and the said Emperor commanded his bishops, as ( Crantzius
witnesses) to talk with the bishop in his name, most friendly under
benediction: this bishop died a confessor, Anno. 534. And as VVicelius says,
he did nothing of any valewe.

25. Agapetus the first.
AGapetus the first a Roman, son of a priest, called Cardinal Gordian, was
sent by Theodatus king of the Goths, as his Ambassador, to pacify
Iustinianus the Emperor, for the cruel murder of Amalasimitha a noble
queen, and an excellent learned woman: whose worthy virtues the same Emperor
reverenced highly, who also procured his peace with spending saint Peter's
treasure: He decreed that on the sunday they should go in procession in the
churches: And died a confessor, Anno. 535.

26. Syluerius.
SYluerius borne in Ca^pania, son of Hormisda a bishop of Rome, when Agapetus
was dead, as he went on his voyage to the Emperor, this man by the
commandment of Theodatus king of Goths, was placed in his stead without the
Emperors consent. Therefore by the provocation of Vigilius a D^acon, who also
did accuse him, that he would betraye Rome to the Goths, he was banished into
the Isle Pontus, by Theodora the Empress, and Antonina the wife of duke
Bellisarius. So that it appears, the Popedom at that time was a thing but of
small countenance, when they were sent as Ambassadors at the commandment of
inferior princes, and could be deprived of their authority, put from their
seat by women. At length Syluerius died miserably in his banyshement being an
hooded confessor, Anno. 537.

27. Vigilius.
VIgilius a Roman, the crafty accuser of the said Syluerius, Goths, another
by the Greeks, or rather by those Grekishe dames. And were used ungently, but
not unworthily of them: for either of them received the reward of his
rashness, for the one attained the Popedom by craft, the other by might, and
yet the Papists will have them both reckened among martyrs. Theodora did sue
Vigilius, because he brake promise with her, and caused him first to be
brought to Constantinople, there to be reviled and beaten, and afterward with
an halter about his neck to be drawn through the streate, and last of all,
be driven into banishement. This man made certain lessons of his own for the
holidays to be read in the church. He would have the church of Rome to be
taken for the mother of other churches: He appointed Candelmas day to be kept
holy day, and that the mass should be said, the priest standing with his
face into the East: He died a confessor, in the year 554. in Cicilia. In these
days was one Maurus, who preached and taught the hipocriticall life of monks.
Also in his time Anno. 542. there was a terrible earthquake over all the world,
as Vspergensis says.

28. Pelagius.
PElagius a Roman, aspired to the pontifical dignity, in Totila, called
Gods scourge, to the great comfort of the Goathes being their king, invaded
Italy, as Procopius writes. This Pelagius to please Totila and his company,
made a public decree, that it was nedeful to have the authority of the
prince, and consent of the people in creation of bishops. He in the midst of
troubles of that time, having more regard to advance the Popedom, then
Christianity: decreed that the Clergy should momble every day seuentimes,
the canonical hours. Abbots should be chosen by order, one magistrate should
be sufficient to punish an heretic: that in Lent priests might say mass at
nine of the clock: and that every Province should contain twelve or ten
cities at the least. This man first avouched that the premacie of the church
of Rome was fette from Christ himself, and not from men nor gene^all
councels. He buried together the bones of the first Martyr Stephen and S.
Laurences carcass. He allowed solemnities in remembrance of the dead, and for
love of gaynes he mingled them with the mass. And because he sometime him
self was accused in a libell, that he had given occasion why Vigilius his
predecessor was troubled, and deprived, therefore he provided that such
libelles should not be hard. But it is reported that he purged him self from
the infamy of that libell by taking an oathe, and kissing the cross. He lived
in the extreme time when Rome was besieged, and died a confessor, Anno. 566.

About the year of our Lord 557. Totila king of Goths, besieged Rome, which
being miserably oppressed with extreme famine, was compelled to yield it self
to the slavery of the saluage people, under which it continued ten years.

In the time of this Pope, a Pestilence reigned over all Italy, beginning in
Liguria so contagiously, that the contreye was almost destroyed of the
inhabitours thereby. Vrspergensis.

29. John the third.
John the third a Roman, was an especial friend to Narsetes the Eunuche,
governor of Italy, when the Goths were overcome: for he recovered his favor
toward Rome, when it was in displeasure, and obtained that he was made
consul, for then the bishop had almost all the swa^e in Rome. This man
decreed contrary to his predecessor, that none ought to be called chief
priest, or universal bishop, Distinctione 99. Nullus. Furthermore, taking
away from the bishops chauncelours the laying on of hands, granted it only to
bishops, as Isidorus writes. Afterward turning his mind, and taking delight
in building, he finished Philip and Jacobs church, which Vigilius had
begone, and restored the Saints tombs in the city. Finally being a very
old man, and taking great thought upon occasion of strange tempests he died
at Rome, Anno, 577. In his time the Armenians became Christians.

30. Benedict the first.
BEnedict the first a Romain, was bishop when the Lombarde, Barnus and Functius
write of him. But yet which is to be noted, for the worthiness of the deed,
he forbad that me^ should tread on crosses made of marble, stone, or wood:
And when there was great dearth in Rome, he or at the least wise Tiberius
Augustu^ in his stead, brought corn out of Egypt, to succor them withal He
died for sorrow to se so many miseries in the city. Anno. 582.

31. Pelagius the second.
PElagius the second, while the city was besieged, without the Princes
commandment, contrary to the custom was made bishop. Therefore to pacify
the Emperor, he sent one Gregory a monk, to Constantinople: afterward he
made the cloister of Hermes a martyr, and builded up S. Laurence pallaice from
the foundation. He renewed the Canon for saying the hours, and commanded
Subdeacons, either to forsake their wives, or else their ecclesiastical
functions, and appointed nine prefaces to be song in the mass before the
Canon: Pestis inguinaria, arising of great tempests, and the contagiousnes of
the air took away this bishop among many other: This pestilence was cause of
many supersticions, for then they first began to think that Gods wrath was to
be pleased: and the Letany of seven parts was made by Gregory. The occasion
hereof says Vspergensis was, that a great part of Italy was drowned with great
flouddes.

32. Gregory the great.
Gregory the great a Roman, was made bishop being before but a Monk and a
Deacon. He was the best man of all these Roman Patriarchs, for learning and
good life. He succeeded Pelagius, unwillingly refusing it, and in the end
compelled thereunto: he (though otherwise he was learned and Godly) yet because
he was a Monk, burdened the church, and religion of God above all other,
with more ceremonies, then had the Jews. He turned his parents houses into
Monasteries, and dedicated the first of them to S Andrewe the Apostle. He made
Schools of quiresters, and made certain songs for the church, according to
Ambrose manner, which we call Anthemes: He appointed one to be chaunter for the
day, another for the night. He gathered together the laws of the holy
fathers. He did devise the order of masses, and linked the Cannons thereof
together, he caused the masses to be begone with pieces of Psalms. He
commanded to say Kyriaeleison nine times, and to chaunt Alleluia after the
Graduall he joined the same Alleluia, for Easter time to the Offertories. He
added three peticions to the Cannons of the mass: That is, Dies nostros in tua
pace. etc. He commanded that the Lords prayer, should be either song or
said, with a loud voice over the communion bread. He commauned that mass
should be said over the dead carkases of saints: And added to the
Canonical hours, Deus in adiutorium, with Gloria patri: He devised Letanies,
and processions, and divided the^ into these seven orders, Clerks, Monks,
Nonnes, Boys, Laymen, Widows, and married wives. He suffered the Image of the
blessed virgin Mary to be carried about withal, But not to be worshipped:
Furthermore this Gregory (as they shamefully imagine) compelled an Angeli to
put up his terrible sword into his sheathe. By his indulgences he established
certain stacio^s, and pilgrimages unto Images in the city, according to the
peoples devotion. He solemnized the feast of the Purification of our Lady with
wex candels, (whereof it is called Candelmas day) and appointed the solemnity
of Palm Sunday to be kept with processions. He added iiii. days to Lent
fast, and hallowed the beginning thereof with Ashwednisdaye. He forbad those
that should fast to eat flesh, milk, butter, chese, or eggs, because they
seem to bear a taste of flesh, and suffered them only to eat fish,
excepting also the greater sort of fishes, whereof Mantuan says Fastor. 2.

Yet was it not against the law to feed on fishes small:
For Gregory forbad the great, but time misordred all
And stately tables combred are with fish of larger sort
So Gregory's laws ^r kept where need does bear a si^ple port
That in the shallowe brooks and floodes to find his fare:
As for the great grown fulsom fish in depth of seas they are.
But holy peers that do with Peter's line and gredy hook,
Down to the bottom angle: can each sort of fishes brook.
Gregory gave tapers to the church, and furnished it with quier Psalmodis,
Canticles, Oades, Hymnus, and other Heathen ceremonies: He builded six
Monasteries of his own cost in Sicilia, and dedicated Agathas church: He
forbad that women should resort to abbeyes, or that Monks should resort to
Nonneries. Also he would not have Monks baptize, neither Nonnes to be
Godmothers. He forbad him that had been twice married to be made priests: And
that priests should give testimony of honest life by taking an oathe: He was
an vphoulder of pardons, but not a seller of them. He was the first that gave
pardons upon certain days, to such as frequented the church. He entertained
strangers at his table. He aided the Monks of Jerusalem with necessaries,
and gave stipendes to three thousand maids: He allowed by decree the first
five counsels: He forbad that saints Images should be broken, or that one of
the Clergy should at the Emperors commandment serve in the wars, or that
there should be two Metropolitanes in one Province: He would have a bishop to
be consecrate but ones, and would have the last will and testament of every
man to be ratified. He made four books of Dialogues, to boulster up
Purgatory: He allowed hallowing of ashes, washing of feet, worshipping of the
cross, and mass^s to be said for the dead, and (wherein the Papists horribly
belie him) he delivered Traian the Emperors soul from hell. He co^temning the
Britains sent Augustine a Monk, to reclaim the English Saxons to the church
of Rome: He reft from London the right of the Archebishoprike, and translated
it by the same Augustines means to Caunterburie. Al these things did Gregory
as Patriarch of Rome, and died a confessor, Anno. 604. But although he doted
in many supersticions, yet more is falsely fathered on him the^ ever he did or
thought.

33. Sabinianus.
SAbinianus borne in Thusca, was a Prelate of no value, Gregory, after he had
published certain flaunders against him, commanded that his books should be
burned. This man being the last of the Roman Patriarchs, commanded that the
hours of the day should be divided by ringing of belles for the
ecclesiastical offices: and that they should have continual burning lamps in
the church: At length he died an infamous death through fear that he
conceived of a terrible vision, which he saw in the night time, An. 606.

The Christian deeds of Gregory.
Now to say somewhat touching the Christian sayings and doings of the
foresaid Gregory: he fought stoutly against the supremacy of the Popish
kingdom, in the very entrance of the Popedom, and hewde in pieces with
sharp tauntes the title of universal Patriarkeship, saying that such an one
was the foreronner of Antichriste, an hipocrite, a tyrau^t, and Lucifer the
usurper of Gods power. He commanded certain Images that were of wonderful
excellent workmanship, to be thrown into the River Tiber, least religion
should be corrupted by them. He commanded prayer and fasting for the asswaging
of the pestilence. He reclaymed the Goths from the Arrians, to the unity of
the church. He wrote Homilies in a pleasant style following S. Augustine. He
xpounded the most part of the holy books of the Bible. He by common consent
defaced the name of universal bishop. And professed him self in his wrytinges
Seruus seruorum Dei, servant to Gods servants, whereby he might show, how
far he was from all ambicion and desire of soueraintie: This title his
posterity has continued, bearing the name, but forbearing the humility that
belongs thereunto. At the length Gregory did greatly lamente to se that
howling and chau^ting in the church had so taken place, that preaching of the
Gospel was neglected. Behold (quoth he among other sayings) the world is
full of priests, and yet in the lords harvest are found few laborers: We
have taken upon us the office, but wce do not discharge the office. Brethren, I
think that God suffers dishonor of none more then of priests (for the
most part). If they se any live in lowly estate, or live continently, they
scorn them. Consider therefore what becomes of the flock, when Wolves are
made shepeheardes. These take charge of the sheep, who are not afraid to
endaunger the lives of the Lords foulde, but they change the office of their
blessed function to the increase of their ambicion. We leave Gods cause, and
run to worldly affairs: we enjoy the place of holiness, and are entangled
with earthly matters, so that Baptist Mantuan says of him in the third book
of his Fastor.

In speech he was full eloquent, his works are yet in store,
He speaks still, and by his works he shall do evermore,
He taught the quyristers to sing, in so^gs was his delight.
Huldricus bishop of A^gusta, shows a wonderful story of this bishop, in his
Epistle to Nicolas the first, the effect whereof is, that this Gregory did
first command priests to live single life: but afterward when he
perceived, that they were given secretly to fleshly pleasure, and that hereupon
many children were murdered, he disanulled that commandment, and said that
it was better to mary, the^ give occasion of murder: For when on a time he
sent a certain woman unto a fishepoole to take fish, there were found in the
same poole six thousand heads of infantes, that had been drowned therein:
which he perceauing to proceed of forced single life, with sighing and
sorrowing, he revoked that Canon. For as that Huldericus shows, they
accompanied not only with virgins and wives, but also even with their own
kindred, with mankind, yea and that which is horrible to be said, with brute
beasts. After the time of this Gregory, ensued more blindness the^ was before.
The purity of doctrine decayed, and the church was darkened maruelously with
man's tradicions: For Monkery with his manifold supersticions waxed great:
Herewithall sprang up sale of masses, and praying to the dead, and the Lords
supper began to be an offering for the dead. Bishops also being deluded with
visions of spirits, or rather of devils, began to reuolte from the doctrine of
faith to put affiance in good works, and man's satisfaction, as appears of
Gregory.

As it is evident of Gregory, who in his Dialogues to Theodolinda, a very
superstitious woman, tells of dead men that appeared and craved to have
prayers and suffrages. This while Christianity began to fall to ceremonies
forthwith blind supersticion, by means of Monkery began to crepe in* Gregory
as is mentioned before, sent Augustine a Roman Monk, and other his
compaignions, to the Englishemen, Anno. 596. not to preach Christ unto them,
whose doctrine the Brytaines had received more sincerely of Joseph and the
churches of Asia, But to thrust upon them the Romain religion, patched up with
man's diuices and tradicions. The Britaynes had always the preaching of the
truth, sincere doctrine, and the lively faith and such service as was
delivered to the Apostles by Gods commandment: They had Christian churches,
whereof Godfrey of Munmuthe, in the eight book and fourth chapter of the
acts of the Britains says thus: In the country of the Britains,
Christianity flourished hitherto, which never failed among them since the
Apostles time. But when Augustine came he found in their province seven
bishoprikes, and one Archebishoprike maintained by godly Prelates, and many
Abbots living by their handy labor, among whom the Lords stock kept true
way. It appears also that there were shepeherdes among the^ that were
diligent to preserve the purity of doctrine, as was Dionotus, Anonius, and his
fellows, who in contempt of the Romans ceremonies stacke stoutly to it even
to the death. Augustine entered the land not with the Gospel of Christian
peace, but with the banner of his Aposticship, with his silver cross, his
Letanie, his procession, images, painted puppettes, relics, canticles, and
books of ceremonies. But when by the authority of the king in the west part
of England he sommoned the bishops and doctors, that they accepting and
communicating the Roman customs should submit them selves to him, Anno.
602. They going to the synod, did first demand of a certain wise man, that
lived solitarely, whether it was laweful to follow his commandment, and
forsake those tradi^ions which they had received of their fathers: to whom
he answered. If he be a man of God, follow him. They further asked how they
should prove that. Ye know quoth he, that the Lord commanded saying: Take my
yoke upon you, and learn of me because I am gentle and lowlye of heart.
Therefore if this Augustine be such an one, it is credible that he also
bears Christ's burden, and offers it to you to bear: but if he be proud
and cruel, it is evident tha he is not of God and ye ought not to regard his
talk. And how shall we know that quoth they. Let Augustine (quoth he) and
his company go first to the Synod: And if when ye come, he rise up to salute
you, know ye that he is Christ his servant, and obey ye him. But if he
disdain you, or make small account of you, and show no token of courtesy in
his countenance, seeing ye are the greater number, do ye likewise contemn
him. Therefore when they came to Augustine sitting ambiciously on his stalle,
and saw that he gave them no token of friendship, they by and by conceiving
displeasure, and noting him to be a proud person, did forthwith overthwart
every thing that he put forth: For he charged them that they did many things
contrary to the custom of the catholic church, especially in keeping their
Easter, in ministering of baptism, and in their preaching, and that they
regarded not man's traditions: and he commanded that in these and other things
they should follow the use of the church of Rome. But they answered that they
would do none of these, neither take him for their Archbishop. Whereupon he
promised them war should ensewe, and threatened them fiercely to revenge it by
death, which immediately ensued. Read Beda in his ecclesiastical history of
England, the second book, and the second chapter, and likewise the said
Godfrey. But I wonder much of this cruelty of Augustine: For Gregory before
had so discussed it, and wrote unto him that it was not needful in all
churches to have the same order of ceremonies: but that every church might
ordain the best for it self. But such was wont to be the tyranny of
hypocrites: whereof Mantuan says. The fathers of the Latin church to tax
they enterprise,
And make them fondly force the Britains bend unto the guise
Of Romish church against al right: with foolish hardines
They rashly cause the ancient league of amity to cease*
As touching peace they say that Rome should rather make then mar,
To kepemans law: so that Christ's law thereby do never larre.
And faith with doctrine which allowed by the first Synod was
As it from Christ the light of life to all mankind did pass.
And to speak in few words, the Roman bishops were stars even hitherto,
yet but falling from Christ's right hand to the ground, from whom the heaven
departed, Apocal. 6. and they are prefigured by the red horse, unto whose
ryder power was given to take away peace from the earth, and to murder to and
fro, whereupon as in the first order the Roman Prelates called bishops by
their true ministering the word of God, and constant faith, were stars
abiding in Christ his right hand: so in this second sort under the name of
Archebishops and Patriarchs, by the neglecting of the same word, and their
earthly affections, they were stars falling to the earth, Apocal. 6. But in
the third rank, which shall follow under the name of Popes and
Antichrists, for their absolute reuolting from Christ, and open idolatries
they shall be the stars falling from heaven to the earth. Apoc. 9.

THE THIRD Book.
Now ensues the third sort of Roman bishops coming from evil to worse:
For as the former company in the second book showed, declining from pure
Christianity, and enclining to Antichriste, so now appears in these, that
the seed sowed by the forainer is growe^ up, and Antichrist as it were
appearing above the ground: who grew still forward from grenenesse to
ripeness, as shall appear by these that follow, and so from ripeness to
rottenness, which is to be hoped for in that already he is wexed so mellowe,
that if he be not plucked from the tree, if it please God to send a small
blaste of wind, he will fall of him self. Note therefore diligently gentil
Reader what fruit ensues and springs of the former grain. Read, confer,
and then judge, whether these men show them selves to be the vicars of
Christ, or deceitful and mischeuous Antechristes, for bye their fruits ye
shall know them whether they are such as they would be accounted.

Abadon or the Latin Antichriste.
IN the year of our Lord six hundredth and four, Phocas the tyrant,
murdered his sovereign lord Mauricius the Emperor, with his wife, his
brother, his children, and many nobles: From this year adding to it two years
to the beginning of the Popedom, established by Phocas, are six hundred sixty
six years, from the co^sulship of M. T. Cicero, and Antonius, as Bibliander
Funccius, and other do evidently reckon it, at which time the Jews (while
their bishops iarred for supremacy) lost their liberty: For Christ (as
Bibliander gathers) in his revelation (which by his dearly beloved Apostle
John, he delivered to the church) foare told, that a certain tyrannical
Empier should afflicte the true church: as Nero and Domician, with others did.
And calls the beast having two horns like a lamb the ennemy of Christ,
which nevertheless should speak like a Dragon, like an evil spirit, and
should rage as unmercifully as the first beast did, which destroyed Peter and
Paul, and great companies of fainctes: which with her charms should so
bewitche the world, and with monstrous works should grow into such
admiration, that none might by or sell, but such as had the seal or the name
of the beast in his forehead. But as touching the name of the beast, he
shows it mistically by these letters, (...). Ch, X, St, and recites it to be
discussed. This (says John) is wisdom, let him that has understanding
account the number of the beast, for it is the number of a man, and his number
is this. 666. Apocal. 13. What mean thief marks but that we should search
the time wherein this beast should arise from the earth and the bottomless
pit, and should destroy the Christian common wealth? But how shall a man
apply it, if he have not the certain time, when Pompeie took the scepter from
the Jews, according to the notable prophecy of Jacob, and entering the temple,
profaned the Sanctum sanctorum. But that was done as Josephus writes, in the
time of Tullius consulship, the 60. year before Christ was borne. To these
three score years add six hundred, until after the death of the said
Gregory the great, who prophesied that he should be Antechriste, which would
be compted universal bishop, or head of all churches. Therefore mark well
what kind of times happened in the 666. year after Jerusalem was taken by
the Romans, Pompeie being their general, and you shall se strange matters
fall out, at the time that this Phocas was Emperor, of whom William
Stantphurdius writes as follows.

The Empier Phocas chokes, and does the Popedom first advance,
By wicked writts about his Empier sent, for to enhaunce,
And to confirm most sure foray unto the after age
The premacy of Rome, and of the dragon that does rage
Against Gods power.
Furthermore apply this mystical number of 666. containing high wisdom in
i^ from the time of Christ's birth, or from the time of his passion, or from
the xv. year of Domician, at which time the revelation was written, and still
ye shall find some mo^sterous thing wrought in the church. But to return to
the matter of England: In the year of Christ 593. Colman, Harding, and
Fabian say, that the reign of the seven kings at one time began: whereby
173^. years after Brutus their first king, the royal estate of the Brytishe
king ceased. For as Paulus Diaconus writes in his fourth book, the Britains
found that the Saxons were in stead of succourers, suppressours and cruel
ennemies, untrusty, warring rigorously upon them, who had entertained them for
aid. Anno 596. the foresaid Augustine sent from Gregory, came into England,
who at his coming did not reprove, but maintain, and uphold the wicked
treasons, the horrible robberies, and the slaughters more cruel then were
Neroes, which the Saxons committed. Anno* 600. Gregory gave to Augustine his
bishops pall. Thereby as was said, London was spoiled of her right without all
order, to the destruction both of the commonwealth and of religion, and
finally the undoing of the Brytishe kingdom, and thereupon are sumptuous
temples builded. Before that time the Britains had their churches dedicated to
eternal God the father, and to our savior his son Jesus Christ. But
afterward the Saxons did consecrate their temples to Images, and dead
saints* Anno. 604. the Christian Emperor Maurice being slain, Phocas an
adulterer and a murderer, obtained the seat imperial, and in him the
majesty of the Caesar's, and the most noble Empire of the Greeks decayed
together. As for the Roman Empire that was weakened and empaired, yea and at
length brought to nothing, by means of the Popedom which he had granted and
established. Anno 606. in November and December, as Paulus Diaconus writes in
his 18. book, even at the rising and beginning of the Popedom, there appeared
a wonderful great blasing star: There were strange sightes and monsters of
the Sea, showed them selves to the terror of many. Thus in ye time of this
Phocas murderer of the Emperor (which is to be noted as a mystery concerning
the Popes) Papistrie and Mahumets religion began both together at one time,
which corrupted, darkened, and weakened the doctrine of the son of God in
many regions. For in another year of the same Phocas, as Bibliander writes,
Mahumet recited the Alcoran, so that (says he) the Egles three heads awaked
all at ones, according to the heavenly vision in the fourth book of Esdras:
that is to say Phocas him self, Pope Boniface, and Mahumet the Arabian, now
follows the third troop of Romish Popes, which is divided into five
parts.

The first part of this third troops of the Popes or Roman Antechristes,
prophesied of by the names of Sodom or Egypt. Apocal. 11. until the time of
Pope John the eight.

1. Boniface the third.
Constantinople endeavored to obstaine the title of universal bishop, and to
have their Church called the head of all Churches, using these fond reasons,
that because the Emperor being chief of all Princes kept at Constantinople,
therefore yt should be the chiefest Church, and there the chief bishop: This
ambition enflamed many to speak and write against it, but especially the late
Gregorye who in this wise reproved John bishop of Constantinople for the same:
Saying, None of my predecessors (although the Emperors began first in Rome,
and were wont to bide there only, and yet do keep the title thereof) durst
take upon them this title of universal bishop. And again Gregorye said
plainlye that such a one was the forerunner of Antichrist. Yet notwithstanding
that the Church of Constantinople with great infamye prevailed not herein,
because that Antichrist or the whore of Babylon according to the 13. of the
Revelation should be in the City builded on seven hills, that is Rome it
self, For so diverse auctors testifye that only Rome is known to be builded
on vii. hills: and certain it is that when this Revelation was written, Rome
was then the greatest Cittye being built on seven hills, as Mantuan testifyeth
in the life of Syluester, speaking of S. Blaze at the end of the first book.
And the fullness of yt time prophesied of, now drawing nighe, this Boniface the
third Anno 607. by the means of Phocas the Emperor an adulterer, traitor,
and murderer of his Lord and sovereign Maurice the Emperor with his wife,
and children) was advanced to be bishop of Rome with much hurley burley and
great tumulte, and in despite of many bishops and Churches standinge against
it, he is extolled, confirmed and worshipped as Lord and Prince of all
bishops: By great suit (but greater bribery) he obtained of the said bloudye
Emperor, that Rome should be called the head of all Churches, partlye by the
same reasons that Constantinople used (as Platina says) yt where the head of
the Empire was, there should be the head Church, again the Emperors had
their beginning in Rome, again though some of them kept at Constantinople,
yet ever they bare the name of Rome, as Roman Emperors: finallye Peter
delivered to Rome ye keys of heaven and hell, A feeble reason though it had
been true. Thus at this time as an adulterer by treason and murder usurped the
Empire, so of the same man this ambitious Boniface obtained by briberye to be
universal bishop, and consequentlye by the saying of his own predicessour to
be the forerunner of Antichrist.

He decreed in a Synod that under the pain of excommunication one Pope being
dead, another should not be chosen before ye third day after: Also the same
penaltye for such as sought to be bishops by favor or briberye, he decreed
that a bishop should be chosen by the voices of the clergy and the people
together, and ye election to be good if it were ratifyed and allowed first by
the Prince or chief parson of the place, and last of all confirmed by the
Popes auctoritye, and with these words of his, We will and command. From
this time forward the puritye of the Gospel decreased and superstition
increased: Likewise y^ Emp^re was at this time mightily weakened, for France
Germanye, Lombardye and Spain revolted and forsook the Empire, and beside
Cosdroa king of Persia invaded and wanne away many countries and Cittyes in
the East, and among them Jerusalem. Boniface having enjoyed his auctoritye
scante a year dyed: From this time says Vspergensis the Romain Empire was
never without great trouble, miserye and missehap.

2. Boniface the fourth.
BOniface the fourth borne in Marcia, obtained of Phocas the Emperor that a
Church in Rome called Pantheon, which the heathen had dedicated to all their
gods and idols, should be translated from the worshipping of Idols to the
service of Christ, and be dedicate to al Saints, and so called all hallowes
Church: An ungodly and blasphemous alteration, and contrary to S. Paul's
doctrine, that Christians should turn that to Gods service, which was dedicate
to idols. He appointed ye feast of alhallowes day, and that the Pope on that
doye should say a long mass: he also appointed the corpse cloth to be had at
mass: he gave moncks leave to baptize and absolve. In this Popes time God
punished ye wickedness of Phocas, who was reft both of Empire and life, by his
successor Heraclius, for having his hands and feet cut of, he was thrown
into the sea.

3. Theodatus.
THeodatus the first was a Roman, the son of one Tacianus Montanus, and
other heretics do) honest marriage, which God has made lawful. At this time
reigned such a strange loathsome kind of leprosye disfiguring men in such
sort, that one could not discern another by the face: Theodatus died Anno
618. in ye third year of his Popedom. Here note by the way that none of the
Popes from this time lived long, which wroughte not some notorious act for
the maintenance of the tyranny of the Sea of Rome.

4. Boniface the fifte.
BOniface the fifte was borne in Campania, he decreed ye thieves, murderers
and leude parsons, making the churches, churchyards, chapels and such others
to be sanctuaryes for them, and that no man should draw them away by violence
that fled thither. He commanded that none but deacons should handle the
relics of Saints: furthermore that a will and testament being made by
commandment of the Prince should stand in force, which prerogatives his
successors did afterward usurp to themselves, that no testamente should be
good, unless it were allowed by them. He dyed Anno. 623.

5. Honorius the first.
HOnorius borne in Ca^pania was a good Pope (as Vvicelius says) for diligence
in building Churches, decki^g them with gold and silver, but a neg^igent
pastor for ought that is read of him in feeding Christ his flock. Among other
temples and monasteries that he founded, he honge S. Peter's Church with cloth of
Tissew, which with ye Emperors consent were taken out of Ianus Capitol or
Romulus temple: he devised holy roode day, and added to the Letanye the
prayinge unto dead saints, Sancta maria, sancta Gregori etc. and commanded to
go about the streates in procession every Sabbath day. This Honorius died Anno
634. in whose time Mahumet arose, the auctor of the Turkishe religion.

6. Seuerinus the second.
SEuerinus or Zepherinus the second, was confirmed Pope in the name of Herachu^
the Emperor, by Isacius his liuetenaunt in Italye. This Pope also was very
careful to build up Churches of dead saints, but careless of buildinge up the
Gospel: whereupon Isacius brake into the Church treasurye, and perforce took
away the great heaps of riches, ye priests to their power defending the same:
for then (even by Gods just punishment) the Sarracens wan from the Romans,
Damascus, Arabia, Phoenicia, Egypt, and other kingdoms of the world, Mahumets
power increased still against them: and as for the Emperors soldiers they
were driven to great pouertye and want of all things, and the houge heaps of
the Churches hourded treasury increased to no bodies profit. For (says
Platina) in this danger of Mahumet, the priests looked that the laitye should
bear the charge of this, to withstand the enemies of Christendom: again the
laitye looked that the clergy for defense of Religion should promise, and
give their money for the maintenance of the war, and should not waste their
wealth prodigallye to worse purposes, as for the most part they do, spendinge
plentifullye their riches gotten by almose deeds and with the blood of
martyrs, upon statelye and massye plate of silver and golden having little
care of the world to come, defying God and man, whom they serve only for luker
sake. Plat. in Boniface the 5. This made Isacius with his soldiers to burst
into the Churches treasurye. Seuerinus dyed Anno 636.

7. John the fourth.
John the fourth, learning by his predecessors harms how to use riches
better, did redeem out of captivity Isacius left in Lateran, his contreimen
the Assirians and Dalmacians, whom the Lombardes had taken prisoners in
battle. And yet least the like deed should be attempted against the church
any more, even sone after in the beginning of his Popedom, he decreed, that
the church goods being so purloyned, should be recompensed four times
double. He wrote to England concerning the keeping of Easter, and against the
Pelagian heresy: He transported from Dalmacia to Rome, the dead bodies of two
martyrs, Vincentius and Anastasius, rather to hurt live Christians with
committing Idolatry in worshipping them, then that the saluage people should
harm the dead bodies. He died ere he had reigned Pope two years, Anno. 638.
Platina reports that in this man's time, a certain priest robbed the tomb of
Rothaeris in S. John Baptistes church: for (says he) they were wont to bury
certain precious things with kings bodies. The like thing happened of late
time to Cardinal Allouisius, Patriarch of Aquilia, for his grave being burste
up, he was robbed by those, whom he from very base estate had advanced to the
dignity of priests and better calling.

8. Theodorus.
THeodorus the first was a Grecian borne, the son of Theodorus bishop of
Jerusalem, he builded many churches in Rome, and golden shrines for
saints. He ^et up the relics of Saints in gold and silver in the church.
He forbad that marriage made after a single vow, should be broken. He depryued
Pyrrus bishop of Constantinople, for heresy: He appointed that tapers should be
hallowed on Easter eve for Easter time: He died, Anno. 646.

9. Martin the first.
MArtin the first a Tuderdinian borne, made laws for the bridegroom and bryde,
should have the priests blessing. He commanded also, that priests houses
should be buylt next to the church: That Monks shoud not go out of the abbeys
without the Abbots leave: and in a Synod at Rome that bishops should not
transpose the church goods to their own private use. He died Anno. 656.
VVicelius says, he was very vehement against certain sects, exco^municating
them whom he ought by the scripture to have admonished. He deposed Paul
Patriarch of Constantinople, not admonishing him first once or twice, according
to S. Paul; rule: for the which he was bound in chains, and so brought to
Constantinople, by the Emperor Consta^tinus, where in banishment he died in
great misery. An. 653.

10. Eugenius the first,
EVgenius the first was a Roman, commended for his manners. But VVicelius
says, this Pope did never Constantinople, containing heresy, which were so
detested, that says Platina, the Clergy it self took upon them to forbid
the Pope to say mass in S. Mary's church, unless he would first burn the
letters, then might the Clergy control the Popes slackenes or error in
religion.

11. Vitellianus.
VItellianus borne in Campania, being an excellent musician, Crete, unto the
bishop of that place, for having a wife. He made the Latin hours, songs,
masses, idolatry, and ceremonies, adding and turning all into Latin, about the
year of Christ's incarnation. 666. which was the number of the name of the
beast spoken of in the 13. of the Apocal.. Here therefore is to be noted, that
the number of the beast agrees unto this time, secondly the number of the
years contained in the name of the beast, is found out in this word
lateinos: as who would say, that Antechriste shall be a Latin, or in the Latin
church, who shall come to his perfection in the year. 666. Also the letters
of his name shall amounte to this number, and last of all is to be noted how
that beside this Lateinos expressed the Latin bishop, and the time of
Antechriste, it agrees with the strange doings of this time, that all
things were turned into Latin in the church. And because that this mystery of
six hundred sixty six, spoken of in the Revelation, may appear even to the
most simple to agree unto the church of Rome, as in this place is said: it
is first to be considered that the ancient father Irenaeus, being immediately
after the Apostles, reading this place, and considering of the words of S.
John, saying: Let him that has wisdom count the number of the beast, for it
is the number of a man, and his number is six hundred sixty six. Irenaeus I
say, considering of these words, did at the length find out that this number
agreed to this Greek name lateinos and therefore he said, that surely
Antechriste should be a Latin and in the Latin church: for the Greeks, in
whose tongue the Revelation was written, do express their numbers by their
letters, as we do by figures. And in their numbringe this letter l the first
letter of that name, stands for thirty: the next letter a stands for one:
the third letter t for three hundred: the iiii. letter e for five, the fifth
letter i for ten: the sixte letter n for fifty: the seventh letter o for
threscore and ten: and the eight and last letter, s stands for two
hundred. So that if these eight numbers, that is: thirty, one, three hundred,
five, ten, fifty, seventy, and two hundred, be added together, they make six
hundred sixty six ^umpe. Again number so the letters in this word (...)
Ecclesia Italica, that is the Italian church, and ye shall find it also make
iump six hundred sixty six. For in the former word of these two, there are
right letters: whereof the first is e standing for five, the second k in value
twenty, and so the third is k that is twenty, the fourth l that is thirty, the
fifth e that is eight, the sixth that is two hundred, the seventh is i that is
ten, the eight is a and that stands for one: All which numbers added
together, make. 294.

Now to coin to the latter word (...) Italica, in it are seven letters, the
first is i and is ever set in the Grecian numbers for ten, the second t for
three hundred, the third a for one, the fourth l for thirty, the fifth i for
ten, the sixth k for twenty, the seventh and last, is a for one: all which
seven numbers amounte to three hundred seventy and two, then unto this add the
number of the former word, which was two hundred ninty four, and the whole
sum is lump six hundred sixty six. Furthermore, in the same thirtene
chapter, and the first verse thereof, S. John speaking of this beast, says
that the beast had seven heads. And in the seuententh of the Revelation, the
Angel does expound this mystery unto John saying: the seven heads were vii.
mountains upon which the woman (meaning the forenamed whore of Babylon) does
sit: and afterward again he says that the same woman whom John saw sitting
on the beast with seven heads, is that great Cittye which has rule over the
kings of the earth: At which time it is manifest to all the world, that Rome
had the soueraignitye and Empire of all the world, and that it was then the
great City, and none but it of whom this might be said: neither is it known
that any other Cittye is, or has been built upon seven hills. And that Rome
is so, it appears by diverse writers Romans and other, that report it as
they have seen it: Among other Munster in his Topographie does not only in
the description of Rome testify that there are seven hills but also shows
the names of them every one which are these: Auentinus, Capitolinus,
Palatinus, Cael^us, Exquilinus, Viminalis and Quirinalis hill. Proper^ius the
Poet confirms it briefly in a verse saying thus of Rome, Septem vrbs alta
iugis toti quae presidet orbi: the like has Virgil in his Georgicks, Septem
quae vno sibi muro circundedit arces, speakinge it of Rome. Mantuan in his
Fast. li. 2. does in like manner describe Rome, calling it Romulea^ septem cu^
Collibus vrbem. So of the Greeks it is called Heptalophos, wherein Hep^a
signifies 7. and lopho^ an hill, head or top.

This Vitellianus commanded shauings and annointings of the clergy to be
used, giving under these marks lice^s to buy and sell pardons in the Church,
as was prophesyed of Antichrist: and after he had choked the Church with much
palcry he dyed. At this time at the fullness of Antichrist, mo^kery grew into
superstitious estimation. At this time also these two strange things were
wrought: Abbeis were first founded for monks, kings were shaued and made
monks.

12. Theodatus the second.
THeodatus ye second a Roman borne, was made Pope being but a monk: He
bestowed great cost to make a sumptuous abbey of that, from whence he came: He
gave license to monks to transport Benedict Nursin patriarcke of his own order
with a scholesister of theirs from Cassim mount into France. At this time were
many strange things as a blasinge star appearing 3. months continually,
with great rain and often thonders, with a strange Rainbowe and earthquakes,
such as the like were never heard of. And some say that the corn being beaten
down with these strange tempests of rain, did spring up again and grew to
ripeness: For these things Theodatus caused prayers often to be said, and
dyed Anno 675.

13. Donus the first.
DOnus the first, was made Pope in a miserable time, S. Peter's porche with
pillars: And after he had punished certain Nestoria heretics, he scattered
the^ in diverse abbeis in Italy. He restored certain old churches, he divided
the Clergy into diverse orders, and advanced them with several kinds of
honor, and dignity. After much controversy he made subject to Rome Rauennas
church, Theodorus the Archbishop thereof, agreing to it through the Popes
flattery, which church before was called Alliocephalis. After he had done
many ^uche deeds he died, Anno. 679.

14. Agathon the first.
AGathon the first, as Gratian writes Distinct. 19. being a Monk of Sicill,
commanded that the Popes decrees Anno 679. to teach them here the manner of
their reading, singing, and ceremonies in their churches. And the better to
utter his knackes of celebrations and sacrifices, as Beda writes in his fourth
book and 18. chapter, de Gestis Anglorum. He ^ent his Orators John bishop of
Portua, and John Deacon of the Roman church to the sixth Sinode of
Constantinople, and against the Monothelites he sent one Agathus. In the which
Sinode the Clergy of the Greek church, were allowed marriage, and the Latin
church forbidden it. Also among other things then done the eight day after
Easter, Anno 681. the said John of Portua, did first of al say ye Latin mass
openly before the Prince and the Patriarch, and people of Constantinople, all
men allowing it for novelties sake, as a new found thing, which taking root
hereupon, was received in all churches, which held upon the Pope. In this
Popes time, after strange Eclipses, both of Sun and Moon, was a Pestilence
so contagious in Rome, that the Pope him self died thereof. The seat then was
v^yde a year and a half.

15. Leo the second.
LEo the second was a Monk very learned, as well in Greek as in Latin, and so
skillful in Music, that he brought the notes of the Psalms and Hymns to
better harmony. He confirmed the sixth Synod partly to establishe the mass,
partly because by it also the Clergy of the West church, were forbidden
marriage. He translated into Latin the ordinance of marriage. He appointed that
the Pax should be borne about, and be kissed of the people, while mass was
saying: Also yt if need did require there should be Christening every day.
He would have (for their sake of Rauenna) no election of any bishop to stand
in force, unless he were first confirmed by the bishop of Rome: But (says
VVicelius) without payinge for his pall, or any other money, which says
Platina I would it were kept still in Rome: for out of this bribing at this day
many mischieues arise. For as yet they durst not enterprise wholly such
polling, as they did afterward about (...) years after Christ: for in time
past the vi. Princes of Italye did confirm the bishops of Italy: yea, and the
Pope him self: Afterward the Emperor Constantine the fourth, agreing
thereunto, the election was again ratified in the hands of the Clergy and
the Laity. But the Prelates of Rauenna, being emboldened because that the
court of the six states was among the^, would not obey the church of Rome,
but avouched that they were egall in dignity. And thus Foelix being their
bishop after Theodorus, went about to shake of the Popes yoke, and to recover
their lost liberty. But the Emperor that was then Justinian, son of the
said Constantinus, being set on by Leo, with stands the purpose of Foelix,
and after he had by assault won the town, he boared out the bishops eyes
with a whot burning iron. Leo before the end of his ten months died Anno.
685. in which time the moon was in a mo^sterous and strange Eclipse,
appearing as red as blood all the night long, diverse nights together.

16 Benedictus the second.
BEnedict the second, whose holiness (they said) moved Constantine the fourth
(if they father not a falsehode on him after his death) to decree, that
henceforth the Pope of Rome should have authority over the people without the
license of the Emperor, or the six states of Italy, which lasted not long.
He reedified diverse temples enriching them with vessels of gold, silver and
guilt, with coapes of cloth of tissue, and cloth of gold, and other jewels,
according to the Iewishe ceremonies: and this Pope was the first that took
upon him to be called Christ's vicar on earth. Out of Vesunius hill in
Campania, such abundance of fire spouted, that it burnt up all the
countries, men and cattle round about: after which it is evident that there
ensued, Anno 686. bloodshed, burning, spoiling, and the death of Princes, and
especially of this Benedict a Pope of ten months.

17. John the fifth.
John the fifte was borne in Siria, he first of all took consecration of three
bishops, of the bishop of Hostia, Portua, and Veliterne, which custom he
appointed to be kept of his successors. And his posterity do keep this use
even unto this day in our Saviors church at Lateran. In his Popedom he fell
sick, in the which time he wrote a vain and unlearned book, touching the
dignity of the pall of an Archebyshop.

18. Conon.
COnon a Thracian, was made Pope after much wrangling between the Romans, who
would have elected one Peter an Archbishop, and the host, preferring one John
a priest. This Conon being established, fell sick and died, Anno 689. He made
one Kilianus being before a Scottishe Monk a bishop, and sent him with other
into Germany, to win the East part of France to ye church of Rome. But this
Kilian and his company, were at the first ^layne of their Auditors, and buried
at Herbipolis. One Paschal an Archedeaco^, and Treasurer to the said Conon, in
this Popes life bribed John Platina, one of the six princes of Italy, to make
him Pope after the death of Conon. Platina took the money, but he performed
not the covenant, neither restored the money.

19. Sergius the first.
Theodorus a priest, some Paschal an Archedeacon. And while every one did
ambitiouslye maintain his own faction, either party with the men of his own
side kept possession in some part of Late^an pallaice: But when the chief of
the clergy, the Romans, and the army saw, that this sedition would wexe
bloudye, they agreed to appease this tumult, and rejecting both ye other they
chose Sergius an Assyrian borne, and brought him to Lateran Church, and
brasting up the doors they drive out the seditious electors, and compelled
Theodor and Paschal to salute Sergius as Pope. He bestowed great cost in
trimming the temples with guilding, images, golden ca^delsticks, and curious
masons work, rich clothes, and such stuff: He (they say) found a piece of
Christ his Cross in a brazen cofer: He repaired the images of the Apostles
being worn out with continuance: He set a new patche upon the mass,
commanding that Agnus Dei should be song thrice when the priest is breaking
the bread. And on the day of the annuntiation of the virgin to sing procession:
He reclaymed the Church of Aquilia which began to decline from Papistrye. He
also by his monks allured the Saxons and Frisians to the same superstition:
While Aldhelmus an Englishman waited at Rome to be admitted to a bishopric,
he hard the Pope accused of adulterye, the child being newborn which was
fathered upon him, Aldhelmus therefore did secretlye admonish the Pope of
this wickedness. Sergius dyed Anno. 701.

20. John the sixth.
John the sixth a Grecian borne, being much delighted in Gisulphus captain of
Beneuent (who then wasted Campania) to return home. This man (as it appears)
was because of Sergius adultery elected only Pope, and not confirmed, Sergius
being restorde again, and therefore he is not reckened among the Popes. Peter
Premonstratensis says, that John was thrust out again because of his unlawful
entrance, and therefore he is not enrolled among the Popes.

21. John the seventh.
John the seventh a Grecian, was delighted in nothing but superstitious
garnishinge Churches and images of Saints, for which he is much commended:
but not one word spoken of him touching preaching the Gospel. He dyed Anno.
707.

22. Sisinius the second.
SIsinius or Sozymus after great conte^tion with Dioscorus about the Popedom
at length obtained it: He was so sore sick of the gout, that he lived Pope
but xx. days, being neither able to stir, nor to eat^ any thing: Nauclerus
writes that he was poisoned by the said Dioscorus in the same year that John
the seventh dyed.

23 Constantine the first.
COnstantine the first being sent for by Iustitian ye Emperor to come to
Constantinople, was the first that ever offered his sovereign to kiss his
feet. At his return home he condemned Philip Burdan of impiety, because he
could not abide the abominations of Idols, and took the Images out of the
Church. Furthermore he commanded that the picture of the Emperor (counting
the godly Prince a wicked heretic) should not be received, though it were
engraven in gold or silver: he cursed all the Emperors coin: And holdinge a
counsel at Rome, he decreed that Images should be had in the Church, and
should be worshipped with great reverence contrary to al Scripture. After this
he moved one Anastasius a mainteyner of images against the said Philippicus,
who apprehe^ding him, reft him of his kingdom, and put out his eyes: when the
bishop of Ticinum rebelled against his Metropolitan the Archbishop of Mediolan,
the Pope would not reco^cile him, but falselye made him tributary by stelth to
the Sea of Rome, whereby that bishopric has brought it self to perpetual
bondage. Kinredus and Offa two kings of the English Saxons for their pleasures
made a voyage to Rome, and when they were there, the Pope made them forsake
their kingdoms, and turned them into monks: he dyed Anno 715. He was the
first that gave his feet to be kissed of Emperors.

24. Gregory the second.
GRegory the second bestowed his time in repayring and Luith Prandus king of
Italye at the first withstanding it, to ratifye Arithpertus donations being
unjust, only to maintain the ro^at of the clergy: He moved the subjects of
the Emperor Leo to break into open rebellion, because their images were taken
away: He caused Spain, Aemilia, Luguria, Italye and other countries to revolt,
and defye their obeisance to the Emperor. The Emperor would have no
worshipping of images in the Church, and therefore the Pope did both
excommunicate him and put him from his kingdom, and threatened him eternal
dampnation. And thus the Emperors of the East lost their title in Italye.
Gregory dyed Anno 731.

25 Gregory the third.
GRegory the third was a stout champion for the Church of Rome and their
ambition. He did excommunicate his sovereign the Emperor Leo, because he
destroyed images. He joined to him Carolus Metellus ye bastard lieuetenaunt of
the Frenchmen, to maintain the estate of the bishop of Rome against the
Lombardes: By help of the Lombardes, he drove the Grecians out of Italy. And
afterward oppressed the Lombardes them selves by the help of France, and
absolved all Italy from the oath of their dew allegiance sworn to the
Empire. He busied him self in taking care, and bestowing costs on churches,
abbyes, celles, altars, and Images. In a Synod at Rome, he maintained that the
Images of dead saints should be worshipped, decreeing excommunication against
those that would do the contrary. He laid up in Peter's Pallayce ye relics of
saints, and commanded that on every day mass should be said there to them.
In the Cannons whereof he addinge certain clauses, clowted it with this piece,
Quorum solemnitates hodie. etc. He forbad to eat horse flesh. He translated
the tuicio^ of the church, from the Greeks to the Frenchemen: He set the
Apostles Images in churches severally by them selves. He wrote to Boniface an
Englisheman, that their priests ought to have shaven crowns, that should pray
for the dead at mass, and that they ought to pray, and to offer sacrifice for
the dead. After these and like deeds he died, Anno 742.

26. Zacharias a Grecian.
ZAcharias emplied his wit and wealth in pompeous and gorgeous buylding:
Among other vain sumptuousnes, Gregory's four books of Dialogues, to the
intent to plant the opinion of Purgatory among the Grecians, which they never
received yet. He made it unlawful to mary the uncles wife, the uncle being
dead, although Gregory the third allowed it. He commanded gosseps (as we call
them) in no wise to marye together. He commanded the Venetians (a Godly deed)
that upon pain of curse they should not for lucre sell their children of
Christians to the Saracenes. Taking upon him the power of God after a sort, he
presumed very churlishly and cruelly, to depose kings from their estate, and to
make kings. He was the first that attempted to release subjects of their
allegiance. For Pipinus son of the bastard Charles Martell, and traitor to
his Prince, by his messengers obtained of Pope Zacharye, that he would depose
king Childericus from the crown of France, and give it to him and his heirs.
The Pope remembering the late deed of Pipinus his father, in ye Popes behalf
against the Lombardes, and thinking by this means that he should be the better
able to encounter the Emperor of the East, granted this traiterous request.
And sent straight charge and high commission to the estates of France, that
they should depose their present king Childericus, shave his head, put him
into an Abbey, and so make him a Monk: And after this they should acknowledge
Pipin being confirmed and anointed by the Archbishop Boniface, to be their
sovereign and king. Furthermore he changed Lachis king of Lombardy,
Charolomannus, and other from their royal estate, and made them Monks. After
ten years reign, he died, Anno 752. One Steven a Deaco^, was chosen to
succeed him, who being wakened out of sleep to go about his affairs, being
taken with the falling sickness, died presently, and therefore is not
accounted Pope.

27. Steven the second.
Steven the second, immediately stepped in after this other Rauenna, which had
wrought the Pope so much displeasure, and beside many other countries in Italy,
thereby to obtain the kingdom of Italy. He craved of Pipin importunatly to
revenge his quarrel against A^stulphus king of Lombardy, for demanding
subsidy of him and his Prelates. Pipin to gratify the Pope, in consideration
of the kingdom of France gotten by his means, after he had long besieged,
and often assaulted, the dominion of Rauenna, at the length delivering it from
the garrison of Lombardy, yielded it as a present to the Pope, with all ye towns
thereof, eue^ to the goulph of Uenice. And thus they robbed the Emperor of
that dominion, and withal pulled down the third part of the strength of the
Roman Empire, empairing thereby the East Empire. And as for the weste Empire,
which then was arising, it lost his strength likewise. But Pope Steven
hereupon annoynting bastard Pipin and his two sons agayn^, and giving him a
pardon for falsefying his oath of alegeaunce, did more ratify him and his, in
the kingdom for ever, cursing all those that at any time should speak against
him. Also he shaued Childericus again, and made him newely Monk, and so put
him afreshe into an Abbey, to make all sure. Pipin for this fell down flat on
the ground and kissed the Popes feet, held his stirropes, and took the bridle
in his hand, and played the osteler, an^ vowed perpetual fealty to the Pope.
The Pope to thank God for this benefit of so great honor, which now began,
caused procession to be song through all Rome, and the Apostles tombs and
other saints relics to be borne about and showed openly, and him self to
be carried triumphantly through the mids of the people on his porters
shoulders in his Pontificalibus. Which use of being borne on men's shoulders,
his successors have esteemed as a most holy thing. He confirmed by his
authority, that all Popes tradicions should be taken for good. He forgave all
treasons against Princes: for the hatred he bare the Grecians, he studied to
change the Empire from them into France. He furnished the churches in France
with prick song and descant. And whatsoever henceforth could be wrested from
the Empire, he commanded it should be S. Peter's see, and so dedicated to the
church of Rome: he died Anno 757.

28 Paul the first.
Paul the first was brother to the said Steven: he after Theophilact,
succeeded: and followinge the dance that his auncetours had led him,
threatningly and fearcely he restored the images, which Constantine Emperor of
Constantinople had abrogated: but Constantine standing stoutly in his opinion,
and defyinge his vain curses and threats, wythstoode images with all his
power even to his death. This Paul honored much the body of one Petronilla ye
daughter of S. Peter, and took her karkasse out of the ground, remouinge it to
another place, and enlarged and repaired diverse Churches, adding many
ceremonies to them: At length he dyed through the extremity of the heat of
summer Anno 767. In his time (as Peter Premonstratensis says) stars fell
from heaven to the earth, according to the 6. of the Apocalips: And immediately
after this Charles the great began to reign, who builded 24. monasteries.

29. Constantine the second.
COnstantine the second being but a layman, by strong hand was made Pope
(though many other stood for it) through the doings of his brother
Desiderius king of Lomberdye, and through Totho duke of Nepesia: but this
hastines at length is brought to none effect, because Constantine had not taken
Ecclesiastical orders. Herevppon arose great discord among the clergy: in
which tumult one Philip was chosen, but because he wanted artilary and power to
mayntaine his part, he was forced to depose himself again: Constantine
obtained the Popedom a year, and that pontificallye: but in the end a
council being gathered of Italian and French bishops, in their great rage
and furye they put him out, and with great reproach clapte him in an abbey as in
a perpetual prison, having both the Popedom taken from him and his eyes put
out Anno. 708. Some do not count him among the Popes because he was a lay man,
and disalowe all his doing, sauinge Baptism and Chrisme: But the next year
after, his brother Desiderius coming to Rome under pretense of prayinge, got
those that put his brothers eyes, and rewarded them with the like punishment.

30. Steven the third.
Steven the third is commended to be a stout maintayner Lateran he did
disanull all that his predecessor Constantine had done: The bishops by him
created were disgraded, if they had no absolution, he commanded yt upon
pain of excommunication no lay man should presume to be Pope without
ecclesiastical orders. He condemned the seventh council of Constantinople as
heretical: And did again establishe setting up of Images, which by that
counsel was condemned: He taught that images should be worshipped, and
increased the worshipping of them, and commanded that they should be hallowed
with Frankincense. He brought to his subjection Mediolan Church, which ever
before had been free. He sued to Charles the Emperor, and obtained to depose
Desiderius of his kingdom. He appointed those that brake their Canons, to
sing Gloria in excelsis on So^dayes: and that in the solemnitye of the masses
it should be song on S. Peter's altar by seven bishops being Cardinals: He went
one time (to counterfaict Christ in his doings) barefooted in procession. He
dyed Anno 772.

31. Hadrian the first.
HAdrian the first was a meet champion to maintain ye Foelix and other: By
the aid of Charles the Emperor, he delivered the Sea of Rome from the peril
of all other Princes: He was the first that with his leaden Bull did honor
their decrees, dispensations, and privileges. He forbad that any infamous
parson should be promoted to priesthood, and that the clergy should not be
sued out of their own court: Charlemaine king of France and brother to
Charles the Emperor being dead, his wife Bertha came with her two sons unto
this Hadrian, suinge to him that he would anoint and establish these her
sons in their fathers kingdom: But this holy sier least he should offend
their uncle the emperor, cast of the orphans, despised their suit, and refused
to do it: and finally committed to perpetual slauerye, both the children and
their mother, with Desiderius king of Lombardye, his wife, his children and his
kingdom, who^ Charles carried into France with him, where they lived long in
care and miserye, until they dyed. And thus Gods vicar uses orphans, wydowes
and poor Princes: To cloak all this he fed in the porche of Lateran
pallaice, a hundredth poor folk every day. But Charles in recompense hereof
after he had kissed the Popes feet, confirms to the Pope his fathers gift,
that is the towns pertayni^g to the Dominion of Rauenna: and like an unjust
pyrate, he added to the Popes possessions, Venice, Histria, the dukedom of
Fotriiulenia, the dukedom of Spolet, and Beneue^t, and other lands. Also he
made Hadrian Prince of Rome and of Italy and ratifyed ye Popes Empire, by
spoiling the kingdom of Lombardy, and joining so in league with the Pope, yt who
so dealt with the one, should be enemy to both: Again Adrian caused Charles
and his successors the kings of France, to have the title of most Christian
king, and like a subtle fox he gave him power to choose the Pope, and to make
bishops through all his dominions, but that lasted not long, and so used him,
that in deed he had but the bare name of the Roman Emperor. This Hadrian
clothed the body of S. Peter all in silver, and covered the Altar of S.
Paul, with a pall of gould. He dyed Anno 796.

32. Leo the third.
LEo the third as soon as he cought the Popedom, by and by sent S. Peter's
keys and the banner of Rome with Charles the Emperor, desyringe him to bind
the Romans by an oath, to become subject to the bishop of Rome. Charles to
pleasure him, sent one Agilbert an Abbot, who compelled the Romans by his
commandment to swear allegeaunce unto the Pope. Hereupon the Pope purchased
such deadly hate among the people, that as he was ones going on procession,
certain furious parsones fell upon him, and beat him from his horse, and
stripping him stark naked out of his po^tificall roabes whipped him very sore:
But at length when Charles came, they (knowing his good will toward the Pope)
turned their former hatred into love and favor, and durst not auouche the
faults laid against him. Therefore when he asked of his conversation, they
answered with one voice that the sea Apostolical, ought to be judged by no
layman. After the which answer the Pope affirming, and swearing him self to
be giltlesse, the Emperor being pacified, does absolve him, and pronounced
him innocent: For with courtesy the Pope desirous to be thankful, with a
great voice proclaimed Charles Emperor, and joined him with himself, and set
the Diadem on his head, yt Romans in ye mean time cried, God grant life
and success to Charles our mighty Emperor. Thus was the name of the Roman
Emperor restored, so as the Popes authority should not be empaired. Hereof
the custom continued that he who should receive the scepter of the Empire,
should be joined in authority in Rome by the Pope. From this time, being in
the year. 801. the honor of the Romayne Empire, was first translated from the
Greeks to the French men by the Pope, and after at his good pleasure, from the^
to the Germans. This Pope also pronounced Pipin of France son to the sa^e
Charles, king of the same part of Italy, which neither he nor any of his
predecessors could ever suddu^: which he did for this policy, that the
kings of France having ye title Emperial, should never suffer him to lose his
majesty. For this cause (says Hieronymus Marius) ye Pope wrought perpetual
dissentions between the Emperors of the West, and of the East, to the great
spoil of Christian blood. Thus upon condi^ion that Charles and his should
swear perpetual homage and fealty to the church of Rome, he made him
Emperor. He first appointed to hallowe the altar with frankinsense. He made
the Popes decrees to be of greater authority then all the writings of the
doctors. Also he caused that a certain counterfeit blood made by a conueiaunce
to run from a wodden roode, should be taken to be the very and true blood of
Christ: And carried it to Mantua where to this day it is preserved,
reverenced, and worshipped. He by his authority allowed it to be so,
appointing for it yearly a solemn holydaye. Such was the dotage of the time,
whereof Mantuan bewitched with this enchauntement, writes to the Emperor
Charles, of the Popes journey.

While Leo hearing of the brute
of counterfaited blood,
Which found was lately streaming from
a crucifixe of wood,
He hieth him to Mantua:
where he perceiving well
The wondrous works wherein this blood
so straungely did excel,
He thought we should it as the blood
of Jesus Christeesteme,
That erst was shed upon the cross
our souls for to redeem.
An abominable elusion and blasphemy to say, and teach that the glorified
blood of Christ should shead it self in a rotten idol, which as the Apostle
says, was ones shed for all, and that out of his precious body. But the Popes
authority in this matter, caused this to be believed, almost of all men. But
so Paul prophesied the coming of Antechrist, to be in false signs to
deceive the unbelieving: Leo died, Anno. 816. Vspergensis says, that in this
time of Leo, the Sun was darkened and lost his light for eightene days, so
that the ships often on the sea wandered to and fro: Also that in an other
year it was twyse in the Eclipse, first in June, secondly in December:
Likewise the same year, the Moon was twyse in the Eclipse, in July and in
January.

33. Steven the fourth.
Steven the fourth, the third month after he had taken Lewis the Emperor, to
purge him self of election, whereby he was made Pope, because he was chosen,
and confirmed by the Clergy, and the people, contrary to the decree made by
Hadrian and Leo. And thus their own decrees which the former predecessor
made, the next successor broke. But to flatter and dally with the Emperor
for a while, he brought with him a fair crown of Remis, and put it on the
Emperors head, and put another on the Empress head, naming her Augusta. When
he had received his reward of the Emperor, and should return, ye church of
Reata wanted a bishop, and yet Steven very subtelly would elect none, unless
he might first know, whether the Emperor would allow his doing: but note
the sequel. As soon as he was returned safe to Rome, he began to consider that
the prerogative which was given to Charles and his successors, might be a
bridelling to the sea of Rome: being embouldened the more, because Lewis was a
gentle person, and a tractable man: he disanulled all that* authority and
right, and affirmed that it ought to belong to the Clergy, the people, and
the senate, to elect the Pope. But to avoid the Emperors displeasure, he
used this interpretation, that it was lawefull for them to choose him without
the Emperors authority, but not to consecrate him, but in the presence of him
or his ambassadors. And thus the Emperors were a little shouldered out from
the election of these prelates. And beside this because he reigned but eight
months, he could not any further enhance the pomp of his seat, dying,
Anno. 817.

34. Paschal the first.
PAschal the first a Romish monk, was chosen without the consent of the
Emperor, according to the gloss devised by Steven: but when the Emperor
complained, yt he found himself agreeued with the election, Paschall very
craftelye wrote unto him purging himself thereof. In process of time when he
perceived y^ the Emperor (upon blind zeal to religion) was a great
maintayner of the Church of Rome, he thinking that it were dangerous, if he
should delay the enlarging of his auctoritye: did so craftelye charm and
enuegle the Emperor, that he yielded whollye to the Romans all his auctoritye
touching the election of the Pope, which was given to Charles, and he confirmed
by wrytinge his auncetours presentacions, which they had wrongfully purloyned.
This did the Emperor confirm with hand and seal, not knowing their craft.
But after yt when this Emperor Jews minding to have his son Lotharius
joined with him in the Empire, and for the more convenient doing thereof sent him
to Rome, to be crowned there by the Pope king of Italy: which after yt the Pope
had done, whiile Lotharius (because of a certain tumulte and sedition there
arysing) fled to his father for aid to suppress it, leaving behind him one
Theodorus and Leo, chief officers about him, who stood stoutlye in their
masters quarrel, the Pope secretly and trayterouslye caused certain seditious
persons to pull out their eyes, and afterward to strike of their heads. And
when he was accused to the Emperor both of the sedition, and of this murder,
he picking out for his purpose a counsel of Prelates, purged himself by his
oath: notwithstanding he absolved and pardoned those that were giltye and
known offenders, he accused them that were slain to be giltye of treason
against the Emperor, and finallye avouched, that they were lawfully put to
death. This Paschall they say (if they over reach not in the number) did take
up ii. thousand saints karkases, that were buried in Churchyards, and bestowed
more honorable tombs upon them in other places: He commanded to worship and
reverence ye relics of Saints: He was beneficial to stone walls, as
Churches, and altars diversely. Last of all he gave commandment to the
clergy, that they should not take any benefice or Ecclesiastical lyuinge at
the hands of a layeman. He dyed Anno. 824.

35. Eugenius the second.
EVgenius gat the Popedom with much brablinge and Zizimus had it granted him:
but the discord being ended Eugenius gat it both for his curtesye and
eloquence (as they say) who as Premonstratensis says, yt while he was Cardinal
of S. Sabines, bestowed on the Church a silver cup and a stately picture, but
now in his Popedom, he so busied himself about corn matters, as if he had
been borne to feed many men: and yet some say that his eyes were put out by
the Romans, other say by the priests that hated him. In this man's time
Lotharius the Emperor appointed magistrates in Italy, to govern and brydel
the Romans, because they abused their liberty very much which they had under
Charles: which deed as many think hastened the death of Eugenius. Michael
ye Emperor of Constantinople sent Ambassadors to Jews ye Emperor, desyringe
to be resolved concerning Images, whether they should be worshipped or
abandoned: and Jews sent them to Pope ^ugenius to be instructed, but Eugenius
aunsweare was never known. He reigned 4. years and then dyed. Anno. 827.

36. Valentine the first.
VAlentine the first being yet but deacon and not full priest, was made Pope, he
was a man of a quick wit, able to persuade and diswade. And some write that
there was in him such excellent hope, that he would have reigned more happelye
and in better order then the rest, wher^y the fathers about, feared the decay
of their former holiness, for he never did any thing that was not liked. He
dyed the fourth day of his reign, and as some think poisoned.

37. Gregory the fourth.
Gregory the fourth would not take the Popeship upon him (fearing the
sequeale) until that ye Emperor had allowed the election, and by this man the
Emperors had restored to them their right of co^firming the Pope, which yet
lasted but a while. In this Popes time there was a counsel of bishops held by
the commandment of Jews at Aquisgran, where it was decreed ( Gregory being
president of the counsel, that every Church should have revenues of his
own, whereby the clergy might be maintained, and not be constrained to forsake
their cure and office, and give themselves to occupations of lucre. And it was
concluded that none of the clergy of what soever degree, should wear any
precious or purple garments, neither wear any ringes, nor i^wels, unless it
were a ring at saying mass. Again that they should not keep a great train
and familye, neither horses, dysing, nor dishonest women, and that monks
should not exceed in gluttony and feasting, and that the clergy should
wear neither gold nor silver in their shoes, slippers, nor girdles, which
(says Platina) are far disagreeing with religion, and most manifest tokens of
inco^^^nencye. Yet such was their royat then, which continued so that Platina
in ye lite of this Gregory cries out in these words.

O Emperor Jews I would thou were living in our time, the Church now
wants thy holy laws, and thy justice, for Ecclesiastical persons do so
wallow in all kind of lust and royat: Ye might now see the^ pranked in crymson,
with bruchies and Jewels, and that not men only, which perhaps might seem
tolerable, but also their horses and beasts. And while our prelates pass
abroad, a lustye troop of youths, go ietting before them, and a knot of
chaplins following behind: and they themselves not ryding on sillye asses, (as
Christ the author of our religion, and only pate^ne of good life in earth
did) but upon their neyeng and trampling horses, al betrapped as if they roode
in triumph after a conquest of an enemy Touching their silver plate and
statelye furniture of houses, and delicate fare, it booteth not to speak:
when as their dainty diet excels all that ever was in Sicilli, their roabes
pass all the pomp of Attalus, their vessels stain all the plate of Corinth:
but what will come of this intemperancye, I say nothing. Thus complayneth
Platina.

But to return to Gregory, he made diverse holy days for saints, as
Bartholmew, Gregory, Sebastian and others, he was beneficial to Churches and
deadmens bones. By the Emperors help he drove the Moors out of Italye: he
procured tenthes to be given to the Churches, and devised solemn erection of
Sepulchers. He dyed Anno. 843.

38. Sergius the second.
SErgius the second was before called hogs snoute, he being made Pope did
first bring up this use yt the Popes should change their names. To
confirmation of whom yt Emperor sent his son with auctoritye Imperial to
Rome, and many nobles to attend on him: which kind of confirmation they were
wont all to attend upon, until Hadrian the third told the Romans, that
they ought not to look for the Emperors good will in creatinge the Pope. This
Sergius was the first that of himself renounced his Christian name given him
in baptism: He appointed yt Agnus Dei should be said thrice at mass, and the
oste the while to be divided into 3. parts: A new patch set on the mass.
He bestowed pains as other did on dead men's tombs. He dyed. Anno 846.

39. Leo the fourth.
LEo the fourth took the Popeship under Lotharius the Vatican, he repaired the
wall and town gates, and raised about them even from the foundation xv.
fortresses, whereof he planted two very well at the end of the river Tiber,
to beat back the force of the enemy. He builded a new S. Maryes Church,
and gave an Alter of iiii. crowns for martyrs bones, he repaired the Castle
of S. Angel, and made seats of Marble in the porche of Lateran. Hitherto he
played the bayliffe of husbandrye, but after this he became a warrier and
captain of an army. For when the Sarracens made many a road into Italye and
spoiled the country, first he promised them heaven that would fight for the
defense of his state, the^ mustring the Roman garrison he making the sign of
the Cross, encountereth the ennemies, and with this prayer (as they say) O God
whose right hand etc. at Hostia gate he put them to flight and overcame them.
Afterward he summoned to a counsel 47. bishops, wherein he condemned one
Marcellus of diverse crimes: But afterward he gave sentence that a bishop should
not be condemned without 72. witnesses. He first began (contrary to the
counsel of Aquisgran) to deck the Popes Cross with precious stones, and
commanded it to be carried before him: He took upon him to profer his feet
to be kissed, and decreed that none of the laitye should abide in the quier at
mass time, but only he which attended on the Alter. He appointed sondrye
hollyedayes, and several prayers and solemnityes to them. He was accused of
many crimes, but specially that he went about by auctorie of a counsel, to
translate the Empire from France into Germanye, but he purged himself by his
oath. He dyed Anno. 854. In this Popes time Anno 847. Ethelwolphus being first
a monk of single life, having a dispe^sation from the Pope, left his monkery
and became king of England, making his dominion tributarye to the Sea of
Rome, appointing a certain tax of money to be levied yearly of every house,
and paid to Rome: And thus all England became thrall to Rome, to the
fulfillinge of the saying in the 17. of thapocalips concerning the x. kings,
These have one counsel and power, and shall give their power unto the beast.

THE FOVRTH BOOK co^tayning the third order of Popes, in who^ Antichrist
appears to be come toward fullness of his wickedness specifyed in the 17.
Chapter of the Revelation, speakinge of Antechrist in the kingdom of the
great whore of Babylon, which sits upon the beast with seven heads:
and that Prophecye seems to master Baale to contain these 41. Popes
following to Siluester the second.
Hitherto from Phocas the Emperors time for the space of 247. years,
Antichrist like the beast reigned in the Church of Christians without
judgment, or consideration of heavenly spirit. Hitherto the Popes even to
the forteth Pope cast their eyes on earthly things, forgetting Gods everlasting
testament, as if they only regarded but the flesh, and not the soul. All
their delight was in new traditions, ceremonies, buildings, pleasures, pomp,
wars, treasons, and translations of kingdoms as appears, so that they
seemed to live in the glory of this world, and in contempt with Christ: so
that the Church under their government is at length become the strompet of
Babylon according to the whole discourse of the Apocalips. The truth whereof the
Lord has most evidently reueiled in this next Pope yt follows, who was a
woman and an harlot, whereby al men may understand the misterye revealed by
Christ.

THE POPES OR ROMAN ANTICHRISTS.
40 Joan the eight.
Joan the eight, being a woman, was made Pope, and because of her bringing up
under a certain English man Fulda, (whom she loved tenderly) her name was
altered, and she was called John English: She sat as Pope in the pontifical
seat at Rome two years, and six months: She was a Germain of kindred, and
borne in Men's, called at the first Gilberta, who the more to enjoy her lovers
company, and the better to avoid suspicio^, dissembled her kind, and put her
self into man's apparel, and so travailed with the Monk her peramour to
Athens: where after she had profited in all the sciences, her lover being dead,
she came to Rome disguising still her self, and counterfaiting to be a man.
For through the promptness of her wit and ready tongue, she talked eloquently
in public lectours and disputations: And many had her in admiration for her
learning: She grew into so great credit, and was so well liked of al, that Leo
the Pope being dead, they chose her Pope: In which office as other Popes did,
she gave orders, made priests and deacons, promoted bishops, made abbots,
said masses, hallowed altars and churches, ministered the Sacraments, and gave
men her feet to kiss, and did all other things belonging to Popes, and her
doings stood in force. But in the time of her Popeship* Lotharius the Emperor
being an old man became a Monk. And Lewis the second came to Rome, and
received of ^er the scepter and crown of the Empier with Peter's blessing:
whereby the whore of Babylon showed her self so mighty that she made kings
stoop unto her. Apo. 17. Also as Houedenus says in her time Ethelwolphus king
of England gave the tenth part of his kingdom to the Priests and Monks to
pray for his soul. And his son Ethelwaldus married Judith a wydow, and
lately his own fathers wife and his stepmother. But as touching Pope Joan, she
was gotten with child by one of her familiar chaplaynes a Cardinal, to whom
her fleshly appetite caused her to disc^ose her self. As she was going on
procession solemly to Lateran church, in the midst of the way, and in ye
open streate between Colossus and Clement church, she was delivered of child
in presence of all ye people, and died of her travel in the same place. And
for this wickedness she was stripped and spoiled of all pontifical honor,
and buried without any pomp or solemnity: Whereof Mantuan writes describing
hell in the third book of Alphonsus thus. Here honge the dame that erst
disguised would seem a man to be
Whose head the Roman miter ware with crest of crownettes three,
Who playde a shameless strumpettes part in place of Popes degree.
Lo this is that seat that can not err, being endued with the holy Ghost by
succession, or rather an evident argument of the seat of Babylon. But ye Popes
since that time in their procession do shonne that place, where she was
delivered as odious for the hap thereof. Funcius says boldly that this was
suffered by Gods especial providence, that this woman should be made Pope
being also an harlot, even then when she should bring kings as she did
Ethelwolphus and Alphredus in subjection unto her, whereby Antichrist might be
known: for then it was the Lords pleasure, to bewraye the whore of Babylon in
a Pope being an whore. Whereof the holy Ghost foretold. Apoc. 17. that the
elect might beware of her. But to avoid the like inconvenience of a woman for
the time following, they devised that who so ever should be chosen Pope, should
be serched very narrowely to be tried a man, shameful to be reported, but used
without shame among such shameless shauelinges. But now commonly they need
not when they choose them Popes, mistrust them to be women, for while they are
Cardinals they play such Carnal parts that they are able to bring forth
bastardes of their own begetting to prove them selves men, whereof one John
Pannonius wrote a merry Epigram in four Latin verses: testifying the truth of
this their doing, of the which I omit the two first verses for civility
sake, it may be gathered by these latter two what is meant.

Cur igitur nostro mos hic iam tempore cessat
Ante probat sese quilibet esse marem
How happens that this groaping them is used now no more,
Because each one does try him self to be a man before.
41. Benedict the third.
BEnedict the third, being first tried upon the porphyry Massaeus says he
howled out and cried miserably, that he should be promoted to so great
dignity, whereof he was unworthy (a rare thing among them.) But some think he
did it but of hypocrysie, because (As Platina says) he offered his feet to be
kyssed, and suffered him self to be worshipped like an earthly Idol. Then
came Ambassadors from Lewis the Emperor, to confirm the election of him done
by the Clergy and people. Among many supersticious and vain ceremonies he
appointed that Dirige should be said for the dead, and that the Clergy should
go soberly, and honestly. He died Anno, 859. In this time (as Sigebertus and
Vincentius testify) in Men's as a certain Priest was casting holy water a
certain Devil lurking under his Cappe, as if he had been a familiar to him,
did accuse him, that he lay with a Proctours daughter that night.

42. Nicolas the first.
NIcolas the first was made Pope in the presence of Lewis the second Emperor
after his father Lotharius. But as soon as Lewis was departed out of Italy, he
began to consider how he might advance the dignity of the Popedom which
before (that the Emperor might count him holy) he refused. He put down John
Archbishop of Rauenna, for maintaining the old liberty of his byshoprike:
and brought that church into perpetual bondage. Among many decrees he
concluded, that no seculer prince, no not the Emperor him self, should be so
hardye as to come in among the Prelates in their counsel, unless they were
debaiting matters of belief, then the Emperor should execute those, whom the
Pope judged to be heretics. Also he decreed, that the layetie should not take
upon them, to judge the life of the Clergy, neither to dispute of ye Popes
authority and power. Also he decreed that Christian magistrates should have no
authority over a prelate, because says he, ye pope is called God, Auton. Tit.
16. He commanded that the Clergy should not be warriors but study, how to
talk, and persuade. He commanded again that divine service should be said
in Latin: But yet granted the Sclauonian and Polonians, to have it in their
own tongue by dispensation: He added the Sequencias to the mass. He added
Gloria in excelsis, to be song to the mass on Maundy thursday. He added the
term of Apostolical authority to the Popes decrees: He commanded marriage to
be openly sole^nised: he allowed that the sacraments might be received of
evil ministers: He first bound the Clergy to single life. But Huldericus
bishop of Augusta, controlled his wickedness herein by a sharp epistle: he
died Anno. 867.

43 Hadrian the second.
HAdrian the second, the son of Talaris a bishop, was Leopart, Syluester,
and Dominicus, (that were bredde and brought up in his kitchen) to keep the
Bulgarians and Dalmacians within his dominion, whom Nicolas had brought to the
yoke before. But the Bulgarians having had proof of his tyranny drove out the
Italian priests, and received the priests of the Greek church. This
enkindled hot coals between the Latins and the Grecians. Hadrian died Anno
873. Before whose death it rayned blood three days at Brixia, and all France
was miserably troubled with Locusts. Alfredus king of England, took his crown
of this Pope, and was anointed, which never any king of England did before:
But afterward he was called the Popes adopted son.

44 John the ninth.
John the ninth was excellently learned, both in Latin and in Greek: He in
his soueraintie crowned three Emperors, Charle the baald, Charles Balbus, and
Charles Crassus. Carolus Caluus understanding that the Emperor was dead, hied
him to Rome to Pope John, whom with his bribes he allured to satisfy his
desire, and so was made Emperor by him, and received the crown Imperial. But
about a year after he was poisoned at Mantua by one Sedechias a Iewishe
physician and an enchau^ter. John hearing of his death, bent al his force to
make Charles Balbus to succeed his father, but the Roman Lords withstoode
him, and made Charles Crassus Emperor. The Pope standing obstinatly in his
froward purpose, was taken of the citezens and put in prison, because he would
not relent: but being released by his friends help, he fled into France. And
bestowing the imperial crown on Balbus, saluteth him Emperor. In the mean
time Crassus having gotten the city of Rome, causes John with terror to
return from France: Who returning to Rome, wills the Emperor to let him
return in safety, and makes him Emperor, and sets the crown on his
head. John at his being in France, sommoned a counsel at Treca, wherein he
condemned certain contentious persons, and made many laws to the
advancement of Popery. Afterward he wrote to Lewis Balbus, that the
privileges of the Church of Rome could not be abrogate without a prescription
of an hundredth years. Also he made it sacrilege, to take any holy thing of any
unholy person, or any unholy thing of an holy person. He excommunicated these
that were gilty of sacrilege, but in such sort that for money they might be
dispensed withal. He gave to many men saints relics for great jewels. He
confyrmed the liberties belonging to ecclesiastical persons, cloisters, church
goods, monasteries, and clerks. He prepared an army against the Saracenes,
and drove the^ out of Italy and Sicil. He died, Anno. 883. At this time the
Empier was translated from the Frenchemen to the Germans, by Carolus Crassus.

45 Martin the second.
MArtin the second was a Frencheman, whose father Anno. 884.

46 Hadrian the third.
HAdria^ the third was of such a proud stomach and hawty Normans. Thus says
Cranzius, these Prelates and the lewdenesse of the Romans, durst contemn
their Empier, until the force and strength thereof decayed. Whereby this one
Pope was now delivered and brought to bed of that monster at ones traveling,
whereof so many of his auncetours had traueled: that is to cut clean of the
Emperors authority: For Nicolas the f^irst had attempted it, but brought it
not to effect. Lo here good reader, how by this decree all the Emperors
right and title which they had over the Pope and city of Rome, is wrest from
them, whereby the Pope with great triumph has gotten the victory, and
vpperhande: Thou shall se him yet creep hier, and attempt greater matters,
ceasing not until he have advanced him self above all that is called God, or
that is worshipped. 2. Tit. 2. Whereby his flatterers may say: Who is like the
beast, or who is able to fight with it. Apoc. 13. But after this he lived not
long: he died suddenly, Anno. 886.

47. Steven the fifth.
Steven the fifth gat to be Pope, at such time as France was invaded by the
Normans, England by the Danes, Pannonye by the Hunnes, and Italy by the
Sarracens. He lived in much trouble and anguish of the mind all the time of his
being Pope, because Italy was so vexed with war and the Romans were not at
his commandment enoughe: yet he employed himself to the most of his
endeavor, daily to increase their Babilonical trumperye, and that none of his
decrees might be defaced: for as Gratian writes Distinct. 6. Enimuero, he
decreed that all the Ca^nons of the Church of Rome ought of necessity to be
kept. The same Pope (says he) forbad any Christians to condemn any to be put
to death with hot iron or scalding water, which was the^ used, Cau. 2. quest,
4. He caused a law to be made, how to order such parents as do either
ignorantly smother their children in their beds with the^, or else do choke
them, or murder them. He dyed Anno 892.

48. Formosus the first.
FOrmosus the first being bishop of Portua fearing the crueltye of John the
ix. forsook Rome, because he was thought to be giltye of John's imprisonmente:
this name Formosus signifying beutifull, which being made Pope he choose and
took upon him, shows (says Cranzius) yt he was a proud parson. This
Formosus for those former causes vowed and swear an oath, that he would never
return to his bishopric, nor to Rome, both which he had forsaken: and so he
gave over his orders, forsook priestcraft, and became a layeman, but the next
that succeeded, did absolve him from the oath, which he had sworn to Pope John,
and for money did restore him. After the death of Steven this Formosus so
monied the matter, that he purchased Peter's chair, but as not with out
bribes, so not without great brauling, by means that one Sergius a deacon
wrestled for the same place. For the appeasing whereof he calling Arnulphus
son of Carolomannus into Rome made him Emperor, who to gratify him for his
curtesy, stroke of the heads of them that were his chiefest adversaries. He
reigned vi. years and did almost nothing, he died Anno, 896. And at the length
for these quarrels continuing among his successors, his body and bones were
taken up by Sergius the third, the ninthe Pope after him and thrown into the
river Tiber. After this Formosus, the Popes did so dispatch one another, that
within nine years, there were xi. Popes.

49. Boniface the sixth.
BOniface the sixte was Pope but a while after Formosus, Anselmus says to be
remembered for nothing, but for his quiet election, and happy in nothing but
in reigning but a while.

50. Steven the sixth.
Steven the sixth succedinge Boniface was so enflamed against Formosus, that at
the first he disanulled his decrees, and cancelled his acts. And although
Formosus had been beneficial unto him before, in making him bishop of Agnina,
yet this curtesye could not cause this unthankful prelate to forbear his
malicious purpose: but because that this Formosus had before prevented him in
the Popedom, and by getting it disapointed him, and would not suffer him to
keep concubines, he conceived such deadly rancour against him, even after his
death, that to revenge his quarrel upon the dead body, he sommoninge a
counsel first took the karkasse of Formosus out of his grave, then put all the
Popes pontifical robes and attire upon it, and plucked it of again, and so
as it were spitefullye to disgrade him, put on layemans apparel upon him,
finallye cutting of those two fingers of the right hand wherewith he used to
hold the Sacrament, and throwinge them into Tiber, he commanded to burye his
body again, but not among spiritual men's bodies, but among lay men. Thus
after one years reign he dyed Anno. 897.

51. Romanus the first.
ROmanus a Roman by name and birth (though some think he were a Spaniard)
did nothing worthy of remembrance: but whereas he favored Formosus, he
allowed his doings, and did abrogate the decrees and acts of Steven. But
because he lived not long, he could not proceed far in his factious
doings, which tainted the Roman prelates shamefully at this time
especially. He dyed the third month of his Popeship Anno. 898.

52. Theodorus the second.
THeodorus the second even at his entrau^ce followed the examples that Romanus
had set to him. But there is no notorious thing mentioned of him, because he
lived but a while, sauinge that as Stella Venetus says, he also walked in the
seditious paths of his forefathers. He had no regard of Gods cause, but was a
maintayner and vpholder of Formosus quarrel, and cherished those that were of
that faction, but his short time prevented his farther doing. He dyed the xx.
day of his Popeship. Anno. 899.

53. John the tenth.
John the tenth succeeded Theodorus as well in manners John (says Barnus)
mindinge to restore Formosus doings whollye, he sturred a great tumult,
because the people did resist, and withstand it: and when he saw that it
would brast into open war, he got him to Rauenna, and sommoning thither a
convocation of 74. bishops, he restored all Formosus his decrees, even to the
uttermost, and did openly condemn the acts made by Steven, because he had
done so reprochfullye against the dead carcass. Also he burnt all the writings
that were to be gotten of that Synod against Formosus, but he proceeded no
further in these broils for want of breath. He dyed Anno. 901.

54. Benedict the fourth.
BEnedict the fourth is reported to have done no notable Stella it happened
that as well through the hedds (meaning the Popes) set all on sedition, as by
the body addicted to sloth, al virtue withered away: Likewise says Platina,
when the Church through her wealth wexed wanton and riotous, and none of the
head of the clergy co^trolled vice, then forthwith wickedness having gotten
liberty, brought forth and yielded us these Popes, being as it were mo^sters and
mongrels, which encroche Peter's place by ambition and briberye. Benedict dyed
Anno. 904.

55 Leo the fifth.
LEo the fifth being made Pope, even in his dignity was taken by strong hand
and cast into prison violently by one Christopher, seking to make him self
Pope, being but a priest and chapleine to Leo, and one whom he had brought up
in his own house. Which thing says Platina, could not be done without great
sedition, and the slaughter of many. And of what authority the place was now,
it may well appear, when as first harlottes bare sway and ruled the Popes,
then a private person durst, and could thus within so short a space as forty
days, drive out the other, and keep the place him self. Leo seeing him self
reft of the renown, and thus defaced even by his own familiar friend, on whom
he had heaped so many benefits, conceived so great thought that immediately he
died thereof:

56 Christopher the first.
CHristopher the first, was of so base lineage, that neither his country, nor
his fathers name was known. He having shoued out Leo, and his concubines
ayding him thereto, wan the Popeship by strong hand. But as he gate it
naughtely, so was he shamefully thrust out again by one Sergius, the peramour
of one Marozia, a notable harlotte and beawtifull concubine, who sought to
place him self in it. So Christopher was put down the vii. month of his
Popeship: And as Platina says, compelled to be a Monk, which thing was then
become the refuge of all caytiffes. And afterward he was again pulled out of
the Monastery by the same Sergius, and cast into a straight prison, where at
length in much misery and sorrow he died. Anno. 905.

57 Sergius the third.
SErgius the third, when as he was but a Deacon, gave a Formosus was chosen.
But taking the foil, he fled into France, but now espying his opportunity by
the aid of Charles Simplex king of France, and Adelbert Marquis of Thuscia,
he returned by stelth into Rome. And as it is said, he deposed Christopher,
apprehended him, and clapte him in prison, and invaded violently the Popes
place: Being settled, and remembering his rank malice against Formosus, not
withstanding the long time that had since passed, and eight Popes between
Formosus and him, yet freshly to revenge his old grudge, He the second time
took up the karkasse of the said Formosus out of his grave, after it had lain
thus long, and setting it in y^ Popes chair, did draw him from thence again,
and as if he had been a live struck of his head. And where as since his last
mangling, he had but three fingers remaining on his right hand, Sergius chopped
of those also. After all this, he caused his body and all these pieces thereof
to be hurled into the river Tiber, as if he had not been worthy to lie among
Christians. And yet not satisfied with this revenge, he defaced, condemned,
and disanulled al his acts, so that it was then needful, to admit them a
new to their orders, whom he being alive, thought mete to make priests. He
compelled the Romans to subscribe to this, for fear of the French king.
This Sergius among other new ceremonies appointed that the people should bear
candels on the day of the purification of the Uirgin Mary, whereupon it is yet
called Candelmasse day, to give their bodies unnecessary light at noone day,
because their souls wanted their necessary light at all times. This lascivious
Pope begat a bastard, which was afterward Pope John the twelfth, whom he had
by the most shameless harlotte Marozia: So Luthprandus testifies in the
third book, and xii. chapter, De gestis Imperat. This and other like prankes,
among harlottes and bawdes he practiced, even in his Popeship: At the time of
whose death Anno. 913. there were seen in the element great flakes of fire
running to and fro.

58 Anastasius the third.
ANastasius the third, after Sergius (all their vnclenlye ceremonies being
observed) was elected Pope. But some write of him that he did neither good nor
evil in his time, and therefore is he more commendable. They write that in his
time the body of Pope Formosus was found by certain fyshers in the river
Tiber, and so taken up, and with great worship buried in S Peter's pallaice, and
as some are not a shamed to feign, the Images of the church did salute it,
while it was burying: A notorius untruth, and gross blasphemy against God,
although in the time of such blindness, God might suffer Satan to move and
stir the Idols, before these idolatours, as in times past the diuel^ has
done when he spoke and gave oracles and prophecies out of Idols: Anastasius
died Anno. 915.

59 Laudo the first.
LAudo the first being a fruytfull Prelate in begetting children, as Petrus
Premonstratensis says, he begat Pope John the xi. in detestable adultrye.
This Popes life says Platina was so obscure that some do not reckon him among
the Popes, especially Vincentius. This Laudo as it appears, spent the more
part of his chaste life (as chastity went then) among harlottes, till at the
length he was destroyed among them: For one Theodora, the Lady that governed
Rome, a shameless curtezane, could not longer forbear the company of her
lover, John Archbishop of Rauenna, who was apparent son to this Pope Laudo.
Rauenna (says Luthprandus) was two hundred miles from Rome, whereby Theodora
could not so often enjoy the bishop her lover, and therefore she caused him to
give over Rauenna, and to usurp the Popes place in despite of the auncientes
of Rome. Here says Funcius, a man might demand which of al these Popes did
err from the truth, seeing they were all called holy fathers, and heads of the
universal church. Let the Popes partakers answer if they can.

60 John the eleventh.
John the eleventh borne at Rauenna, the bastard and adulterous Laudo, as
says Praemontratensis, he obtained the Popedom by right of inheritance,
though whoredom were his aid. For thus writes Luthprandus in his second
book, and thirtene chapter of Emperors. Theodora an impudent harlot and the
Lady of Rome burning in fleshly lust, was so enflamed with the comlye
countenance of this John coming to Rome, that she did not only request him,
but compelle him to satisfy her carnal desire. For the which afterward she
made him bishop, first of Bononia, secondly Archbishop of Rauenna, and
thirdly to obtain her filthy pleasure more conveniently, she made him Pope of
Rome. Thus at this time was the holy mother church subject to an harlot, and
ruled only by her, and is made an whore, according to the xvii. chapter of the
Apocalips. This John having a warlike courage, played rather the warrior then
the bishop: For when the Sarasins wasted Calabria, Apulia, and Italy, he
putting him self in armor, stew a number of them in these countries, and
drove them clean out. As concerning the end of this man, thus writes
Luthprandus in his third book and xii. chapter: In the mean time Guido
Marquis of Thuscia, began to confer earnestly, and divise with his wife
Marozia (the daughter of the said Theodora) how he might depose this John.
Guido had many soldiers gathered together at Rome, the which apprehending
Pope John in Lateran pallayce, Anno. 928, cast him in prison, and holding a
pillowe to his mouth, did smother him to death very miserably: After his death
they set up John the twelth, the bastard son of this Marozia, whom she had
by Pope Sergius. Thus the young harlot Marozia, for the advancement of her
misbegotten son, murdered the lover of the old harlot her mother Theodora,
by the help of her husbands servants. But because the people of Rome and
the Clergy, had not agreed upon the election of this subordined John the xii.
the self same year of his election, he was deposed again. And thus the same
John of whom (being set up by force, and by and by thrust down again)
Carsulan, Platina, Stella and others do make mention, because they knew not the
true story of him, which Luthprandus wrote, the ignorance whereof bredde
much confusion, for some took these two John's to be both one, and some the
one for the other.

61. Leo the sixth.
LEo the sixth, after that John the xii. bastard of Marozia the harlot and
Sergius the Pope was deposed, obtained to be Pope by the election of the
Roman people and clergy being in great tumult. This Pope did nothing
commendable, but the establishing of peace in Italye: after he had reigned vii.
months he was poisoned by Marozia, whereby she might establishe her son
again Anno 930.

62. Steven the seventh.
Steven the seventh did as Leo had done, he meddled with Crantzius it is a
strange thing that so many Popes at this time dyed so soon in their
dignityes, which is a great presumption yt they were poisoned, as the most
part of them were known to be.

63. John the xii.
John the xii. the bastard impe of Pope Sergius ye third, Marozia, was now
again made Pope after much sedition. At this time a fountain in Genua flowed
with blood very plentifully, prognosticatinge the wrath of God that immediatlye
followed, for the Aphricans, Sarracens and Hungarians, wasted and spoiled all,
and slew a houge number of people. There are some writers (as is said before)
that make ii. John's of this one, the one going before Leo and Steven, who they
said never enjoyed the Popes Albe or Rochet, and the other this which now was
set up after Steven, of whom (they say) the historyes write nothing. Again
there are other some, that make this being borne in Rome and the other borne
at Rauenna all one: among whom Platina says, that either of them was son to
Pope Sergius, but Anselmus deceived by Platina says the one was brother to the
other: but other writers do make him a several parson from the other two,
saying he was not known of the Cronographers, because he did nothing worthy
of memory. But Luthprandus in his third book and xii. Chapter writes thus
of the mother of John. Marozia a shameless concubine and mother to Pope John,
after the death of her husband Gui, does send messengers to his brother Hugh
king of Italy a Burgundian borne, to desire him to come to her, and to receive
of her the noble cittye of Rome: which (she said vvithal) she could not do,
unless he would take her to be his wife. For which her incestious desire
Luthprandus wrote thus against her in Uerse.

Why broyling thus vvvith Venus brand Marozia do thou rave?
Thunlavvfull love and vvilt thou of thy husbands brother have?
Dare bucksom dame Herodia two natural brethren wed,
Lo Lady blind, John Baptists law is quite out of thy head.
Who did forbid that brother with his brothers wife should me^l,
And Moses Law does not allow thy doing to be well.
Who did command the brother raise unto his brother seed,
If that the former by his wife had issue none in deed.
But that thy husband children has by the can be declarde,
It Is so (say you): but dronken love does nothing it regard.
King Hughe even as an Ox to death, for thy desire is brought,
Whose mind not for to gain thy love but rather Rome has sought,
What boteth it thou cursed dame this noble man to spoil,
For se^king thus by sin to gain a Queenely place a while,
Jehovah judge does make thee leese both Rome and all the toil.
Upon the said message the king leaving his army aloof, came to Rome who
being honorably received passed forth unto the strong hold S. Angels
castle, and so into the bed chamber of Marozia. After he was established in
vncesteous marriage with her, he began to contemn and despise the Romans: at
which time Marozia had a son named Albericus, brother to Pope John, but
begotten by Marquis Albericus. While this Albericus at his mothers bidding gave
water to king Hugh washinge his hands, the king because he did it not
handsomelye, gave him a bl^w on the face: Herevppon Albericus to revenge this
iniurye, calling the Romans together spoke thus unto them. The honor and
dignity of Rome is brought to such doultishnes and follye, that it is now
controlled even by harlots: For what is more abominable, what more shameful,
then that Rome should be brought to obeysaunce, through the incest of one
woman? and that the Burgundians whilom slaves to the Romans, should now be
lords over them? If he being yet especially but a new come gest take upon
him to dashe me on the face, being his very son in law, how think you
vvil he deal with you in process of time? Know ye not the pride of a
Burgundian etc? This being said, without any delay the Romans all defied
king Hughe, and chose the same Albericus to be their Prince. King Hughe being
driven into this terrible fear, was compelled to forsake Rome, and leauinge
Marozia fled to his own company: Then Albericus and his mother Marozia did
only enjoy the Monarche of Rome, and his brother the Popedom, who spendinge
five years in Popish practices dyed Anno 937, while the harlotte his mother
ruled as well the estate temporal as spiritual in Rome.

64. Leo the seventh.
LEo the seventh succedinge John because he desired to Luthprandus, the said
king Hugh forsaking his wife Berta loved especially three concubines Bezola,
Roze, and Stephana: and because they were such notorious harlots, he gave them
the names of three Goddesses, calling Bezola Venus, Roze Juno, and Stephana
Semele: by Bezola he had a son called Bozones, whom he made bishop of
Placentia, by Stephana he had Theobaldus made Archdeacon of Millain Church,
and by Rosa he had another great prelate of the Church, and a daughter
beside. In those days many saw blood rain out of the Sun, as Masseus
writes, and after it followed a great pestilence among men. Leo dyed. An. 941.

65. Steven the eight.
Steven the eight a German obtained y^ Popes chair Leo, yet this seems
strange to many, how it should be done, because no Emperor out of Germany
procured it. But Steven being notwithstanding Pope, was so vexed with civil
seditions among the Romans, that he could do nothing worthy remembrance:
for he was so shamefullye wounded, and foulye mangled and defaced amid the
broils, that for shame of his foul disfigurings, he durst never show his
face abroad: So little reverence had ye Popes at that time, for their little
holiness. Steven dyed Anno 944.

66. Martin the third.
MArtin the third being Pope gave himself only to repair the Church, not
in Religion, but in building: not in reforminge ceremonies, but encreasinge the
dignitye and pomp of the Church. He was very beneficial to the poor, and
bestowed plentifully on their bellyes. He was diligent in reformation of
outward manners. In the first year of this Pope a great blasing star was
seen in Italye, after which says Vspergensis followed an extreme famine: and
again says Masseus the Sun appeared very terrible, threatninge the
sequeale of Gods vengeance. Martin dyed Anno 947.

67. Agapetus the second.
AGapetus the second being Pope ruled Popelike in the time of one Berengarius
a Marquis of Italy, who was the last of that name, that had that dignitye after
Hughe. This Berengarius is reported to have driven many Monks out of their
cloisters, which lived idellye, and gave them selves to the pleasures of the
world. The Pope perceiving how he could not rule Berengarius in these and
such other spiritual matters, and that he would not restrain his
soueraignitie, according to the will of him and his: He sent for Otho the first
king of the Germans, to come into Italy, promising him the kingdom of the
Romans, to fight with Berengarius, and so says Sabellicus, troubled the
estate of that country. And except it were the settinge of these princes
together by the ears, he did nothing worthy memory till his death, being Anno.
954.

In his time was a counsel holden at Ingelhaim, but such was the negligence
of the time, that no man can tell what was done there, or wherefore it was.

68 John the thirtene.
John the thirtene, being the son of the foresaid Albericus Marozia,
obtained to be Pope partly by the bribery, partly by the threatening of his
father Albericus, being Prince. He being Pope lived not like a bishop, but
altogether like a rank ruffianly roister, giving him self wholly to all kind
of pleasure, as to whoredom, adultery, incest, masking and momming, hunting,
maygames, plays, robberies, fyring of houses, perjury, dyce, cards, bla^ing,
robbing of churches, and other villainies even from his youth: he misused his
cardinals in cropping their noses, thrusting out their eyes, chopping of
their fingers and hands, cutting out their tongues, gelding them, and using
diverse diversely. For before the Emperor Otho, in an open Sinode it was laid
to his charge (as Luthprandus writes) in his sixth book, that he never said
Mattins, that in celebrating the mass he him self had not communicated, that
he made Deacons in his stable among his horses, that he had committed incest
with two harlots being his own sisters: That he played at dice, prayed to the
devil to send him good luck, that for money he admitted boys to be bishops:
He had ravished virgins, and strange women: He had made the holy pallaice of
Lateran a stews and brothell house: That he had defloured Stephana his fathers
concubine, and one Rainera a wydowe, beside one Anna an other wydowe and her
niece: that he had put out the eyes of Benedict his ghostly father, used common
hunts, that he woare armor, and set houses on fire, brast open doors and
wyndowes by night: that he took a cup of wine and drank to the devil, and
never blessed him self with the sign of the cross: these and many more
odious articles were laid to his charge: Whereupon the Emperor by the consent
of the Prelates deposed him. And Leo the eight was set up in his stead. But as soon as the Emperor was gone, those harlottes that had been his companio^s,
inueigled the nobles of Rome, promising the^ the treasures of the church to
depose Leo, and place John again: which they did out of hand, and so Leo
whom the Emperor appointed, was deposed, and John established again. Who in
his Popeship decreed that the Emperor should ever be crowned at Rome by the
Pope: But as he was solacing him self with out Rome on a certain night, with
the wife of one that was a valiant man, he was taken by him even in his
adultery, and so sore and depely wounded with a dagger, that he died thereof
within eight days, in the tenth year of his Popedom, as Mantuan witnesses.
Of this Pope John S. Dunstane a Nicromancier and a coniuring Monk archbishop
of Caunterbury in England, received at Rome confirmation and pall to be
metropolitan, Anno. 960. This Dunstane did shamefully snaffle king Edgar: For
the king had deflowred a certain Noonne, for the which cause Du^stane did so
taunte and rate him, that the king fell down flat before him, offering to
submit him self to any satisfaction, and obayed this that was commanded him
by Dunstane, first because he was yet uncrowned, he charged him that he should
not take the crown upon him for seven years, and that during this time he
should fast twyse in the weke, distribute his treasure to ye nedy, build a
Noonnery at Shaftesbury, and last of al, that he should drive out all married
ministers, calling them adulterous priests. Cronicon Saxonicu^ ecclesiae
VVigorniensis. But as other stories testify, they were shortly after restored
again, and the mo^ks who had encroched their places were deprived. Also he
purchased of him for a great sum of money, a commission to disanulle and
condemn the marriage of the Clergy, and to constrayne them to single life, or
else to deprive them of ecclesiastical benefits: So writes John Capgraue, and
Polidor Virgil. in his sixth book of the history of England. Hereupon he being
emboldened by the authority of king Edgar, joining to him self in the same
commission, Oswalde bishop of York, Ethelwalde bishop of Winchester, and
Monks of the like disposition, did violently thrust out of the cathedral
churches the Curates and Ministers, which would not forsake their wives: and
planted in them Monks with their counterfaited chastity, which they kept
until the time of the most renowned Prince king Henry the eight. But many
there were that stoutly stood in defiance of this wicked doing, especially a
certain Scot did bitterly speak against it. Of this Pope John came this
proverb, As merry as Pope John.

69 Benedict the fifth.
BEnedict the fifth, after the departure of Otho the Emperor Leo, being but a
Deacon, and Cardinal, was made Pope by John's friends in a tumultuous time. But
Otho would not suffer Leo, (whom he had appointed) to take this iniurye, and
therefore returning to Rome with his army, he plonged the Romans diverse
ways, to make them yield this Benedict into his hands, and to restore Leo.
Therefore after they had kept the gates locked two months, they yielded
Benedict unto the Emperor, and received Leo, and established him solemly in
the Popes chair. But when as Otho should return into Germany, he sent
Benedict to Hambrough to his Chauncelour Adaldag the Archebyshop thereof, where
he lived in exile, and for very thought and anguishe of mind died, and was
buried in the Cathedral church, Anno. 964.

70 Leo the eight.
LEo the eight citizen of Rome, and chief secretary of Lateran church, was
made Pope by Otho the Emperor, in stead of John deposed for his vilany. Who
being established in his Popedom (and Benedict) deposed because he perceived
the leudnes of the Romans, how that with threatninges, with bribes and evil
means, they were still aduauncing their own: He crowned Otho and made him
universal Emperor. Afterward by decree of a Synod, he bestowed on Otho the
whole and absolute authority, to elect the Pope, taking it from the people
and Clergy of Rome, which (says Gratian) Charles the great had given unto
them. This he did to avoid those seditio^s, which used to arise in the
elections. Otho desirous to be thankful for this courtesy, restored to the
sea of Rome, all which they forge, that Constantine gave them, or that Charles
or Pipin took from the Lombardes. And had bestowed on them: He restored says
Barnes, those things which he neither possessed nor was able to defend. But
Leo after he had reigned a year and three months, died Anno. 966.

71 John the. xiiij.
John the xiiii. son of one John a bishop (or as some say of Pope John the
xii.) obtained the Popedom, as it were Angel castle the space of eleven
months. This being known, the Emperor hasted to Rome with his army, and
dealt sharply with the offenders, some he banished, some he made to forfaite
their goods* some he hanged on the gallows. But the Pope having Peter the
president, yielded to his will, delivered him to the hangeman, who according to
the Popes commandment, stripped him out of his apparel, shaued his bearde,
and hong him up by the hair of the head for the space of an whole day.
Afterward he commanded that he should be set upon an ass with his face to
the tail, and his hands tied under the Ass tail, and to make him a laughing
stock to all men, to lead him thus about the city, and withal to scourge him
with rods, this being done to drive him out, to be banished into Germany.
This Pope John allured ye kingdom of Poleland to Popery, and sent thither
Giles Cardinal of Thusculan to confirm the people therein, to divide
dioceses, to annoynte bishops, and consecrate them, and to account the Pope as
supreme head of all churches. After this he died, Anno. 973. At this time they
began to Christen belles, and to give them proper names: For this Pope called
the great bell of Lateran after his name.

72 Benedict the sixth.
BEnedict the sixte succeeded John as well in misery as in place, for he was
cast into Angel castle as prisoner (for certain offenses) by Cynthius a
Roman, a man of great power. And within a while after he was strangled to
death with a roape in the same prison: or as some say, pyned to death. I
cannot but marvel (says Platina) that his death was not revenged, neither by
the Romans, nor by Otho the Emperor, who so tendered the estate of the
church of Rome: but I fear says he, that Benedict deserved as Cynthius
rewarded him, seeing no man revenged his death.

73 Donus the second.
DOnus the second, succeding Benedict, learned by him to be more wise, and
therefore did nothing at al worthy to be written: Only this is mentioned, that
when the Polonians desired they might be made a kingdom, and have a crown
granted to them, he denied their suit. Crantzius says, he governed
indifferently, deserving neither great praise, nor disprayse, for a year and
six months, he died Anno. 975.

74 Boniface the seventh.
BOniface the seventh was of so base birth, that neither the name of his
stock, nor of his country was known, he getting to be Pope by lewd means
lost it leudly again. For having obtained the seat, the magistrates conspired
against him, whereby he was compelled to hide him self: But perceiving he
could not tarry at Rome safely, he filched and robbed Saint Peter's Pallaice of
the most precious and richest treasure and jewels, and so by stelth fled to
Constantinople: where after a while selling them all, he made a great sum of
money, and returned to Rome, knowing that money could obtain anything. But in
his absence the Romans made one John the fifteth Pope in his stead: But he
returning enriched the citezins with money, and allured to him every rascal,
whereby he took John, and thrust out his eyes, put him in prison, pined him to
death, and so gat his place again, wherein shortly after he died wretchedly of
y^ falling sickness: Whereupon his body (having a roape tied about his beles)
was haled through the streates, and despitefully stabde in with daggers,
pikestaues, iauelinges, and such like things: and at length commanded by the
Clergy to be buried in a common place.

75 John the fiftene.
John the fiftene a Lombarde, was made Pope by the citezins Boniface robbing
the treasury, fled to Constantinople secretly. This John was a Deacon
Cardinal, and of great authority, and favored not Boniface, but (as Platina
says) he with certain other honest citizens stood against Boniface his
doings, whereupon (as is above mentioned) he was made Pope, the other being
fled, and so continued eight mon^ths, till the other returning, did put out his
eyes, imprisoned him and murdered him there, with the ^a^ke stink of the
prison, and famine, and grief of mind together. Yet some think that Ferrucius
the father of Boniface slew him, because he withstode his son to be Pope: so
says Anselmus.

76 Benedict the seventh.
BEnedict the seventh, after these was made Pope by the Remes against Lotharius
king of France, wherein he restored Archebyshop Arnulphus, who was violently
deposed, and he deposed and condemned of heresy one Gilbert a Monk, being a
coniurer, whom the king for his money and sorcerie, had advanced to be
Archbishop. This Gilbert notwithstanding, did yet afterward obtain of the
Emperor Otho the third, whom he had taught to conjure, that he might be
Archbishop of Rauenna, and afterward he was promised by the Devil, that he
should at length be Pope of Rome. Whereupon says Polidor Virgill in his sixth
book of his story of England, Monks and priests at this time, declining
from the trade of their elders in all places began, even as it were by their
own right to scratche together howge heaps of riches, to compass honor by
ill arts, (coniuring and sorcery) and to exercise tyranny. Benedict after he
had reigned nine years died, Anno. 894.

77 John the sixtene.
John the sixtene, son of one Leo a Priest, succeeded by election of the
people and Clergy. As soon as he was Pope he began to bear deadly hatred
against the Clergy, so that he was abhorred not only of them, but of all the
people: and chiefelye because he neglecting the dignitye of the Roman Sea,
bestowed the riches and treasures there of upon his kindred, his harlots and
bastards. Which fault (says Platina and Stella) has continued among the
clergy unto our time, for an ill president to the posterity: Then the which
custom nothing is more perilous, when our clergy (says Platina) shall covet
spiritual dignities, not for love of Religion, and to serve God, but to
maintain the prodigality, gluttonye and covetousness of their kindred, and
friends, their concubines and bastards. Of the like complayneth Mantuan of his
time.

Sanctus ager scurris venerabilis ara cynaedis,
Seruit honorandae diuum Ganymedibus edes.
At this time appeared a Comet, after which followed both famine and pestilence
with terrible earthquakes, which shook both Beneuent and Capua: which plagues
most men judged, were sent for the pride, ambition, greedines and royat of the
Popes, and for the contempt of God so great at this time. This John dyed in
the viii. year of his reign* Anno. 985.

78. John the 17.
John the 17. was very expert in feats of cheualrye, he Crescentius the
Consul, going about to make himself king of the Cittye, gave place unto
Crescentius conspiracye, and banished himself into Hetruria: but Crescentius
knowing of John's displeasure, and that he went about to call the Emperor with
his army into Italye against him, he sent those friends and kinsefolke which
John had remaining in the City, to entreat him not to send for the Emperor,
but himself to return to Rome with his autoritye, and he promised to be
obedient to him in all things. John being entreated by his friends, and
fearing that the Emperors coming would do more hurt then good to him and his
clergy, returned to Rome: Against whose coming Crescentius with all the rest
of the co^spiratours came forth to meet him, who with ye other people (a great
multitude) waited upon him into the City, and in ye porch of Lateran Church,
Crescentius and his company falling down before the Pope, kissed his feet and
craved pardon. This John dyed Anno 995.

79. Gregory the fifth.
Gregory the fifth a German borne, but a Saxons son was first called Bruno:
He after wranglinge and iarringe was made Pope by the Emperors auctoritye,
because he was his cosen. But after Otho the Emperor was departed, the
Romans desyringe change of state, did adua^nce Crescensius to be Consul
again, and committed the estate of Rome to his government. This Crescentius
and the people of the Cittye took it grievously, that Gregory being a Dutchman
should by the Emperors auctoritye be made Pope, and therefore they deposed
Gregory: after which the people and clergy of Rome established one John ye
xviii. being before bishop of Placentia, an excellent learned man and very
well stoared with money. Gregory in fine went to the Emperor to complain of
his great iniurye, the Emperor taking it dispitefully, went into Italy with
his army, besieged Rome, assaulted it, and took Crescensius the Consul and
John the new Pope, and as for John he had his eyes put out and so dyed:
Crescensius was put on a vile beasts back with his face to the taylewarde,
having his nose and his ears cut of, and to be seen of al men was carried
about the Cittye having his members quartered, he was honge up about ye walls
of the Cittye. Then Gregory (his enemies being punished) was restored, who
perceiving that the estate of kingdoms were fickle and wavering, through the
ambition of Princes and covetousness of the clergy, while there followed great
wars hard upon his restoring, he sommoning a counsel at Rome, made a
decree for the election of the Emperor. He decreed that ye election of the
Emperor should continue from henceforth among the Princes of Germanye, that
is the Archbishop of Men's, of Treuers and Collen, the Palsgraue of Rhein, the
duke of Saxony, and the Marquess of Brandeburge. To these also he added ye
king of Bohemia, to be an vmpier, if the voices were even: which decree Anno a
thousand and ii. the Emperor Otho did allow and confirm, but the kings of
France were highly offended that ye Germaynes had this prerogative. Gregory
dyed Anno 998. ye third year of his Popedom.

80. John the xviij.
John the xviii. a Grecian borne (of whom is spoken in ye former Gregory)
obtained the place by bryberye, sedition, Placentia, an old man, learned and
rich, but proud, covetous, and desirous to be Pope, which wrought his horrible
and mischeuous end. For he brought so much money to Rome with him from
Constantinople, whereby he was able to draw and tempt unto him as well the wise
and wary, as the simple sort, to be of his faction: whereby he corrupted
Crescentius the Consul, violently to abuse Pope Gregory, and to drive him out
being a German, and so purchased the Popedom and the sequel thereof. But of
those things that he and his train set to sale in his Popeshippe Mantuan
writes thus: Pernices mercantur equos, venalia Romae
Templa, sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, coronae.


I marvel (says Platina) that the Chronographers would recke^ this John
among the Popes, seeing he usurped the place while Gregory lived, unless in
wrytinge the Popes lives they think to do as they do in a continual
historye: For the peeuishe deeds of tyrants are set among the great exploites
of good Princes, that the readers may discern the good from the evil, and so
by the example of good men be moved to virtue, and by the example of the ill
terrifyed from vice, and so live happilye upon earth, which happiness this John
wanted being a thief and a robber even in his Popedom. So much says Platina
of him. At the length this John with his Cresce^tius perished, having his eyes
dug out, and his body foulye ma^gled: Crescentius for his doing was set
upon a vile horse (as is said before) having his nose cut of, and was so led
through the City, his face being turned to the horse tail, and afterward
having his members cut of, he was hanged upon a gibbet. Here will I allege
the words of Gualther out of his third homelye as touching Antichrist, and so
end this book. Now (says he) let any noble heart judge whether so many
good men have upon sufficient cause, complained of the tirannye and unjust
dealinge which the Popes have used: seeing that seat of Rome has sustaind
within so fevve years so many leude persons, tyrants, thieves, filchers,
robbers, rebels, adulterers, and open purloyners of Church goods. And who in
Gods name will reverence that as holy, which receives so many plagues, but
as yet the number of the wicked ones is not fulfilled as shall follow
immediatlye etc.

The end of the fourth Book.
THE FIFTE BOOK contayninge the third division of the third order of Popes
or Roman Antichrists in the kingdom of the great Dragon, which is the
devil and satan Apocalips 20. unto the time of Innocentius the fourth.
From Joan the eighte ( who was an harlot) for the space of 146. years to this
year being the thousand year from Christ his incarnation, Antichrist reigned
like an harlot in the Church of Rome, pretending chastity in the meanetime.
Yet we see how here the prophecye in Daniel 11. concerning Antichriste was
fulfilled, contained in these words: And Antichrist shall be in the concupiscence
of women. We see in these former historyes how these Popes have lived in
wantonness, royat, whoredom (and worse the^ whoredom) incest, pride,
ambition, robbinge and riflinge Churches, coniuringe, treason, rebellion,
discention, murders, poysoninges and such other detestable enormities. So that
according to the saying of Esaie they deserve rather to be called the Princes
of Sodom, the^ ye elders of ye Church. Consequentlye after the thousand year
after Christ's birth, it was prophesyed that the devil should be let loose, and
this shall be called the kingdom of the great Dragon: wherein the acts of the
Popes do wonderfully aunsweare unto it, both in Syluester the second, who with
his Necromancye raised the devil from hell, and having coniured him up, did
compounde with him for the Popedom. And again in Benedict the ix. who made
sacrifyce unto the devil in woods, and upon mountain tops: In Hildebrand
or Gregory the seventh, who took counsel of evil spirits, and used other
devilish charms, beside other.

81. Syluester the second.
SYluester the second was a Frenchman, in profession a monk, and called
Gilbert, before he was Pope. He was of S. Benedicts order in an abbey at
Florence, where he being a young man and addicted whollye to deuilishe arts,
betoke himself to the devil both body and soul. Afterward forsaking that
abbey he went into Spain delighti^g much in profane sciences, and came to
Hispalis unto a certain Philosopher being a Sarracen and expert in Magic, of
whom he learned much both sorcerye and ambition, and began to devise how he
might attain to great honor and riches: and thought in deed that coniuringe
and Necromancye were the meetest ways to come by his purpose. He had espied
before in the house of his host a certain co^iuring book, and did his
endeavor to steal it away, but the Magician kept it so deuoutlye, that
Gilbert could not come by it: therefore he inueigled the Magicia^s daughter,
(with whom being in ye house he had good acquaintance) ^o steal her fathers
book, and let him have a sight thereof, ye maid fulfilled his request, and so
he obtained his purpose. He having ye book went about to depart by stealth,
but fearing least this might endaunger his life for stealing the book, he gave
himself to the devil upon this condition, yt he should warrant him to pass
safelye into France, and to obtain great dignityes. He came into France and
taught the liberal Sciences, so as many had him in admiration, whereby he had a
number of scholars and auditors, some of great calling that learned ye former
arts of him, as Constantine abbot of Maximin, Lotharius Archbishop of Seven,
Otho the Emperors son, Roberte king of France, with sondrye other bishops,
prelates and priests of Rome. By the procurement of these parsons he was made
first bishop of Remen, afterward by his leude arts he obtained to be
Archbishop of Rauenna: Last of all he obtained to be Pope of Rome by the help
of the devil, whom he with coniuration raised out of hell according to the xx.
of the Apocalips. For Peter Praemonstratensis and other writers say, that he
was made Pope in the Thousand year of our Lords Incarnation: In the which
year says Masfeus, was a great and terrible earthquake, and a blasinge star
horrible to look upon the xiiii. day of December. In his Popedom he concealed
his coniuring, and dissembled that familiarity which he had with the devil:
but yet he kept in a certain secret place a brazen head, of which when he
demanded any thing, he received aunsweare of an evil spirit. At the length
in his pontificality he would needs demand of the devil how long he should
be Pope? the devil answered doubtfullye and misticallye, saying he should
not dye, until he said Mass in Jerusalem: He therefore conceyuing good hope
of long life began to ware careless, thinking to take heed enoughe of
coming in Jerusalem. But the use was that on a certain day of stations in
the Lent time, ye Popes should say mass at Rome in the Pallayce of the holy
Cross, which was called Jerusalem: whereupon Syluester not fearinge his
life, nor heedefull enoughe to forecast the devils despite, according to
custom said mass in the same Chapel, And by and by, a terrible shyueringe
and quakinge came upon him with a great fever, and by the rumbling noise of
devils (as Peter Praemo^stratensis and Platina say) he perceived his death was
at hand, and that he must pay the devil his fee. And thus bewayling and
lamenting openly the abuse of his charms, he confessed his fault, til he
perished miserablye. And (says Benno) he commanded his tongue and his hands
to be cut of, wherewith he had blasphemed God in sacrifisinge unto devils: thus
he dyed Anno 1003. The report is that the tomb of this Syluester does ever
since prognosticate the death of the Pope, by the ratlinge of the bones and the
gushing out of water that ryseth out of the ground about it: as also (says
Platina) is testified by ye Epitaphe written on his grave.

82. John the 19.
John the 19. an Italian, did likewise succeed Syluester, and gat to be Pope
by ye devils aid: for (says Benno) the scholars of the said Syluester being
coniurers, every one gaped for the Popedom. This John did take from ye people
the election of the Pope, saying in behalf of his doing, that the clergy
must teach the people, but not follow them: And again, the law which is
ruled by Gods spirit, is more worthy then that which is man's law. He allowed
and commanded to establishe in all Churches the feast of al souls, at the
motion of one Odiloe abbot of Clunie: who dreamed that souls were delivered
out of Purgatory by virtue of the mass, and said that he hard the devils
houle and roar, while the souls were taken from them, through dirges and
trentalles. After he had reigned 5. months, he was poisoned by his own
friends. In his time the name of Cardinals began to grow to estimation, and
many strange monsters were seen, and diverse terrible earthquakes.

83. John the 20.
John the 20. called Fasanus after yt John the 19. was poisoned, by magic and
coniuringe gat to be Pope. For from the foresaid Syluester till Gregory the
seventh (a notorious parson) all the Popes were famous enchaunters: by their
charming they sturred up walking spirits, bugs, goblins, fierye sightes, and
diverse terrible goasts and shapes of things, with howlinges and gro aninges
about dead men's graves, perswadinge the simple people yt they were dead men's
souls. And those spirits being coniured up by priests, deluded men,
dessemblinge that they were the souls of the dead, complaining their
intolerable pains in Purgatory fire, and craved to be released by the
meritorious deeds of their friends and kindred, bestowinge dirges, masses, and
trentalles on them. But to return to this Pope John, he (says Platina)
being given to idleness, did nothing worthy remembrance. He dyed after he
had been Pope.iiii. years Anno 1009.

84 Sergius the 4.
AFter this John, came Sergius to be Pope by the like Loraine a fountain
turned into blood. He dyed Anno 1012.

85 Benedict the eight.
BEnedict ye eight was borne in Thusca ye son of George Portua, brother to
Albericus and John, and was a layman: He had a nephew called Theophilactus,
which was the scholar of Syluester, and by the magical charms of this
Theophilact, Benedict gatte to be Pope: and obtained the place so long as
Henry Bauarius lived, whose aid defended him, because he had bestowed on
Henry the crown Imperial. But after his death the Cardinals enuyinge him,
deposed him and set up another: and herevppon arose a cruel debate. Yet
afterward he compounded for money with his adversaries, and so the usurping
Pope being put out again, Benedict is restored with great pomp: He granted to
the foresaid Henry (as Barus testifyeth) to make at Bamberg builded by Henry a
cathedral Church, but with this condition that the same Church should pay to
the Pope yearly under the name of tribute, an hundred marks in silver with a
white horse furnished with trappings. He dyed Anno 1023. Peter Damianus
cardinal of Hostia shows, as it is also written by Platina, Carrion, and
others, that this Benedict (or an evil spirit in his likeness) appeared rydinge
on a blackehorse, and came unto a bishop of his familiar acquaintance, who
amazed at this sight asked him, Art not thou Pope Benedict whom we know to be
dead? He aunsweared I am the same unhappy Benedict: And how do you said the
bishop? I am cruellye tormented, but I may be eased quoth Benedict: And
therefore go to my brother John, who now is Pope, and bid him repair to
such a place (naming it) and take the treasure that is there hidden, and
distribute it to the poor: And likewise he appeared to Pope John, saying I
hope to be delivered, and I would to God that Odilo would pray for me. Thus
the devil deluded this age, bearing them in hand that the distribution of
money, and not ye death of Christ might bring salvation to souls, to the
great advancement of Purgatory and masses.

86 John the xxi.
John the xxi brother of the former Benedict, and son of Gregory bishop of
Portua being as yet but a lay man, yet likewise by the enchauntmente of his
nephewe Theophilact, gat ye Popedom, as Benno a Cardinal writes. For the
coniuring and charms of these me^ Theophilact, John, Gratian, Laurence,
Malsitan, Brazutus and other like, wrought and ruled all things at Rome
according to the devils appointmente, the aucthor of their arts: For (says
Benuo,) Theophilact using to do sacrifice to devils in woods and on mountains,
caused women to run after him, whom he with his enchauntments bewitched to
love him: And this appears to be true by certain books of his, which after
his death were found in his chamber. This Pope John crowned Conradus Emperor,
and was by him defended from the violence of the Romans, who had long
troubled him: ye Emperor threatened to destroy the Romans utterly, if they
should practice ought against the Pope, and by this means he continued Pope xi
year. The latin Church does highly commend him, but show no good works that
deserved it: He commanded Princes to keep a solemn kind of geuinge alms,
he appointed priests to say mass, and the people to fast: In his time began
the superstitious fastes of S. John Baptist, and S. Laurence. Of the counsel
of Triburia Anno 1030. began in France a sect of fasters, who said that it was
revealed to them from heaven, that to fast Saturday with bread and water was
sufficient for remission of all sins, if so that they had made a vow to
keep it: But the bishop of Camera did overthrow this blasphemye, as
derogatorye to the passion of Christ. Pope John dyed Anno. 1034.

87. Benedict the ix.
BEnedict the ninth who before was called Theophilact, the son of Albericus
and nephewe (as is said) to the Benedict and Pope John: as he by coniuring and
diuelishe arts did first advance his uncles, so now by his magic he
brought to pass that he succeeded them. He being Pope did greatly aduau^ce eue^
next to himself as his chief and secret counselors, Laurence, and John
Gratia^, for that they were notorious coniurers brought up with him under Pope
Syluester: He with these companio^s had used before he was Pope according to ye
cursed ceremonies of their sorcery, to call upon their evil spirits in woods
and forests, and to bewitch by his cunning any woman yt liked him, to covet
his carnal company. But (says Benno) as on a time he with these his mates
was coming from the woods to the Church, a number of birds being together, a
sparowe made a merye and pleasant kind of chirping: This Laurence being both
captain coniurer, and also a southsayer, curious in the observation of byrds,
was demanded what it was that the bird prated? The bird (quoth he) calls
other birds to the great gate, where a countreymans carte is broken, and his
meal spilte, which was carried in it: and therefore she with her much
chattering bids them to come thither to eat, and fill themselves. Which
being hard, diverse of them yt stood by ran in all poast have to the gate to
try the matter, and when they came there they found it so in deed as Laurence
had said. Their cunninge in south saying and coniuringe was such, that they
knew what was done both East, West, South and North, and in the corners of the
world, either touching wars, or the death of Princes, And therefore many had
their cunninge in great reverence, and did attempt dilligently to learn of
them, and gatte their skill, especially one Hildebrand: Who forsaking an abbey
where he was placed, did so follow this trade, that he excelled his masters,
and was wonderful busye in pestilent practices, by means of his magical
arts, as the Church by the fruit thereof did afterward feel, says Benno.
But to return to Benedict, who after the death of Conradus conspired with his
former counselors, to disherite his son Henry the third of the Empier, and
to plant in his steed Peter king of Hungary, and therefore he sent the crown
of the Empier to him with this Uerse. Petra dedit Romam Petro, tibi Papa
coronam,
The rock to Peter gave Rome the town,
The Pope to thee Peter gives ye crown.
But Henry at the first conflict overcame Peter, and took him prisoner, and
purposed to set forward to Rome, which being heard Benedict being terriblye
afraid, soulde his Popeship to his companion John Gratian, who paid for it
fiftene hundred pounds, and was afterward called Gregory the sixth. But in the
mean time the Romans deposinge Benedict for his negligence and sloth Anno.
1045. did place in his steed John bishop of Saba, calli^g him Syluester the
third: For this sale (says Platina) Benedict was accused of all men, and
condemned by divine sentence, and at the length by Gods just judgment he was
strangled to death by a devil in the woods Anno. 1056. The Historiographers
write, yt this Benedict or Theophilact, was seen of a certain Hermit in a
most ouglye and gastlye shape hard by a Mill, for his body was all rough and
hairye like a bear, with head and tail like an ass: And being asked of the
Hermit how he was thus tra^sfigured? He aunsweared, I wa^der in this shape
because in the time that I was Pope, I lived without reason, without law,
without God: and defiled the sea of Rome with all kind of villanye. In his time
the Cardinals that began of little, grew to be great in dignitye.

88. Syluester the third.
SYluester ye third a Roman, first called bishop of Saba obtained to be Pope,
partly by his own briberye, partlye Benedict, as some say, but as it is rather
to be thought by the magical sorcerye of his father Laurence ye famous
coniurer: For thus says Benno. After Benedict was driven out and yt Popeship
sold, John Gratian being in the place, John bishop of Saba was thrust in upon
him, and called Syluester the third, and thus these iii. Popes being at once,
it rent the Church of Rome a sonder, and divided it into diverse factions: thus
with cruel wars and great bloodshed the Church was torn in pieces, foulye
mangled with sciesmes, and choked with errors, while under the color of wine
it gulled in poison: Thus wrote Benno of that wretched time. But (says
Platina) Syluester enjoyed the rowme but a while, for within xlix. days the
friends of Benedict with great tumult restored Benedict to that, which he had
first both lost and soulde. The Popeshippe says ( Platina) was now brought to
this pass, that he that was of greatest wealth, and best able to give bribes
and most ambitious, and not most godly or best learned, he only (good men
being oppressed and rejected) obtained that dignitye: which trade (says he) I
would to God they had not continued even unto our time, but these are but
small matters, for we are like to see worse unless God amend it. Thus much
does Platina complain of their leude lives, who otherwise flattered ye Sea of
Rome and extolled their doctrine. But as touching Syluester, the Emperor Henry
drove him from the Popeshippe, and caused him to return to his own
bishopric, wherein he continued (as before he was,) Cardinal and bishop of
Saba. In the time of the foresaid Benedict the sixte day of April Anno 1039.
there was seen a mighty beam of fire burninge in the Element, as Masseus
writes in his sixte book. Anno Domini 1041. Pope Benedict made one Cazimirus
a monk in Clunace abbey and a deacon, king of Poleland, on this condition,
that for every head in Poleland, he should pay yerelye to the Pope and his
successors, an ordinary sum of money: And furthermore that they should not
let the heir of their head to grow long, and that they of Poleland should
remember for ever, how yt this polling had given them a shaue^ king out of an
abbey.

89. Gregory the sixth.
Gregory ye sixth an Italian first called John Gratian, learned Syluester the
second: He bought the Popeship of his kinseman Benedict the ix and at the
length obtained it. He after sciesmes and sedition being made Pope says
Premonstratensis, perceyuinge yt certain filchers purloyned the goods of the
Church, and that strangers were robbed on all sides, began to have a regard
unto the riches, and first admonished them, afterward he excommunicated them,
and last of all he warred on them that contemned his threatenings: and thus he
did both recover the Church goods with increase, and also executed, and put to
death the wasters thereof. The Cardinals being moved with this cruelty called
him Simnist, murderer and blood sucker: and on a time while he was sick, they
said he was unworthy to be buried in the Church: Whereunto among other
things he answered thus: I have warred upon other, that with the damage of
the laietye I might purchase glory to the clergy, and thus ye recompense me?
and sone after he recovered his health. The troublesome and tragical broils
which these Popes wrought at this time, are thus described by Otho, Frisgensis,
Godfri Viterbiensis, and other auctors: While (say they) Benedict the ix. was
Pope, Syluester the third, and soon after Gregory the sixth did invade the
seat. And in the 7. year of the Emperor Henry the third, these 3. Popes made
themselves 3. several seats in Rome: whereby they brought in a detestable
sciesme, and every one endeavored that he might not yield to other in
sedition, impietye and villanye. Benedict he sat as Pope in Lateran Pallaice,
the rest, the one at S. Peter's, ye other at S. Mary's made his pontifical
throne. While these three Popes did at once (to the peril of the whole estate)
possess and comber the City, John Gratian a priest came unto them, persuading
them every one to take a piece of money and give over their title of Popeship,
and so it came to pass: and for this cause the Romans created Gratian Pope,
as one yt had saved the common wealth. Henry the Emperor hearing of these
sturres, in haste came to Rome and held a Synod, wherein those three
Benedict, Syluester and Gregory were condemned, and the fourth Pope created in
their steed called Clemens the second. And thus says Benno the Emperor made
Theophilact to fly, he put Gregory in prison, and afterward he banished him
with Hildebra^d into Germanye, and compelled the bishop of Saba to return to
his bishopric: So Gregory dyed in Germanye, of whose falsehod and money
together (says Benno) Hildebrand was made heir, who after his death returned
to Rome.

90. Clement the second.
CLement the second was made Pope in a Synod at Rome by the Emperors
commandment while the other three Popes were yet living. He caused the
Romans to give over to the Emperor their title in electing the Pope, for the
auoydinge of those broils which arose there upon: But some say that it was
the Emperor who made the Romans swear, that they should never name any to
be Pope. But the Emperor being gone into Germanye, they forgettinge their
oath, did poison this Pope Clement, because he was chosen without their
consent, the ninth monthe after his creation: which poison was tampered by
Steven, who succeeded him called Damasus the second, or as some think that
Brazutus being commonly practiced in these things, and companion to
Theophilact and Hildebrand, was auctor thereof. At this time were great and
strange contencions about the Sacrament of the alter, and by the devils
doing many wonders and miracles were wroughte, but ye Pope forbad many to
utter their conscience hereof, least it should be prejudicial to the mass:
And therefore many of the doctors as appears by their wrytings, wrote
doubtfully.

91. Damasus the second.
DAmasus the second otherwise called Steven Bagniarie, Platina) it was now a
common thing for every ambitious parson to prease into Peter's seat
violentlye, but he kept it not long, for the thirtenth day after he was
poisoned by the said Brazutus Anno 1049. This Damasus being chau^celar to
Clement his predecessor did poison his master, and therefore drank worthily
of the same cup. After this (says Benno) Theophilact who before was fled
returned to Rome, and there with his old acquaintance Laurence, wroughte much
mischief, and by the letters of his scholar Hildebrande being then in the
Emperors Court and a traitor about him, he knew all the Emperors secrets.
While he thus did greatly vex the Romans, they by the counsel of Cardinals
sent Ambassadors to the Emperor, desiringe him to assign one to be Pope. And
therefore one Bruno, afterward called Leo ye ninthe was made Pope, and
perforce against his will brought to Rome: In whose company through overmuch
gentleness of the Emperor, Hildebrand was suffered to return to Rome, who
afterward wrought such mischief in the world, as never was hard of, both
against Emperor, Church, clergy, and common wealth under color of religion:
meaning not to keep his oath long sworn to the Emperor, So says Benno of
him.

92. Leo the ninth.
LEo the ninth a German borne of the country of Dasburg, Etistheim and
bishop of Tulledo he became Pope in this manner. Because the Romans (not for
the love of the Emperor) but being wearyed with those ambitious and seditious
prelates that straue for the Popeship, desired him to appointe one to be Pope:
he sent them this Bruno bishop of Tulledo, a man of a simple wit, for none of
the other German bishops durst adventure to come among the poisoned
cups of Rome. He goinge on forward in his pontifical roabes, had with him
in company the abbot of Clunace, and Hildebrand the monk, the clergy of Rome
meetinge him and seeing him come on this manner, altered his Popes vesture, did
most dispitefullye charge him with apostasye, because he had received his
auctoritye from the Emperor, therefore they persuaded him to put of his
po^tificals, and to return to Rome in his wonted apparel: Saying, the
election of the Pope was not granted to the Emperors, but to the clergy and
people of Rome. Bruno obeyed their commandment, and came to Rome in his own
private apparel. And through the counsel of Hildebrand did confess openly
before the ancients, that he had offended, and therefore because he ascribed
the auctoritye to them, they chose him Pope more willinglye, and for this deed
called him Leo or Lio^, whose courage argued him rather to be a sheep.
Afterward he made Hildebrand a Cardinal, and partner of his Popeship with him,
committing to him the charge of S. Peter's Church, whereof Benno writes thus.
As soon as he came to Rome (meaning Hildebra^d) he obtained of Leo to be made
one of the keepers of the alter of S. Peter's Church, and within a while he
filled his cofers: and to the end he might put out his money to some man for
dailye enterest, he became familiarlye acquainted with ye son of a certain
Jew, who though he were latelye become a Christian, yet he left not his
Iewishe trade of vsurye. And before this he had well acquainted himself with
the famous worker of mischief Brazutus friend to Theophilact: who is reported
to have poisoned by his cunning these Popes within xiii. years Clement the
second, Damasus the second, Leo the ix. Victor the second, and Nicholas the
second. Pope Leo held a counsel at Vercella, wherein he condemned the doctrine
of Berengarius, who held opinion against transubstantiacion, and the real
presence of Christ in the Sacrament: Likewise he held a another counsel at
Maguntia wherein was concluded that priests should not keep hounds nor hawks,
neither meddle with any such profane things: Also ye marriage of ye clergy was
utterly condemned by ye procurement of Hildebra^d: And it was decreed to be
simonye, for a priest to be preferred to an ecclesiastical living by a layman.
By the enticement of Hildebrand and Theophilact, this Leo not knowinge their
disposition, moved war against the Normans, whose power was the^ great in
Apulia. But Theophilact meaning to work the Pope mischief secretelye (because
he durst not openly do it) bewrayed first al his secret counsel, and finallye
with Hildebrands advise, betrayed the Pope himself to the Normans, from whom
(his men being slain) he himself escaped narrowly: who yet returninge to
Rome was poisoned by Brazutus the fifth year of his Popedom.

93. Victor the second.
VIctor ye second a German borne in Bauaria was made Henry the Emperor, that
they durst do nothing against the oath made to the said Henry in the time of
Clement the second. And therefore to gratify the Emperor, they sent
Hildebra^d as Ambassador to him, to know his pleasure in the election, and by
this means this Victor being a German came to be Pope: In this Embassage
Hildebrande took upon him by virtue thereof, to make Henry the Emperors son
heir to the Empire. This Victor held a great Synod at Florence, wherein he
condemned all those priests of Symonie, who had been presented to their
spiritual liuinges by any temporal parsons. Immediately after the
establishment of this Victor, Brazutus repaired to Rome at the procurement of
Hildebrande to poison him, or any other (says Benno) that should step into
the Popeship before Hildebrand, and so Victor sone after he had reigned two
year was poisoned by the same Brazutus. Anno 1057.

94. Steven the ninth.
Steven the ninth borne in Loraine, the duke of Loraines Victor with general
consent of all, but without the Emperors agreemente. This Steue^ caused ye
Church of Millain (which almost 2. hundredth years had defied ye supremacye of
Rome) to become subject unto it: A note for gredye benefice mongers and
nonresidents, that even Antichrist himself is like to be a witness against
them, who thus condemned that wherein they offend obstinatlye.
He also before he came to be Pope, had accused the Emperor Henry of heresye,
because he somewhat abridged the usurped auctoritye of Rome. Also he held a
counsel in Florence against marriage of priests countinge it fornication, and
therein concluded many things against dualities, pluralityes, and totquots.
But at ye length in the tenth year of his reign Hildebrand caused his old
companion Brazutus to give him such a drink, yt the Pope dyed thereof Anno.
1058. At his death Hildebrand was not at Rome, but returned in all have upon
it, and at his coming he commanded all the clergy to appear before him, and
bound them with an oath to suffer none to be Pope, but such a one as obtained
it with the consent of every one.

95. Benedict the tenth.
BEnedict the x. borne in Campania was first called Mincius, Benedict had the
name generally, and so was made Pope, contrary to ye oath which ye clergy had
made to Hildebrand at his departure lately. Hildebra^d therefore taking it
despitefully thus to be deluded in his abse^ce, deposing Benedict, was very
importune with the clergy, to make one Gerhard bishop of Florence, that came
with him, Pope in his presence, as they promised him at his departure. The
clergy because they could not with safetye chose another in Rome went
therefore to Senas, and there they chose this Gerhard Pope, naminge him Nicolas
the second. Gerhard being Pope held a Synod at Sutrius against Pope
Benedict, who understanding of this conspiracye wroughte by Hildebrand, was
content for quietness sake to forsake Rome, and to live like an outlawe privately
in Veltra, after he had been Pope ix. months. Christian Masseus reports,
that this year a great company of snakes about Tornaie fought cruelly
together, until the people beset them with fire and burned them.

96. Nicolas the second.
NIcolas the second was made Pope as is mentioned in Benedict. After he had
held the council of Spire against Benedict, he returned to Rome, and
sommoned a council at Lateran by ye craft of Hildebrand for his own purpose:
wherein was decreed, that he should be condemned for an apostata, that should
be Pope either by favor or money without the whole consent of the Cardinals.
Also he gave the Cardinals, the priests and laitye, power to excommunicate any
such Pope, and to hold Synod against him any where, and to drive him out. In
this Synod Berengarius was forced to recant his opinion against the real
presence: for he had long maintained, that in the bread and wine was neither
the body and blood of Christ really, nor naturally, but a sign and figure
thereof, as Platina, Mu^clerus and other write of him. This Pope Nicolas
established and stre^gthened the Popedom, with sondrye and diverse strange
forgeryes, fables, and untruths, terrible vizards, and gastlye countenaunces
of excommunication, and dreadful threats of cursings. The words of the
excommunication and curse are these, in the 23. distinction as Barnes
testifyeth. In the name of God Amen: If any man do break this our sacred
decretal sentence, and presumptuously attempt to hurt or disquiet against this
statute the Church of Rome, let him be accursed for ever, and damned by
excommunication: Let him be reputed among the wicked, that shall not rise
again to judgment: Let him feel the wrath of the Almightye against him: Let
him feel the rage of Peter and Paul upon him in the life to come, that
spurneth against their Church in this life: Let his dwelling be in the
wilderness, and let his house be left desolate for none to dwell therein: Let his
children be orphans, and his wife be a widow: In his trouble let him be
troubled: Let his children beg their bread, and be cast out, and be vagabounds
driven out of their own houses: Let the usurer rifle all his goods, and let
strangers spoil the labor of his hands: Let the whole world fight against
him, and let all the Elements be contrary unto him: Let the merits of all
saints confound him: Let him spend this life prisoner fettered in chains:
and let the saints power their open vengeance on him. But our grace defend
them that keep this etc.

Such thonderbolts did the Pope shoot abroad to terrifye the world, which yet
wroughte so in men's hearts, that for fear there of they yielded themselves
subject to the Pope, against their own native and Christian Princes. But to
return to the historye concerning the stir that Hildebrand kept at this
time in Rome, Thus writes Benno: Nicolas being Pope, Hildebrand perceiving he
could not yet get to be Pope, devised to get an archdeaco^shippe by hook or
by crook. At the length he set up one Mancius archedeacon of Rome, whom he
tossed and disquieted with diverse injuries: who being ouerlayed with the
reprochful dealing and craft of Hildebrand, and beguiled with his money, at the
length granted him to surrender unto him his archedeaco^ship. This being
granted, Hildebra^d comes to Pope Nicholas ere he were advised, and very
impudentlye, partly by unreasonable request, partlye by ye threatenings of armed
soldiers hired for the purpose, who gave him watchworde to yield or to dye,
he made Hildebra^d archdeacon. This being done even immediatlye after Brazutus
ministered the same cup to Nicolas, that he had done to the other Popes.
Nicolas being thus poisoned, ye Cardinals being so well acquainted with the
ambition of Hildebrand, besoughte the Emperor earnestlye to assist them in the
behalf of Cadolus his bishop of Parma, who^ they had chosen Pope: which thing
so struck Hildebrand to the heart, that from thence forward he professed
himself an utter enemy to the Emperor: He brake his oath of fealtye and
allegiance. And making a conspiracy with ye Emperors enemies, and with the
Normans, he beguiled Anselmus bishop of Lucia, causinge certain Romans to
choose him bishop, and call him Alexander the second, as one whom he would set
up against Cadolus chosen by the Cardinals. And thus Hildebrand brought trouble
as much as he could, both to Anselmus and Cadolus, who in deed waited to
succeed them both, etc.

97. Alexander the second.
ALexander the second was as ye read made Pope Hildebrands craft, for his
own purpose against the Emperors mind: and therefore ye Lombards by the
Emperors consent, did set up another against him called Cadolus, (as is before
mentioned) who came to Rome and besieged it with a great army, and after one
or two battles was with his company put to flight. The Emperor willinge to
end this sciesme, sent to Rome Otho archbishop of Collen with his auctoritye,
to debate the matter: who coming to Rome began with a sharp oration to
reprove the intrusion of Alexander, and to amplifye the Emperors auctoritye in
the election of the Pope. But the mischeuous Hildebrand puffed up with his late
victory, did interrupt Otho, and stoutly defended the Popes doing, auouching
that the election belonged only to the clergy: whereunto Otho the bishop in
this case more favoring ye Pope, then his master, did easelye give place, and
desired to have a council at Mantua to appease ye matter. Wherein was decreed
that a man ought not to hear mass of a priest yt lay with a concubine: that
married priests should leese their livings: And yet their children with the
Popes dispensation might take orders: That the Pope should be chosen only by
Cardinals. But this Alexander perceyuinge at the length (says Benno) yt it was
but for a pollicye of Hildebrand, that he was made Pope by the Emperors
enemies to spite him withal, began to mislyke of it with himself: and on a
time as he was preaching to the people, he told them that he would not any
longer enjoy the Apostolical seat without the Emperors good will, and
professed openly that he would send letters to the Emperor for the same
purpose. Hildebrand hearing this was forthwith so enraged, yt presentlye he
began to mumble, curse, and fret, and could scant keep his hand from ye Pope
till mass were done: Mass being done, he took the Pope, and with a troop of
armed soldiers he led him into his chamber, where with his fistes he buffeted
and bepomelled him shamefullye, rating and taunting him with railing and
reuiling words, because he would go about to seek the Emperors favor. And
from that time forward Hildebrand (because he saw him so simple) allowed him
but five shillinges a day to spend, and the rest of the revenues he retained
to himself, and casting Alexander into prison he purloyned a great mass of
money. Alexander being thus in the miserable bondage of Hildebrand, in an
eueninge dyed God knows whereof, and the same hour Hildebrand was enstalled
Pope by his garrison of soldiers, without consent of the people or clergy:
because he feared yt if he had delayed it, another should have been chosen.
None of the Cardinals subscribed to his election, unto the which when the abbot
of Cassia came, Brother (quoth Hildebrand) ye have lingered over long, and you
quoth the abbot have hied you over fast, who ere your master the Pope be yet
buried, have usurped his place contrary to ye Canons. Hildebrand being thus
chosen, how he lived, how he drove the Cardinals from him, how he tormented
them miserablye, how he poisoned the world with heresies, how often he committed
periurye, how great and many conspiracyes he raised, it is hard for many men
to utter: But most of all, the blood of many Christians which by him and his
means have been miserablye shed, do cry out vengeance on him. Thus and
much more does Benno the Cardinal write of him.

98. Gregory the seventh.
Gregory the seventh was first called Hildebrand borne Hetruria, a notable
co^iurer and great Magician, he gat to be Pope by his saluage sorcerye, and
bloody means. He forsaking ye abbey where he was monk, gat to one Laurence an
archpriest of whom he learned his notorious enchauntments, which ye said
Laurence had learned of Pope Syluester the second. There was great
familiaritye between this Laurence, Theophylact, John Gratian and Hildebrand,
being archpriests or Cardinals of Rome: whereby this Hildebrand by his subtiltye
bare all the swaye with Theophylact, while he was bishop under the name of
Benedict the ninth, and so he continued in his factious dealing in all other
Popes times, till he came to the place himself. Benno Cardinal writes of
him, that when he listed, he would cast of his sleeves, and skip and dance
in form of sparkles, or flames of fire, and with these miracles he deluded the
eyes of the simple people, bearing them in hand it was a sign of his great
holiness. And (says Benno) because the devil could not openly persecute
Christians by Pagans, he practiced craftelye to overthrow the name of Christ
by this counterfaite monk, under the color of religion. Diverse auctors do
write that this Hildebrand or hellybrand rather, by the help of his companion
Gerardus Brazutus poisoned vi. or vii. Popes, so to open himself a gap to come
to be Pope: and yet he in these broils behaved himself so subtellye, that no
man could charge him therewithal, yt it was rather thought he sought to shonne
the Popeship. And yet when in name he was not Pope, yet was he the only
instrument, and contriuer of all their doings and devises: and began to work
by little and little under other, which he brought to perfection in his own
time. Under color of religion and godliness, he practiced all treachery and
mischief. He accused Pope Alexander his master, because he had craved the
Emperors assistau^ce against his adversaries: His accusation was this, yt he
was unmeet to be Pope according to the Canons, who contrary to the Canons had
craved aid of a profane Prince: and cast him into prison, where he wrought
his death, and forthwith ere he was buried usurped his place: He imparted his
treasure (says Benno) to Brazutus and to a certain Jew, that were his
companions, and by their means he purchased the voices of diverse, who ere that
Alexander was buried cried out amayne: Peter ye Apostle has chosen Hildebrand
to be Pope, and so they set him in the Popes throne calling him Gregory the
seventh. And this was done in the thousand year after the destruction of
Jerusalem, in the which year the Popes began to challenge and take upon them
the name, office, and power of Christ: for it was proclaimed at the enstalling
of this Gregory, yt he was created ye true vicar of Christ, and Gregory
applied unto himself those things that are spoken in ye 7. Psalm of Christ:
He altered the laws of God, for where the Scripture lice^ceth al estates to
marrye, he barred ye clergy thereof, forcing the^ to vow single life above
their abilitye. Now was ye Scripture in him fulfilled prophesyinge of the war
of Gog and Magog, which this Gregory broched so perillouslye to all
Christendom, as the like never happened, which his companion Urban the second
did execute. Gregory at the first entrye to his Popeship began to urge such
canons, as he had in his ancestors time procured against priests marriage,
and the bestowinge of benefices by temporal men, which he did not of purpose
to take away the abuse of byinge and sellinge of ecclesiastical lyuings, but
with a fair show to abridge Princes and other estates, of their preeminence
in that matter, whereby he might bind all the bishops and clergy to be more
subject to Rome, who now depended more on their Princes, because of the
bestowi^g of the lyuings, whereby the Popes strength increased, and the temporal
Princes were weakened, and neglected of their clergy. And the better to
atchieue his purpose, because Henry the Emperor was chief of temporal
Princes, he attempted it first against him: for this matter he sommoned a
council at Rome, whereto the Emperor could have no regard, because of his
warlike affairs then present. And yet this matter so delighted ye Pope, that
for compassing it he spared neither treason nor murder, but in many places he
procured civil war, and sedition, with all kind of mischief that might be.
For first seekinge ye Emperors death he attempted it diverse ways, as thus
among other even in ye Church: The Emperor (says Benno) used to go to
prayers to S. Maryes Church in Auentine hill. Hildebrand therefore having his
false espyes caused the place to be well noted, where the Emperor used to
kneel or sit in the Church all service time: and hired one to go and lay
certain great stones secretelye in the roof of the Church right over the
same place, in such sort as he might throw them down upon ye Emperors head,
and so slaye him: which as this fellow went about and was busye with a great
stone, the waighte thereof overwhelmed him, so as he fell down to the pauement
and the stone upon him, which bruised him so as he dyed of yt, which he had
provided to slaye the Emperor withal. This thing being known, the Romans
bound his heels to a roape, and drew the dead carcass through Rome streats
three days together for an example. Again (says Benno) John bishop of
Portua who was of Hildebrands priuye council, said in his preachinge before
the people and clergy in S. Peter's Church: what meaned Hildebrand and we to do
this thing whereby we should be burned alive? (meaning that violence which they
had used toward the Sacrament of Christ's body:) Because Hildebrand
demanding of it (as ye heathen used to do of their idols) what success he
should have against the Emperor, and because the Sacrament spoke not and gave
him no aunsweare, he threw it into the fire, maugre all the Cardinals that were
about him, and said to the Sacrament most blasphemouslye: Could the idol Gods
of the heathens give them answer of their success, and can not thou tell
me? He excommunicated the Emperor being a comfortable Prince, without
lawful accusation, without canonical citacion, or judicial order: and caused
his peers to revolt from him, and sought by secret traitors to murder him.
Also he caused the bishops to swear them selves utter ennemies against him,
wresting and wringinge places of the Scripture to make a show to maintain his
purpose, But (says Benno) as soon as he roose up from his chair being newly
framed of wood, by Gods workinge it claue in pieces and was rent terriblye
into diverse parts.

When he saw that his secret treasons took not effect, he brast out into open
outrage and enmitye: he excommunicated the Emperor, and discharged all his
subjects of their allegeau^ce, and gave his crown unto Rodolpho duke of
Sueuia, which he sent to him with this poesye. Petra dedit Petro, Petrus
diadema Rodolpho.
This moved the Emperor very sore, in so much that he stripped himself out
of his royal roabes, and puttinge on woollen apparel, came with his wife and
his son a little child in the depth of winter, a cruel and perilous iourneye
to Canusius, and stood barefooted at the gates of the City, fasting from
morning to night, suing humblye for pardon at Hildebrands hand, and for three
days suffered with lamentable miserye to be laughed at, and flowted by
Hildebrand among his paragons and monks. He desired often to be let in to
come to the Pope, but he was still answered for three days together, that ye
Pope was not yet at leisure to speak with him. The good and gentle Emperor
took it patiently to be thus delayed, and because he could not be let into the
City, he abode in the suburbs with his great inconvenience, for the frost was
very extreme more then ordinarye: and yet he endured it continuallye 3.
days, least by taking his ease he should have offended my Lord bishops grace,
and still he sued to be pardoned. At the length the fourth day by the
intercession of the Countess Mathilda, who for love, not for honesty was in
favor with the Pope, and the abbot of Cluny, and Adelaus Earl of Sauoy he was
admitted to come in. And though he craved pardon on his knees, and offered up
his Crown, yet would the Pope neither pardon him nor absolve him, unless he
would promise that according to the Popes appointment he would purge him of
his fault in the council, with other unlawful conditions. All which he
promised and confirmed with hand and seal, and yet was not restored to his
estate. This being known, the Princes and Lords of Italye were highlye
offended that the Emperor Henry in such manner with so great dishonor, and so
shamefullye had submitted himself to recover the favor of this Hildebrand,
who by treachery purloyned the Popedom, and defiled all things with slaughter
and harlotrye. But the Pope and his Cardinals being puffed up with this yt
they had brought the Emperor to this servile yoke, began to attempt further
matters: but Henry reue^ged this dishonor sone after by the sword, and after
sharp battelles he overcame Rodolpho, who having his hand cut of commanded
to bring unto him the bishops and auctors of his rebellion, before whom he
said thus having his hand laid before them. I am (quoth he) iustye plagued,
lo this is the hand wherewith I pleighted my allegeaunce to my sovereign Lord
Henry, and by your enticements I have often time fought against him to my
loss, and falsified my faith, and therefore have received the reward due to
my periurye: Consider therefore whether ye have guided me right or no: Go ye
therefore, and stand to your first faith vowed to your king, for I must go to
my father: this being said, he dyed. After his death at the Popes commandment
they set up another to be Emperor, one Harman a Saxo^ County of Lucelburg: who
while he was assaulting a certain Castle in Germanye, was slain by a
certain great stone, which a woman hurled down upon him. And yet the Popes
malice ceased not, but he raised up a third traitor against the Emperor
eue^ his kinsma^ Egbertus a Marquess, who also being taken in a Mill by the
Emperors friends, was miserably slain. In the mean time the Pope did solace
himself with the company of Mathilda, who forsaking her husband Azon
Marquess of Esta kept continually by the Popes dear side, whereby she was
called S. Peter's daughter: and so of one jest another spra^g, for (as Lambert
Hirswalde^sis says) the talk was how S. Peter's daughter lived in secret
incest with S Peter's heir, and that he that had deuorced other men from their
wives and honest matrimonye, lived in whoredom with another man's wife. Also
this Gregory judged to death three men before they were convict or confessed
their crime, without the sentence of any seculer Judge, and caused them to be
hanged forthwith. Another time he cast Centius the son of a Senator into
prison being his especial friend, and caused him to be tormented and rolled in
a barrel of sharp nails till he was almost dead: But Centius escaping
apprehended the said Hildebrand and might have quitted his quarrel, yet the
people disappointed him, but the Pope ere he were delivered swear openly yt he
would forgive him, and the rest yt had apprehended him. But being at liberty
contrary to his oath he revenged it, causing Centius and ix. of his company to
be hanged for it, ye other he condemned to banishment, and among them the
son of a widow, who after the year of his vanishment was expyred did return
and was led with an halter about his neck by his mother to Gregory, who^ ye
mother for full satisfaction desired to take her son and deliver him again
as a new purged man: But Gregory had hanged him but yt the Iu^tices*
considering the penance that he had done were more just and wise, and refused
to do it, and therefore Gregory in a rage commanded one of his feet to be
cut of, whereof the yongma^ dyed within five days, to the great grief of the
poor wydowe his mother. Abbas Vspergensis and other write thus: It is manifest
(say they) that this Hildebrand was not chosen by God, but intruded himself by
money and guile, who tossed the ecclesiastical estate vpside down, and
troubled the kingdom of Christen Empier, practiced to murder the quiet
Prince, defended oath breakers, fostred debate, sowed discentio^, raised
offenses, made deuorceme^ts, and disordered every thing that seemed to be well
among the godly. He was the first that put the ministers of the Church from
their wives by excommunication: He moved broils through France, Germany and
England, tedious to be told. This deuorcement of ministers wives, did offend
a great number of learned men at that time: for in Germanye and France there
were yet xxiiii. and more bishops, who with the clergy of their Diocese were
then married, and did stoutly maintain their marriage still, beside those that
were in England and Italye. Among other things Gregory commanded the
Saturday to be fasted. He canonized Pope Liberius saint, who was an Arria^
heriticke, also he appointed an holy day in reverence of him. He took away
the Crown from the king of Poland. He condemned Berengarius opinion against
real presence, and was the first that is noted to have established the
doctrine of transubstantiation. He condemned a layman of sacrilege, that should
reap the commoditye of tenthes as of impropriat parsonages, but condemned him
of heresye, that invested a priest, and him of Idolatrye that should take a
benefice of a layman. These and other like attemptes gave Hildebrand, whereby
he made the Popes leaden blade, to hew asonder almost the Emperors iron
sword. Many of ye clergy as 14. Cardinals beside diverse bishops and other,
did so abhor ye detestable treachery of this coniurer Gregory, yt they
forsook him for shame, his villanyes were so many, and so monstrous
encreasinge dailye: In steed^ of God he served the devil, and of Princes whom
he should honor he made worse then slaves: finallye as his name was
Hildebrand so in deed he was an helly brande to all Christendom, tormoyled by
his means with rebellions, treasons, murders etc. But at the length Henry ye
Emperor began to set himself against the Popes practices, and in the year of
Christ 1083. in a Synod at Brixia, layinge his treacheryes to his charge he
did deprive him of his place, and appointed another in his steed, whom he
called Clement the third. He sent his army to Rome to drive out Gregory, and
to establishe this Clement, and by his long siege he brought Rome to so great
penurye, that they were compelled to sue for peace. But Hildebrand because he
would not come in the Emperors sight, being rejected and forsaken of the
Romans fled to Salerne, where he ended his wretched life in great miserye Anno
1086, Antonius and Vincentius show that this Hildebrand even at the latter
gasp called to him a certain Cardinal, and confessed to him yt he had
haynouslye offended, because at the devils enticeme^ts he had sturred up hurlye
burlies, hatred, and wars among many, and bad the cardinal go to desire the
Emperor to pardon him. Diverse me^ wrote against him and his vile life, as
Ca^didus a Cardinal, VValramus bishop of Niemburg, Venericus bishop of
Vercellen, Rowland priest of Parmen, Sigebertus Gemblacensis. Also of this
Gregory it is said that he never went without a book of coniuring about him.

99. Victor the third.
VIctor the third abbot of Cassa was made Pope, not by Mathilda, and the
Normans that were of his faction. He being established began to defend
Gregory's prankes against the Emperor, and Clement appointed by him, but the
hastines of his death shortened his malice: who as Hermannus, Contractus,
Carsulanus, Praemonstratensis and sondrye other testifye, was poisoned by his
deaco^, who at mass time put the poison into the challice, against yt Pope
should receive it. Diverse wonders are reported to have happened at that time,
as of tame birds, geese, cocks, hens, pigions, and pecocks flewe into the
mountains and became wild, houge store of fish died in the Sea: diverse Cities
were so shaken with earthquakes, so as the greater Pallas at Syracuse falling
down, did slaye all that were then in the Church, saving a couple.

100. Urban the second.
Urban the second an Hetrurian borne called Otho before, was made Pope by the
harlot Mathilda, and the Norman Lords in Apulia in dispite of ye Emperor. This
is a scholar of Hildebrand, whom for followinge his masters steps, Benno
calls a blind guide, a sciesmaticke, an heriticke, and companion of Liberius
the Arrian heretic: He watered those graftes of mischief which Gregory had
planted, and was therefore called the turmoyler of the world, by descantinge of
his name and in steed of Urban calling him Turban. He excommunicated Clement
ye second established by the Emperor, and also the Emperor for establishinge
of him, and procured many forsworn rebels both nobles and commoners, to
conspire against him: and likewise the same Clement as being Pope, did again
excommunicate him as an usurper, whereupon it moved many reasonings among
both spiritual and temporal, who should be right Pope: And these
controuersyes were tossed both in Germanye and other countries. But when Urban
would absolve none, whom Gregory had excommunicated, he was feign for fear of
his life, to fly by stealth from Rome. He held five councils in sondrye
places, and all for the establishing of Gregory's decrees, and to confirm that
auctoritye which the Church had gotten. Among many other enormities he
concluded that no priests son should be capable of orders. He made ye
archbishop of Toledo primate of Spain, upon condition yt he should swear
fealtye to ye Pope, and so by that means he brought Spain under his winge.
He cursed the king of France for imprisoning a bishop. He caused all that
should take order to swear with this clause, So God help me and the holy
Evangelists: finally he standing in awe of one John Pagan a Roman, did hide
himself for two years in the house of one Peter Lion, where he dyed Anno
1099. And his body was conveyed by night over Tiber for fear of his foes,
the same year also dyed Clement the third, who had seen in his time the
death of three Popes.

Of the former Hildebrand and this Urban his scholar, Theodor Bibliander
writes thus to Princes of al estates: Hildebrand (says he) by sturringe up
the Greek Emperor against the Turks, did sow the seed of the voyage of Gog
and Magog, vppon-whom the blood of the Church cries vengeance, that was shed
with the sword of his tongue. But this Urban by causinge Christians to go
war upon Pagans, with vain color of fighting for ye holy Land, and for
Christ's Sepulcher, has caused more Christian blood to be shed of all
Nations, then can be esteemed: and did it only to oppress Clement the second
and his faction, the while to restore himself to be Pope. In the time of this
Vrba^, William Rufus king of England was sore combred with the proud prelate
Anselmus archbishop of Canterbury, who when he was commanded to aunsweare to
his misbehauiour, did avoid it in appealinge to the Court of Rome, both
against the liking of all the bishops in England, and in spite of the kings
heart went to complain to the Pope.

101. Paschal the second.
PAschal the second was an Italian called before Rainerus, he was made
Cardinal of S. Clements by Hildebrande his Scholemaister, and succeeded Urban.
He when he saw he should be chosen, would not take the place upon him until
the people had cried three times S. Peter choseth thee worthy man Raynarde:
Then having a purple roabe upon him, and a Miter on his head, he was brought
upon a white horse unto Lateran, where he received the Popes Scepter, and had
the gyrdle put about him, whereon are hanged seven keys, and as many Seals.
All the time he reigned he was continually busyed in wars, and ^editio^s,
attemptinge by all means possible to advance yet hier the estate of the
Popedom. He drove out furiouslye from their places all those bishops and
abbots, yt were established by the Emperor. At this time there was a certain
prelate called Fluentinus, who saying the great enormityes that presently
choked the Christian Church, held opinion that Antichrist was incarnate and
borne, and that he was revealed herein. And therefore (says Sabellicus) the
Pope held a council against him, with the bishops of Italy and France, in
Rome: among other canons he concluded it heresye to deny obedience to the
Pope, and made a canon for paying of tenthes to priests, concluding it siane
against the holy Ghost to sell the tenthes. He renewed and published the
excommunication against the Emperor, and caused the bishop of Mentz, of
Collen, and of Worms, to thrust him from his estate, taking his Crown from
him with all princelye title, dignitye and honor. Yea and which is horrible to
be heard, not content with this he did provoke and arm his only son Henry
the fifte, to rebel against him being his natural father: A lamentable and
pitiful case, to see the only child of so good and noble a father, not
being provoked by any iniurye on the fathers part, not only to despise, to
forsake and revolt from his father, denying to aid him, but also to assault
him by force of arms, and to enclose him with his army as he did, and took
him entrapped by treason, spoiled and robbed him of his royal estate, and
forced the wretched and miserable man captive to his own child, to dye a
double and doleful death. Thus could the Pope put the sword in the sons
hand, forsing him to sheath it in his fathers bowels: Neither could this
unnatural death of ye good old man, cause the unnatural rancour to dye in
the Popes breast, but for further revenge he commanded that the Emperors
carcass should not be buried, but first be cast out of ye Church and be carried
from Leodos to Spira, where it rotted five years without any Christian burial.
But lo what a wonder God wrought in the mean time. To testify (says Abbas
Vspergensis) the Popes tyranny, it rayned blood at Spira. It were a lamentable
thing to tell at large the manner of the Popes unmerciful dealing with this good
Emperor. For first the forenamed bishops coming to him to Hilgeshem, they
commanded him to deliver up his Diadem, his Purple roabes, his Signet and
other like ornaments belonging to the Empire. When he required a reason
thereof, they aunsweared partly for sellinge spiritual liuinges, but chiefly
for the Popes pleasure. With that the good Emperor sighing said: Ye know you
received your bishoprics at my hand, that I gave them freelye and am giltye
of no such crime, and yet do you thus quite my curtesye? But the unthankful
prelates moved neither with allegeaunce, oath, nor benefit, prosecuted their
purpose: and first yelding him no reverence, they plucked from him (sitting in
his place of estate) his Crown Emperial, and his Purple roabe, and his
Scepter. He being thus stripped out of his royaltye and forsaken, said
patiently Let God see and judge. They leaving him, bestowed these things upon
the son creating him, and causing him forthwith to pursue his father, forcing
him to fly but with ix. parsons to the Dukedom of Limborough, where ye duke
being his deadly enemy did also make speed to apprehende him. The Emperor
perceiving himself thus entrapped and fearing death, submitted himself to the
duke, beseaching him rather to show mercy then vengeance: Hereupon the noble
hearted duke, though the Emperor had whilom displaced him of his Dukedom, yet
pityinge his miserye he both forgave him and entertained him courteously in his
Castle, and with an army conducted him to Collen, where he was well received.
But the son hearing thereof besieged the City, but the father fled by night
to Leodium, where so many louinge hearts resorted to him, that he bad his
son a battle and ouerthrewe him, and still desired that if his son were
taken, he should be saved harmless. Yet the son ceased not, but renuinge
the battle prevailed and so dispossessed his father: who in the end was
brougth to such penurye, that he craved of the bishop of Spire to give him but
a prebende to live upon in ye Church: But the earl forgetting the benefits
received of him in his prosperitye, denied him flatlye and said, by lady ye
get none here. Thus after he had reigned 50 year in his life he lacked
lyuinge, and after death he wanted a grave through malice of the Pope.

Pope Paschal held a council of Princes and bishops about matter of gaynes,
as homages and fealtyes due unto him, also he spoiled the bishop of Rauenna of
his lands, and took them into his own hands: But afterward because he
refused to confirm certain bishops appointed by the Emperor Henry the fifth,
the Emperor (though la^e before he had kissed the Popes feet) apprehended
him, and cast him into prison, where he continued until he had confirmed them
all, and should by his Seal restore the privilege of ratifying a bishop,
which was granted to Charles the great, and confirm him to be Emperor. While
(says Masseus) the Pope sat in his chair after Mass, behold the soldiers
cried unto him and his clergy, Give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's: and
forthwith apprehended both him and all his clergy, and carried them out, and
stripped them out of their apparel so naked, that they left them not their
breeches on, and led them thus handled to Soractis mount, where they put them
in prison etc. This broyle being ceased, and Henry being crowned Emperor,
Paschal renewed unto him the auctoritye of appointing bishops, and pronounced
openly in the Church, that they were all held accursed, who soever would
disanul the preuiledge which he had granted: Then thy sange Gloria in
excelsis, because of this peace between ye Emperor and the Pope. But as soon as the Emperor (this being done) was departed into Germanye, the Pope brake al
his oaths, and went from his word in every thing, saying yt he did it not
freelye and of his own accord, but that for fear he yielded to the Emperors
desire. Then was the privilege condemned, and the Emperor excommunicated, and
terrible tragedyes sturred, which were all blazed through diverse countries.
Also he by a council divorced the clergy of France from their wives, as
Gregory had done in Germanye, and drove diverse bishops from their Seas,
because they would not leave their wives. Again to increase the regiment of
Rome, he revived the strife for the bestowi^g of bishoprics, which wrought
great slaughter and bloodshed in all countries of Europe. Anselmus archbishop
of Canterbury, with sophistrye and cauillinge vphelde this Popes doing, as he
did Pope V^banus being both their cou^celour at Rome, and their Uicar here in
England. This Anselmus did deprive king Henry the first of all auctoritye in
Ecclesiastical causes, and denied to do homage to the king, thinking and
auouching it to be vnlawfall, because it was due in the clergy unto the
successors of S. Peter. Also he condemned in England the marriage of ministers:
Pope Paschal dyed Anno 1118.

Matthaeus Pa^siensis writes in his Chronicle, yt when Anselmus accused his
sovereign king Henry the first of England, before the Pope at Rome for
meddling with the appointing of bishops and ministers, William VVarelwarst the
kings Proctour did aunsweare stoutlye in his Princes behalf, and among other
things said, that the king would not for the loss of his kingdom lose his
auctoritye in appointing of prelates* Whereto the Pope said: If as thou say
thy king to hazard his crown, will not forgo his giving of Ecclesiastical
lyuinges, know thou preciselye, I speak it before God, yt I will not suffer
him without punishment, no not for the price of his head. Which being heard,
Anselmus besought the Pope, to lay hands in despite of the king on those whom
he had disgraded, and so (says Mattheus) the holy seat ready to yield
favor to all, restored them to their former dignities by the intercession of
White and red. But king Henry did deprive Anselmus of all his goods, and
confiscated his Archbishopricke and defied the Popes auctoritye. Anno 1110. the
Moon was darkened, as if she had lost her light, the year following it
rayned blood at Rauenna in Italy, and at Parma in the month of Iulye. Anno
1114. in December the Heaven appeared suddenly of a very fierye and ruddye
color, as if it had burned, and the Moon suffered an Eclipse. The same year
the river of Thames was dry for two days. Anno 1* 17. there were thonders,
hayle, great winds, horrible dreadful and houge earthquakes, that ouerthrewe
Churches, Towers, walls, buildinges, and destroyed men.

102. Gelasius the second.
GElasius the second called before John Caietanus of a noble house, was
sometime a monk, he succeeded Paschal Cincius a man of great power in Rome
would not suffer this iniurye, but went with a troop of soldiers to
Palladia^ minster, where the Cardinals were gathered together: and breakinge
the gates open he rushed in upon them, and stroke at every one that he met.
And as for the Pope with his neck wrongde awrye he threw him on the ground,
stamped on him with his feet, and cast him into prison: and as the Cardinals
were running away, he hoysed them of their Mules and horses to the ground, and
used all the despite he could toward them. But ye Romans would not suffer
this, and therefore by the aid of the Normans they delivered the Pope, and made
his enemies to submit themselves, and to ask pardon with kissinge his feet.
The Emperor hearing this sent a great ar^^ye out of Germanye to Rome, which
Gelasius fearing, fled by ship with his company to Caieta, and there was
made a priest, for he was made Pope before being but a deacon. Henry the
Emperor coming to Rome in the absence of Gelasius, created Maurice Burdinus
archbishop of Bracharie Pope, and called him Gregory the eight, and the^ he
returned from Rome. Gelasius hearing thereof returns priuilye to Rome, and
taking heart to him he comes into Praxis Church to say mass, where he was
so hindered by the contrary side, that he scant saved himself by running away:
From thence he fled into France, where at the length he was entertained by an
abbot, in whose house he dyed of a pleuresye in the second year of his
reign. In his life by a Legate that he sent, he held a council in Collen,
where he excommunicated the Emperor, and decreed yt the Popes of Rome should
be judged by none.

103. Calixtus the second.
CAlixtus the second being before called Guido of Burgundy came of the kings
of France and England, he succeeded Gelasius. And after he was confirmed at
Rome, he sent a messenger to the said Conon in Germanye, to continue the
excommunication of his predecessor against the Emperor. Hereupon ye Emperor
was compelled to summon a council of Princes and bishops at Tybur, to make
peace between him and the Pope: and least the Popes part should have spoiled
his dominions, he took peace upon unequal conditions. He confirmed to his
great dishonor the election of this Calixtus, who was chosen Pope at Cluny in
France by a few Cardinals, whom Gelasius had brought with him: and yet was
the other Pope Gregory alive, whom ye Emperor himself had first created. And
when the Popes Legates demanded of the Emperor to give over his auctoritye in
Ecclesiastical causes, and bestowing spiritual liuinges: he desired respit to
deliberate thereon with the Princes of Germanye, who councelled him to seek
for the favor of the Pope, (to such puissancye was ye Pope then start up over
the mighty Monarchs.) Finallye Ambassadors meetinge at Worms in Germanye
for either part to debate the matter, after great controuersyes and sharp
reasoninges on either side, the Pope bare away the victory: for the Emperors
Proctours were the bishop of Spire and the abbot of Fulda, by their calling
bound to favor the Popes part, who persuaded the Emperor to yield over his
right for fear of the excomunication, which would cause his subjects to
revolt from him: And so he obeyed. This being done the Popes Legates did
absolve him, and gave him license to repair to service in the Church, which
Gelasius had denied him. These compositions were drawn in wrighting for both
sides, and therefore the Popes part even to triu^ph of their victory, and show
how the Emperor was vanquished, caused theirs to be read with open
Proclamation, and hanged them up at Lateran to be seen openly. Calixtus after
he had thus maistred the Emperor, persecuted Pope Gregory his aduersarye that
stood against him for the Popedom, by the Emperors means: Gregory hearing
of this fled from Rome to Sturium, where Calixtus caught him, and to make him a
laughing game even to the Emperors reproach, he caused Gregory to be set
upon a Camel with his face toward the Camels tail, and so to be brought to
Rome: afterward he caused his head to be shaven, and so sent him into a
Monasterye. Among many Canons that Calixtus made, one was, that it should be
adulterye if a man in his life time should forsake his bishopric or Church,
wresting this place of Paul unto it: The wife is bound to the law of her
husband, while he lives etc.. He appointed to fast four times in the year,
whereas before it was but thrice, and said it was not lawful to fast any
otherwise then according as the Church of Rome did, addinge this reason: For
(says he) as the son came to do the will of his father, so must Christians
do the will of their mother the Church of Rome. He dyed of a fever which he
took by the travel of a great iorneye, Anno 1125. One Simeon an Englishman
borne in Duresme in the 2. book of his historye of the Kings of England
writes, that this Calixtus held a general council in France, wherein he
forbad priests, deacons, or subdeacons to have wives: and first to leese their
benefices, secondlye the Communion if they would not yeilde herein. Whereupon
one in England wrote a sharp Epigram against him, thus in effect.

O bone Calixte nunc omnis clerus odit te,
Quondam presbyteri poterant vxoribus vti:
Hoc destruxisti, postquam tu Papa fuisti,
Ergo tuum merito nomen habent odio.
O good Calixtus now the clergy does the hate,
In former time the Churchmen might enjoy their spousal mate:
But thou bast taken this away to Popeship since thou came,
Therefore as thou deserved have they do detest thy name.
104. Honorius the second.
HOnorius the second before called Lambert being but of Hostia for his
learning, and so came to be Pope. But (says Platina) his entrance into
Peter's place is not to be commended, because he came in rather by the ambition
of a few, then the consent of good men: for he was made Pope with great debate
by the policy of one Leo Frangepain ye chiefest Citizen, who persuaded that
they should not chose ye Pope, before they knew all the Canons concerning the
election. While they stayed about this, Leo practiced to serve this Popes turn
by such fetches as he could devise: but the Cardinals perceyuinge his policye
did create one Theobaldus (a Cardinal) Pope, calling him Celestine, but the
people stood earnestlye vrginge for another Cardinal that was a Saxo^, which
Leo seemed to like of, only to defeat the election of the Cardinals: and
when by this means he had ye people somewhat indifferent to be ruled by him, he
brought to pass by them to make Lambert Pope, and called him Honorius. This
Honorius (says Mattheus Parisiensis) sent out a Legate one John Cremensis a
riotous Cardinal, to fill the Popes bags: He coming into England Anno 1125.
with the kings favor passed from one Religious house to another, still
fillinge his pouches with money and his panche with delicate cheer. And when
he had even laden himself meetely well, he held a Synod in London, where he
condemned all the clergy of adultery which had wives, and even the self same
day at night my Lord Legate himself even his own parson was taken in
adultery. And yet Pope Honorius wrote in his behalf to ye clergy of England
thus: We desire you, charge you, and command you, that ye receive this John
as the Uicar of S. Peter with reverence, hear him with humilitye and at his
commandment be assistant at his Synodes etc. The like for him wrote Honorius
to David king of Scotts. There is a certain statute made by the same John,
in ye said Synod held at London to this effect: We by our Apostolical
auctoritye command that priests, deacons, subdeacons, and canonists, shall
not come in company with their wives, concubines, yea or any other women,
except their mother, sister or aunte, or such women as may altogether give no
suspicion, and who so shall break this, shall forfaite his orders. We
command that no marriage shall be made between kindred, or affinitye to the
seventh degree. Honorius dyed Anno 1130. Platina says that in the time of this
Honorius, one Arnulphus an Englishma^ and a noble preacher of ye Christen
Religion, was murdered at Rome by the treacherye of the clergy, because he
did sharpelye reprove their royat and wantonness, and rebuked their pomp, and
greediness in gatheringe riches. Many of the nobles of Rome did follow this
man as a true disciple and Prophet of Christ, and only preacher of the
truth.

105. Innocentius the second.
INnocentius the second after he was made Pope, could Roger Duke of Sicilia,
for saying that he was king of Italye. The Pope brought out his army, and
marched forward stoutlye and manfullye overthrew his enemy: but the dukes
son coming upon his back with an army took the Pope, and his Cardinals,
and so Roger obtained all beside the title of Sicilia. In the mean time the
Romans created one Peter Leo his son Pope, and called him Anacletus, which
being heard Innocentius desired to be set at liberty and obtained it, and
purposed to return to Rome: but because he saw al was in an uproar at Rome, he
turned from thence, trauayling till he came into France. In the mean time
Anacletus sought with spendinge and brybinge, to win and confirm all men's
good wills toward him, that any way seemed to favor him: He made Roger king
of both Sicils to be his freinde. Innocentius was busye on the other side, to
recover the Popedom, and therefore held a council in France and condemned
Anacletus for an enemy of the Church. Afterward he went to Philip king of
France, and crowned his son Jews, then he went to Carnotus, where he met
with Henry the first, king of England, persuading with him to send an army
against the Sarracens that kept the holy land, but his purpose was to have
used that army for the recovering of his Popedom. From him he went to
Lotharius king of Germanye desyringe him to see him restored: Lotharius
gyuinge his oath to the Pope, prepared an army to conducte Innocent safe to
Rome. So Lotharius entered into Italye with a puissante army to restore
Innocent to his place, and coming to Rome divided his host, and entered into
the City, ouerthrewe Anacletus with duke Roger, and set Innoce^tius safe in
Lateran. Innocentius therefore to show himself thanckfull, crowned Lotharius
Emperor, and gave to Reginold his chiefest Captain the Dukedom of Apulia, yt
was none of his own to bestow, and all that Roger possessed in Italy* But
Reginold dyed soon after, and then Roger claymed his right again, and because
ye Pope withstoode him, he took him again, and his Cardinals suddenly ere yt
they wist, and would never let them depart until they had granted him his
whole desire: yea to make him king of both Sicils, and so since that time the
kingdom of Sicill is called S. Peter's patrimonye. But (says Nauclerus) much
mischief arose up hereof, because the Pope would thus take upon him the
bestowinge of Princelye titles, robbinge the Emperors of that right, which
they had gotten by the sword. Innocentius made a law, that whosoever should
strike an anointed priest or shaven clarke, should be excommunicated, to be
absolved only by the Pope: after this he dyed Anno 1143. In this Popes time
Steven King of England Anno 1136. kept to himself and used in his own power
the inuesture of prelates. And Lotharius the Emperor would have reclaymed that
to himself, which the Pope took from Henry the Emperor, but that S. Bernard
being then of great credit dissuaded him About this time was William bishop
of York called S. William of York, who was poisoned in his challice by his
Chapleynes.

106. Celestine the second.
CElestine the second a Thuscan succeeded Innocent by ye Conradus: his life was
so short that he could not play the Pope like other. At this time was a great
contagious plague through out al Italy. Celestine dyed in the sixth month of his
Popeship. In his time the bishop of Winchester in England held a council,
where was concluded yt if any man abused either Church or Churchyard or laid
hand on an Ecclesiastical person, he should be excommunicate, to be absolved
only by the Pope.

107. Lucius the second.
LVcius the second borne in Bononia succeeded Celestine. Patricianship, which
the Romans being weary of the Popes yoke had made in the time of Innocentius,
because the Popes took upon them all swaye within the City and abroad
likewise. But this Pope Lucius because he was not able to depose the Patrician
alone, craved aid of ye Emperor Conradus, who being otherwise busied could
not assiste him. Lucius therefore sought to attain his purpose another way:
for when the Patrician and the Senators were all gathered together close in
the Capitol, Lucius took his oportunitye and came thither with a band of
soldiers in armor, meaning either to destroy the Capitol, or to drive
them out. The Cityze^s hearing hereof armed them selves forthwith, and ran to
succor their officer, whervppon roose a very bloudye fraye: Pope Lucius being
in the midst of the broyle was so pelted with stones and other lumpes, that
sone after he dyed thereof Anno 1145 ere he had reigned a year.

108. Eugenius the third.
EVgenius ye third sometime an abbot, was made Pope Eugenius was scholar to S.
Barnard, who for his learning was then in great reverence, and considering the
time how the Romans wrangled to have auctoritye in the election of the Pope,
they thought it safest and surest for the maintenance of the Popes
auctoritye, to chose none of the College of Cardinals but this Eugenius, that
it might be a cause why his scholemaister Barnarde should advance ye Sea of
Rome in his wrytinges: and so it fell out as it appears in his 2. book of
Considerations. Eugenius at his first creation perceived the Romans would be
importunate, to have the election of their Senators ratifyed, and therefore
he fled with his Cardinals from Rome by night to Viterbium, where he
excommunicated all the Romans, which caused ye Citizens to obey Jordan
chosen Patrician: then he joined his army with the host of the Tiburtines,
old enemies to Rome, and so compelled ye Romans to sue for peace: which he
granted at length upon condition that they should fullye abolish the
principalitye of the Patrician, and should restore his deputye to his former
place, and for hereafter should be content to take such Senators, as he by
his Papal auctoritye would assign them. Peace being thus concluded he
returned into Rome, but perceiving afterward that falsehoode was mente toward
him, he slipped again to Tiburie: the Romans pursued him forthwith, with bows
and bills, and drove him from Tiburie into France. And at length he returned to
Rome and there dyed Anno 1152.

109. Anastasius the fourth.
ANastasius of a Cardinal became Pope, wherein he Lateran a rich and massye
Chalice, and bestowed cost in repayringe S. Mary's Church, and so dyed the
second year of his Popeship Anno 1154. This Anastasius after the death of one
Henry Mordachus a proud monk whom Pope Eugenius intruded. restored S. William
archbishop of York, which William was afterward poisoned in the Challice
coming to receive the Communion, as Mattheus Parisius says. In this Popes
time y^ Thames at London was so frozen, ye carts and waynes passed over the
ise, and a little before were two Eclipses, one of the Sun, and the other of
the Moon, after which followed terrible tempests, storms, thonder,
lightninges, rain and wind.

110. Hadrian the fourth.
HAdrian the fourth was an Englishma^ borne called Nicolas ye son of one Dan
Robert a monk of S. Albanes: he was first a reguler priest, and afterward a
bishop, then a Cardinal, and finallye Pope of Rome. He being chosen by the
clergy at Rome, would not ascend and take the place until they had consented
unto him, that one Arnold bishop of Brixia whom he counted an heretic, should
be banished out of Rome. This Arnold persuaded the Romans to recover their
liberty of choosinge their Maiestrates: and when the people withstoode the
presumption of the Pope, it wroughte gre^te strife. This Hadrian a man of
loftye courage forthwith did excommunicate the Romans, until they should
drive out Arnold, and compel their Consulles to leave their offices, and yield
the gouernemente of the City freelye unto him. In the mean time Frederick ye
Emperor hasted him to Rome with an army, to put down the rebels: the Pope
and his clergy went out to meet him, whereby ye Pope thought to get
oportunitye to be revenged by the Emperors aid upon his enemies. The
Emperor meeting with ye Pope alighted from his horse and went on foot, and
attendinge on the Popes parson when he should alight, ye Emperor held the
left stirope, for the which the Pope scorned him for mistakinge the stirope,
and said unto him: Ye should have held me the right stirope. The Emperor
taking it patiently aunsweared him smilingly, I have not (quoth he) learned
to hold a stirope, and you holy father are the first, to whom I ever did this
service: And (quoth ye Emperor, because he saw the Pope angrye that he
answered) I would know of you whether this be my duty to do it, of force, or
of my own curtesye: If a man offer it of curtesye, how will you rebuke him for
negligence? If it be not of duty, what need ye care on which side he come
unto you, that comes to do you worship? Such sharp talk passinge between
them, they departed both full of wrath. But on the morrow the Emperor being a
man of wisdom, neglected all that he had heard and seen touching the Popes
statelye and proud mind, and sent for him desiringe him to come to his
pauilion. The Pope came and ye Emperor went forth to meet him, and as he was
tought the day before against the Pope should alight, he held the right
stirope, and so conducted the Pope in. As they sat together, Pope Hadrian
began to talk in this manner. Princes (quoth he) in old time which came to
crave the Crown, were wont to recompense the curtesye of the Church of Rome
with some excellent benefit, that as it were preventing the Popes blessinge
and the crown, that they should receive by their dutifulnes, might notifye
themselves to all men by their noble deed: For so Charles deserved his Crown
by conqueringe the Lombardes, Otho his by asswaging the Berengarians, Lotharius
his by suppressinge the Normans. Therefore your worthiness may restore Apulia to
be territorye to Rome, which now the Normans withholde, and then will we
afterward sone do y^ which is our duty. The Princes therefore perceiving yt
the Pope would not crown Frederick, unless he should first win Apulia from
William king of Sicill by his own cost and charge, they promised it should
be performed with a new army out of Germanye, as soon as the other army were
grown out, if so be he would crown ye Emperor. Thereupon the next day he
was crowned with ye Crown Imperial, by the Pope in S. Peter's Pallaice: and
afterward having executed above a thousand of the rebellious Citizens, he
prepared to return into Germany. After the Emperors departure, ye Pope being
disapointed of his aid, purposed to set upon Apulia to win it from the king
of Sicill, with such force as as he could make: first he excommunicated the
king because he would not yield it up, and discharged his subjects of their
alleageaunce, to make them to rebel against him. But because these things
prevailed but little against king William, he set Emanuel the Emperor of
Greece upon him, because he knew that he had been a mortal enemy to king
Williams father. William fearinge this sought for peace, and promised to
yield all to the Pope, but the Pope by the counsel of certain Cardinals
(hopinge to gain more by the war then peace) refused the offer, and
proclaimed war against him. King William perceyuinge this to prevent the
danger in time, gathered an army in haste out of all Sicill and sailed to
Apulia where he fought with Emanuel and ouerthrewe him. Afterward he assaulted
the town Beneuent (where the Pope and his Cardinals wear) in such sort yt
they dispayring to escape craved peace: William granted it, and so was
reconciled to the Pope, who then pronounced him king of both Sicils, making him
first to swear that he should hurt nothing that belonged to ye Church of
Rome. Thus the Pope returned to Rome with foul shame, where contrary to his
expectation he was troubled with civil discention, for the Consuls began to
reclayme their liberty and auctoritye which he had taken away: and because he
could not prevail with his vain thonderboltes of excommunication, he
departed to Arminy.

While these things were doing, the Emperor abydinge at home, remembered with
himself how the Pope had taken from the Emperors the former right of
inuestinge of prelates, and by his Legates had summoned all nations together,
and had sowed ye seed of rebellion through all his Empire, taken homage and
fealtye of all the bishops in Germanye. Hereuppon he commanded, that if the
Popes Legates came into Germanye without his commandment, they should be kept
out. He forbad that any of his subjects should appeal to Rome, he set his
own name in wryt^nge before the Popes: whereupon the Pope was so wroth, that
he sent letters to the Emperor rebuking him sharpelye for it. The copye
whereof for the better understanding of it, it thus.

Hadrians letter to the Emperor.
HAdrian bishop servant to the servant of God, sends greeting to Frederick
the emperor, and apostolical blessinge. As the law of God promises long life
to them that do honor their parents, so does it threaten death, to them that
dishonor their father or mother. The truth teaches us that every one that
exalts himself shall be brought down. Therefore right well beloved son in the
Lord, we do not a little marvel at your vvysedome, that ye do not so much
duty as becomes you to S. Peter, and the holy Church of Rome: For in your
letter sent unto us ye have set your name before ours, whereby you do bewray
your vanitye, I will not say your pride. What shall I speak, how little ye
observe your fealtye, which ye are bound by oath and promise to perform to S.
Peter and us? Seeing ye requier honor and allegiance of them that are Gods, and
of al our honorable sons, bishops I mean. And ye wrap their holy hands
within yours, settinge your self manifestlye against us: Ye shut not only
the Churches, but also the Cities of your dominion against the Cardinal sent
from our own side. What shall I say? Repent therefore repent we advise you:
for we fear least your noblenes while you deserve of us to have both blessing
and Crown, will loose that which we have granted you, by taking upon you
that which we have not granted. Fare ye well.


The aunsweare of Frederick the emperor to the Popes letter.
FRederick by the grace of God Emperor of the Romans Augustus evermore, to
Hadrian Pope of Rome, and to al those that (are vvilling to cleave to that
which Christ began to do and teach) sends greetinge. The law of Justice
restores to every man his own, For we do not dishonor our ancestors, to
whom within this our kingdom we yield due reverence, by whom we have
enherited our Crown and regal dignitye. Is it known that Syluester
bishop of Rome in the time of Constantine the Emperor, had any kinglye
poart? But by his godly grant the Church obtained liberty, peace was
restored, and what soever your princelye pontificality is known to have, it
came by the bountifulnes of Princes: Whereby when soever we write to the
Pope, by good right we set our own name former, and according to the rule
of Justice we allow it to him writing to us. Look over the Records and if
ye marked not in readinge which we auouche, there ye shall find it. But why
should we not require homage and royal oaths tovvarde our parson of them,
that are Gods by adoption, and possess the royaltye belonging to us: Seeing
that he who taught both us and you, taking nothing of a Prince but geuinge al
goodness to all men, yet paid tribute to Caesar, for himself and Peter, and
gave you an example that ye should do the like. And so he teaches you saying:
Learn of me, for I am humble and gentle of heart. Therefore let them either
grant unto us that belongs to our royaltye, or else if, they will challenge
this for their more commoditye, then let them pay unto God that is due unto
GOD, and unto Caesar that is due unto Caesar. The Churches are shut to your
Cardinals, and the Cities are not open unto them, and reason good, because we
see that they are not feeders but ste^^ers of their flocks, not kepers of
peace, but catchers of pence: not those that amend the world, but that devour
it. But when we shall see them such, as the Church requires, bearinge
peace, giuinge light to their countreye, assistinge the cause of the lovvlye in
equity, we vvil forthwith succor them with necessary stipends and
sustinaunce. But ye do much discredit your humilitye and curtesye, being the
saueg^rde of all virtues, when ye move to secular parsons such questions as do
not much further religion. Let therefore your fatherlye wisdom provide,
least while ye stir about such unmeet matters, ye give offense unto those
which apply themselves to give ear to the words of your mouth, as it were
to a shovver of rain after Harueste. For we cannot but aunsvveare to those
things which we hear, when we see the detestable beast of pride to have
crept even to Peter's seat, so long as we purpose God vvillinge continuallye
to provide for peace and the Church. Fare ye well.


Here may you discern somewhat the dealing and spirit of the Romain bishops,
which I leave to every ones own indifferent consideration. To return to the
matter, hereuppon this Pope Hadrian did excommunicate ye Emperor, and by his
Legates sent from Rome provoked rebellions against him in Italye and other
places: and brought it secretly to pass, that the conspiracye of the rebels
should be made the stronger, by these laws confirmed among them by oath, that
none of them should take peace with him, wtoute the whole consent of all the
rest. And again, that if this Pope Hadrian should dye, they should choose none
to be Pope, but one of those Cardinals that were of the conspiracye against the
Emperor. But shortly after God punished this Hadrian very straungelye for
(says Abbas Vspergensis in Frederico primo) it came to pass that this Pope
Hadrian the fourth, going to Agnania to denounce the excommunication against
the Emperor, after he had tarried there a few days, walked forth with some of
his company, to cool him self: And when he came to a certain spring of
water he drancke thereof, and forthwith a fly did enter into his mouth, and
did cleave to his throat in such sort, that no art of the Phisitio^s could get
it away, and so he was choked therewt, and died thereof Anno 1159. in the fifth
year of his Popeship. But the Italians being thus set on by the Pope, devised
continuallye treasons against ye Emperor, among other, practiced to have
murdered him by a certain counterfeit fool, being in deed an excellent
Musician, who had surely slain him, but yt the Emperor driven to his shift
leaped out at ye fifte window down into a river, which ran under ye place
where he was: The fool being taken was also thrown down out of the same
window, and so he brake his neck. After this they hired an enchanter of
Arabia, who poisoned his bridle, his spurs, his ringes, and his stirope, and
such other things, that with ye only touching thereof he should have been
slain: But he was bewrayed and hanged up. This Pope Hadrian made king Henry ye
second of England, Lord of Irelande. Carrion in his Chronicle wrytinge of
Conradus the third, Emperor of Germanye says, that it is found written that
this Pope Hadrian ye fourth even a little before his death should say: that
there is no kind of life upon earth more wretched the^ to be Pope, and to get
the Popedom by blood is not to succeed Peter, but Romulus who for the
kingdom slew his own brother.

III. Alexander the third.
ALexander the third was borne in Hetruria called first Rolland Chancelour.
After Hadrian ye fourth had his breath stopped, and was choked with a fly,
this man succeeded him being far worse then the other. But because that all
parties could not agree to elect him, nine of the Cardinals that held on the
Emperors part, did choose another Pope called Octauianus a citizen of Rome,
being a priest and Cardinal of S. Clements, whom they called Victor the
fourth. And after the death of this Victor the sciesme and discention being
continued, three Popes succeeded in order, Paschalis, Calixtus, and
Innocentius, all which withstoode this Pope Alexander and made great turmoyles
in the Church of Rome, and al perished, he yet lyuinge. But when the Emperor
sommoned a council at Papia whereby the strife might be ended, and the matter
debated, that he might be confirmed Pope that had ye better right: this
Alexander defyinge the Emperors Ambassadors, answered proudlye that the Pope
(as he took himself to be) is to be judged by no man, and thus sent away the
Ambassadors with great contempt: and sendinge his letters through all
Christendom, he plagued both the Emperor and this Victor with
excommunications. And because he might assure Rome to himself, he sent
letters forthwith to John Cardinal of saint Peter's Church, who supplied his
room there, who by briberye and flatterye so curried favor with the people,
that he allured the most part of the City to favor Alexander, and to make
those Consuls that did most lean to his part. In the mean time Alexander
coming out of France into Italy returned forth with to Rome, and was
courteously received: and ye Cities of Italy being emboldned by his coming, to
shake of their allegiance to the Emperor contrary to their oath, did
forthwith reuolte from him, king Philip of France favoring their part. The
Emperor knowing of these rebellions and conspiracies against him, did
forthwith gather a new army and went into Italye: but when he came to Brixia,
one Hartman ye bishop thereof being of the Emperors priuye council, (but a
false hipocrite) did dissuade him from ye war. And persuaded him (by the
Popes secret council) to make war rather against the ^urkes enemies to
Christian faith, then against the holy father and Christian men, addinge
withal yt now the Sultan oppressed and enjoyed Jerusalem, and al ye holy land,
which his uncle had whilom conquered with great power and charges. He prayed
him to try the force of his army upon the Agarens and Saracens, and to recover
these lands therewith: furthermore he promised the Emperor to perform this,
that ye king of France likewise should leuye an army to aid to conquer the
Sultan king of Aegipt. At his supplication the Emperor led his army
against the Paganes, which he had prepared against the Pope and his rebels. He
traueyled through Hungary to Constantinople, and sendinge over his army he wan
many towns from the Turk, as among other Philomenia and Ionicus, and passed
into Armenia the less, conquering all: yea God so prospered his victoryes,
that ye Sultan him self feared the loss of his kingdom. At the length he
came to Jerusalem, where he suffered the Pagans to pass with life out of the
City. At length having gotten great victories in Iewry, he considered how he
might defend from the Turks that which he had won, and repair that which
was wasted. But while he was thus busye here in the East, Pope Alexander was
not yet quieted, but both he and his conspiratours still feared him, if he
should ever return into Italye, and therefore Alexander still devised how to
have him destroyed. He sent a cunning painter to go to the place where the
Emperor was, who (the Emperor not knowing thereof) should draw his picture:
this being perfectly done, he commanded a secret messenger to convey it to the
Sultan, and wrote a letter wtall to the Sultan certefying him that it was the
Emperors picture, and tellinge him that if he would live quietlye, he must
work the feate to have him destroyed by some train. The Sultan having received
these letters and ye Emperors lively picture, devised how to gratifye the
Pope, and to slay his enemy: but he could never get oportunitye, neither in
battle nor in his tents to have him slain. But when the Emperor having
won Jerusalem retired with his army homeward, he having no fear of himself
did divide his army into diverse parts, whereby they might return the more
conuenientlye for vittaile and lodginge one after another. But in Armenia being
on a time in a great heat and sweatinge, partly with travel, partly with the
heat of the Sun, mistrusting no danger in ye saluage country full of
woddes, he taking a few horsemen with him and his chaplein, did step from his
army. Being a little gone a side he alighted from his horse, and was about to
put of his apparel at a rivers side, where commanding his horsemen to depart
he purposed by himself and his chaplen alone to baath himself, because he was
exceeding hot: where it so happened that the Soldanes which had lain in wait for
him as he traveled negligentlye, came and took him, and led the noble
Emperor prisoner through the woods to the Sultan: his horsemen not knowinge
thereof attending for him in vain, at length came and sought diligently for
him till the next day. The rumor was brought to the army that he was
drowned, whereupon all the host lamented, wept, and mourned heauilye, and
sought him alonge the floude almost the space of an whole month: but when they
could not find him they chose them new Captains, and so marched homeward.

The Emperor being brought to the Sultan did dissemble that he was one of ye
Emperors chamberlaynes, but the Sultan perceyuinge by the picture which he had
from the Pope, resembling his face that he was the Emperor, commanded the
picture to be brought forth, and the le^ters to be read before him. The
Emperor being astonished at this treason, saw that it auayled not to deny
himself, he confessed the truth, and besought the Sultan humblye to have
compassion on him. After the Sultan had talked much with him, and saw both by
his words and deeds, that he was a worthy and noble gentleman, in whom there
was no virtue meet for so princely a parsonage wanting, and having him in
great estimation for his wisdom, his good demeanor, his faythfulnes and
vprighte dealinge, thought he should purchase himself great glory and
renown to deliver him. Therefore afterward he called the Emperor unto him,
offered him liberty upon conditions, and curteouslye proffered him that he
should lay in hostages for his ransom paying. And on this condition he let
him go, that he should make a perpetual league of peace with him, and should
pay an hundred thousand ducates, and should leave his chaplen that was taken
prisoner with him, to lie in pledge till it were paid: so writings were drawn
of the conditions, and the Emperor prepared his journey, and bad his chaplen be
of good courage, promisinge him yt he would not take his rest in Germany, until
the money were sent and that he saw him returned thither. Then the Solda^
bestowed gifts on the Emperor, provided for his voyage, and with xxxiiii.
horses and certain soldiers conducted him to Brixia, and stayed there. The
Princes understanding of the Emperors return, for joy resorted fast unto
him. The Emperor loadinge the Soldanes men with diverse rewards sent them
back again, and other with them to conduct them to the coast of the Empire.
Afterward he held a Parliament at Norimberg, calling together all the Princes
of the Empire, to who^ he detected the treason of Pope Alexander, and read the
traitors Epistle which he sent to the Sultan, and told them by what means he
escaped. The Princes promised to assist him to perform his promise to the
Sultan, and in great disdain against Pope Alexander traitor to the Empire,
they offered to aid him. The army was gathered, he came to Rome, and not a
man through out Italye withstoode him: and sending his Ambassadors into the
City, he demanded of the Romans (concealing his own iniurye) that the
Church might be brought to quietness by hearing both the Popes causes heard: and
that the right bishop might have his place, whereby the Church might be
governed by one. If they would do this, he promised that he would grant them
not only peace, but would restore them all their right. Pope Alexander
perceyuinge that by this means the Emperor might obtain his purpose to be
revenged on him, fled by night to Caieta, afterward to Beneuent: last of all in
the 17 year of his Popeship, he came to Venice disguised in the apparel of
one that was his cook, where lurking in an abbey he became a Gardener. A while
after he was bewrayed and known, and there upon calling a council by the
commandment of duke Sebastian, he was received with great honor, and brought
into S. Maryes Church with pontifical pomp. The Emperor hearing that the Pope
was at Venice, desired the Venetians to yield to him his enemy, being likewise
the enemy of the common wealth. The Venetians denied to do it: therefore ye
Emperor sent his son Otho with a nauye of soldiers to demand Alexander
of them, but he charged him withal that he should attempt nothing in any case,
till he himself were come unto him. But Otho being a lustye young Prince full
of courage and desirous of renown, neglecting his fathers commandment, would
needs encounter the Venetians, whereby he was overcome, taken prisoner,
bound and brought to Venice. Hereupon Alexander began to set up his crest and
put out his horns, and would not take peace with the Emperor in any case,
unless the Emperor would come to Venice, and take such conditions of peace,
as he would offer him. Whereupon the good and careful father to provide for
the unfortunate miserye of his son, promised he would come at the time
appointed: and so came where they commoned upon conditions of peace. But the
Pope would not absolve the Emperor of excommunication, till he came to S.
Marks Church, where before all the people, Pope Alexander commanded the
Emperor to prostrate himself on the ground, and to crave pardon. The Emperor
did as he commanded him: then the Pope trod on the Emperors neck with his
foot, saying it is written: Thou shall walk upon the serpent and adder, and
shall tread down under rhy feet the Lion and dragon. The Emperor
disdayninge this reproach answered: It was not said to thee but to Peter. The
Pope then treadinge down his neck again said: Both to me and to Peter. The
Emperor then fearing some danger, durst say no more, and so the peace was
concluded. The conditions whereof are these, that the Emperor should uphold
Alexander to be true Pope, that he should restore all that did belong to the
Church of Rome, which had been taken away in ye wars: Thus the Emperor
departed with his son. The Pope to show himself thankful to Venice,
bestowed of his liberality gifts upon duke Sebastian and ye Senate. First he
gave them a white Taper which only the Popes used to Bear. Secondlye he
lycensed them to seal their letters with lead: and he granted their Duke the
third seat in the Popes Theater. Fourthly he granted that on Ascension day,
they should have whole and perfect pardons for ever at S. Marks Church. Fifthly
he gave the Duke viii. banners of silk, and an attier for the head like an
hat. Afterward Alexander deprived the bishop of Papia of his Pall, and exempted
him of the dignitye of caryinge ye Cross, because he took the Emperors part.
He made many Canons in a council at Lateran, as that an archbishop should not
receive his Pall, unless he had sworn first to be true and obedient to the
Pope. And that a man should not marrye his brothers wife being wydowe, that
they that took orders should vow chastetye, that a bastard should not be made
a bishop, that the canonizinge of Saints belonged only to the Pope, and that
such saints should have divine honor. Among other he made Thomas Becket
archbishop of Canterbury, and a rank traitor to his prince (but stoutlye
vpheld therein by the Pope) a saint. He bound king Henry the second, of
England (excusing himself of the death of Thomas) yt his subjects should
franklye and freely appeal from him to the Court of Rome, and that afterward
none should be king of England, unless he were first called king by the Pope.
This arose upon the quarrel between the king and Thomas Becket, who so vexed
and disquieted his sovereign prince, with all the nobles and prelates of this
Realm, with cursinges, excommunications, interditinges, threatninges, moving
both French king and Pope to moleste the king in his behalf: and finallye as
then Pope Alexander played the incarnate devil against the Emperor, so did
Becket rage like a subdeuill against the king in England, till certain not
able to endure his arrogante, seditious and traiterous doings, in great
despite thereof slew him at Canterbury. He decreed that a man should not be
deuorced from his wife, though she had ye Leprosye. Also that those yt could be
proved usurers, should neither be admitted to the Communion, nor buried in the
Church: after these and other like deeds he dyed Anno 1181. Robert Monte^sis
Chronicle has, yt Jews king of France and Henry king of England, waited on
Pope Alexander as his gentlemen ushers and footmen, the one leading his horse
by the bridle on the right side, and the other on ye left, through the whole
City Taciacu^ to Legeris. In this Popes time the Sun was Eclipsed, and
earthquakes were every where. Also there were certain called Waldensis who
defended many articles against the Pope and his doctrine, as
transubstantiation, Purgatory etc.

112. Lucius the third.
LVcius the third borne in Thuscia of an honorable stock, succeeded by
consent of all the Cardinals. But Verona, where in a council he condemned the
Romans doings, and even then when the Christians were persecuted in Asia
(which pretense of holiness wrought the peril of many) that they might be
succored, because the enemies were emboldned to wast the bolye land under
their Captain Saladinus, presuminge for that our Princes were at disce^tion.
This Pope being mindful of his cou^trye Thuscia bestowed large gifts upon
it, and obtained of the Emperor that the Hetruria^s should have the self same
coin that the Luce^sians among them had, even as the Lombards had only the
money of Papia with the Emperors coin. Valerius Anselmus writes that this
Pope contrary to other, allowed the Sacraments that were done by whoremaister
chapleins, he dyed in Verona Anno 1185. In his time were great earthquakes
which did destroy diverse notable Cities, and in Sicil were destroyed thereby
five and twentye thousand parsons. The Armenians being at this time at great
debate with the Greek Church, did for hatred thereof become subject to the
Church of Rome.

113. Vrbanus the third.
VRbanus who because of his troublesome dealings was nicknamed Turbanus, was
borne in Millen. He as soon as he was made Pope, was careful at the first to
set the Christian Princes at concord, least while they were divided the Paga^s
should destroy them: but lo how it fell out, for says Crantzius because the
Emperor would not in all points follow his mind, he purposed forthwith to
draw out his blade of excommunication against the Emperor, whereby he made the
matter worse, but death took him away in time and prevented him. As some
think he dyed for grief, because he heard dailye increase of the miserye
among the Christians, and how Saladinus triumphed in victory against them,
with their great slaughters, Jerusalem being taken again, and king Guido
also, as he was going to Venice to repair his army. In this Popes time on
Midso^mer day at vi. of the clock in the morninge was an Eclipse of the
Sun, after which ensued a great pestilence in Polonia, Russia, and other
countries. By the bolstring up of this Pope the monks of Canterbury did in
matter of co^trouersye out swaye both the archbishop and king their Prince
Henry the second, who were glad to yield to the monks their desire for fear of
the Popes threatening.

114 Gregory the eight.
Gregory the viii. borne in Apulia succeeded Urban. At this time the Popes
seemed very careful for the recovery Judea and Jerusalem, being but a vain
and false color of them to weaken the Princes of Christendom, whereby they
might the better master them one by one: and by this means also being so holy
a show, they so occupied the minds of Christian Princes, yt they could
entende to have no regard to the Popes doings, who in the mean time while
they had no eye unto him, wrought his feats to the great enriching and
aduauncinge of his own dignitye. For so this Pope Gregory, even at his first
entrance did send letters to the Princes of Christendom, to raise their
armies to go to recover Jerusalem, and to spend their blood in a vain
quarrel: but as he was going to stir up the Pisans and Genuans in this matter,
he was poisoned, and so dyed before he had reigned two months.

115. Clemens the third.
CLemens the third a Roman son of one John Scholar. Sarracens: wheruppon
the Princes raised their armies, the chief whereof are these, Frederick the
Emperor, Philip king of France, Richard king of England, and Otho duke of
Burgundye, and diverse bishops and archbishops, with sundry people of Denmark,
Fryzeland and Flaunders, but yet they did almost nothing at all. King Richard
of England coming nigh to Rome in his iourneye, met with one Octamanus bishop
of Hostia, to whom he complained much of the insatiable and shameful simony
used by the Pope and his court, for taking vii. hundred marks for
consecrating the bishop Cenomanensis, also fifteen hundred marks of William
bishop of Elye for his office of Legatship, beside an houge sum of money of
the bishop of Bordeaux for absoluinge him, when he should have been deposed for
a crime urged against him by his clergy. Anno 1188. William king of Sicil
dyed, and left no heir, and therefore the Pope by and by would needs claim
it to be tributarye to the Church of Rome, and belonginge to it. But the peers
of the Isle chose Tancred bastard to king VVillia^. The Pope therefore
determined to challenge and try his right by the dinte of the sword, whereby he
filled the world full of ^poylings, and slaughter, and yet he obtained not his
purpose, and so left of. He made diverse Canons and among other this one, that
none but the Pope might remove a bishop from one sea to another, or to an hyer
dignitye. Also he decreed that bishops should be preferred in dignitye above
Princes. He commanded to celebrate the Mass with unleavened bread and wine
mingled with water, with many other ceremonies. He sent a Cardinal into Poland
to reform ye clergy, who among other matters in a Synod there held, forbad
them to have wives, and because the Danes decreed marriage lawful to their
clergy, they were excomunicated by ye Pope, who dyed Anno 1191.

116. Celestine the third.
CElestine the third was borne in Rome, he being an old Clement, was made Pope
by the bishops and Cardinals, the next day he crowned Henry the sixth Emperor.
This Celestine grudging that Tancred did enjoy the kingdom of Sicilia, married
unto the said Emperor a Nonne out of Panormita^ Nonnery called Constance, the
daughter of Roger, upon this condition, that he should challenge the kingdom
of both Sicils for a dowrye, and should drive out Tancred and possess it
himself, always provided, that ye Pope should have his yearelye tribute out
of it. And thus the Sueuian Captains became Lords of Sicill, but thereuppon
ensued bloody wars. After ye death of this Henry through the great division
in the Empire, there arose such debate through all Germany (while the Pope was
at defiaunce with the Sueuians for ye soueraignitye of Sicill which he sought
ambitiouslye) so that one parish was not at amitye with another: whereby the
Popes purse was excessiuely fed to appease the sciesme among those spiritual
men. Such were the practices of these holy fathers, while they set the Princes
of the world on work to conquer the holy land. Of the atonement of this
strife Abbas Vspergensis writes thus, which is worthy to be noted, thereby to
discern the holiness of Rome, and how it grew to this rich estate. There was
sca^t (says he) one bishopric or Ecclesiastical dignity or parish Church
which was not at a braul, and the matter was brought to Rome to be determined,
but not with emptye hands. Rejoice O mother Rome because the conduites of al
treasures on the earth are opened, ye mountains and whole rivers of money
might flow into thy hands: Rejoice upon the iniquity of the sons of men,
because thou art rewarded for so many mischiefs: Rejoice upon thine assistante
companion Lady Discention, who has burst loose from the pit of bottomless
hell, that she might heap upon thee many gubs of goulde. Thou have that which
thou do thirst after: because thou have daunted the world by the malice of
ma^kinde, not by holy religion. Men are haled and drawn unto thee, not by
devotion or pure conscience, but by treachery and working mischiefs manifold,
and the deciding of controversies gotten with blood. Thus says that abbot even
in those times when and where the Popes pride flourished ranckly even in his
ruff. Pope Celestine perceiving the advantage hereof for his estate, was
still urgent to send out the Christian Princes to fight for the holy land,
while he at home with their treasures builded for his ease and pleasure (as
Platina mentions) diverse stately Pallacies and Temples. Among many decrees
he made that an oath made by fear and co^pulsion, should be of none effect.
It is said before that this Pope Celestine did crown the Emperor Henry ye
sixte, which because it was done after so strange a sort as has not been
heard, it shall not be amiss briefly to declare ye manner of it as it is
reported by Rogerus Houedenus, Ranulphus, Rogerus Cestrensis and other, of whom
the first lived at that time, reportinge it as follows. The Pope was going
from Lateran to S. Peter's Church, where the Emperor and his wife Constantia
met him in the way: but the Romans did shut the gates against the Emperor
and Empress, coming with a great troop of armed soldiers. And Celestine
standinge upon the stayres of S. Peter's Church, took an oath of the Emperor
(his army being shut out) that he should defend and restore the libertyes and
patrimonye of the Church to the uttermost, yeldinge to Rome ye City
Tuscalanum. After this he did annoynte him Emperor and her Empress in the
Church: while he sitting in his pontifical chair and holding the Imperial
crown between his feet, caused the Emperor to stoop and bow down his
head to his feet, and so put the crown on: And it being thus put on, he
caused the Emperor still to hold down his head, while he with his foot did
spurn ye Crown of his head again, saying: I have power to make and unmake
Emperors at my pleasure: Then the Cardinals took it up and set it upon the
Emperors head. And in like manner the Empress was both crowned and uncrowned
with the Popes foot. Celestine dyed Anno. 1198. In his time one Cyrill an
Hermit had a strange vision revealed unto him as he was at mass, as Mantua^
writes Fastorum. lib. 5. (if a man will believe every vain fantasye.) As
Cyrill in his holy weed was earlye saying mass,
Behold a child with glorious shape before him present was.
And houering in the air on hye with silver plate in hand,
Which he upon the alter laid, where Cyrill still did stand.
And said unto him holy s^er, God does to the disclose
These secrets: and do thou reveal unto the Romans those.
The written verses out of Greek he turns to latin tongue,
Which strait were set in schools and yet are cited us among.
But touching the truth of this fantastical dream, it shall follow in Gregory
the ix. for that age took into credit three strange and monstrous miracles, so
yt then the world did greatly esteem of ye sect of begginge friars, while
Satan wrought in Antichrist the full mystery of his iniquitye. The miracles
are these, first the upholding of Lateran Church revealed in a vision to a
Dominicke Friar at Rome, the five Seraphical wounds of S. Fraunces in a
certain hill of Lauernia, and the Oracle of this Cyrill.

117. Innocentius the third.
AFter Celestine was Innoce^tius ye third, who so boiled Philip the Emperor,
because he was made Emperor by the Germaynes contrary to his will, that he
brast out into these words: Either shall the Pope spoil Philip of his Crown
and Empire, or else shall Philip take from the Pope his Apostolical dignitye.
After this he sturred up against ye Emperor, one Otho a duke both boulde and
rash, so that by this holy fathers help there grew cruel bloodshed and
foul slaughter infinite, until that this Philip the Emperor was
traytecouslye and vilanously slain by another Otho, and this Otho whom the
Pope had set on against Philip poasted to Rome, and of him was made Emperor.
But this bloody league did not last long between them: for as soon as Otho
began to reclaim and recover such things as of right belo^ged to the Empire,
(which ye Popes by subtle practices had purloyned many years) he was
excommunicated by the Pope himself, and spoiled of all his royal estate:
furthermore he discharged al his Princes of their alledgeaunce, which by oath
they ought to Otho, and commanded upon pain of his cruel curse, that no man
should take Otho to be Emperor, nor call him so, and caused the Princes to
make Frederick king of Sicill Emperor. Also this Innocent Anno 1212. sought
to compass three hard matters, that is the deposing of Otho, a voyage to
Jerusalem, and a general council. Also the same year (says Vlricus Mutius
certain noble men of Alsatia did condemn this Pope of impietye, because he
would not suffer the clergy to keep their wives, and the bishops burned an
hundred in one day, because they taught that Christians might lawfullye eat
flesh, and marrye at any time.

This mischeuous Innocent did mischeuouslye contriue many cruel tragedyes
against king John of England: he even in despite and defiance of the king,
did thrust (an enemy to the Realm called Steven Langton a Cardinal) into the
bishopric of Canterbury, and encouraged threescore and four monks to work
several treasons against him. Because the king would not suffer these
treacheryes, he condemned him to be an ennemy of the Church, excommunicated him
from the company of all Christians, interdited his kingdom vi. years and three
months, deposed him from government, took from him the Crown and ye Scepter,
discharged his subjects of their allegeaunce, gave his Realm to Jews the
French kings son, commanded to spoil him both of goods and life, with
diverse other tyrannous dealinges. King John being dismayed with these storms
being otherwise a noble and valiant Prince, yet because he was forsaken of his
nobilitye, his bishops and commonaltye, submitted himself full sore against
his heart to ye Popes obeysaunce: compelled to acknowledge the Pope to be
supreme head over all Christendom, and God upon earth, and bound himself
with a solemn oath to stand to the Popes arbitrament, and yt his posteritye
should do the like, to acknowledge themselves perpetual tributaryes to the
Popes of Rome. Also he kneeling upon his knees to Pandulphus, yielded up his
Crown in the presence of all his nobilitye, saying: Here I resign up the
Crown of England to Pope Innocent the third etc. Which Pandulphus kept for
five days, during which time the king was as a private person: and then being
bound to pay the Pope for his Crown a thousand marks a year, with other
shameful conditions, he received his Crown at the hands of Pandulphus,
pardoning and restoring to full estate all those that had rebelled, conspired
and wroughte treason against him. And yet by the procuremente of Steven Langton
Archbishop of York, and other of the clergy and priests of England, he was
myserablye vexed with treasons and rebellions continuallye, for certain of the
nobilitye and priests, had chosen Lodowicke to be their king, son to Jews
king of France: who entered the Realm and took the estate upon him by their
maintenance against king John, to the great heart breaking of the noble
Prince, the spoiling of the Realm, and oppression of themselves, while this
foreign Prince bestowed all things upon his own countrymen, accomptinge the
English nobles that assisted him to be but traitors. In the end after much
miserye and sorrow a certain monk (as Caxton says) named Simo^, of
Swinested abbey in Lincolnshire did there temper a cup of wine with the
poison of a toade, and drinking thereof to the king both he and the king were
poisoned and dyed: For which doing the said monk had a certain mass song
for his soul confirmed by the abbots procurement for ever.

This Innocentius under the color of recovering Jerusalem, held a council at
Lateran Anno 1215 against the Emperor to excommunicate him, and depose him,
because he had invaded certain Cities of ye Popes. In this counsel the Pope
first wrested out Auricular confession, and robbed the laitye of the Communion
cup. He condemned one Almericus a learned man for an heretic, and
commanded his bones to be burned with the rest of his sect at Paris: this he did
(says Dominicus Soto in a certain Sermon) because he preached that Images
should be put out of the Church. Among many other dotinge decrees, he
disanulled the marriage of the clergy for ever, he required priuye tithes to be
paid, and to maintain war in Asia, he commanded the fourtye part of all
revenues to be paid. He took from many Partriarkes, archbishops, and bishops,
their ordinarye auctoritye in many things. He commanded that the quarrels of
Princes should be brought before the Pope to be determined by him: and if the
election of the Emperor could not be agreed upon, then it should belong only
to the Pope. He devised that the Communion cake should be kept in a box in the
Church, and that when the priest should visit the sick, he should go with a
burninge Taper and a bell before him: He made the Canon of the mass to be
equal in auctority with the Scripture, and that the Pope should have power to
correct and control Princes, that none should be Emperor, unless he were
crowned by the Pope, finally he dyed Anno 1216. In his time Liuonia first
recovered papistrye, and Peter king of the Arrogons was inueigled to yield his
kingdom and all his dominions tributarye to Rome, to purchase his salvation. A
certain noble man in England hearing that this Pope had again condemned
priests marriage in Lateran council, did make a certain rhyme thereof the year
following, which one John Pullan found in an old book at Oxeforde as
follows.

PRisciani regula penitus cassatur,
Sacerdos per hic and haec olim declinatur:
Sed per hic solum modo nunc articulatur,
Cum per nostrum praesulem haec amoueatur.
Old Priscians rule does whollye go to wrack,
Because sacerdos erst declinde with hic and haec,
Must be declined now but even with hic alone,
Our prelat has compelled now haec for to be gone.
Ita quidam presbyter cepit allegare,
Peccat capitaliter qui vult seperare:
Quod Deus coniunxerat foeminam amare
Tales dignum duximus fures appellare.
A certain priest began in this wise for to reason,
Against the law of God he sins in hye treason:
Who parts that which God has toynde as wife from man,
To call these robbing thieves full well avouch we can.
O quam dolor anxius, quam tormentum grave,
Nobis est dimittere, quoniam suaue.
O Roman pontifex, statuisti praue,
Ne in tanto crimine moriaris, cave.
Alas what pain it is, what torment, and what grief,
For us to leave our wives our comfort and relief?
Thou Popish prelat do this wicked law begin,
Take heed thou do not dye continuing in this sin.
Non est Innocentius, immo nocens vere,
Qui quod facto docuit, verbo vult delere:
Et quod olimiuuenis voluit habere,
Modo vetus pontifex studet prohibere.
He is not Innocent but nocent may be termed,
That does condemn by word that he by deed confirmed:
And though that he himself, in youthful years did love it,
Now he a doting Pope does labor to impriue it.
Gignere nos praecipit vetus testamentum:
Nouum quod non retinet, nusquam est inuentum.
Praesul qui contrarium donat documentum,
Nullum necessarium his dat argumentum.
Thould Testament says multiplye and increase,
Which in the new Testament is not found to cease:
The prelate that bidding the contrary, seems to abhor it*
Of this his doing brings no lawful reason for it.
Dedit enim dominus maledictionem,
Viro qui non fecerit generationem.
Ergo tibi consulo per hanc rationem,
Gignere vt habeas benedictionem.
For by the mouth of God the man is cursed and band,
Which has not raised seed and children to the land.
Therefore I do advise you provide you may have isseu
Whereby it may be so the Lord our God may bless you.
Non ne de militibus milites procedunt?
Et reges a regibus, qui sibi succedunt?
Per locum a simili, omnes iura laedunt,
Clericos qui gignere, crimen esse credunt.
Do not men of war of men of war proceed?
And kings of kings, that do upon their throne succeed:
So the similitude houldes, they do offend in dotage,
That think it is a fault the clergy should have marriage.
Zacharias habuit prolem and vxorem,
Per virum quem genuit adeptus honorem.
Baptizauit etenim mundi Saluatorem:
Pereat qui teneat nouum hunc errorem.
Zachary had both a wife and a son,
By him whom he begat great dignitye he won:
Baptizing him on whom our souls health does depend.
Then cursed be he, that does this error new defend.
Paulus rapitur ad coelos superiores,
Vbi multas didicit res secretiores.
Ad nos tandem rediens, instruensque mores,
Suas (inquit) habeat quilibet vxores.
Up unto the third heaven S. Paul was translated,
Whereas he hard many misteryes debated:
And after coming down and teaching us trade of life,
Let every man quoth he enjoy his proper wife.
Propter haec and alia dogmata doctorum,
Reor esse melius, and magis decorum,
Quisque suam habeat, and non proximorum.
Ne incurrat odium vel iram eorum.
For these things and diverse doctors decrees,
With right and comeliness I think it more agrees:
Each should his own wife have, and not his neighbors borrow,
Lest thereby he procure wrath, malice, mischief and sorrow.
Proximorum foeminas, filias and neptes,
Violare nefas est, quare nil deceptes.
Vere tuam habeas, in qua delectes,
Diem vt sic vltimum tutius expectes.
It is a deadly sin therefore be not beguiled,
Thy neighbors wife, neice, or daughter, to be of the defiled:
Therefore take thee a wife in whom thou may delight thee,
And at the latter day more safely to acquit thee.
Ecce iam pro clericis multum allegaui,
Nec non pro prestyteris plura comprobaui,
Pater noster nunc pro me, quoniam peccaui,
Dicat quisque presbyter, cum sua suaui.
Thus for the clergy much I have alleged,
And also for our priests largelye have I pleaded:
Now all priests with your wives to God for me render,
A Pater noster for that I am an offendour.
FINIS.
118. Honorius the third.
HOnorius the third a Roman borne was made Pope Prusium, at what time the
Cardinals distressed for want of food, did there dispatch the election of him.
Who byinge to Rome as fast as he could, took order about the war in Asia, to
maintain it still, knowi^g how auaylable it was to their matters wroughte hear
at home in Christendom: forth with John Columna a Cardinal of Rome was
appointed to proceed as ambassador with yt army, which Innocentius had
provided for yt purpose: He crowned Frederick the second son of Constance
the Nonne Emperor against Otho the fourth, whom notwithstanding afterward for
vsinge his own right in the coasts of Sicil and Apulia the Pope
excommunicated. Yea this Honorius (says Marius) was so enflamed against this
Emperor Frederick yt he did trayterouslye maintain Thomas and Mathewe Earls
of Thuscia with other rebels that put themselves in armoure against the
Emperors majesty, whereby the Emperor could not punish them as they
deserved: which (says Vspergensis) caused him much to complain that the Sea
of Rome did ever maintain traitors and rebels, Rome the sturrer and nourisher
of rebels.
which presumed upon that refuge. Also he discharged his barons of their fealty
to their Lord: which mischief was yet for a while stayed by the means of
Hermannus, master of the flemings of Zeland. He confirmed the orders of
Dominican and Franciscan friars devised in the time of Innocentius. He
maintained the white friars and Augustinian friars, that they should vphould
transubstantiation against the Valdenses, who then began to defye the Church of
Rome in many matters: for the Dominicans forged that Pope Innocentius a little
before his death had a vision, wherein was revealed unto him that Lateran Church
should fall, unless their patron Dominicus should bolster it upon his
shoulders: whereof Mantuan deluded with such fansyes makes mention. Al. so he
writes of another dream for the Franciscan friars, of which though they
dreamed as necessary, yet I omit as vain and fond. In this Popes time
while these things were doing, Signs of Antichrist in the heavens.
there were seen in the air strau^g sights, testifying the horror of
Antichrist increasing in his members as shall appear by the Popes following.

While the Christian estates were turmoyled abroad fighting for Jerusalem, the
Pope in pomp and ease at home, was at leisure to build sondrye sumptuous
Palaces and gorgeous Temples, dedicating them to diverse Saints. He published
Epistles decretall: and decreed that unlearned parsons should not be made
priests. He commanded that when the singinge cake was heaued and lifted up,
Worshipping of the host at mass.
the people should fall down on their knees: and that it should be carried in
comlye order to the sick, with a burning Taper before it. He granted
Archbishops power to give pardons, faculties, Nonresidenties and pluralities
licenced by the Pope.
dispensations, dualities, and pluralities wtin their diocese. Anno 1223 one
Adam Cathane^sis a bishop in Scotland (as Boethius writes) was burned of his
own neighbors in his own kitchen, because he had excommunicated certain of
them for with holding their tithes: the Pope knowing of this murder never
ceased, till to revenge the same four hundred of these men were hanged, and
their children gelded by king Alexander: A sufficient revenge for the death of
one man. Furthermore this Pope warred upon the Emperor in Apulia: and
condemned the Earl of Tholos for an heretic, The Popes rigor on the dead.
geuinge his lands to the French king, and finallye would not suffer his
body to be buried like a Christian. At length the Pope died Anno 1227. of whom
Mattheus Parisius in the 8. book of his Chronicle writes thus. The Popes
pillage in England.
Pope Honorius sent his Legate Otho to require to have Prebendes given unto him
through all England: For (says the Pope) the natural children must assist
their mother in pouertye. Therefore he required ij. prebends of every
Cathedral Church, one of the bishops stipende, and the other from the charter.
And so he ^raued diverse porcio^s out of the religious houses. At this time the
Pope was sick of the spiritual dropsye, so that by his Legate he drancke up the
treasures of the clergy, and cloystermongers, and used strange tyranny
among them: for Hugh Wells bishop of Lincoln to recover his bishopric
paid an hundred marks to the Popes Legate, and a thousand marks to the Pope.
At this time it rayned blood for the space of three days in Rome: whereupon
one wrote these two Verses.

O pater Honori, multorum nate dolori,
Est tibi dedecori viuere? vade mori.
O Pope Honorius borne thou werst,
to mischief many men:
Thou live with shame, conuaie with speed
thy boones to deadly den.
119. Gregory the ninth.
Gregory the ninth borne in Campania, was nephew to Innocentius the third. He
maintained the quarrel of his predecessor Honorius, against the Emperor. This
Gregory (as Marius writes) was more maliciouslye disposed toward ye said
Frederick: for he accused him because he would not fulfill that vain promise,
to the needelesse sheddinge of Christian blood, which he made to Honorius for
the unprofitable recoueringe of Jerusalem. And therefore this Gregory did
excommunicate him, before the Emperor could be heard to speak, or were
convicted by reason: neither would he suffer the Emperors Ambassadors to
come to his presence, nor hear them in the council which came to allege
good and reasonable excuses in ye Emperors behalf, as his own sickness at
his settinge forward caused him to stay, besides the death of the Lautgraue.
Therefore (says Vspergensis) this Pope like a proud man, began in his first
year to exco^municat and curse the Emperor for certain foolish and false
causes, neglectinge all order of judgment, as the Emperor shows in
excusinge himself in his epistle to the Princes of Almanye: openinge to them
(because the Pope refused to hear it) his innocencye and upright dealing. And
therefore certain noblemen in Rome, namely of the house called Frangentes
panem, when the Pope did the second time excommunicate Frederick, they caused
the Pope to be driven out of the City with foul shame, so that he ran
away byding at Peruse all that year, and the year following. Yet no means
could assuage his furye: but he provoked John king of Jerusalem, and the
foresaid Earls of Thuscia rebels to the Emperor, and many other Princes to
trouble him. The Emperor appointed a day of assembly for diverse Christian
Princes at Rauenna, and the Princes were making speed thither to obey him,
but by the Popes commandment they went back again: and certain soldiers
wearing ye Cross by the Emperors appointment for the voyage to Jerusalem,
were robbed and spoiled of all their provision. The Emperor seeing this sought
to appease the Popes furye, and to get his goodwil prepared his journey
according to his promise to Jerusalem: he took ship and sailed into Cyprus,
and afterward to Acon, and striued much against the Sultan for the Christian
faith, with great pain and travel. In the mean time ye Pope (seeing the
Emperors absence seruinge his turn) gat Apulia to be under his obeisance: and
forbad that the soldiers wearing crosses should pass over to assist the
Emperor, but he drove them out of Apulia, and Lombardye, shewinge himself a
wicked and mischievous man by many other means, in slaying those Germaynes
that returned from the Emperor, most cruellye. Thus while the good Emperor
defended the flock of Christ with ye sword abroad, the Pope devoured and
spoiled them at home. After the Emperor had won from the Solda^, Jerusalem,
Nazereth, and Ioppa, he took a truce with him for ten years, whereof he
certifyed the Pope by his letters, looking that the Pope would have showed
himself joyful thereof, and all Christians likewise: But the Pope despysing
and rejecting the letters, commanded the messengers that brought them to be
put to death, least they should make report of the Emperors noble success.
Also he spread this rumor that the Emperor was dead, to this end, to make
such Cities in Apulia to shrincke for fear, as had with stood to submit
themselves to him. And both to stop the Emperors return, and to obtain
Apulia at his pleasure, he wrote to the Sultan desyring him not to yield the
Holy land to the Emperor, as he was about to do. But the Emperor finishing
his matters with the Sultan, returned into Italye, whereupon the slaughter of
his men done by the Pope as they returned stayed: and within a while he drove
the Popes power out of Apulia, and by the help of God recovered all his own
from him. Hereupon the Pope did excommunicate him, and curse him a new, and
conspired with the Lombards and Thuscans to rebel against him, because he had
made a league with the Sultan. But in the end many Princes seekinge to set
them at unity, The price of absolution at the Popes hands.
the Emperor had absolution of the Pope, paying to him for it, ere (as Platina
says) he could obtain it, an hundred thousand ounces of gould. For (says
Vspergensis) notwithstanding all these injuries, yet so often as the Pope did
excommunicate him, he craved and sued for the benefit of absolution humblye,
with all obedience, devotion and yelding of justice. Soon after the Emperor
prepared to go into Germanye, to redress certain disorders done by his
eldest son Henry: the Pope hearing thereof wrote to the estates of Germanye,
commaundinge that they should make none of the Emperors family king of the
Romans, because the king of the Romans is heir apparent to the Empire.
Frederick understanding this treachery, and that the Pope had conspired a
fresh with many Princes of Italy against him, did forthwith invade Italy,
suppressed the rebellious Lombards, wanne diverse towns in Vmbria and Hetruria,
subdued to the Empire Lomberdie, Viterbie, Peruse, Fauentia, Cremona, Vicentia
and Patauy, all which had conspired with the Pope. The Pope saying this, cursed
him again. The Emperor hearing of it, because the Popes covetousness,
ambition, tyranny and pride grew so great, that it was no longer to be
suffered, thought good to reveal the same to all Christians, to reclayme them
from their error and false Religion: and therefore he lying in Patauy,
commanded a certain learned man well studied in the Scriptures to preach
before him, concerning the Popes curse, and of the Church of Rome. After the
preacher had disclosed all the abuses of the Pope and his Church, the Emperor
moved thereby wrote these 2. Uerses to the Pope.

Roma diu titubans, longis erroribus acta,
Corruet, and mundi desinet esse caput.
Rome that has ruled long, and has
in error far been led.
Shall come to naught, and cease to be
on earth the supreme hedde.
The Popes aunsvveare to the Emperor.
Niteris incassum nauem submergere Petri,
Fluctuat, at nunquam mergitur illa ratis.
To drown S. Peter's ship ye spend
your labor all in vain,
It tottreth often, but sinks not so
but it may floate again.
The Emperors replye.
Fata volunt, stellaeque docent, auiumque volatus,
Quod Fredericus ego maleus orbis ero*
It Is destinye, the stars of heaven,
and flight of fowls do show,
I Frederick shall be the club,
to strike the deadlye blow.
The Popes aunsvveare.
Fata volunt, Scriptura docet, peccata loquuntur,
Quod tibi vita breuis paena perennis erit.
It Is destenye the Scripture shows
and thy offenses tell:
Thy life is short, thy pain shall last
for evermore in hell.
Thus was the Emperor now the third time excommunicated by the Pope, and
pronounced not Emperor: but at this time there were many Cardinals yt
disalowed the Popes doing, so that the Emperor had many friends in Italy,
because he still sued and sought for the Popes favor, and could not have it,
and now therefore he set all at defiance in manner before showed. Of this
Gregory ( Mattheus Parisius says further) calling him blood sucker and
covetous Pope, that he held a council at Rome to depose the Emperor, who had
married Isabel daughter to king John of England: and ere the council began, he
caused ye Apostles heads to be borne about the City in a solemn procession,
that the sight thereof might astonishe men's minds, and draw their hearts
from the Emperor. Also he gave free pardon to every one that would fight
against him. The Emperor understanding it, stopped all passages both by Sea
and land, and taking many Cardinals and other prelates as they were sailing
away, he put them in prison: he drowned ii. Cardinals in the Sea, and of the
rest some bishops, abbots and chaplins, and among them the Popes brother for
their notorious and heinous treasons were hanged. The first excommunication yt
was sent out against this Emperor arose of this ground: because the emperor
would not at the Popes commandment danger himself and many Christians with
him, to go out to fight for the holy land. For ye Pope as it appeared by his
acts, coueted to encroch the kingdom of both Sicils, Apulia, and other
lands, so that he sought means how to destroy the Emperor being inheritour
thereof, which he might see come to pass by the chance of the war: or else
while the Emperor should there have been busye against the infidels, he in
the mean time as chief prelate (having Christendom committed to his credit)
might the more easily disposses ye Emperor. Furthermore this Gregory was the
cause of sedicion in Rome for banishing one Hannibal out of ye Senate, because
he sued to recover the aunciente Roman libertyes. Also he provoked the
Polonia^s to destroy the Prutenians being his foes. He made that cursed
division in Italy, which to the great confusion of Christian blood, lasts to
this day between the Guelphes and Gibelines: for these being two of the most
noble and famous houses in Italye, whereof the one name whollye (that is the
Gibelines) took part with the Emperor, and the Guelphe with the Pope, and this
quarrel has and does last to this day, between all of the one name against all
of the other with continual revenge, as oportunitye serves from time to time.
Among diverse other his superstitious deeds these were some, he canonized S.
Dominick, S, Frau^cis, S. Anthony of Padua and others, thereby to advance the
credit of the begging friars, and of their holiness. He decreed that the
white friars should possess nothing but male Asses, and such food as coms of
certain birds and beasts as eggs and milk, and all other things they
should beg from door to door, as Paleonydorus says. He granted the Jews
to be enfranchised for money in spite of all Christian Princes. He forbad any
man to have above one benefice. He commanded out of England the fifth part,
and out of low Germany the twenteth part of all Church revenues. He appointed
that to Aue Maria should be song Salve regina, and the sacringe bell to be
ronge then and at elevation time. He decreed that no lay man should preach, and
that no custom should take place, which leads to ^inne. And finallye he dyed
for thought because the Emperors power prevailed so mightily against him An.
1241. In his time Tiber in Rome braste out so hye, that many were destroyed by
it, after which ensued such a pestilence, that (says Platina) the tenth parson
was scant left alive: In his time also a certain hill in Burgundy cleaued in
twain, and swallowed up an houge multitude of people, and a little before the
Pope dyed, was such an Eclipse of the Sun as has not been seen before.

Of the Oracle of Cyrill at Mass.
IN the time of this Gregory Anno 1234. Cyrillus a Grecian the third
president general of ye white friars dyed by report. They say that this man
(according as Moses and John the Evangelist did) received Anno domini 1192. a
revelation from heaven written in Tables of silver with Gods own finger in
Greek, concerning the estate of the Church to come: and with this new
delusion certain caytifes went about to put away and whollye to destroy the
Revelation of S John in that time of deep darkness. Because at yt time in
Italy, Germanye, England and France, many (through the doctrine of the
VValde^ses and ye preachers of Frederick the emperor, prouinge it out of the
Revelation of John) believed that Rome was Babylon yt great strompet, and yt
the Pope was Antichrist himself: which opinion the uncle of Petrus Veronensis
held, as his Lege^d and Fasciculus temporu^ testifye. To such shifts was ye
totteringe estate of ye Pope then driven as to abrogate the old Scripture and
to forge new: for then Princes began to pluck from ye Church their
temporalities, which maintained their excessive pride and pomp: Also they
began to defye their transubstantiacion in the mass, and to work diverse
things that pinched the bellyes of the clergy, and made them keep leaner
kitchins. In most things this revelation of Cyrill, is clean contrary to
the Revelation of John: many monks and friars have written great co^mentaryes
and fantastical interpretacions upon it, as Ioachimus Abbas, Guilihelmus
Cisterciensis, and John de rupe scissa. But who so ever preaches any other
Gospel etc, let him be accursed. Gallathians. 1.

120. Celestine the fourth.
CElestine the fourth borne of the house of Castilians, being Gregory: who
likewise purposed to pursue the quarrel against Frederick, but that he was
disappointed by a cup of poison, whereof it is reported he dyed the xviii.
day of his reign. One Thomas Egleston in his book of the entrance of ye
Minorits into England, writes of an Englishma^ called Robert Somerton
Cardinal of Rome, who likewise was poisoned hard before the election of this
Celestine least he should have succeeded Gregory: of the same Robert Somerton
and his death, writes Mattheus Parisius commending him as a man who for the
love he had of all was worthy to be Pope. The same Mattheus writes of the
behavior of Legates at the same time saying, two of the Popes messe^gers
remained in England to gather up his money, whose extorsion was so odious and
shameful, that it is better (says he) to let it pass not to offend men's
ears, then to defyle the air with the filthye report thereof. This Celestine
used this saying commonly: It is harder to keep moderation in prosperity,
then in aduersitye. After his death the Popedom was void xxi. weeks, till
the Emperor at the request of Baldwine Emperor of Constantinople, and Raimond
Earl of Tholos, delivered those Cardinals which he had in captiuitye.

FINIS.
THE SIXTE BOOK and according to master Baales order the fourth division of
the third sort of Popes unto Julius the second, contayninge 260. years which
he calls the reign of the Locusts under Abadon the destroyer, according to
the 9. Chapter of the Apocalips: For that in this time the Locusts which he
enterpreteth the new found orders of begging friars, invented and ratifyed by
the four last Popes, devour, spoil, waste and destroy all with their
sophistical and cauilling doctrine: As did Thomas Aquinas, Ioannes Scotus,
Occam, Gerardus Bonomensis, Aegidius Romanus, Magister Sententiaru^, with
other like subtle schoolmen and Sorbonistes, who with their gloses,
allegories and distinctions, corrupted the true sense of the Scripture, and in
manner took it clean away.
121 Innocentius the fourth.
Innocent the fourth borne in Genua, whose name before was Cynebaldus of the
house of Flisci and the countyes of Lauauy: who being in time paste the
Emperors especial freinde, became forth with his deadlye enemy, and did
more annoye the noble Prince then any other before had done. Marius reports
thus of him, this Pope (says he) for hate he bare to Frederick, did forth with
summon a council at Lions whither he cited Frederick, purposinge himself to
have preached there: but the Ambassador of Frederick desired he might have a
reasonable day granted him that he might conuenientlye come to Lions, which
the Pope did not only deny to grant, but forthwith enflamed with wrath and
rage did curse the emperor, deprive him of his estate Emperial, release al his
Princes of their allegiance and faith to him, and does move them to choose
another to be Emperor. He charged ye godly Emperor with diverse false matters,
as periurye, sacrilege, emprisoninge certain of the clergy and such like,
whereof though the Emperor had by writing sent to the Princes very honorably
purged himself: yet this malicious man continued so importunate with the Princes
with great promises, that they choose the Landsgraue of Thuringe: and rewarded
all men with crosses and pardons, given by Proclamation against the Emperor as
again a Turk or infidel. Furthermore he commanded all bishops and
archbishops to publish every where, how he had cursed, excommunicated, and
deprived the Emperor: which was boldly done in England, France, and
Denmark, but the bishops of Germany fearing the Emperors displeasure,
besoughte the Pope it might not be done. Which the Emperor hearing did
valiantlye set himself against the Pope and all his tyrannous rebels, til he
could not escape the Popes snares in Apulia. For the addition to Vspergensis
says: After the Pope had deprived and excommunicated both Frederick and his
son Co^radus, Frederick did so shake and worrye the Pope and the Church of
Rome, that some marked with crosses set themselves in battle against him, when
he came to batter down the gates and walls of Rome, where he encountered with
a mighty army of these crossed fellows. But over coming them and taking
them prisoners, some of them he hewed a fonder with four square wounds in form
of a Cross, of some he cleft their sculs a cross in 4. parts, some he marked
on the forhed with a cross cut: and as for the clergy he caused their shaued
crowns to be pared a cross. When the said Henry Landsgraue of Thuringe was
chosen king of the Romans, and Frederick deposed by this fourth
excommunication, then the bishop of Strosborough like a peaceable prelate of
yt time, to gratifye the Pope took part with the Landsgraue, and assisted him
with such power and strength as he could, both against the father and Conradus
the son: for he assaulted and wan diverse towns, some he sacked and razed to
the ground, some he burnt with fire, which towns and Cities the emperor had
recovered to the Empire in Alsatia. On the other side Conradus ye son of
Frederick gathered an army against Henry, but was easily overthrown and many
of his army being slain, diverse of his nobilitye were taken prisoners. But
soon after this Henry being thus foysted into the Empire by the clergy, grew
into contempt with them that liked not his election, whereupon he was in
mockadge termed King of clerks and Prince of priests: but the Pope did
straightly charge by his Legates all the Almaine Princes to obey Henry as their
sovereign, and to defye Frederick and his son. In the mean time this Henry
dyed, and yet the Pope ceased not but sent a Legate into Germanye, one Peter
Caputius a Cardinal, who summoninge the Princes at Collen, caused them to
elect one William Earl of Holland, a ready man to maintain any quarrel by
the sword. In the end the Emperor being in Apulia, one hired by the Pope
gave him poison by means whereof he was daungerouslye sick, but seemed to
recover it: but was smothered to death with a pillowe by Manfredus his bastard
son, who as some think was allured by bryberye and fair promises of the
Pope to do it. The truth hereof is written in six books of Epistles, written
by Peter of the Uine.

Anno 1250. Frederick dyed, and as some write in his last will and testamente
he gave a sum of money for satisfaction to the Church of Rome, and
bequeathed his estate and the order of all things to his son Conradus. This
Will was brought to the Pope to be approved, but ye Pope did whollye disanull
and frustrate the Will, saying that the Prince whom he had deposed, could make
no Will and so it was void. Within a while after a young Prince to whom the
Emperor by his son King Henry was grau^dfather was murdered, but by who^
no man could tell.

About this time before ye death of Frederick, there were certain preachers in
Sweueland who stoutlye and openly preached against the Pope and his Cardinals,
and justified the doing of Frederick and his son Conradus, saying bouldly
that the Pope, his bishops and Cardinals, had no auctoritye, because they were
al stained with that one blot of simony, and yt their power depended not upon
Christ: and that a priest committing deadly sin, could neither bind nor
loose, nor consecrate: that no man in the world might forbid a Christian to
execute divine functions, and that they should be heard and celebrated without
any difference. And in the end of their Sermons this pardon (quoth they) which
we do pronounce unto you, we do not declare it to you as forged by the Pope
and his prelates, but procedinge from Almightye God. These preachers were
maintained by Conradus, and therefore he incurred almost danger of his life.

In the former council held at Lions it was decreed that the Cardinals should
ride on their trapped Gennets through the streates, and wear red hattes and
crimsen roabes: to signifye (says Parisius) that they are ready to spend
their blood for the Catholic faith and the safetye of the people: but as (
Platina says) for the honor of their estate. Also in that council
Innocentius decreed among many matters that the Pope might depose the
Emperor. He did greatly favor the order of begging friars, and bestowed on
them many privileges and benefittes. He preferred the Dominicans to dignityes
Ecclesiastical: and aduau^ced the Francisca^s to be the Popes confessors: He
adopted the White friars and Augustine friars to be his sons: where as they
lived before in deserts he brought them into Cities, teachinge them to beg
their bread with idleness. By the help of the Dominicans he reformed the rule of
the Whitefryers, mitigated it, and finallye with his blessinge confirmed it
that (as the said rule shows) they should hope to be saved not only by
Christ: He granted these and the begging friars license to preach, to dispute,
and to shriue people. Also he exempted them from all power and jurisdiction of
kings and bishops: whereupon they crammed the world full, and chaoked it with
their gloses upon Sentences, decretals, cannons, which their commentaries upon
Aristotle, their Sophisms, Repertories, Su^maries, Tables, Trinies, Quatrinies,
Conclusions, Questions, Distinctions, Quidities, Quodlibets, Miracles of the
dead, Legendaryes, Saints lives, Martyrdoms, Uisions, Dreams, Reuelatio^s,
Exorsisms, Concordances, Discorda^ces, Marials, perspectiues, Aphorisms, with
a thousand vain and combrous pamphlets, full of gross and deceitful
heresies: and then nothing was counted deuinitye nor law, but their fansyes
and canons. And in these days the world was fallen into such gross
blindness, ignorance, and barbarousnesse, that not only knowledge in
divinity, but also other learning was almost decayed, the knowledge of the
tongues as Greek and Hebrew buried in ignorance, and though some rubbishe of
the latin tongue were left, yet it was rustye, corrupt, and broken stuff, as
appears yet by their wrytings, yt the like barbarousnesse is not in any
tongue. But to return to Pope Innocent: he canonized diverse, making them
saints that for his aduauncemente had played the traitors and rebels against
their own Princes, as one Edmond Archbishop of Canterbury, and other of
sondrye places.

Till the time of this Innocentius the 4. (says Bibliander) it was not an
article of faith, nor a law of the Church that men should worship the bread
and the wine in ye Sacrament: therefore (says he) ye Pope as a creator brought
forth a new God Mauzis by transubstantiation. This Pope offered to sell to king
Henry the third of England, ye kingdom of both Sicils to the use of his son
Prince Edmond, and yet Conradus king thereof was lyuinge. He vexed and polled
the Churches of England with miserable exactions: for money he maintained and
licensed any wickedness among the clergy, suffering worser matters in his
bastards whereof he had diverse, especially one called William. One Robert
Capito bishop of Lincoln, had a great controuersye with this Pope, for he
detested and defied both in preachinge and wrytinge, the Popes covetousness,
pride and tyranny. He would not admit one of ye Popes bastardes because he was
unlearned and but a boy of years, to a canonship of Lincoln, but rebuked ye
Pope for it in a letter, and withstoode the Popes pollinge and ^obbinge the
Realm: and therefore the Pope receyuinge the sharp letter from this Robert
Grosted, for anger rayled not only on the bishop, but also brast into these
arrogante words against his Prince king Henry the third, saying (as Mattheus
Parisius testifyeth): Is not ye king of England our vassel, our slave, and our
page, who may at our pleasure to hamper him, put him in prison, and to utter
shame? And finallye because he could not tell how otherwise to ease his
rank stomach against the bishop he excommunicated him: but he constantlye
defied and despised his excommunication even to the death. He defended in
disputation that ye Pope could do nothing against justice and truth, and that
he was worse then Lucifer and Antichrist: at the length being cited to appear
in ye court, and condemned by the Pope wrongfullye, he appealed to the
judgment of Christ. This good bishop after he had detected much of the Popes
treachery, before his death uttered these two Uerses applying them against the
Pope.

Eius luxuriae meretrix non sufficit omnis,
Eius auariciae totus non sufficit orbis.
One concubine could not suffice
his burning lust to quench,
Nor yet his honger after gold,
one world serude not to stenche.
Also this bishop by diligent search tried it that this Pope and his clerks
had in revenues out of England above iii. score and ten thousand marks,
where as the revenues of the Crown came not to 30. thousand. Cestrensis in
his seventh book writes, that when this bishop of Lincoln dyed, a voice was
heard in ye Popes court saying Veni miser in iudiciu^ dei, that is Come thou
wretch to be judged of God. And that the Pope was found dead in his bed the
next day, and a blewe stroke in his body as if he had been beaten with a
staff. This was done Anno 1253. he being at Naples and loking soon after to
have enjoyed the whole kingdom of Sicill, where he lies buried. Thaddition to
Vspergensis shows, that the year before, as the Pope was going from Lio^s to
Millen, these strange tokens happened: certain bloody clouds were seen in
the air, and streams of blood gusshed out of bread as out of wounded
bodies. After his death the seat was void two years.

124 Alexander the fourth.
ALexander the fourth borne in Campania, being Cardinal of Hostia succeeded
Innocent. He persecuted Ecelinus of Runcan, and Manfred king of Sicill, because
they had been enemies to the former Popes: thus he began his reign. And
first he craftelye admonished them not to stand against the dignitye of the
Church in any point, and before he gave them this charge, he had provided his
army in a readiness meaning to course them if they should seek to prevent him
and his Cardinals of the kingdom of Sicill: yet these Princes very
couragiouslye with an oast of Saracens and other, fearinge not the Popes
threats, did set upon his army at unawares even in a trench ere they wist,
and partly slew them, partly took them prisoners. In the mean while Pope
Alexander goinge to Anagnia excommunicated Manfred, and sent a Cardinal called
Octauian to Naples, to make the Neapolitans to stand faithful to him against
Manfred, promysing speedely to bring aid to all Campania and to the
Neapolitans: but Manfred not pacifyed with troubling Naples did also move
factions in Hetruria, but chiefly in Florence, where he brought in the
Guelphis again, who ever were at deadly food with the Gibelines. Thus was al
Italy in a miserable uproar, torn in sonder with cruel and saluage war. But
Manfred having poisoned Conrad king of Sicill, was proclaimed king at Panorme,
and with an army of hired soldiers, he overthrew the Popes Legate with great
slaughter. This Pope sent one Rustand Legate into England Anno 1255. to gather
up the tenthes in England, Scotland, and Ireland, to war against Manfred.
And says Mattheus Parisius) many mischiefs detestable, issued from ye
burning fountain of Rome in those days, to the destruction of many: for
after the begginge friars had preached the power of ye Cross, he required
infinite sommes of money, the exaction of the Pope was such (says he) that
the like has not been heard. Whereupon Fulck bishop of London said with great
grief: Ere I give my consent to oppress the Church with such iniurye,
servitude and bondage, surely I will first loose my head: for although that
Court has often in times past pinched even to the bone the faithful flock
of Christ, yet it never wounded in such deadlye sort all, and every one of
Christ's servant, as it did this year and the year following etc. The money
ye was gathered for the holy land was transposed into Apulia against
Christians, and (says Mattheus) unmeet me^ are made governors of noble
Churches, the prelates are sold as oxen and asses, this is the extreme point
of servitude etc. About this time the said Rustand the Popes Legate being
Prebe^dary of Paul's Church in London dyed beyond the sea, king Henry the third
hearing thereof gave the same prebend to one John Crakehale his chaplein, but
after the said Crakehale had full possession thereof, came one John Grass
from Rome, with the Popes embulled letter to challenge the said living:
Hereupon the matter being in controuersye, it was brought before Boniface
bishop of Canterbury, who finding that the Popes gift was dated before the
kings, dispossessed the Englishman and invested the Popes man, which was taken
so in despite by certain repyning to see the Pope and his Italian priests in
this and all such cases to bear more sway then ye king, and to reap all
commodyties from the king and his subjects, that the said Italia^ and a
companion of his were murdered in a thronge, by whom no man knew.

Rustand in a convocation at London, alleged that all Churches were ye Popes,
to whom one Leonard an Englishman answered modestly: yea sir in tuition, not
in fruition, to defend not to expende. Seuell bishop of York by ye example of
the former bishop of Lincoln, did likewise wtstande this Pope Alexander, and
desired him by letter to leave of his wonted polling, and according to Peter's
example to feed the sheep, not to flece them, not to flea them, not vnbowel
them, neither as a wolf devour them. Further it follows in the said
Mattheus, that the Pope sent yet other Legates into England, namelye Arlot and
Mansuet minorite friars, who had power to pardon for money either liars,
forswearerers, vowbreakers, adulterers, and Sodomits, traitors, poysoners,
murderers, and all such: Whereupon a certain woman an anchoresse in S.
Albons abbey had this terrible visiion, she heard an old man of grave
countenance cry three times VVo, woe, to all that dwell on the earth, and then
faded away again.

Anno 1258. Richard Earl of Cornwall son to king John of England was chose^
king of Almany for his great treasure, and the Pope procured that he was chosen
Emperor, but he did that closely, because he had likewise for the same matter,
taken a bribe of Alphonsus king of Spain: Whereupon a certain Poet made this
Verse.

Nummus ait pro me, nubet Comubia Rome,
Thus money says for love of me,
Cornewal with Rome shall lincked be.
Beside these shifts made for money, this Pope Alexander used another
notorious knacke, he abusing and deluding the simplicitye of the king of
England, made him believe that he would make his son Edmond king of Apulia,
if he would sustain the charges thereof to maintain the wars appertayning
to it: whereupon the king caused his son forthwith to be proclaimed king of
Apulia, and sent to the Pope all the treasure and riches that he could make in
his Realm. And thus was the king and his son deluded, and the Realm
wonderfullye impouerished by the Popes craft. It were to long to discover all
the superstitious and wicked devises of this Pope, who at length going to
Viterbium Anno 1262. to make peace between the Genewaies and Venetians
according to his own fansye, and because he could not have his will therein,
he dyed there for anger.

125. Urban the fourth.
Urban the fourth borne in France, and as some say Pantaleon being patriarch
of Jerusalem. As soon as he was Pope by and by he commanded soldiers out of
France to subdue Manfred the ennemy of the Church: and for the furtherance
thereof he requested Jews king of France to send his brother Charles and the
Earl of Anteganor with an oast into Italye, and made him king of both Sicils.
After many conflictes ye said Charles overcame and slew Manfred at Beneuent,
and received of ye Pope against all law and right the kingdom of Sicill with
the dukedom of Calabrie and Apulia, whereupon arose many great slaughters.
While this Pope was from Rome at Pruse, ye Romans coveting their old
libertyes made a new kind of officers, calling them Branderesies, who had
power of life and death in their hands: they chose one Bra^caleo a private
parso^ of Bononia to be Senator, who^ banished late before they restored. But
touching Urban it was not much more then this that he did, sauinge that he
ordained an holy day, namelye Corpus Christi day, the fifte day after
Trinitye sunday, upon this occasion as some (and most likely) do write, namelye
Arnold Bostro, and Petrus Praemonstratensis. Anno 1264. (as they say) a
certain woman called Eve in a Religious house in Leodia, with whom the Pope in
time past had been well acquainted, had a revelation which she signified by
writing to the Pope, beseeching him that the said day might be kept holy in
the honor of the Sacrament of the altar, to whom the Pope according to her
desire, returned his aunsweare with this Bull to confirm the holy day,

The Bull of Pope Urban to Eve the Anchoresse for the establishing of the holy
day called Corpus Christi day.
BIshop Urban servant to the servants of God, sends greeting and
apostolical bleshing to Eve our beloved daughter in Christ. We know O
daughter, that thy soul has longed with great desire, that a solemn feast
day might be appointed for the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, in Gods Church
to be celebrate of all faithful Christians for ever. And therefore for thy joy
we signify unto thee, that we have thought it good for the establishing of the
catholic faith, that beside the dailye remembrance which the Church makes
of so wonderful a Sacrament, there should be more special and solemn record,
appointing a certain day for it, namelye the fifte day after Whitsontyde
next ensuinge, that on the said day the faithful flock do gather together to
the Churches deuoutlye and effectuallye, and let that day be to all Christians
joyful with new holiness, and holy with much joy, as is more set out in our
apostolical letters, sent for this cause through the world. And know ye that
we have caused this feast day to be solemnized with all our brethren
Cardinals, bishops and archbishops, and other prelates then being at Rome, to
give example of celebratinge the same to all that shall see or understand the
same. Therefore let thy soul magnifye the Lord, and thy spirit rejoice in God
thy savior, for thine eyes have seen his salvation, which we have prepared
before the face of al people. Moreover rejoice because almighty God has given
the thy hearts desire, and the fulness of the heavenly grace has not
disapointed the of the will of thy Iippes etc.


This Vrhan sat more then three years between the Guelphes and Gibelines,
and provoked their quarrels to be tried by the edge of the sword, to the
confusion of many through Italye. He being on a time vpbrayed that he was of
base lineage, aunsweared that no man was noble by birth, but that to be made
noble by virtue is true nobility: finallye being at Pruse because in great
attemptes he had not his desired success, he dyed for grief. Masseus says
that a blazing star appeared three nights before the death of this Pope, and
ceased the same night that he dyed.

126 Clemens the fourth.
CLemens ye fourth called before Gui Fulcodius borne in Narbonie, ere he came
to be Pope was a married man, and had 3. children by his wife, a son and two
daughters. He (as his predecessor began) continued in sheddinge of blood: he
sent for Charles Earl of Angeow to bring an army into Italye where he slew
Manfred, and was made king of Sicill and Jerusalem, but upon this condition
that he should pay yearelye to the Pope fortye thousand Crowns. This
bargain being made between them, great slaughter and bloodshed was committed
in diverse places, for the said Pope betrayed Conradinus son to Conradus king
of Sicill, and inheritour of the kingdoms to ye former Charles, so that as he
passed through the fields of Viterbie with an oast of Germaynes, where his
abode was at that time, the Pope by report said: that the said Conradinus was
as a lamb brought to the slaughter, showing thereby that he was of council to
the treason. Afterward when he fought with Charles about Naples, and at the
first conflict had sufficient victory, yet then the treason revealing it
self, Conradinus and Frederick duke of Austria were taken: and being
myserablye used in their captiuitye mocked and flouted, were in the end
beheaded by the Popes commandment, because Conradinus claymed the kingdom
which his auncetours possessed. Thus the kingdom of Naples came into the hand
of the Frenchmen, and ye dukedom of Sweuia decayed and came to naught by ye
wickedness of ye Pope. In the time of this Clemens one Octobonus a Legate of his
coming into England, enrolled to perpetual memory the valuation of all
Churches in the Realm so narrowly as he could possiblye gather the certaintye.
Clemens dyed at Viterbium Anno 1270. and was buried among the Dominickes, and
the seat was void two years.

127. Gregory the tenth.
Gregory the tenth borne in Placentia in Lombardye, of Millen, was first
called Theobaldus. He being an archdeaco^, after the Cardinals discention
(which had lasted almost two years) was ended, was chosen Pope: of whose
election John Cardinal of Portua wrote these Verses.

Papatus munus tulit archidiaconus vnus,
Quem patrem patrum fecit discordia fratrum,
One archdeacon against his hope,
by chance obtained to be Pope,
The iarringe of brethren caused the rather,
that he was created of them the father.
This Pope among other things made peace between the Genewaies and Venetians:
He excommunicated the Florentines for inuadinge such towns as belonged to the
Popeship. Afterward he held a counsel at Lions in France to the which came
Michael Palaeologus Emperor of Greece, to reason of the opinions of the Church
of Rome, for xii. of his auncetours had in times past conferred with them, and
ever departed dissentinge from them. In this council was decreed that the Pope
being dead, the Cardinals should be shut up in a certain closet without meat
or drink, till with one consent they should agree upon choice of another.
He made many decrees for the helping of the Holy land, and the maintayninge of
Religious me^. Many noble and great parsonages both kings and Earls, made
themselves apparel with the Cross on it, to go the voyage to Jerusalem, to
whom the Pope very craftily, to further their purpose promised to come visit
them there. He advanced diverse of the begging friars to great Ecclesiastical
dignityes, as to bishoprics, archbishoprickes and Cardinalships. After the
Empire had been void a long time, at ye length he made Rodolph Earl of
Hamboroughe Emperor, because he should maintain civil discention: and after
yt Alphonsus king of Castile had bestowed houge sums of money in hope to be
Emperor, (especially the duke of Cornwall being dead) ye Pope appeased him
with words enoughe, but no recompense in money toward his charges. This
Rodolph after he was chosen was charged by the electours that he should go to
Rome within a year to receive the Crown of the Pope, yet he never did it,
excusing himself with pretense of private affairs: and used to say
oftentimes among his friends, that the footinge of the Emperors goinge into
Italye seemed glorious and triu^phant: but in their return out of Italye
wretched, miserable, and full of sorrow. Alluding to the fable of the Fox, who
being sent for to come to visit the sick Lion, made aunsweare that he
perceived ye footesteps of many beasts goinge into the Lions den, but he
could find few or none coming from it. But Rodolph sent his vicegerent into
Italye whom the Cities for the most part received: but the Pope returning to
Rome and iourneying hard by the Florentines, would not yet absolve them of
their excommunication which had lasted almost 3. years. At length he came to
Aretium Anno 1275. and dyed in his journey in the fifth year of his Popeship
and is buried there, and never came to Rome nor saw it.

128. Innocentius the fifte.
INnocentius the fifth borne in Burgundy a dominican in profession, was cho^en
by the Cardinals at Aretiu^: who being chosen Pope and crowned in S. Peter's
Church, went about to establish peace in Italye. Therefore he sent great
Ambassadors, who should compel the He^rurians (entendinge to destroy the
Pisans) to take peace: also the Venetians and Genewaies being at deadly
enmitye, to fall to unity upon peril of his curse. Also he procured ye
Ambassadors of Charles king of Sicill to be present at ye peace making, the
better to countenance his doings: the Hetrurians obeyed, and especially the
Florentines, and therefore the Pope did absolve them from the excommuni^atio^
of Gregory: But the Genewaies and Venetians continued notwithstanding the
slaughter of each other, whom yet Innocentius had brought to his purpose if he
had lived, he purposed it so earnestly. He dyed the same year that Gregory
dyed, in the second day after he had reigned vi. months. This Pope (says
Platina) did not a little offend seculer priests, because at Viterbium he did
determine the dominica^s should enjoy the tomb of Clemens the fourth, for
which they and the secular priests had long been at sharp debate.

129. Hadrian the fifte.
HAdrian the fifte a Genewaie borne before called Othobonus, Lateran porche:
this man was nephewe to Innocentius the fourth, and made Cardinal of S.
Hadrian by him, and sent into England as Legate to gather up the Popes money.
But while he went about to appease strife between the king and his barons,
thereby to work his own matters more quietly, he was put into prison by the
Citizens of London, and at length delivered again. Anno 1266. with a great
train of bishops and priests, he held one council at Northampton and
another at London: where after he had dispatched his matters touching
papistrye according to his own mind, he made laws whereby England did long
after maintain Papistrye. Also he denounced all those bishops to be wicked,
who had taken part with the Princes against king Henry the third, and yet
those same bishops were partlye absolved by him for money, partlye compelled to
go for absolution to the Pope. This Hadrian as soon as he was made Pope went
forthwith to Viterbium, and sent for Rodolphe the Emperor into Italye, to
break the power of Charles king of Sicill: this Charles is he whom against
law and right he had advanced before, who then ruled all at Rome according
to his lust. But Rodolph being troubled with the Bohemian war, could not
satisfye the Popes desire: but Charles meaning to eschew the malice,
transported all the power of his army into Achaia, purposinge to make a way
to attain to the Empire of Constantinople. Hadrian (says Platina) purposed to
make the gouernemente of the Church to be safer from oppressors, and to alter
the constitution of Gregory his predecessor, touching the restraint of the
Cardinals for the election of the Pope. He dyed at Viterbium ere he were
consecrate Pope 40. days after his election.

130. John the xxij.
John the xxii. a Portingale borne and a Physician by profession Peter
Portingale, was made Pope being first bishop of Tusculan. This man although he
were counted very well learned, yet for want of skill in government, and
infirmitye in his manners (says Platina) did more hurt and dishonor to the
Popeship then good. For he did many things that seemed to be both of a foolish
and light mind: and was to be praised in this thing only, that he ^uccoured
with money and Ecclesiastical lyuinges young men that were toward in
learning, and especially the poorest. At this time the Venetians spoiled the
Anconita^s, because they vsinge trafique into Dalmatia would pay them no
tribute: and yet the Pope would not defend them as he ought to do, being
tributaryes to the Church: and though in words he were hasty, yet in his
doings a slouggarde and dastard. The Anconitans therefore being destitute of
the Popes aid, gathering themselves together, brast out of the City upon the
Venetians besieging it, and drove them away with great damage. But the Pope
vsinge the advice of John Caietan who the^ ruled all, because by his aid he
came to be Pope, he sent his Ambassadors both to Michael Paleologus, and the
kings of the West, to move them in his name to make peace among themselves,
and to provide to send their powers against the Sarracens: which if Paleologus
would not do and keep the unity promised, he would give his Empire from him
to Charles king of Sicill. He prophesyed by the course of the stars that he
him self should live long, and told this to every man in his vanitye, as one
whose want of discretion was evident to every man. But behold while he thus
vaunted his cunninge in prophecyinge and constellations, openly in a certain
chamber which for his pleasure he had builded in his Pallaice at Viterbium the
fourth day after fell down sodainlye. Anno 1277. After this ruin wherein he
perished myserablye, he was found the seventh day after having reigned viii.
months. Valerius called the place which fell down Gamesters hall, and Stella
calls it the precious Chamber, for the Pope had builded it so gorgeouslye for
his pleasure. After his death the seat was void through great contention vi.
months.

129. Nicolas the third.
NIcolas the third a Roman, called first John Caietan, after vi. months with
great discention and brauling Charles king of Sicil was as Senator president
in their consistorye, who was very urgent to choose some Frenchman Pope: and
therefore this Nicolas having gotten the place, purposinge to abate the power
of Charles took from him the Vicarship of Hetruria, and filled Italye full of
broils. And for his own lucre he persuaded Peter king of Aragon to claim
the kingdom of Sicill, saying that it belonged to him, by the inheritance of
his wife Constance, which liked Peter: but note the sequeale. Peter with a
great nauye went to Sardinia, and there waited when some motions should arise
in Sicill, for the Sicillians making a conspiracy against Charles and the
Frenchmen, appointed a day that as soon as at eueninge a bell should be
told, the Frenchmen should be forthwith murdered both man woman and child,
wherein they were so cruel yt they slew even women with child. But this
horrible deed was not done under Pope Nicolas, but in the time of his
successor Martin the fourth. Also this Nicolas took to himself ye
Senatourship, which Clement the fourth had bestowed on Charles: and forbad for
ever that any Prince or king should be so hardy to desire or take upon him
that dignitye. By his falsehoode it came to pass that Flaunders, and Bononia,
and the royaltye of Rauenna, which long time were under the Emperor, became
subject to the Pope. Among other buildinges yt he made about Rome, he
enclosed a warrante of hares with hye walls, wherein even in his Popeship he
used often to hunt. He bestowed silver cases for the Apostles heads: he was
reproved of many for making his nephewe Berthold Earl of Romundiala, and for
another of his nephews being a Dominican and Cardinal because he sent him
Ambassador into Hetruria. For Platina and Stella and other complain that he
loved his kindred to well, so that he bestowed without law on them that which
he had filched from other: for he took perforce from some nobles of Rome,
certain Castles and bestowed them on his freindes. He made the Gibelines being
seditious me^ magistrates at his own lust in Florence and else where, to defend
and maintain his tyranny. Also he purposed to make two kings of the stock
of Vrsines, the one in Lombardye the other in Hetrury, but while he purposed
this he dyed suddenly of an Apoplexye, without speakinge any word Anno 1281. in
the fourth year of his Popeship, and yet it was thought by his goed
complexion he should have lived much longer. Some say that one foretold the
death of this Pope by ye rysinge of the river Tiber, which then happened. The
report is that of a concubine he begat a son that had hair and claws like a
bear: it is written in John Noueomagus in illustrationibus Bedae.

130. Martin the fourth.
MArtin the fourth a Frenchman called before Simon, was next made Pope by the
Cardinals of France, Viterbium, because he thought that City was
excommunicated, because they had made a tumult against the Cardinals, for the
Viterbians entering into the consistorye apprehended the Cardinals, and put them
in prison, dryuinge out and contemninge the house of Vrsins: therefore Martin
going to an old town called Oruietus, did there kept all his solemnitye, and
made viii. Cardinals the same day to strengthen his power. Also he did not
only entertain curteouslye king Charles coming to him, but also restored
to him the dignitye of Senatorship which Pope Nicolas had taken from him: which
thing displeased many, because it should make sedition in the City, the
Vrsine being now returned and their enemies driven out: for Charles for the
hatred conceived against Nicolas, was sore bente against the Vrsines. But Pope
Martin meaning to work warelye, did much set by Matthew de Aquisporta a
Francisca^, of the house of ye Vrsines, a Cardinal and bishop of Portua. He
excommunicated Peter king of Aragon, who went about to invade ye kingdom of
Sicil with his navy against Charles: also he gave his kingdom for a ^ooty to one
that did desire to enjoy it: He released his subjects from their allegeaunce,
calling him an usurper of Church goods. But Peter defyinge all this did by
the help of Paleologus obtain the kingdom of Sicill: the Sicilians also
being able no longer to sustain the pride and Just of the Frenchmen, at the
persuasion of John Prochita, conspired against Charles, and ringinge the
belles, did at once without any regard murder all the Frenchmen. Pope Martin
among other things granted to the Romans liberty to chose two Senators
of the nobilitye, and excommunicated Paleologus. He made war against the
Forolinians. He bestowed great pryuiledges upon the begging friars: and as he
was taking his accustomed recreation with his chapleins (as Carsulan
testifyeth) a certain secret disease came upon him, which after he had said
it panged him extreamlye, he dyed Anno 128^. and yet the Phisicions could
find no token of death in him. Some write that this Pope in the first year of
his Popeship, received into his familiarity the concubine of his predecessor
Nicolas: but to avoid the like chance that his child (if he should have
any by her) might not be like a bear, he commanded all bears which were
painted in his Pallaice by a Pope that was of Vrsine house, to be taken away
or blotted out, to avoid in his concubine the sight thereof, which he
thought wrought great effect in conception.

131. Honorius the fourth.
HOnorius the fourth a Roman of a noble familye was Jacob, was next made
Pope. He had a brother called Pandulphus a worthy man who at that time was
Senator in Rome, who did sharply execute laws against fensers, thieves, and
murderers. Honorius excommunicated Peter king of Aragon, because he held at
that time the kingdom of Sicill against Charles, and confirmed the curses and
edict of Pope Martin, because for ye Popes lucre he would not leave the
kingdom. Also he raised terrible war against Gui Feltro who held the town
Flaminia, and ouercomminge him, against all law and right by tyranny subdued
the town to Rome. Also he confirmed the sect of Augustine friars which was
refused at Paris, but withstoode by many. Also he appointed to the Carmelites,
that puttinge of their rich roabes, they should wear white weeds, and
commanded they should be called our Ladies brethren. After which he died
quicklye Anno 1288. in the second year of his Popeship. The seat after this
was void x. months for pestilences and earthquakes. This Pope was much
troubled with the gout, both in his hands and his feet, so that he was feign
to make certain instruments fit for the purpose to say mass. The Grecians in
his time forsakinge papistrye returned to their old faith.

132. Nicolas the fourth.
NIcolas the fourth a Franciscane friar borne in Picene, Platina) loved all men
a like, and thought that he ought no more duty to his kindred then to other.
He did nothing of any great weight, but busyed himself in erectinge
superstitious buildinges, and making new ceremonies about friars and monks,
which are not worth the mencioning: finallye he seeing Rome sore tormoyled in
his time with civil discentions, burninges, slaughters and spoylinges, dyed
for very grief and sorrow thereof Anno 1291. He being dead the Cardinals
went to Peruse, that they might use the more liberty in choosing a new Pope:
and yet they iarred so bitterly among them selves two years and 3. months,
that they could never agree in yt election.

133. Celestine the fifth.
CElestine the fifte borne at Esernia beside Sulmo, by profession an Anchore
called before Peter Moronens, after the Cardinals had scoulded two years, he
by the procurement of Charles the second king of Naples and the latin
Cardinals was chosen Pope, who as soon as he was created went to Apulia, and
calling all the Cardinals thither, he created xii. new Cardinals whereof two
were Eremites. Ptolomeus Lucensis writes, that at his Coronation were two
hundred Thousand men: because (says Massaeus) at the first time he sat in
Consistory, he went about exactly to reform the Church of Rome y^ the clergy
might be an example to other, he purchased such hatred that he doated and was
a fool. Thereupon one of the clergy called Benedict, hired one to set
through an hoole in ye wall of the Popes chamber a great hollow troncke, and
through the same should make an hydeous noise many nights together, (as if
it had been the voice of an Angel from heaven) saying in the night time:
Celestine, Celestine, give over thy charge, for it is above thy habilitye.
Beside this diverse persuaded him to give over for his own safetye. King
Charles understanding of this spoke with the Pope, desiringe him as earnestlye
as he could, not to forsake that dignity, which came to him by the grace of
God. But he gave this answer: I will do as it pleases God^ And returning
from Naples from the king, and perceiving he could not be quiet, he gave
over the Popeship on S. Lukes eve, and made haste to go live an Eremites life
in ye desert, says Massaeus: but first of all he made a decree with the
consent of al, that the Pope might yield up his dignity. But Boniface who had
thus beguiled the simple man, and now gat to be his successor, fearing least
ye people would follow the same Celestine as Pope, and defye him, he
therefore put Celestine in close prison till he dyed, Anno 1292. the x. day of
May after he had reigned one year and five months. Of this Celestine sprange
a sect of monks called Celestinians.

134. Boniface the eight.
BOniface the eight borne in Campania called before Benedict being chief
counselor to Celestine, was set up in his stead by a strange kind of
treason at Naples. This Boniface while he was Cardinal of S. Martines in the
mount, did so honger after the Popeship that he spared no falsehood nor
ambicious means yt might further his desire. He was so proud that he did
almost disdain all men. And boiling thus with heat of ambition, he suborned
(as is said before) certain who should come in the night time, and with a
still and strange voice in the Chamber of Celestine as it were from heaven
persuade him (being a very simple man of himself) to yield up the Popeship if
he would be saved: which in the end was brought to pass. But Boniface
usurping by craft against all right the Popeship, apprehending the sillye man
Celestine (who was departing from Rome to some wilderness there to end his
life) put him in perpetual prison: and yet (as Marius witnesses) he professed
he did it not for hatred against Celestine, but lea^t the auctours of sedition
should make him their head, to trouble and disquiet the peace of the Church. And
thus this vnthanckeful Boniface was not contented only to delude poor
Celestine, and to beguile him of his dignity, but furthermore to cause the
simple soul as if he had been a malefactor, to dye for thought in prison.
After this Boniface began to exercise such crueltye and he seemed to be another
Nero: he sent for certain Cardinals to come unto him, but they being
terrifyed with his falsehod and rigor, durst not come to him, and therevppon
they were proclaimed scismatickes by him, and depryued not only of their
benefices and such dignityes as they had received of Popes, but also were
berefte of all their lands, towns and goods which they had by inheritance.
Furthermore he gathered an army, and pursued them with the Columnians and as
many of the Gibelines as he met withal in any place. He destroyed and spoiled
all men's places whether soever they fled: whereupon many of them seeing they
might be safe in no place, fled into woods and forestes and tarried there,
other some of the most noble houses of Italye, after they had even in manner of
wild beasts ranged long about the Sea shore, did at length depart from
Italye with saluage Pirates and rouers: for they trusted more the barbarous
Pirates then this churlishe Boniface. He hated ye Gibelines with such rancour,
that in persecuting them he heard say that some of them were fled to the
Genewaies, and thereupon he poasted thither to destroy them utterly, and to
root out ye very name of them upon earth. And when upon Ash wednesdaye he
should according to the superstitious use cross al comme^s on the forheade
with ashes, and say unto them thus: Remember man that thou art ashes, and to
ashes thou shalt return. Upon the same day and for the same cause, the
archbishop of Porchet (who was a Gibeline) came unto him, and kneelinge down
unto the Pope put of his cappe, to have the ashes put on his head, who^ when
Boniface had espied, being neither ashamed for the time, nor the place, nor
the people present, uttered his rancour toward the bishop most shamefullye.
For taking up an handful of ashes, he threw them spitefullye in the eyes of
the bishop, saying reprochfullye with malicious change of words: Remember
man thou art a Gibeline, and to the Gibelines thou shall return. And beside
this deprived him of his archbishopricke, though in the end he restored it.

In his time were great and cruel wars between the Sicilians and Robert duke
of Calabria, which wroughte much mischief to all Italye, and yet the Pope
being oftentimes requested thereunto, would never with his auctoritye step in
between them to pacifye the matter. But by the providence of God, they that
before fled out of Italye with the rouers, arrived in Italye again, and
gathering together a few (who fled and lurked here and there for fear of the
rage of Boniface) came to Anagnia, and ere the Pope mistrusted any such matter,
they brast open the gates upon him, apprehended him, and brought him to Rome,
where frettinge and raginge in a great agonye most desperatlye for the space of
xxx. days, through the extremity of his malady, he dyed myserablye Anno 1304.

This Pope sent a commandment to the king of England, charging him not to
molest Scotland (as he did then) any longer, because the Scotts were a
privileged people belonging to his Chapel: but the king stood stoutlye in
the defense of his right and quarrel, and claymed it as his right and not the
Popes. After this the Pope moved king Edward to war upon the French king
because he had offended the Pope, but the king would not be so abused by him.
After this when the king had bestowed the bishopric of Canterbury upon
Robert Burnel bishop of Bathe, the Pope in spite of his teeth did not only
place another called John Peccam, but also sent down his Bull to the
spiritual men of England, for their discharge, not to pay one penye tribute
to the king in any case, to his no small trouble: for upon this the most of
them were at defiaunce with the king and his Parliamente, especially the
bishop of Canterburye. This is that Pope of whom it was co^monlye said: He
entered like a fox, he reigned like a Lion, he died like a dog. He thinking
that kingdoms and Empires were all in his own hand, did usurp the
aucthority of both swords, and would be counted the Lord of all the world. He
gave sentence ye unless kings would receive their kingdoms at his hand,
they should be accursed, and ought to be deposed. He excommunicated Philip
king of France, because he would not suffer the treasure of his Realm to be
transported out to Rome: he cursed both him and his to the fourth generation.
Also he would not confirm Albertus to be Emperor (whom before he had three or
four times rejected) until he would invade France, and depose king Philip.
He maintained the discord that was in Italye, and purposed to nourishe them
continuallye. He forbad that the clergy should pay any tribute to their
Princes without his commandment. He boasted that he bare the keys of heaven,
and published this Canon that he ought to be judged of none, although he
should draw thousands of souls to hell with him. He was the first that
devised the Iubelye, according to the Iewishe tradition. He gave full remission
of sins and pardons to all that should come on pilgrimage to Rome. At the
first day of Iubelei he prancked himself gorgeouslye in his pontificalibus.
The second day he being arrayed most royallye, with Imperial insignes,
commanded a naked sword to be carried before him, and said with a loud voice:
Ecce potestatem vtriusque gladij: Lo here is the power of both swords.
Finallye he being (as is said) apprehended, and offeringe rather his head to be
cut of then he would yield up his Papacye, those conditions being put to him:
his house was first spoiled of so much treasure, yt as it is reported all the
kings of the earth together were not able to make so much out of their
treasurye, as was carried out of his Pallaice, and from three Cardinals and a
Marquess that were with him. Then afterward he was set upon an unbroken coult
with his face to the horse tail, and so caused to ride a gallop and iaunted
til he were breathless, and then was he imprisoned and there almost pined, by
king Philips soldiers of France, till the people of the town of Aragon
where he was did releue him, and yet nevertheless for thought of this misery
and loss, he dyed.

He bestowed on S. Peter's Pallaice a chayme of belles making a sweet and
pleasant noise, and increased the reuennues thereof: he yet increased very much
yt privileges of the begginge friars. He doubled ye idolatrous honor of the
Apostles, the 4, Evangelists, and the four doctors of the Church. He gave
auctoritye to ye Ecclesiastical parsons generally in England, to excommunicate
the people twice in the year. He caused one Hermanus of Ferraria to be taken
out of his grave, and burned xxx. years after he had been buried. He said
that to be subject to the Church of Rome is of the necessitye to salvation. He
deposed diverse Cardinals: he deuested diverse kings of their estate: he
fostered harlots, ^e begat diverse bastardes, beside sondrye other l^ude
pranckes. He sommoned king Edward the first to Rome upon the complaint of
Robarte VVinchelsey bishop of Canterbury after ye death of John Peccam, both
which Archbishops troubled the king, as almost all their auncetours from the
time of Hildebrand had done to the Princes in their time: for so William Rufus
and Henry the first, were troubled with Anselmus Archbishop of Canterbury:
Henry the second also with Thomas Becket: King Richard and all England with
William bishop of Elye the Popes Legate: King John with Steven Langto^ bishop
of Canterburye: Henry the third with Edmonde Archbishop, and now this king
Edward with these two. The king being cited to Rome, was there suspended
till he had purchased full dearly his absolution: but of the said Peccam this
one thing is to be noted, that he caused to be ordained yt no spiritual
mynister should have any more benefices the^ one, which was also decreed by
Octo and Octogonus, the Popes Legates in England at that time.

An Epistle of Peter Cassiodorus to the Englishmen, reprouinge the extreme
robbery, filching and slauerye whereby the Popes spoiled this land about the
year of our Lord 1302. to move them to shake of the bondage of the Popes
tyranny, taken out of an old book in S. Albons Church.
TO the noble Church of England serving in claye and brick as the Jews did
in times past under the tyranny of the Egiptia^s: Peter the son of
Cassiodore a catholic Soldier and devout champion of Christ, sends
greeting and vvishinge to cast of the yoke of bondage, and to receive the
revvard of liberty.

To whom shall I compare thee or to whom shall I liken thee O daughter
Jerusalem? to whom shall I match thee, O daughter of Sion? Great is thy
perturbation, like unto the Sea. Thou sit alone without comfort all the
day long, thou art confounded and co^^umed with heaviness. Thou art given up
into the hands of him from whence thou can not rise without help of one to
lift thee up: for the Scribes and Pharisees sittting upon ye chair of Moses.
thy enemies the Romans are as thy heads and rulers, enlarging their guarded
philacteries, and seeking to be enryched with the marowe of thy bones: laying
heavy burdens, and not able to be borne, upon thy shoulders and of thy
mynisters, and they set thee under tribute (which of old time have been free)
beyond all honestye or measure. But marvel not thereat, for thy mother, which
is the lady of people, like a wydowe having married and coupled her self to
her subject, has appointed him to be thy father, that is to say, the bishop
of Rome, who shows no point of any fatherlye love toward thee, He magnifyeth
and extends to the uttermost his authority over thee: And by experience
declares himself to be ye husband of thy mother. He remembers often with
himself the prophetical saying of the Prophet, and well disgesteth the same in
the inward part of his breast. Take to thee a great book, and write therein
quicklye with the pen of a man, take the spoil, rob quickly: But is this it,
which the Apostles says, that he was appointed for, where he writes thus?
Every bishop taken from among men, is appointed for men in those things that
belong to the Lord: not to spoil, not to lay on them yearelye taxes, not to
kill men, but to offer gifts and sacrifices for sins: and to sorrow with
them, that be ignorant and do err. And so we read of Peter the fisher (whose
successor he boasts himself to be) that after the resurrection of Christ he
turned with other Apostles, to the office of fishinge, who when he could take
nothing of the left side of the ship, at the bidding of Christ, turned to the
right side, and drew to the land a net full of fishes. Wherefore the
profitable mynisterye of the Church is to be exercised on the right side, by
the which the devil is overcome, and plentye of souls be lucrifyed and won
to Christ. But certainlye the labourer on the left side of the ship, is far
otherwise: for in it the faith stumbleth, heaviness bears rule, when that
thing that is desired by seekinge, is not found. For who is so foolish to
think that he can both at one time serve God and man, and to satisfye his
own will, or to stick to the revelations of flesh and blood, and to offer
worthy gifts to Christ? And doubtless, that shepeheard that watches not for
the edifyinge of the flock, prepares an other way to the roringe Lion, and
seeking who^ he may devour. And now behold, I say, O daughter, the deeds of
him that is called thy father, such as have not been heard of before: he
dryueth away the good shepeheard from the sheepefold, and places in their
stead bishops, to rule, but not to profit (his nephews, cosins, and
parents) some that knew no letters, and other some domme and deaf, which
understand not the plain voice of the sheep, nor curing their wounds that be
hurt of the wolves: but like hyrelinges pluckinge of the fleeses a pase, and
reaping that which other men have sown, whose hands moreover be always
ready in their baskets and pouches, but their backs are turned from their
burdens. By which thing it is manifest yt the priesthood is clean changed
at these days, the service of God decayed, alms diminished and brought to
naught, the whole devotion of princes, and kings is banished. May not this
be thought wonderful in the eyes of all men, that where as Christ commanded
tribute to be paid to kings for him and for Peter, he now goes about
dominion of his style, to subdue to him, both realms and princes of realms
(against his will, whose Uicar he says he is, and who refused the realms and
judgments of this world) which this bishop contrarywyse chalengeth, clayming
all that which he in his style writes to be his. Alack, O daughter, what does
he yet more against thee: mark, he draws from thee what so ever pleases
him, and yet he thinks not himself content, to have the tenth part only of
thy goods from thee: except he have also the first fruits of the benefices of
the Ministers, whereby he may get a new patrimony as well for himself as for
his kynred, contrary to the godly wyls of the first founders. Over and besides
all this, he infers other execrable taxes and stipends for his Legates and
messengers, whom he sends into England, which not only take away the
feeding and clothing of thee and thine, but also tear in pieces like dogs
your flesh and skins. May not this prince be compared to king
Nabugodonoser, which destroyed the temple of the Lord, and robbed away the
silver and golden vessels thereof? The very same does this man also: he robbed
the mynisters of Gods house, and left destitute of due help. In like manner
does he: Truly they be better that are killed with the sword, then they which
be pined with hunger: for they are dead straight, but these are wasted with the
barrennes of the earth. O daughter, all they that pass by the way, let them
have pitye and compassion on thee, for there is no sorrow like thy sorrow.
For now thy face is blacker then coals through much sorrow and weepinge, and
thou art no more known in the streates: thy foresaid ruler has placed thee in
darcknes, and has given thee wormwood and gall to drink. O Lord, hear the
sorrow and sighinges of thy people, behold Lord, and descend, for the heart of
this foresaid man is more indurate then the heart of Pharao. For he will not
suffer thy people to depart, except in the fortitude only of thy hand. For
he scourges them, not only myserablye upon the earth, but also after their
death he intends to incroche the goods of Christians under the name and
title to dye intestate or making no will. Therefore let the chiualrye of
England well remember, how the Frenchmen in times past, directinge their
greedy eyes on the Realm of England, labored with all their power how to
bring the same under their subjection. But it is to be feared, least the new
devises and practice of this new enemy, supply that which hitherto has
been lackinge in them. For in diminishing of the treasury of the Realm, and
spoylinge the Church goods: the Realm shall be brought into such inability,
that it shall not be able to help it self against the enemy. Therefore O
daughter and you the mynisters thereof, suffer not your selves to be led any
more into such miserable bondage. Better it is for the wealth of the and thine,
that the Christian king and the powers of the Realm which have endued thee
with great benefits, and you also which are endued with their benefits, do
labor with all your power how to resist the devises, conspiracies, arrogancye
and pride, of the foresaid person: who not for any zeal of God, but for the
enriching of his parents, and for his own kindred (exaltinge himself like an
eagle) by these and such other exactions, goes about after a new kind of
extorcion to scrape up and devour all the money and treasure of England. Now
least the dissembled simplicitye of the Realm in this behalf do bring utter
subuertion, and afterward be compelled to se^ke remedy when it is to late: I
beseech the Lord God of hosts to turn away the vale from the heart of that
man, and to give him a contrite and an humble mind, in such sort as he may
acknowledge the ways of the true God, whereby he may be brought out of
darckenes, and be enforced to relinquish his old sinister attemptes: and that
the vyneyard which the Lord has planted, may be replenished contin^ally with
true preachers of the word. Let the words of the Lord prophesyed by the
mouth of Ieremye stir up your minds to withstand and resist the subtle
practices of this man, by the which words the Lord speaks: O thou pastor
which have scattered my people, and have cast them out of their habitacions,
behold I will come and visit upon thee, and upon the malice of thy studyes:
neither shall there be any of thy seed which shall sit upon the ^eate of
David, neither which shall have power any more in Judah. So that thy neast shall
become barren, and utterly subverted like Sodom and Gomor.

And if he being terrifyed by these words do not leave of from this which he
begins, and does not make restitution of those things which he has
received: then let all and singular parsons singe for him being indurat, to him
that sees al things, the Psalm 108. Deus laudem etc. For truly as favor,
grace, and benevolence, remitteth and neglects many things: so again the
gentle benignitye of man being to much oppressed and grieved, seekinge to be
delivered and freed from the same, strives and searches to have the truth
known, and casts of that yoke by all means possible that greeueth him. etc.
Haec Cassiodorus.


What effect this letter wrought in them, to whom it was directed, is not in
story expressed. This by the sequeal may be coniectured, that no reason nor
persuasion could prevail, but that the Pope retained here still his exactions,
what soever was said or written to the contrary notwithstanding.

135. Benedict the xi.
BEnedict the xi. borne in Lombardy called Nicolas, a dominican by profession
of obscure parentage (whose father was a sheepeheard,) he after he had been
Cardinal and bishop of Hostia came to be Pope. He was of stature but a dwarf,
and at length waxed ba^ld, but of an excellent wit and very eloquent, and
therefore in high favor with Pope Boniface: who as soon as he was created,
applied his mind diligently to assuage all those broils and seditious
factions that wasted Italye. Leander Albertus reports, that when he was made
Pope, his mother came to Peruse to see her son so exalted, and was apparelled
by the Senate that she might come in seemly order to salute him: but he did
reprochfullye disdain and would not acknowledge her to be his mother, til she
had put on her former apparel again. Then (quoth he) I know this matrone,
for she is my mother. He offered to S. Estorge Church in Millen a challice of
silver of great weight, also a senser and a box of frankincense, silver
candlestickes, and a silken curtein of ye price of an hundred Crowns, and gave
iii. hundred pounds out of the Popes treasurye to make another curtein about
the Sepulcher of one Peter of Verona a dominican friar. All that he gave, cost
viii. Thousand pound according to their computacion at Millein. He
excommunicated all those that were the apprehenders of Boniface, until they
had paid for absolution. He received into favor John and James Cardinals of
Columna, whom Boniface persecuted. He absolved Philip king of France who was
excommunicated. He made three Cardinals Nicolas Pratensis of Hetruria, William
Macklesfild and Gualter VVinterburne, being Englishmen. After he had appeased
those braules which his predecessor had procured, he dyed Anno 1305. in ye
fifth month of his Popeship. The report is that he dyed of poison which was
given him in a fig: Of this Benedict were made these two Uerses.

A re nomen habe, Benedic, benefac, Benedicte,
Aut rem peruerte, maledic, malefac, maledicte.
136. Clement the fifte.
CLement the fifte was borne in Vasco, his father was one Bernard a noble
knighte, he was first called Bertrad and was chosen Pope by the Cardinals after
much strife at Peruse, he himself not being there. He agreeing to the
election went from Burdigall to Lions, and sent for all the Cardinals, whither
they came out of hand: where the Pope translatinge the court of Rome hither
into France Anno 1305. continued still there threscore and ten years, to the
great damage of the Romans. Philip king of France, and his brother Charles,
and John duke of Britain, were at this Popes Coronation, where duke John and
xii. other mayned with a wall that was overthrown by the wonderful prease of
people, dyed out of hand. Also King Philip was somewhat wounded with the fall
thereof. And the Pope himself in so great an hurly burly being thrust beside
his horse, lost a Carbunckle stone out of his Miter, valued at six Thousand
Florences. The pomp and triumph being ended, he made many Cardinals of the
Frenchmen, but none of the Italians, saving that he restored to John and James
of Columna their Cardinalships. He sent three Cardinals with Senators
auctoritye to Rome, to govern it and Italy. He granted to Frederick king of
Sicill, the Isle Sardinia (inhabited of the Saracens) upon this condition, yt
as soon as he could he should drive out the enemies and recover it, but to the
use of the Pope. To these words of Platina, Marius has added this: Clement
the fifth (says he) because he desired not to serve other as Christ commanded
his Apostles, but to have Emperors serve him, decreed by Canon, yt the
Emperors appointed in Germany (although they bare ye name of ye king of
Romans) should yet receive of the Pope ye title, right, and name of Empire:
and that the Emperor being dead, all the time the Empire should be void, the
Pope should have jurisdiction over those towns in Italye that are tributaryes
to the Emperor. So much of Marius. Clement being an open whoremo^ger and
maintayner of harlots, appointed the Popes Court to be at Auenio for his own
pleasure. He rooted out ye Jews called Templars, in a council at Vienna Anno
1311. In the same council be decreed that all religious orders exempted
should be subject under the common laws as other were, but the Cistercian
monks did purchase of him to be privileged, and gave large bribes to him for
it. Also the Franciscan friars offered him fortye Thousand Florences of gold
beside other silver, that they might against their rule have a dispensation for
lands and possessions: the Pope thereupon willed them to bring the money, and
having taken assurance for it of certain marchaunts which they brought, he
both took the money and told ye friars yt he would not nor could not break S.
Frauncis rule for any money, and thus he beguiled ye friars. He aduau^ced S.
John's knights* called ye knights of the Roades, because they had won ye Roades
from the Saracens. He commanded the master of the Te^plars to be burned with one
of his fellows at Paris in presence of ye Cardinals, and made certain decrees
to bridle the disorder of the Jews confiscating their goods. He appointed
punishment for such of the clergy as should busye themselves in secular
affairs, or be costlye apparelled: and deprived monks of hunting and hauking.
He excommunicated the Venetians, the Florentines and Lucians, and confirmed
Corpus Christi day for an holy day. He commanded yt the relics of Saints
should be reuerentlye honored. He governed Italye by his deputyes two
Cardinals: he made Celestine the fifth a confessor Saint: finally after diverse
decrees of superstition, he dyed of the bloudye flixe, panged and pained
sometime with a collicke, sometime payned in the guts, the sides and the
stomach, at Rocca Maura a tent upon Rodanus Anno 1314. His body was carried to
Carpentorate in Vascony: the seat was void 3. years. This same year also
dyed Henry Lutsenburg the Emperor, poisoned by a monk called Bernad by the
co^spiracy of the Guelphes, because he went about to take upon him by force the
kingdom of Sicill, being moved thereto by the Sicilians: for this cause the
said monk (who had long dissembled friendship and good will to the Emperor)
wrought his destruction in most sinful and blasphemous manner: For against the
good and godly Emperor should come to receive the Sacrament of the body of
Christ, the cursed monk had provided and tempered one hoaste with such rank
poison, yt the Emperor perceived forthwith the horrible treason: and yet the
godly Prince as soon as he felt himself poisoned, gave the traiterous monk
warning to escape away with these words: Sir, conuaye your self away, for
if the Dutchmen perceive this and our godly friends, ye shall dye the death.
The monk therefore goinge to Seen, received ye reward which was promised him,
and yet he did not by this treason deliver his fryerlye brethren, for many of
them in Thuscia, Lombardy and other places, both men and houses perished with
fire and sword. This Pope Clement took displeasure with the Venetia^s, and
furiouslye yielded them as a pray and spoil to all that would make havoc of
them and theirs. They therefore sent to him a noble man of Venice called
Dandalus, to sue for favor and for the safety of their City: and to obtain
pardon this noble Frauncis Dandalus was feign to yield himself bound in a
chain about the neck, and to couch at the Popes feet under his table, and
there like a dog to feed of the scrappes and bones that the Pope did cast
unto him, ere he could assuage the Popes fury, as Sabelicus declares Enned. 9.
lib. 7.

137. John the xxiii.
John the xxiii. a Frenchman borne, called Jacob Caturcensis bishop and
Cardinal of Portua, after ye seat had been void through ye discord of 23.
Cardinals ii. years, was chosen Pope at Lions: from thence remouinge his Court
to Auenio he created viii. Cardinals, among who^ was Jacob Caturcensis the
younger his sisters son, and John Caietan of the house of Vrsine. He delivered
Hugh Gerard bishop of Caturcia, to a seculer Court being disgraded and
spoiled of his pontifical array to be tormented, his skin fleed from his body
and then to be burned to death, because he had (as he said) conspired against
his parson. He was so new fangled that he made much chopping and chaunginge,
erecting and supplanting of bishoprics, abbeyes, and such like dignityes. He
made two Thomasses Saints, the one bishop of Hertford in England, ye other
Thomas Aquinas a dominican, beside sondrye other. He ordained that belles
should be ronge thrice in the day, that the people fallinge on their knees even
as they go in their way, should say Aue Maria thrice. He condemned them for
obstinate heretics, that defended that Christ and his Apostles possessed
nothing privately, and sent commandment to the Uniuersities that no scholars
should presume to dispute thereof. He condemned the writing of one Peter a
franciscan friar, who went about to encourage men to follow the pouertye of
Christ, for the which thing many were condemned and burnte. He exempted the
white friars from all jurisdiction, reserving them only to S. Peter's
auctoritye his dear children, and made diverse of them bishops: for (by the
suggestion of Satan, as surely it may be well thought) he had a wonderful
strange vision before he came to be Pope, as he him self testifyeth in a
certain bull, that is this: That the Uirgin Mary delivered him from his
enemies among great debate of the Cardinals, and made him Pope, but upon this
condition that he should save from Purgatory these his brethren. This Pope
John taught certain errors, namelye that ye souls departed from the body do
not see God till the day of Judgment: for so (says Massaeus) his father
taught him, being deluded with the false vision of one Tundalus an Irishman.
He sent to Paris twain, the one a dominicke ye other a franciscan, to preach
ye same heresye: but one Thomas VValleis an English friar dominick, withstoode
the Pope in his heresye, whom the Pope committed to prison. Durandus of S.
Porcian, William of Callis, and other wtstoode the Pope likewise. Touching the
error and gross heresye of this Pope John, he was charged with it in the
council of Constance by these words: Pope John said and stubbornely
believed, that the soul of man dies together with the body, and is consumed
to nothing like the soul of brute beasts: whereof he never would purge him
self. Furthermore because that Thomas Vvalleis an Englishman was imprisoned by
the Pope for reprouinge his heresye, the king of France sommoned a council
into his Pallaice in Viciana sylua, where the whole assemblye subscribed
against the Popes heresye: and therefore the king sent to Pope John, willinge
him both to reform his heresye, and also to deliver the prisoner, and so the
said Thomas was set at liberty. This Pope reformed and transposed the orders
and decrees of the Church at his own pleasure, and made Colleges of Scribes
according to the number of the Apostles, who receiving their fee, should write
such letters as he should appoint. He condemned John Poliacus a divine, because
he taught that me^ should not trust the begging friars. He compelled certain
Nonnes called Biginae to marrye, and detested pictures. He held it for a
grounded article that Christ gave none other rule of godliness to his Apostles
then to other Christians, and that ye Apostles never vowed pouertye. John
Mandeuil in his first book and seventh Chapter, shows that this Pope wrote
at large to the Greeks that there is but only one Christian Church, and that
he was head thereof and vicar of Christ, to who^ the Greeks answered
briefly: We do assuredlye acknowledge your high power over your subjects,
but we cannot abide your high pride, we cannot stanch your greedye
covetousness: the devil is with you but God is with us. Thus briefly in a
word they revealed the Popes estate. This Pope condemned Lewis Bauare a noble
Emperor, to be a rebel to the Church, a scismaticke and heretic, because he
took upon him by the Electours choice the government of ye Empire, not vowing
any fealtye to the Pope. Thus writes John Marius of this Emperor Lewis: Pope
John (says he) hated unto death Lewis Bauare, partly because he being chosen
by the estates of Germanye king of the Romans, did disdain to receive at
the Popes hand (according to ye Canon of Pope Clement the fifte) the name and
title Imperial, partly again because he defended from the Popes power
certain monks whom he had condemned for heretics: therefore Pope John
avouched Lewis to be an heretic. Lewis coming into Italye, appointed his
deputies in every Cittye and came to Millen: and because he desired to qualifye
the Popes displeasure, he sent Ambassadors to him kepinge his court then at
Auenio in France, to require of him the ornaments belonging to the estate
imperial, with freindlye affection as his ancestors had done: the Pope did
not only deny the suit, but sent away the Ambassadors with great reproach,
and cited the Emperor him self peremptory wise (as they term it) to come to
Auenio, and submit himself to the Canons of ye Church. The Emperor knowinge
the Popes tyranny used in his Church, and understanding that he had his estate
given him from God, desired to keep and defend the same holy and undefiled:
and therefore would not submit himself like a slave unto Popes, and so denied
to come to Auenio. And yet being desirous of peace, he besought the Pope by
Ambassadors once again, to bestow on him with curtesye ye ornaments of the
Empire: the Pope stood peuishlye in his wilfulnes, vaunting and boasting in
his wrytings, yt he had power to play make and mar with Princes, and yt at his
pleasure he might set up and depose whom he listed: and yt the Empire being
void, the Pope is full Emperor: And for malice against Lewis he excommunicated
the Uicounts, whom the Emperor had appointed to govern Millen. The Emperor
perceyuinge the Popes obstinate mind, taking with him many Princes of Italye
came to Rome, and was honorably received of all the people, and required
according to the custom to receive the solemnityes of the Empire. The Roman
peers and all the people sent Ambassadors to Pope John in France, and humbly
besought him to come to visit his City Rome, and to bestow upon the king of
the Romans the imperial rites: which if he would not do, they said plainly
that they them selves would keep the old law and privilege of the Romans.
John having heard the Ambassadors, using great threats and terrors drove
them away with foul rebuke from him. The Romans, seeing this decreed to yield
to the noble Lewis his lawful request: and so by the commandment of the
clergy and people, both he and his wife together were crowned by Steue^ and
Nicolas being Senators, in the mean time the nobilitye shouted out, saying:
God save Lewis Augustus Emperor of the Romans. The Pope hearing this (though
the Emperor did nothing but that was lawful and godly) did accuse him for a
traitor, and an heretic: he published sore process against him, put him from
his estate imperial, deprived him of his kingdom, condemned him by vile and
cruel curse of excommunication, as a rebel and Captain heretic against the
Church of Rome, by means whereof he enflamed all Christendom with such
discord and deadly wars, as could not afterward be quenched in thirty years.
Thus far writes Marius.

Thus the Pope had nothing to defend his forged supremacye and auctoritye, but
the dreadful boultes of his excommunication. But there were certain at this
time as well deuines as lawyers, which preached that Christ and his Apostles
did possess nothing properlye, and that the Emperor in temporal cases was
not subject to ye Pope: Among these men were Michael Coesenus and William
Occam minorites, Marsilius of Padua and John of Iandane lawyers, with diverse
other. Lewis the Emperor was so comforted by these, that he did stoutly
withstand the Popes ententes, and published this his appellation about the
coasts of his Empire.

The Emperors letters.
WE Lewis king of the Romans, do pronounce against John (who says that he
is Pope) that he does naughtelye execute the testament and will of Christ
concerning peace, troubling the common tranquillity of Christendom, neither is
he mindful that what honor soever he now does enjoy, was first given by the
holy Emperor Constantine, to Syluester even when he forfeare lurked in
forrestes. Thus does he show himself unthankful to the Roman Empire, from
whence he reaped all the roialty which now he abuses etc.


Thus when Lewis and the peers of Rome perceived well the iniquitye of Pope
John, and the people of Rome from the highest to the lowest, did take it in evil
part that ye Ambassadors who^ they had sent were so mocked of him, they all
agreed together that the old custom of chosing the Pope should be brought
into the Church: that is, that he being chosen by the people of Rome, should be
admitted and allowed by ye Emperor. Therefore one Peter of Corbaria a minorite
was made Pope, and was called Nicolas the fifte: and as for John they concluded
of him that he was an heretic, and a tyrant of the Church, not a pastor but a
breaker of the common peace of Christians. In the mean time Pope John Anno
1335. in the fourscore and x. years of his age dyed at Auenio. About ye year
of our Lord 1326. in ye time of this Pope John, the prelates of England played a
stout prancke: for the bishop of Hertford was by the kings commandment with
other mo impeached of treason, and finally arested in the Parliament house to
answer to his endightme^ts. Whereunto after long pauze he answered (clayming
the privilege of the Church) saying thus: I am humble mynister of the holy
Church etc. and cannot neither ought to answer to such matters, without ye
auctoritye of the bishop of Canterbury my direct judge next under the Pope
etc. whereupon the other bishops stepped up and sued to the king for this their
fellow. But when ye king would not yield, the said bishops together with the
archbishops and the clergy coming with their crosses, took him away perforce,
chalenginge him to the Church without any other answer: charging moreover under
ye censure of terrible excommunication, none to presume to lay any further
hands upon him. And yet the king encouraged herewith commanded law to pass
upon him, and he being found gilty his goods to be confiscate: but yet the
party remained safe under protection of the Archbishop of Canterbury.

This Pope left more abundance of treasure then ever any other did, namely
five and twenty thousand thousand Crowns in gould, and yet but latelye before
he joined in war with Robert king of Apulia to defend Genua, in which war
(says Antonius Florentinus) either side spente as much treasure as would have
boughte a good kingdom.

138. Benedict the xij.
BEnedict ye xii. borne in Tholos, in profession a white friar (sath
Paleonidorus) called Jacob or James of Furne, the sixtenth day after ye death
of John he was enstalled Pope. This man (says Marius) was as discourteous to the
Emperor as ever was Pope John: he renewed the curses against him, he reft him
of all regal dignitye, and by his sentence deprived him of the dukedom of
Bauary. The noble Emperor went into Germany, and called together (behoulde
his virtue and wisdom) all the Princes electours, Dukes, Counties, bishops
and the best learned, either in diuinitye or humanitye. And in presence of them
all with open and solemn proclamation, he added and established his late
confirmation with old laws: and very wiselye proved that only the Princes
electours and no man else, ought to meddle with the election of ye king of ye
Romans, so that he that had most voices among them was to be accepted
berely, be it either king or Emperor, which in effect are al one though in
name they differ. Because that he that is Emperor may take upon him the
government belonging to his estate, without the confirmation of the Sea of
Rome: and he being lawfullye chosen, ought after aduisemente given by the
Princes to be anointed by the Pope. Which if the Pope refused to do, he might
be proclaimed Emperor by any Catholic prelate as the use has long been, for
these ceremonies enjoyed by the Pope, are but imagined toys and solemnityes
devised by the prelates of Rome, who only have but the geuinge of the name, and
not the thing, for a sign of unity and mutual help and succoure between
the Empire and the Church. For the Emperor vowed to the Pope not an oath of
allegiance and fealtye, but of defendinge the Christian faith, for as much as
the taking of this oath makes not greater dignitye in temporal things.
Furthermore the Emperor showed how that the estate being void, the right
thereof should not belong unto the Pope, and yt to have it so was against the
liberty, right, honor and majesty of the Empire: but by long and allowable
custom notwithstanding the Clementine Canon, and by decree immovable
hitherto kept bie his a^ncetours, in the time the Empire is void, ye right of
governing the Empire, the bestowing of fealtyes and ordering of other affairs,
belongs to ye Palsgraue of Rhene. Afterward for his own defense, he made
proof of his upright and trusty dealing before them all, and plainlye
confessed that he (as a Christian man ought to do) did believe the Articles of
Christian faith, even as the Church taught: and purged himself of all those
accusatio^s which Pope John the xxiii. and Benedict the xii. had laid to his
charge. Thus did the godly Emperor of his own good motion, when as if he had
not pitied the shedding Christian blood, he might have tried the matter with
the Pope, by the dint of the sword. At the length Pope Benedict began to
consider of the goodness of this Emperor: for when a certain grudge happened
between this Lewis and Philip king of France, by and by peace was made
between the Emperor and the Pope. And the Pope loved the Emperor so
entirelye, that he defended him against the Ambassadors of the French king
(which ever spoke sharply against the Emperor) and stoutlye defended the
Emperors innocencye. So that it came to pass that the Pope was by them called
defe^der of an heretic, whose words although Benedict for a while did much
fear, for they threatened to set upon him with all their powers if he absolved
the Emperor, yet in the end he absolved him. And commanded to proclaim
through Germanye, that all the processes of John what soever they were should
void and of no effect: and that it did not become Pope John thus to deal
with the Emperor, saying their two functions as diverse, and testified openly
that Lewis had in all things behaved himself, as might best beseem so noble
and Christian an Emperor. Yet it is to be noted that the Pope did not this of
hartye good will to the Emperor, but upon pollicye: for when he perceived the
king of France (within whose precinct he was then abiding) dealt vnfreindlye
with him, he feared yt if he should also have the Emperor his enemy, he
should have no succor left, if the French king should go about to do him
displeasure. And for this cause Benedict thought it stood with his commoditye
to have the favor of the Emperor, hoping it would so fall out that he durst
attempt nothing against the Pope. Such from time to time has been the policy
of these prelates, to maintain their estate. But to return to the purpose (and
leave these words of Marius) Pope Benedict avouched the judgment of his
predecessor against Lewis. He appointed deputies in those towns of Italye
that belong to the Empire: and took to himself from the Emperor, the
Senatourship of Rome. He devised that every thing did belong to the Court of
Apostolical penite^ciary. He appointing subsidyes, gathered houge sommes of
money out of every nation. He first took upon him to usurp the presentiments of
all bishoprics, prelatships and benefices. He abridged unlearned men of
priesthood. He reformed many sects of monckes. He commanded that all his
chapleins should lie in one dormitorye together, and should have none other
revenues then for their diet and apparel. He with a great sum of money
bought for his carnal desire, the sister of Frauncis Petrarcha a beutifull
woman, of her brother Gerard: he denied that the Pope had any kindred: he
published certain acts (as Leander testifyeth) against the dominicans: he
left to the Church great store of treasure: he kept diverse concubines: he dyed
of an ague while he was hyring one Zotus a conning painter, to por^rature the
stories of martyrs in his new buildinges Anno 1342. Of whom these Uerses were
made.

Iste fuit vero laicis mors vipera clero,
Deuius a vero turba repleta mero.
About this time John Stratford being bishop of Canterbury, did greatly abuse
king Edward the third, both in defraudinge him of his treasure when he needed
it most in his wars in France, and refusing obstinatly afterward to come at
the kings commandment to aunsweare, until time and place served according
to his own pleasure.

Benedicts common sayings were these to be noted: Be thou such a son as thou
desire to have cosens. The evil man dreadeth death: but ye good man fears
him more. Those things that thou have learned keep by reading, and get by
learning those things that thou want. It is as great shame to have no
freindes as to change them often. It is more dishonor to a Prince to be
overcome with benefits, then by force of arms.

139. Clement the sixth.
CLement the sixth borne in Lemonia by profession a Benedictine, called before
Peter Rogers being abbot of Phisca, Benedict at Auenio. This man with his
faction troubled the Roman Empire above measure: for he excommunicated (says
Naucler) all the Princes, lords and bishops, that consented to the doings of
Lewis. To deface the Emperor he created Uicountes and made them Uicares of the
Empire: and Lewis on ye other side appointed other Uicares to govern the
Church. Ierom Marius in his book called Eusebius Captiuus, does thus set out
the rigor of Pope Clement: Clement ye sixth (says he) much given to women,
honor and auctoritye, provoked with diuelishe furye, set up bills in wrytinge
upon Church doares wherein he threatened the Emperor to be punished with more
cruel torments, unless he would obey the Popes mind and that within three
days, and would give up his right of the estate imperial. Great was the
cruelty of this Clement void of clemency. The Emperor comes to Frankeforde,
and preparing with all diligence to do all that was commanded, besought the
Pope by his Ambassadors, to pardon him and to receive him to favor. But the
Pope answered the Ambassadors, that he would never pardon Lewis, unless he
would first confess all his errors and heresies and yield up the Empire, and
put into the Popes hand both himself, his children, goods and possessions, to
dispose them at his pleasure, and would promise that he would never more enjoy
any part thereof without the favor of the Pope, and delivered a certain
form of of these articles in writing to the Ambassadors, co^mau^ding them to
carye the same to Lewis. The good Emperor least if he did not thus submit
himself it might be cause of slaughter and sedition, received the order
taken by the Pope, and looking upon it was content in such wife to save
Christian blood, and therefore he did not only set his seal to it, but gave
his oath to perform all. Which when the Pope heard he waxed angrye. But note
whether he took the Emperor to favor, and whether he showed any token of
good will, by that which follows. Lewis showed that order to the Princes
electours, and orators. The Princes detested and abhorred certain of ye
articles, because they were devised by the Pope to the confusion of the Empire:
and therefore they promised sufficient aid to the Emperor if as he did before,
he would maintain the liberty and honor of the Empire. They sense
Ambassadors desiringe the Pope not to exact those articles yt tended to the
utter subversion of the Empire: and ye orators crauinge and doing nothing else
came away again. But Clement blaming Lewis only for all, did purpose the
destruction of him and his children: he cursed him cruelly even at consecrating
the Sacrament. He renewed all the extreme processes which Pope John had given
out against him, he pronounced him to be an heretic and scismatick. He charged
the Princes electours to choose another Emperor. He deposed the Archbishop of
Men's both of his bishopric and auctoritye of electorship, because he knowing
the Emperors innocencye and vngiltiues, would not abuse his majesty. But the
other electours being brybed with money by John king of Bohemia, as the bishop
of Colen who took viii. Thousand marks, and the duke of Saxonye two Thousand
marks) did appoint his son Charles to be king of the Romans: who^ this
discourteous Clement did allow afterward in open consistorye. But who is able to
report the horrible bloodshed and war that arose in the Empire by means of
this mischief wroughte by Clement: for king Edward the third of England slew
xx. Thousand Frenchmen, and John king of Bohemia father to Charles was slain
with many nobles. But Lewis yet taking thought because of the Popes processes,
and not meddling with the government of the Empire, was by the Popes procurement
poisoned in a cup whereof he dyed. Thus writes Marius: Lo by these kind of
treacheryes have the prelates of Rome brought the Empire to ye low ebb and
poor estate, that it is at this day: for the said Charles whom they against
all law created, to make his son to succeed him, did so corrupt the
electours with bribes and fair promises, that he morgaged to them the common
revenues of the Empire, which they enjoy to this day, and therefore the
Roman Empire cannot aduau^ce it self again. For then the Electours
compelled Charles to take an oath, yt these pledges should never be reclaymed:
whereby at length it came to pass that the Empire being thus decayed, the
Turk invaded the Church of Christ, and destroyed it wonderfullye, and it is by
the especial grace of God, that Mahomets blasphemye does not with fire and
sword rage over all Christendom etc.

This Pope Clement now at the fiftye year renewed the Iubelie, and being
absent caused it to be celebrated at Rome Anno 1350. for his advantage: and
(says Premonstrate^sis) there were five Thousand strangers coming in and
going out at Rome, as might well be counted dailye within the said year. He
made at several times xii. Cardinals whereof some were monks, some his
nephews and kinsemen: beside he promoted diverse other to dignityes, and
bestowed cost on diverse buildinges. He gave license to the bishop of Bamberge
to absolve those that took part with Lewis, but upon these conditions: first
that they should swear fealty to him as to the Uicar of Christ: secondly,
that they should believe that the Emperor has no power neither to make nor
mar the Pope: thirdlye that they should acknowledge none to be Emperor who^
the Pope had not confirmed. While his companio^s and servant went to dinner
leaving only his chamberlayne with him, he fell down sodeinly and dyed of an
impostume Anno 1352. This Clement (says Marius) took upon him so prodigally in
his Popedom, yt he gave to his Cardinals in Rome, bishoprics and benefices
being then void in England: wherewith the king was offended and undid all the
provisions of the Pope within his Realm, commau^ding upon pain of
imprisonmente and life, that no man should be so hardy as to bring in any such
provisions of the Pope within his Realm any more, and under the same
punishmente charged ye 2. Cardinals forthwith to avoid the Realm, Anno 1343.

Certain blasphemies gathered out of the Bull which the said Pope published
for the year of Iubelie.
Whosoever purposes for travel sake to come to Rome, may choose that day
whereon he sets forwards a confessor or confessors, or else in his
iourneye by the way, or in any other place: Unto the which confessors or
ghostlye fathers we give full power to give absolution in all cases that
concern ye Popes own prerogative, in as ample manner as if our own parson
were present. Item we grant that if any being confessed dye by the way, that
he shall be free and discharged from all his sins: And furthermore we
command the Angels of Paradise (that his soul being fullye delivered from
purgatory) they receive it into Paradise.

And in an other Bull he wrote thus.
WE will not that any man be tormented in him self with the pain of hell:
and also we grant to all those that wear the Cross, 3. or 4. souls at
their own pleasure whom soever they will to deliver them out of Purgatory.

Against these heretical blasphemies, the Uniuersitye of Paris did then
openly detest and reprove.

There were an hundred Thousand poor men of ye clergy in that year resorted
to Auenio to obtain pardons out of all countries, and to be hired confessors.

140. Innocent the sixth.
INnocent the sixte borne in Lenomia called Steven, doctor Claromont, and of
the Cardinal of Hostia and chief penitenciary to the Pope, was made Pope him
self. He was a man that in his Popedom was a cunning lawyer, but of hauty
courage, wilful mind, very rigorous, and one that fra^ckly bestowed benefices
on such as would pay for them. After he was established, he did wisely
abrogate certain reseruatio^s made by Pope Clement, because it made more for
his co^moditye in time to come so to do. And forthwt he decreed yt al
Ecclesiastical parsons, as many as had any benefices should go forthwt to their
charge: for he said yt the flock ought to be kept by their own sheapeheard,
and not ^y an hyrelinge. He like a covetous niggarde diminished his house
keeping, reducing and stinting the parsons of his family to a certin (but as
Petrarcha says) not an honest number: Neither would he have any to wait on
him at home, but such as should in all points feed his own humor: he gave
strait charge to the Cardinals so to do, saying yt ^e and all other
Ecclesiastical parsons ought to be an example of life to other. And for the
more sparing he made cellars in his house for his auditour and clerks of the
kitchen to lock up all things. For his table diet the writers report of him
that he was a great pincher, but for the maintenance of wars very
prodigal. He sent one Giles a Spaniarde Cardinal of Saba from his side into
Italye, to persecute certain robbers and thieves: and to assure the better to
the Pope Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. By Peter Thomas of Aquine a white friar
this Popes Legate, Bononia became subject to the Pope, which Peter did first
plant there the doctrine of the Sorbonits: therefore the Pope bestowed on him
ye bishoprics of Pacte, Mileto, Coranie, the archbishopric of Crete, and at
length the patriarckship of Constantinople. At the commandment of this
Innocent, Charles ye fourth was crowned Emperor by two Cardinals at Rome, but
upon this condition that he should stay no longer neither in Rome nor in
Italy: he notwithstanding as soon as he returned home, warned ye archbishop of
Men's to reform the clergy in their apparel, shoes, hair, and all the order
of their life, upon penaltye of forfeytinge all his benefices. Richard
archbishop of Armachane in Irelande, did publishe before this Pope ix. articles
against the begging friars.

In the first year of his reign this Pope commanded that John Rochdal a
franciscan friar should be burned, for speaking certain words against the
clergy. The said John (says Premonstratensis) did prophecye many things to
come of Antechrist and of the Popes, and therefore was suspected of heresye: for
he began to prophecye Anno 1354. in the time of Clement the sixte, and many of
his prophecyes were found to come to pass. A certain priest having had a bull
of this Pope the space of three years, came in the end and did cast it down
at the Popes feet saying: Lo take your bull unto you for it does me no good,
for the which cause the Pope commanded him to be apprehended and whipped, and
afterward committed to prison.

This Pope made an holy day for the spear and hammers wherewith Christ was
pierced and nailed. He builded walls about Auenio, and founded an house of
Carthusian monks without the City. While he was preparing an army against the
Turks Anno 1362. he dyed for grief understanding that the Romans were at
civil discentio^. There appeared so great an Eclipse of the Sun before the
death of this Pope as has not been seen. In his time also (says Masseus) a
certain flame brandishing in the air, after the going down of the Sun gave
a terrible light in the sky: afterward houge swarms of Locusts destroying and
eating up the fruits of the earth, did also feed upon the very stalks.

141. Urban the fifte.
Urban the fifth was also borne in Lemonia called before Grymold Grison, son
of one William a Physician and an Englishman, in profession he was a
Benedictine monk, and in the end he being absente in an Embassage was chosen
Pope. Being therefore called to Auenio and saluted Pope, he did forthwith
addict his mind to maintain the prerogative of the Church in covetousness,
riot and pomp, with great diligence, vsinge herein the assistaunce of such as
were proane to this purpose, especially one Giles a Spaniard whom he sent
Legate in the behalf thereof, who scoured Italye and oppressed the Uicountes,
and other governors with great calamityes and slaughters, and compelled them
al to submit themselves for fear to the Church of Rome. Pope Urban himself
in the fourth year of his reign coming to Rome with his Cardinals, bestowed
superstitious cost upon idols and ruinous Churches. He covered the sculs of the
Apostles (as he thought, which they had long sought for ere they could find
them, and ye missed of them also in the end) in cofers of gould and silver,
valued at xxx. Thousand Florences, and set them in the place where they are yet
seen. He repaired diverse houses of the Popes: he commanded to preach the
Cross against the Turks: he commanded that the Nicene creed should be song
on S. John Baptistes day: he yielded soueraignity to the sea of Rome: he
builded schools for those that should study Physic and the Decretals. Briget
a woman of Sweaueland came to him to Rome, because of a vow that she had made,
and procured that there should be Religious parsons both men and women of the
order of S. Briget. Afterward be returning into France, made one John Hawcuth
an Englishma^ liefetenaunt of his army, in the stead of Giles that was dead,
that he might still defend the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction until he should
return: for he purposed not to return to Italye. But while he went into
France hopinge to return to his court in Rome, Anno 1371. he dyed at
Massilia, poisoned as it is thought. Sabellicus writes that he made great
war in Italye, yea eue^ with the Princes yt his auncetours had set up against
the Emperor, and he slew many of them. In this Popes time (says
Premonstratensis) the archbishop of Collen had a wife. In his time also the
order of the Jesuits and Scopetines orders first began, as John Palionedorus
testifyeth in the third book and second Chapter of his tripartite historye.

142. Gregory the xi.
Gregory the eleventh borne in Lenomony called before Peter Belfortius, was
Cardinal of new S. Maryes and nephewe to Pope Clement, he succeeded Urban.
This Gregory (says Platina) was made Cardinal when he was scante xvii.
years old by his uncle Clement, and least he should seem to have more regard
to his kindred then to the Church, he sent him to the best learned doctors in
Italye, to be brought up in learning, especially to one Baldus who then read
the Popes decretals at Peruse, where he profited in all kind of such learning
as Baldus could teach him: so much that the said Baldus for the assurance of
his own affairs being in danger, used his auctoritye for his own safetye.
Gregory being Pope sent a Cardinal into Italye to ouersee according to
custom, the estate of the Church. But because (as Volaterain says) almost all
the Cities revolted from him (by the council of Katherine a Nonne of Scene,
which afterward became a saint, and of Baldus his scholemaster) he returned
from France unto Rome with xii. galleyes. Or (as Sabellicus says) because
that he reproving a certain bishop for being nonresident, was by the same
bishop reproved again, that he being the chief bishop did yet lie so far
and so long from the place of his Church. Anno 1376. he excommunicated out of
the Church the Florentines, who were the auctours of the reuolting, and had
taken to their use all the Popes towns lying about them: and because they
despised and defied the terror and vain boults of his excommunication, he
warred upon them. Some other say he returned into Italye for other causes.
Masseus says, that one Briget a woman returned from Jerusalem to Rome, wrote
to Pope Gregory that it was the Lords pleasure that the Popes court should
return to Rome. Crantzius says, it was because a certain bishop did
sharpelye rebuke him that he would leave his Church and follow the Court: Of
whom the Pope received this aunsweare: And thou (quoth he) being Pope of Rome
that ought to be an example to other, do not return to this bishopric.
And therefore he did again translate his seat from France to Rome, by the
persuasion of two women and one bishop, in the 70. year after the translation
thereof. This Gregory demanded tenthes throughout the whole Empire, and
repaired the walls of the City and old buildings with great pompous cost. He
added the eve to the holy day of the birth of the blessed virgin Mary. In ye
time of this Pope, king Edward the third of England made many profitable
laws abridginge the Popes pilladge, usurpation and ambition, within the
Realm. Also certain soldiers of this Pope Gregory lyinge in a City called
Cesenata, did not only take things as victuals and other necessaryes,
refusinge to pay for it, but also did beat like slaves the Citizens, and upon
further stir they murdered them pityfully^, sparing neither man woman nor
child though they were sucking babes, so that they filled all pittes in the
City with dead karcasses, for in a few hours upon one day they slew in the
City of all ages viii. Thousand, and then robbed and spoiled the town, and
so left it desolate and emptye. Theodoricus lib. 3. Cap. 2.

At the length Anno 1378. he dyed of extreme pain of the bladder. Even at the
hour of the Popes death the report is that ye Pallaice of Auenio was set on
fire, and could not be quenched till the greater part thereof were burnt.
Afterward ensued the greatest sciesme and division that ever happened in the
Popedom. Then (says Massaeus) the clergy and people of Rome complaining to
the Cardinals, besought them to choose an Italian and not a French man Pope,
that the Court might not go into France again. But when they began to make
an election, suddenly a controversy began, for the Italians were but four, and
the French Cardinals were xiii. who might easelye have prevailed but they
durst not, for the Romans stood ready in armor, and made a tumult.
Therefore on Saturdaye being the ix. day of April, they choose Urban the sixth
to be Pope, who was Crowned on Easter day being the xviii. day of the said
month. Praemonstratensis says that in the time of this Urban the sixte, began
a new and straung sect of bedlams both of men and women, who used to skip and
dance against all modestye: who Anno 1375. came (says he) from Aquisgran into
Hannonia and so into France, which might prognosticate ye return of Pope
Gregory and his Cardinals to Rome. This sect of Dau^cers imagined with
themselves that they dau^ced in rivers of blood, but they yt stood by could
perceive no such thing. The people thought that these dauncers were evil
baptized by priests keepinge harlots, and therefore the people thought to
have risen against the clergy to slaye them, and to spoil them of their
goods, unless God had withstoode it (says he) by certain coniurations.

143. Urban the vi.
Urban the sixth being but a poor man and very obscure Naples, called otherwise
Barthelmew and at length archbishop of Bare but never Cardinal, and absent (the
Romans urging it very sore) was chosen Pope. He being chosen Pope, Jane
Queen of Sicill bestowed great cost in tryumphing for joy, and sent to him
for presents forty thousand dukates in gould and silver, besides wynes,
victuals and other things, yelding also to him her kingdom and all that she
had, to be at his commandment. Likewise her husband the noble Otto duke of
Brunswick and Prince of Tarentum offered him the like curtesy But (says
Theodoricus of Nyem. lib. 1. cap. 7.) sone after Otto after dinner among many
great estates and Cardinals drancke to the Pope, but Urban was so proud that he
suffered the noble Prince to kneel before him a great while, ere he would take
the cup out of his hand, in so much that one of the Cardinals moved withal
said unto him: Most holy father, it is time for you to take the cup and
drink. Whereby he fulfilled the old sayings: Asperius misero nihil est qui
surgit in altu^. And again: Cord stat inflato pauper honor dato. Claw a
churl etc. But greater unkindness he showed in the end both unto this duke
and Queen Jane his wife, for by his means Otto was taken and murdered, and
Jane also committed to prison, and therein miserablye strangled to death by one
duke Charles, who contrary to his oath by procurement of this Urban,
violentlye wrested from them that had brought him up, y^ kingdom of Sicill
with their lives: for furtheraunce whereof Urban sold the proprieties and
lands of Churches and Monasteryes in Rome, beside great store of silver and
golden challecies, crosses, images and such like monuments turned into wine,
and given to Charles to the sum of fourscore Thousand Flore^ces to maintain
his war against the foresaid Princes, in recompense whereof Charles should
bestow upon a cowardlye wretch Francis Butillus nephewe to Urban, the
dukedomes of Capuan and Amalsitan, and many noble Earledomes in the kingdom
of Sicil. Urban being enstalled, warned ye clergy of their duty, he charged
all the bishops with periurye, because they were not reside^t lying in the
Court of Rome, and not in their bishoprics, says Theodericus of Nyem, and
seemed that he would purge his Court of idle parso^s. He warned the Cardinals
diverse times to take heed of simonye, and to content themselves with their
porcions: he commanded them to ride with fewer horses, yt (quoth he) we may
even from our hearts be a pattern to the people: and (quoth he) as touching
that ye speak of returninge into France, ye know that I will continue still
in Rome. Then viii. of them being Frenchmen went first to Anagnia and
afterward to Fundum because they feared his seueritye, where they conspiring
among themselves and affirming that he was not true Pope, but violently thrust
in by ye Romans, they chose to themselves another Pope the xx. day of
September called Clement the seventh, whereupon arose a sciesme which was more
perilous and lasted longer then ever did any, for it lasted almost xl.
years. Theodoricus says lib. 1. cap. 11. that Clement being chosen, many
prelates, offieials and courtiers, did on al sides fly to him from Vrba^ so yt
he was left alone almost, and as for those y^ tarried with him or resorted to him
in hope of preferment, or about any suetes, yet they misdoubted the estate
thereof and murmured dailye, still doubting what to do: which when Urban saw,
he wept bitterlye repenting his roughe regimente the cause of all, and to salve
his sore, and to allure the favor of men for his own strength, he made
xxvi. new Cardinals out of al sort of men, and gave other offices and lyuinges
franckly, by means whereof many began to repair to him from diverse places,
hoping to speed well in being partakers with him in this division.

Theodoricus in the 33. Chapter of his first book, reports that Francis
Butillus nephewe to this Pope Urban, did rauishe a virgin being a Nun in
Naples keeping her perforce certain days in his lodging: but what marvel is
it (says he) saying the filthye will still be filthye, for he was ever given
to glotony, leachery, sloth and royat. And yet the Pope would not rebuke his
nephewe for this villanye, but being told thereof and of his licentious life,
he used to aunsweare: Tushe he is a young man. And yet says Theodoricus,
Butillus was at this time forty years old. But upon this fact there was a
great murmuring among the people, saying ye like prancke was never played
before in Naples. And yet the Pope did not only defend his nephewe being for
it condemned to death by the king, but also with crackes and threats made
the king glad to bestow a noble virgin of his own blood upon the said
Butillus, and threscore and ten thousand Florences yearly, with the castle
of Luceria.

This Pope Urban (as Stella says) was a crafty man, and one that would
remember an iniurye and seek to revenge: Crantzius says he was a churlishe,
cruel and unmerciful man, who taking upon him the Popedom, sought not to
make peace (as he should have done) among Christians, but rather bent himself
to revenge the injuries of his Cardinals and of Jane Queen of Sicill, and
therefore to make the Florentines to take his part, he absolved them from ye
excommunication of Pope Gregory, and sent John Hawcuth an Englishma^ captain
of them against the Queen. Furthermore he being of nature given to wra^gling,
strife, and cruelty, creating certain new Cardinals at Nuceria, he cast vii.
of ye old Cardinals into prison because they had co^spired with Clement the
seventh against him: and five of those vii. he laid upon great stones, and in
despite of Clement drowned them, which kind of death also one Adam an
Englishman being a Cardinal did hardly escape at the same time. And of those
new Cardinals being xxix. they were all Neapolitans and his cosens, saving
three. This Pope proclaimed war against Charles of Hu^gary king of Naples,
because he would not make a nephewe of his Prince of Campania: he governed the
Church with all tyranny that might be, and to show his rigorous rage more
openly, thus writes his friend Platina of him: Urban (says he) being
delivered from the terror of France and gone to Naples, desires the king to
make his nephew king of Campania, which when he could not obtain, this fellow
under pretense of a just and honest man, being one whom no man neither loved
nor liked, began forthwith to threat and crake the king, whereby he so offended
the king that for a while he committed him to the charge of certain parsons,
and suffered him not to come abroad. But the Pope dissembling his malice for
the time, departing with ye kings good will to Nuceria (because of the heat of
the weather as he feigned) and fortifying the City sufficientlye, he does both
make new Cardinals and imprysoneth seven of the old, because as he said they
had conspired with the king and Pope Clement against him. Furthermore he sent
out a process against the king, and a citacion according to the custom: the
king aunsweared that he would shortly come to Nuceria, and aunsweare his
accusations both by word and by sword. So he came to Nuceria with a great army
and besieged the City, Ramond Balsian being moved with this discurtesye,
being Prince of Tarent presuming of his power, and conueying Urban with all his
Court to the next shoore, he put them into three Galleyes of Genewaies provided
for that purpose: whereby while the Pope is transported to Genua, he drowned
five Cardinals fastened to rocks, of those seven which he took at Nuceria.
Furthermore in the year after the death of Charles, he passed to Ferentine (to
see Naples as he said) but in deed of this mind, to deprive of their
inheritance ye young Princes Ladislaus and John being but a child, ye sons
of Charles. This Urban granted to the sect of begging friars, that they might
change their vows to commit another dishonest act, and challenge as it were to
restore to right unlawful goods being in controversy. He dyed in Rome Anno
1390. poisoned as some think, after he had misgouerned the Popedom x.
years, and few or none were sorye of his death. The year before his death
his Mule fell under him as he was rydinge, where withal he was soore hurt and
brosed, so as he did never recover it til his death: he being dead, his nephewe
Frauncis was thrust from all his living, and came to Rome poor and despised no
man showing him good countenance, according to ye old saying: Cum moritur
praeful, cognatio tota fit exul.
When as a prelate goes away,
then all the kindred do decay.
And so this Francis with sorrow and anguishe forsook Rome at length and went
to Sicill. This same year (says Funcius) this covetous miser Urban brought up
the year of Iubelye, because he saw it would prove gaineful to him and to the
Romans. He also appointed annuities to be paid out of priests lands, under
pretense of waginge an army against the Paganes: the Englishmen withstanding
this constitution, calling a Parliamente did decree yt the Pope should have no
jurisdiction beyond the limits of the Ocian Sea: but the bishops and prelates
like traitors to their country, did take upon them afterward to pay y^
pention.

It would ask a great volume to touch every vilanous practice of this Pope
Urban. Certain coming to meet him on a time did first kiss the ground three
times, and then his feet with all humility. He had given him by a certain
Lady, a precious Miter and certain garments valued at more then xx. Thousand
Florences. He caused a Cardinal in one day to depose, to rack, to tormente,
to spoil and imprison, all the prelates of Sicilia, because they did not
mauger their Prince assist him against Clement, and made in their steed 32.
new bishops and archbishops: and (says Theodoricus) there was not a clarke in all Naples so deltishe and beggarly, but that he was made either a bishop,
archbishop, abbot, prior, or some prelate, if he would take it upon him to
take part with Urban. He used the service of Charles king of Sicill on a time
going before him as his vssher, and bearinge the Popes target following with
his army into a town called Auersa. He put six Cardinals in a dongion with
their feet set in the stocks, and caused them to be myserably tormented and
racked, only for suspicion of falsehoode against him, and so kept them in
prison where they pined through famine, thirst and cold, having also worms
and life breedinge in their bodies: and yet they stood stoutly in their
innocencye. But no humble and importunate suit neither of them nor any other,
could ever move ye stonye heart of Urban to pitye their cases, but (says
Theodoricus) the more he was entreated the more wrathful he was, so that his
eyes would sparkle, his face burn and glow, his throat wax dry for anger. And
after sundry examinations he sent unto them again Theodoricus (the writer of
this historye) and other to examine them in a vaute of the castle where they
lay, then (says Theodoricus) the Cardinal of Sanger was first brought up
unto us, with a pair of iron shakles on his feet and a short mantel about
him, because it was a cold and windy prison. Who when he came to the end of
the cellar and saw above him ye roapes hanging wherewith he should be racked,
and was by y^ wayters striped out of his apparel, leaving him scarcelye his
shirt on, and bound very hard to the rack, Frauncis ye Popes nephewe stood by
and laughed at this miserable sight without all measure: but I that loved this
Cardinal of old was sore grieved thereat, but I could not depart the place.
But to be short, the said Cardinal was an aged man of a corpulent body,
comlye and taule of stature, and being bound he was thrice lifted from the
ground by the strong pulling of those that racked him, so that he waxed very
feeble, which when I beheld, when he was let go to the ground again I said
to him softly: O dear father do you not see how your blood is sought for: I
beseech you for Gods cause confess something to deliver your selves for this
time from these tormentours? He answered, I cannot tell what I shall say. And
when they would have ^acked him again, I bad them cease for he has satisfied
me as I will certifye the Pope in wrytinge, and so they lose^ him and carried
him out to take air: who coming to himself said unto us heauilye. Behold my
brethren the time has been as ye know, that I lived in the pomp and royaltye
of this world, but now I am become a most miserable caytife and despised
wretch. And I would to God this were granted to me as a singular benefit,
that I having nothing might beg my bread from place to place: but out alas,
this trouble and sorrow are justly by Gods judgment fallen upon me, because
even in this kingdom of Sicil I was so cruel an executor of the Popes
commandment, in deposing without favor the archbishops, bishops, abbots, and
other of the clergy without respect of age or degree, hoping herein to have
pleased his mind. The next day after this Pope Urban called unto him one
Basilius to be chief tormentour of these Cardinals, which liked him very well
for he was a malicious man and hated the clergy naturallye, and was a
persecutour of God and his servants, a notable pirate, and a plaguer of
Christians whom he used to take captive from his youth: at the first he lived
by theft and robbery, but when that failed and he became a beggar, he sought
succor of Pope Urban, who not for devotion but to obtain a priorship of an
hospital in Tinacria made him a friar. To this fellow, Urban gave charge to
torment on the next day, ye Cardinal of Venice, and to continue rackinge him
until such time as Urban himself might hear him cry for pain: So when
Basilius and we came to the prison where the Cardinal of Venice was, Basilius
taking him out and bringing him to a certain hall in the Castle did stripe of
his apparel, and having the roapes fastened aloft and hanging down to the
ground he tied him hard to them. And although ye Cardinal were an old man,
broken and diseased, and weak of complexio^, yet he tormented him upon the
rack most cruellye from morninge till dinner time continuallye, but the sillye
man ever as he was haled up cried still and said: Christ has suffered for us,
etc. In the mean time Pope Urban walked in a garden below, and read on a
book so loud that we might hear him, which he did to this end that
Basilius might the better look to his charge to plong the Cardinal the mere.
But as for me (says Theodoricus) I could abide this woeful sight no longer,
and therefore dissembling my self to be sick I gat leave to depart. And in
like manner was the other Cardinals used afterward. Finally Vrba^ removing from
Naples commanded that these Cardinals and their fellow prisoner the bishop of
Aquilo, should follow him and ride next after him, assigninge to every one
his guard to keep them that they should not escape by the way. But the bishop
partly because he road upon a jade, partly because his body was yet after his
racking so sore and feeble that he was not able to endure fast riding, but as
the Pope galloped he came lagging after as fast as he might. And yet the Pope
thinking that helingred to have stolen away, in a great rage commanded his
villains to kill him, and so they slew him mangling him with many wounds, and
left his dead carcass unburied in the way. Afterward at the suit of king
Richard of England, Pope Urban did partly release to the custody of a certain
priest one of the Cardinals called Adam Cardinal of Sicil: but he took from him
all that ever he had, and left him in case of a vagabounde till Boniface his
successor restored him. But as for the other five he kept miserablye in prison
in an abbey in a town of Ianua, being next to ye Church where he lay: and if
that he saw any man resort to that Church at extraordinary hours, he thought
that he resorted thither to deliver the Cardinals by stealth: and therefore he
committed to prison and tormented many of his own Court only upon suspicion
thereof. And notwithstanding ye duke and citizens of Ianua sued for those
prisoners, yet he would never show them any mercy, but in the end caused them to
be put to death, as some say beheaded, other say drowned, but how so ever it
were sure it is they perished. Furthermore Charles king of Sicil being at
variaunce with Urban, and having his nephew Frau^cis prisoner dyed at length.
Then came Margaret the wife of the said Charles, humbly suing to Urban to be
gracious to her and to her children, and to grant that her husbands body might
be buried, in which suit many nobles of Florence and other Cities joined with
her, and yet his hard heart would nothing pittye her suit, nor grant her so
much as a grave for the king her husband, though she had freely released his
nephewe to him, yet he added process to process, and heaped condemnation upon
condemnation against her and her poor children, because he did from his heart
detest the name of the said Charles. Thus reports Theodoricus word for word
as he is alleged, who being Secretarye to Pope Urban wrote that which he
saw with a sorrowful heart. The cause why that the Pope did dispatche those
Cardinals was this: he was suddenly forced to remove from one place to another,
and therefore thinking that those Cardinals if he should carye them with him
would hinder and comber him on the one side, and on the other side he was loath
to leave them behind least they should escape, and therefore flying from Nuceria
to Ienua (as is said) it is thought that by the way he tied them fast to the
rocks, and so lef^ them to be drowned. It is said that this year one
Bertholdus Swart or otherwise Schuuartz an Alchymist and a monk, in the North
part of Germanye devised first and contryued Gunnes to the spoil of mankind.

144. Clement the 7.
CLement the seventh was a Frenchman, and by birth Earl of Gebenny called in
time past Robert, he being first a Cardinal was made Pope by the Cardinals.
These Cardinals after the third month of the election of Urban, perceyuinge
bow he was given to tyranny, and that he would not return into France, they
stale away and fled from Rome to Fundus. But first they besoughte him to give
them license with his favor to go to Anagnia, to change the air for the
Summer time, but they fearinge his melancholy mode and frantic fits, went
away. These Cardinals were gotten together John Preuestin, William of S.
Steuens in Coeli hill, Bertrandus of S. Cicill, Robert aforesaid, Hugh of the
4. holy Crowns, Gui of the holy Cross in Jerusalem, John of S. Marcellus,
Peter of S. Laurencis in Lucine, Gerard of S. Clements, Peter of S. Eustace,
William of S. Angel, Peter of S. Maryes immaculate, and Peter of S. Maryes of
Cosmidin. These says Platina did pilfer out the treasure of the Church at the
death of the Pope, and did every thing as liked them best. Who as soon as
they fled to Fundus, rayled upon Urban as an usurper of the Popedom, saying yt
he was creat perforce, and perforce received the Crown of the Pope ship,
because that election was made for fear in a place of great danger, in ye
which men ought to have had liberty to do and speak their minds francke and
free, and yet they were compelled by the people contrariwise, to choose rather
an Italian then a Frenchman. For these causes (they said) the seat being
void and Jane Queen of Sicill favoring their purpose, they choose the
foresaid Robert to be Pope, and called him Clement the seventh. Because (says
Theodoricus) they knew him to be ambitious, nedye and yet very prodigal, of a
large conscience but of noble birth, well be frended and of great power, having
a strong troop waiting upon him: whereby (says he lib. 1. cap. 10.) it may be
judged that this election proceeded not of the holy ghost nor of good
consciences. Hereupon arose a great discord among Christian Churches, while
some Princes favored Pope Urban, some favored Pope Clement, and some there
were that meddled with neither of them, and they were called neuters. Clement
goinge to Auenio was worshipped of the Spaniards and Frenchmen, who did welcome
him thither. He continued fiftene years making diverse laws, whom beside the
French king, the king of Aragon, of Castile and Nauar obeyed. In the mean
time a council was held at Paris to take up the strife for the Popedom, which
council yielded to Clement as Tillius writes. In his time about the year
1387. arose a controversy between the students of Paris and the dominick
friars, concerning the conception of the virgin Mary. Pope Clement dyed Anno
1392. being buried at Auenio. These two Popes scattered about ye world in
diverse quarters their terrible and fearful bulls, and spread abroad railing
books full of infamye, and defacing, backbytinge and excommunicating one
another, calling each other with sharp despite and bitter reproach,
Antichriste, scismatick, heretic, tyrant, thief, traitor, unjust, wic^ed
sower of darnel in Gods Harvest, and the cursed son of Beliall. John of
Lignia doctor of both Laws, set out a book in the behalf of Urban, and the
abbot of S. Vedast counselor to the French king, did publishe another for
Clement against Urban.

Among other broils wrought between these 2. fyrebrands, it shall be
sufficient to declare but some of the least, Theodoricus lib 1. cap. 14. says,
that Clement with his Cardinals being in Campania, sent for their Captain
Bernard de Cazala with other men of war out of Gascony and Britany, who
should pass over a certain bridge upon Tiber nighe Rome, but they that kept
the bridge wtstoode them, whereupon all the City was in an uproar, and many
ran out disordered to defend the bridge against Bernard and his Brytaines who
entered perforce, and in this conflict there were slain as some think 8.
hundred Romans, and the rest beaten back into the Cittye, whereof arose great
howling, crying, and lamenting through Rome. But ye Romans to revenge
themselves, fell upon al such as might seem in the City to favor Pope
Clement, as al those that were borne beyond the Alps, both Frenchmen and
Spaniards that were weak and unweaponed in the City: they spared neither man,
woman nor child, parson nor degree, some they murdered, some they chained in
prison, the women they used vilanouslye without al shame, bishops and noble men
they spoiled, robbed and long imprisoned with great misery: This hurly burly
continued long. Yea I saw then (says Theodoricus) certain matrones of Rome
desirous to inflame the Roman Citizens against the courtiers and strangers,
to iastle them ruffiantly in the streates, and without al honestye to spit and
slauer in the faces of the courtiers both of men and women. But while the
friends of Pope Urban did thus within the City molest the freindes of Clement,
a certain Frenchman being Captain of Angel Castle, and keeping it to the use
of his countryman Clement and his Cardinals: did leuel a certain engine out of
the Castle against ye City, discharging and shooting arrows and pellets
violently into Rome among the Romans and courtiers, and with this shot he
overthrew, shook down and fyred many houses. Thus was the City in a
miserable broyle, and in these tumults were slain diverse noble men. John
Vrsine, Rainolde his brother and one Honoratus, with Angelus lieuetenant of
Rome and diverse other estates, stepped up in arms in the quarrel of Clement
assaulting ye City round about: Rainold laid siege against it at S. Agnes
gate a whole month, so yt the Romans were robbed of their cattle, and durst
not peep out of the City to follow their husbandrye during this storm.
Whereupon Charles the Emperor and Lewis king of Hungary at the humble suit of
Pope Urban, sent to Clement their Ambassadors, desiring him to yield up his
Papacy for the ending of these sturres tending to ye ruin of the Church and
Christian estate: but Pope Clement and his Cardinals in steed of reasonable
answeares used the Legates vilanously, keeping some of them in prison, some
they racked cruelly, and by this means all christendom was divided, some (as
Almany, Bohemia, Thuscia, Lombardy, England, Polony, Denmark, Sweueland,
Norwaie, Prusia, Frizland, with diverse other countries) took part with Urban:
and likewise many countries with Clement. Urban made Charles king of Sicil, and
Clement set up Jews of Andegana against him for it, to the spoil of much
blood. Many other notable historyes are written of this Clement, which for
tediousness are ouerpassed, only I note that which Theodoricus says, that he
being Cardinal under Gregory the xi. was cause of the destruction and
lamentable spoiling of the City Cesanate, having charge of the soldiers that
did it as is showed in the said Gregory. Also at the same time he sold the
City Vercels unto a couple of tyrants, to the great confusion of the same
City in like manner, but those tyrants Caleatius and Barnabonis having full
possession thereof, robbed this Cardinal again of all the treasure which they
had paid him. But when he sat in the Papacye he was so prodigal in spendinge
the Church goods, that he granted to every man especially noble men, large
pentions, farms and lands at an easy rent.

145. Boniface the ix.
BOniface the ix. borne in Naples, was first called Peter being but a yonker
scant xx. years old, but a toughe and sturdy fellow, he was made Pope by
consent of those Cardinals yt remained in Rome. Theodoricus says that he could
neither write nor singe, and that when he was chosen he knew not what belonged
to the great charge of the Papacye, and when supplications were offered him,
he handled them so untowardly as if he had never been brought up in the Court
of Rome, neither could he understand the contents thereof. When any advocates
during his government moved any matter debated in his consistorye, he never
understood them, but would bolte out an indiscreet aunsweare to their
demaundes. At the first during the lives of certain good Cardinals he durst
not openly commit simonye, though priuilye he used his brokers therein: but
they being dead after vii. years he used it openly. First he took the first
fruictes of all abbeyes and great Churches void, and ere the living were
bestowed the money must be paid: yea often he was heard to wish, that the
money being paid the party might not enjoy it, that he might be paid new first
fruictes again by another. This was the chiefest of those xxvi. Neapolitans,
who^ being of his alleance Pope Urban made Cardinals at Nuceria: who (as
Crantzius says) being confirmed and established, did forthwith confirm those
things which Urban had decreed touching the Iubely to be kept every xiii.
year, the feast of the visitation of the virgin Mary, and indulgences and
pardons for the worshipping of Christ's body. But by his covetousness and
simonye, because al benefices were sold for money, vsurye waxed so rank in
Rome, that it was counted no sin (says Theodoricus) in his time: yea
oftentimes vsurye was required openly, even in the presence of the judges and
officials. And again there was no suit made to the Pope for any matter, but
that brybes must be given for speakinge. The fifte day of November in the
first year of his reign, he, his Secretaryes, and his chamberlaynes set
benefices to sale so impudently, offering and trying who would give most, so
that al men laughed it to scorn. At which time he gave under seal any
benefice where soever, were it in his disposition or no, his gift to take place
upon ye death of the incumbente: and this kind of sale lasted long in the
Court of Rome, so that many poachers ran up and down ye country to espy
where were any old or sick prelate, and thereupon poas^ed to Rome to purchase
a grant of his living: so that sometime the Pope sold one benefice to diverse
parties, and used to set down in the dating of it that the second third or the
fourth grant should stand above and before the rest: and therefore after
diverse grauntes of one benefice yet some purchased one after al with this
clause, to defeat the rest notwithstanding al former or after graunts, and for
more assurance the last should be antedated. Thus the Pope played pollage so
long till all men being weary of his mockery, his market decayed.

A thousand other practices were put in ure by him and his clergy as
appears at large in Theodoricus, and yet because the Pope did it, is was no
sin, for so they said generallye. He sent abroad his collectours into diverse
cou^tryes with pardons, who thereby purloyned great treasures from the simple
people, so that they brought out of some one province an hundred thousand
Florences: but ye Pope calling these his officers to account, and findinge yt
some of them defrauded him, he put them in prison, some he put to death, some
murdered themselves, some were he wed in pieces by the people for their cruel
exactions. When these and the former shifts waxed stale, then the Pope and his
accomplices devised new. They made new grauntes of benefices which did disanull
all the old: but they were very dear, for they were sold for fifty dukates a
piece, and they to whom the Pope granted them, sold them with condition that
the sellar should have portion of the commoditye. And if one man had a benefice
granted him and the grant were written and sealed, yet if another came in
the deed doing ere it were delivered and would give more, the former seal
was broken, the wrytinge cancelled, and the grant void, and so as often as
the price was enhaunsed, ye gift was changed: yea they that made the former
offers were rayled on, and rebuked bitterly by Boniface, charging them that
they went about to beguile him in bargayning, offering not so much as ye
benefice was worth. At this time a contagious plague reigned in Rome where of
men dyed so fast, that (says Theodoricus) I have seen one benefice sold to
many men in one week, every one paying the price for it and dying immediately,
another came by and by and gave money for it, and so he dying ye third did
likewise. Then might a doult get a lyuinge better cheap then a learned man,
for the Pope being ignorant loved those best that were likest to himself.
When money wanted, yet rather then Boniface would leese his market, he was
content to take other stuff, as hogs, horses, grain, wheat, neat, sheep
or any thing else. Thus were all the Popes courtiers become bargainers, brokers,
usurers and simonistes: and he that could devise the most crafty shifts, was
counted wysest and most esteemed. Some having then a grant to take for
himself perhaps ii. iii. or iiii. of the benefices that he could espy next
void, would by means of this commission cease upon xx. and keep the
commoditye of them in his hands: they that used these shifts were the Popes
auditors, and by this means they disapointed other men that had the like
grau^tes, and thus they might do with pretense of law, because they had
prerogatives being chaplains and officers unto Pope Boniface. Hereupon a rose
many suetes and controuersyes in law, so that the clients being wonderfully
increased in number, the proctours and lawyers would not plead but have
unreasonable fees. The Pope also for every seal that he granted had his ^ee
of al men except his Cardinals: thus was Rome on all sides fleeced, filched and
fleaed. And yet in all this simony and briberye, every one that received a
benefice had an oath ministered to him that he came by it without any unlawful
conditions of bying or sellinge. Afterward the said Boniface decreed that
every archbishop, bishop, abbot or such like, if within a year after the
receiving of his living he had not fully satisfied ye Popes trea^urye, the
living to be void immediately: and in this snare many prelates of all degrees
was suddenly trapped, so that of archbishops, bishops and abbots they became my
Lords quondam, and of rich men, beggars. Many fugitive friars, hedge priests,
roages, rascals, verlets and pezaunts seeing this, ran thick to the Popes
court offering themselves to serve him as his slaves, on who^ he bestowed ye
lyuinges whereof other were deprived: so that some yt to day were ruffians,
beggars and lackeyes, as to morrow were become bishops, archbishops, abbots
and priors: thus on all sides the miser Boniface made a miserable clergy for
greedines of money. Beside this many monks and friars did purchase license of
him to dwell aloof out of their religious houses and cloisters: priests
boughte lycences to have as many benefices and dignities as they could get, to
sell their old and to buy new, and to be nonresident at their pleasure.
Neither (says Theodoricus) could any thing be demanded so unjust and absurd,
but for money it might be gotten. And as Boniface did, so his covetous mother
and two of his brethren being in his court with him, obtained grauntes of him
at their pleasure, and sold them for double the price. If any noble men came
to ye court with fair horses, then the mother and her sons would be sure to
have them or the most part of them: for no man durst deny them any thing that
they craved. This Boniface had also a sister whom he gave in marriage to the
Earl of S. Flauia^, and made him duke of Adria, geuinge him with his sister 17.
Thousand Florences, but at length the said duke in a fraye slew her with a
knife, for the which yt duke was afterward trayterouslye murdered. Many
tumults were made and procured by this Boniface in diverse places, and
especially one bloudye sedition which lasted long in Peruse. Also he
entertained very courteously a certain abbot, who to gratifye him had murdered
Beordus governor of Peruse in his bed chamber, suffering him upon especial
good will and amitye to come into him. In the xi. year of this Boniface one
Nicolas de Columna made a conspiracye to have come in the night upon the said
Pope, to have deprived him of his temporal jurisdiction, but he geuinge the
attempt and coming with his men in armor to the Popes gate, was yet
disapointed and fled: but the next day xxxi. of his servants that by
commandment waited upon him were apprehended, and though one word of the
Popes mouth mighe have saved their lives, yet they were all hanged but one, who
being but a striplin for want of an hangma^ was promised pardon if he would
hang the rest: who pausing there at a while (because his own father and
brother were of the same company) did yet at the last for sauinge of his own
life do the execution both on his father, brother and the rest, weeping
tenderlye at this hard hap. And yet he also should afterward have been
hanged, but at ye people moved with compassion, sued for his life.

This Boniface received to favor master Adam an English Cardinal being
skillful in the Hebrew tongue. He banished utterly the Earl of Fundus, who at
the first procured the discord. He reigned over the Romans not like a bishop,
but like a saluage tyrant Nero or Caligula. He suspectinge diverse Romans of
treason against him, did cause them to be put to death. He repaired and
fortifyed ye Pallaice Vatican, the Capitol Angel Castle. There was never Pope
that bare such rough sway over the Romans says Crantzius. He had no
learning, but coueted to increase the pomp of his estate, and therefore devised
a law whereby he purloyned the soueraintye of the world, that is, that it
should not be lawful for any of the clergy to enter on a benefice which he
should obtain, unless he paid the first fruits to the Apostolical
excheaker or the Popes Chamber. He put down the Banderesians a noble estate
among the Romans: also he compelled the Romans by a cruel law, to fetch
home their foreign Senator Malatesta of Pisauria. He strengthened the City
for his own purpose with fortresses and bulwarks: but making wars with the
Uicountes he lost Bononie. He caused Ladislaus a young gentleman son to
Charles king of Naples, to be Crowned king in his fathers Realm by the
Cardinal of Florence: whereupon Sigismunde king of Hungary thinkinge himself
greatly iniuried, great wars ensued to the miserable slaughter of
Thousands, burning and spoiling of Cittyes, towns, monasteryes and castles in
Hungarye: So great a thing it is to dispossess a king. Boniface also
canonized S. Brigit borne in Sweueland. He gave to his cosens and kindred the
advantage and commoditye of the Iubelye. He offended and sinned much in
parcialitye, and because he subscribed and granted certain abominable
indulgences and pardons, he ran into great infamye. He kept the Iubelye at Rome
Anno 1400. where many strangers were robbed, and great Ladies ravished by
the pezantes of the Popes court: Finallye Anno 1404. he dyed of the collicke
and stone. The Summer before that Boniface dyed, there happened horrible
tempests, boisterous winds, hayle, thonder and lightninges. And in the night a
certain house (new builded by Boniface) of square stone very costlye (wherein
for the time he used to bless the people) had ye roof of it blown down by
the violence of the storm, and the timber hurled to the earth. Also the strong
pinacles of Angel castle were thrown to the ground with much other mischief
and ruin. Also another night appeared such terrible and vehements lightning
and thonder all night long, that all men being in a desperate fear, thought
surely the City would have been overwhelmed withal. Another time also there
was in Rome an earthquake, which though it did no hurt yet it amazed al men.
Theodoricus lib. 2. cap. 33.

This Pope rooted out a superstitious sect called Albes, and burnt a priest of
them who came with a great train of that sect both men and women down from
the Alps into Italy: for Boniface seeing him come thus with his company all in
white (for yt which cause they were called Albes) was afraid as some write,
least his Popeship should be taken from him by the said priest. But some (says
Platina) say that the man did purpose no harm, but that the Pope did imagine
this to put away the rumor that went, how the priest was for spite and malice
taken and put to death.

146. Benedict the xiij.
BEnedict the xiii was a Catalan borne and called Peter of the Moon: this man
even in the time of the sciesme duringe Clement by those Cardinals which
continued at Auenio. This fellow while he was but Peter of ye Moon and not
Benedict Pope of Rome, did dispute against the auctoritye of the Pope and of
his clergy, and said that it was not to be feared: and for this his true
saying notwithstanding he became Pope, yet afterward he was and is still
condemned by his successors for an heretic. While he was but Cardinal being
sent by Pope Clement Ambassador to Paris and other places, he used often to
boast that if he might be chosen to succeed Clement, he would spare no means
to procure that this long sciesme might cease. And therefore the Cardinals
abused with his great protestations, did chose him in deed to succeed the
other, but before the election they swear all and he among them, yt whosoever
should be chosen Pope should be content at any time to resign and give it up
again, if the Cardinals thinkinge it meet would require it. But afterward
when it came to trial, he defying his oath would not yield one jot, no though
ye Cardinals and diverse Princes did exhort him to it, and chargde him with his
oath: and councels conclude against him that he was no Pope. But certain
estates of France moved with his troublesome obstinacy, did set upon him by
force of arms: took him priner and kept him so three years, and yet could
not make him give over, but that he would first dye ere he would deminishe his
dignitye: so that they being wearye of him, delivered him again at the end of
the three years.

By his laws it appears that being Pope he would that even the wrong
sentence of condemnation uttered by him and his sons should be feared. He
abode in his place (says Crantzius) till the time of the council of
Constance, and he swarued much in the auctorizinge of it: finally he began to
be hardened being cast of in that counsel. He continued in his obstinacye with
his Cardinals, who also after his death endeavored to continue and maintain
this strife by putting up another to be Pope, but they were forbidden. Among
other things this Pope gave to the king of France ( Charles the vi.) the
tenthes of ye Church, partly to hyre the king to maintain him in his quarrel,
partly that he might take part of this great lucre, and (says Theodoricus) he
saw it stood him upon. He at length followed Boniface his practice in
bestowing benefices, giving dispensatio^s, tolleratio^s, exemptio^s, totquots,
pardons and such like enormityes, according to the saying: If thou saw a
thief run thou did dest run with him. This he did to allure men from the
obedience of Boniface to himself, ye better to maintain his quarrel against
him. When this Pope Benedict abode and planted himself stronglye in his
country, and avouched that he himself was ye true vicar of Christ, he was
shamefullye reproved by the auctoritye of the said general council. And yet he
sommoned and held a Synod in Perpinian, and created many Cardinals. At the
length he dyinge at Paeniscula Anno 1424. commanded these his Cardinals to
choose another in his steed forthwith: and they forthwith choose Giles Munyos
canon of Barchynony, calling him Clement the eight, who out of hand at the
motion of king Olphonsus did both create new Cardinals, and took upon him to
do those things that appertayned to the Pope. But when Pope Martin the fifth
came in favor with king Olpho^sus, this Giles at his commandment yielded
up all the right and estate of the Popedom being appointed bishop of
Maiory: and in like manner they whom he had made Cardinals, did likewise give
over their Cardinalship.

147. Innocent the seventh.
INnocent the seventh was borne at Sulmo and called Cosmarus Peruse: he being
Cardinal of the holy Cross, while all Italye was in an uproar he was made Pope
to succeed Boniface ye ix. While this Innocent was but Cardinal (as Plat.
says) he purposed to reprove ye dastardlines and negligence of the former
Popes, saying yt their s^oath was the cause yt the sciesme of xl. years in the
Church of Rome and the destruction of the common wealth was not redressed. But
he having gotten the Popedom, and following the fashions of Boniface and Urban
in diverse things (which being but a Cardinal he had reproved) he did not
only that which in other he had so much condemned, but also would be highly
offended if any man should have mentioned it unto him. He governed all things
so disorderly, yt when the Romans required to have the Capitol, their
liberty, kight bridge, and Adrian castle to be restorde unto them, and were
very earnest that he should take away this dangerous division in ye Church,
pacify the wars, and qualify the seditions, whereunto the French king
promised his aid, and Peter Moon denied not to take peace: then the Pope
sent the Romans to Lewis his nephewe (dwelling in the hospital called the
holy ghostes hospital) as to an hangma^ for the purpose, who forthwith
murdered xi. of the Citizens, which came to procure redress for their
country, which by the maliciousnes and negligence of the Pope was brought
almost to confusion. The said Lewis first stripped them naked, then he
murdered them, and last of all threw them gasping for breath out at a window
saying: We cannot cast out sedition by any other means then this, Where
their bodies lay mangled in the streates till it was night. By the which
crueltye the Romans being much enraged seeking assistance of Ladislaus king
of Apulia, they range a larum bell and put themselves in armor, to revenge the
villainy upon Lewis. But the Pope to shonne the furye of the people fled in
all post have with his nephew the murderer to Viterbium, in the extreme heat
of the day, so that he and some Cardinals that fled with him being sore heated
were almost choked and dead for want of drink, but xxx. of his company
perished out right. Also one of the pezantes killed the abbot of Peruse by the
way hard beside the Pope, and another pezant killed one of the court for
greedines of a pot of drink before the Popes face: and all their bodies that
dyed by yt way were left unburied. Also after the Pope was come to Viterbium,
many of his court dyed with drinkinge suddenly cold wine. Then the people for
anger that they could not ease their stomachs upon the woorkers of this
treacherye, turned their rage upon the courtiers, whose goods for the most
part was spoiled and taken away, but some courtiers by report were saved in
Cardinals houses. Afterward they having taken the Capitol and won Right
bridge, attempting in vain to assault Adria^ castle. In this broyle John
Columna Earl of Troy, and other noble Captains of great bands, with
Ladislaus his furtheraunce, joined with the Romans. And hereof arose a bloody
conflict joined with much villanye (says Theodoricus) between the Guelphes
and Gibelines, these fightinge for the City, the other joined with the Vrsines
for the Clergy lasted many days in the City with murder, rauishing of women,
robbing and spoiling without co^trolme^t. Many Cardinals were used irreverently,
taken and led to ye Capitol and there beaten with coodgels, some prelates had
their garments torn of their backs and lay long in cruel prison, the Popes
treasury was robbed and pilfred, many of his bulls and pardons with other such
wrytinges were rent and torn. And (says Theodoricus) who can tell all the
vile touches used in the City. The pictures of Pope Innocent were in all places
daubed with dirt and greater despites done against him. But in the end all
things being appeased, because it was thought that Innocentius much misliked
this murder done by his nephew as he dissembled it, the Pope returned to Rome
and choose more Cardinals, among whom were Angel Corrarius a Venetian, Peter
Philargus borne in Candy, and Otho Columna a noble Roman. He having thus
fortifyed his Popeship, created his bloudye nephewe Lewis Marquis of Picene,
and also appointed him afterward Prince of Firma. He commanding the half of
Ecclesiastical liuinges both in France and England, took the foil in this
matter for it was denied him (says Gaguinus) after the which he lived not
long but dyed Anno 1407. at Rome. Theoricus shows how yt when these sturres
were hot in Rome, on a night in Auguste such tempests happened that two
Nuns standinge together, were slain with a flashe of lightninge, and diverse
houses, walls and towers were beaten down. Also he reports yt this
Innocentius refusing contrary to his oath at his election, to come to agreement
with Peter Moon (the other Pope yt stood against him) was straungelye touched
by the hand of God ye same time: for having hired his freindes to be a means
that he should never be more moved to give up his estate, he was sodeinly
taken with a strange Palsy in the face, all men saying it was Gods judgment
for his dissembling, But he was recovered of this ere he returned to Rome.

148. Gregory the xij.
Gregory ye xii. a Venetian borne was first called Angel he being Patriarch of
Constantinople, and S. Marks Cardinal was chosen to succeed Innocent. But
he was chosen at Rome upon this condition, that if it should be needeful for
ye behoof of the Church he should depose himself of his Popeship, because
that Benedict the xiii* called Peter Moon, who at Auenio was chose^ to
succeed Clement the vii. Gregory being enstalled Pope, did confirm his
promise by wrytinge before notaryes and witnesses, upon condition that the
other who also claymed the Popedom should do in like manner, and yield up his
estate. But when Benedict would not but stood stiflye to claim his right,
and fled from Auenio into Spain, this Gregory likewise would not give place.
But in the beginning they notwithstanding exhorting each other by Legates, and
offeringe on either side to yield up their titles, appointed to meet in Sauona
to make peace. But by their conference used by Legates, they so mocked and
disapointed one another (which caused many Christians to speak evil of them)
they sturred a greater strife, and therefore a great council was held at
Pise Anno 1410. wherein these dalyers and deluders were both brought before
the Cardinals of either faction, who with one consent deprived them both of
the Popedom. In this Sinode were 124. deuines, and almost 300. Lawyers which
deposed them both, and choose forthwith one Alexander borne in Candy. This
deed was allowed by all Nations, saving the Spaniards, the Scots, and the Earl
of Armenia, who whollye claue to Peter Moon: nevertheless Gregory and
Benedict defying this council, took upon them still the estate as they did both
before. But fearing least they should be apprehended, the one of them fled to
Ariminus with Leonarde Aretine Secretarye, the other with his companions fled
into Catalony. And thus at one time three Suns (for so the Pope calls
himself the Sun of the world) did shine at one time in the Popedom, and yet
none of them all shoane in heaven. Gregory after the degree of ye council, was
curteouslye entertained by Charles Malatest Prince of Arminus. And while he
stayed at Luca by the consent of ye Cardinals that hitherto forsaked him not,
he created Gabriel Condelmerius his sisters son Cardinal. He drew by the
ears one Nicolas of Luca a white friar and doctor of diuinitye, out of the
pulpit, because in his Sermon he moved and persuaded him to seek for peace and
unity to the profit of all Christendom: beside that he used him so violently
in the Church, he afterward also sent him to prison to terrifye other that they
should not talk of this matter. In the end the fathers of the general
council of Constance sent unto him, that either he should come thither or send
his messenger, and thereupon he sent Charles Malatest to be his proctour, who
saying them thus to be minded to put him from the Popedom, he stepped up into ye
Popes trone (being there for the purpose prepared) and coming down from it
again, francklye gave over the fourth day of Iulye Anno 1415. for the which
free yelding the whole assemble made him Legate of Picene, which as soon as
Gregory understood within a few days for anger, grief and anguish of mind,
he dyed suddenly. But Peter Moon stood stiffely in his dignitye, of whom John
Gerson doctor of diuinitye of Paris did (being present in the said Synod)
speak of yt lunaticke Pope Peter Moon saying, ye Church shall never be at
peace until the Moon be quite eclipsed. But he would not yield neither for
entreating, persuasion, nor threatening of any man. Thomas Walden does make
larger discourse hereof in his Sermon preached before king Henry the fifth of
England.

Because that the doings of these two Popes reigning both at ons, that is
Gregory the ix. and Peter of the Moon are so notorious that it were worthy to
be known, but so long that it were tedious here to be showed, only this may
suffice to signifye their treacheryes, which Theodoricus has written as a
preface to the rest of their storye co^piled by him at large. I come now (says
Theodoricus) to Gregory who succeeded the former Pope Innocentius. A man should
scante find incke and paper sufficient, and should be tediouslye occupied to
declare by what craft, guile, deceit, iugling, caueling, hypocrysies and
subtilties this Gregory was chosen by the College of Cardinals, with whom he
and Peter Moon afterward delayed to agree for the quietness of the
universal Church: promisinge and not performing: and excused themselves for
not agreeing, mocking and deluding with naughtye pranckes all Christendom:
using shifts, excuses, false forgeryes, and frumpinges on both parts by their
messengers to and fro. But it is euidente that they have their consciences
seared, saying that they are plain and simple men, when as they are in deed
full fraughte with diuelishe delusions. And because it should be a godly
deed, they have said and do say yt they would yield to unity, which yet in
their malicious hearts they neither do nor ever did purpose as by their deeds
shall appear, as I will reveal to the world for ever, not only in this
book, but also in my other work called Nemus vnionis. Although alas there be
many kings and princes, and many inferior secular powers, Cities, boroughes,
towns, villages and castles, and the most part of Ecclesiastical prelates of
al sorts, beside clerks and Ecclesiastical parsons both secular and regular
in sondrye countries, nat^ons and lands walkinge and wandering in deserts of
darcknes, and many of them not desiringe the common profit of the catholic
faith, but being divided into sondrye factions for their sundry affections, do
yet cleave to the said Gregory and Peter, vpholdinge and cherishing them most
dampnably in their obstinacye, sciesme and heresye, and lifting them up as
their idols, like the foolish Egiptians etc. What end therefore is like to
come of this lamentable sciesme which they foster which are Lords of this
world, not to procure peace but greater discord, and to be feared if God help
not to the destruction of lower powers, who being perilouslye bewitched and
charmed with the vain promises and sleightes of these two Popes and their
adherents, do uphold them in the pride of their ranckour, mischief and error,
as if there were no God in heaven, but that the salvation of souls and bodies
did only depend upon these two priests of Babylon: from whom more mischief
has spronge and flowed over all the face of the earth, then ever proceeded from
any that fought for the Papacye, from the beginning to this our time. And out
alas these biles and soars are so brast out in the eyes of all the world that
there is no shift to deny or cover the same: whereupon the Catholic faith is
darkened with clouds of ignorance, al religion has suffered shipwreck:
Christians being at jar among themselves do devour one another: Gonnes and
other instruments of mischief and murder are put in practice: fear of God,
honesty and virtue have departed far from kings and governors and from the
people of all sorts, and vice has stepte into their places: and finallye the
whole and universal Church is sick from the Crown of ye head to ye sole of
the foot. etc. Much more to the like effect complayneth Theodoricus, being
then Secretarye to the said Gregory when these vprores were thus raised by
these prelates, whose particular doings as they are many and diverse, so are
they strange, monstrous, horrible, and to be wondered at that any man though
he did but suspect that there were a God, would so delude both the world and
him, but yt the spirit of God has said yt they should be blinded in their
sins. And thus was all the world troubled with this Gregory on the one side
the Sun of darcknes, and with Petrus Luna the man of the Moon on the other
side.

149. Alexander the fifth.
ALexander the fifth was borne in Crete, a franciscan friar in profession,
called Peter Philargus or of Candy. He succeeded the foresaid Gregory in his
Popeship, for the former prelates Gregory and Benedict being deposed in the
counsel of Pice as is said, this Alexander was chosen Pope by general consent
of all that were there present. Which dignitye being bestowed upon him (says
Platina) he was worthelye called Alexander, because he being before but a
beggarly and begging friar, might now be matched with the proudest Prince in
Europe, for excessive prodigalitye and hautye courage. Whereupon he used to
jest merelye oftentimes saying: I am a rich bishop, a poor Cardinal, and a
beggarly Pope. This Pope was of so stout a stomach yt he cast out of his
kingdom Ladislaus then most mighty king of Naples and Apulia, who did convert
to his use more conuenientlye the lordships of the Church being evil gotten. To
this wicked deposition of the Prince agreed all yt clergy and priests of the
council of Pise. This being done, the Pope did most unlawfully bestow it on
Jews duke of Andegania. The council of Pice being dissolved this Pope went to
Bononia, where Balthazar Cossa Cardinal of S. Eustace was president, being a
most sinful Sodomite and filthye baude. This man was confirmed Legate by
Pope Alexander, because that council was sommoned by his politic devise, and
because he was the man who might best encounter and deal against such as
durst at any time go about to govern the Ecclesiastical estate. And this Pope
(says Platina) was more wild in manners, more saluage, more bold and more
laymanlike then became his profession. His life was counted almost a warrefare:
he thought that soldiers and warrelicke prancks, and many other wanton toys
which are not to be named, became him well enoughe. Among other decrees this
Pope made bulls for S. Frauncis marks yt they should be counted among the
articles of Christen faith, and made a solemn holy day that they should be
worshipped of all believers* because he had been a franciscan friar. When this
Pope began to be very sore sick of a poisoned medicine which was mynistred to
him by his Physician Marcillius Parmensis, receiving of Balthazar a great bribe
to do it, (as Baptista Panaetius shows in his six and fiftye Sermon) whereby
Alexander perceived yt his death drue nigh, he exhorted the Cardinals that came
to him to mutual concord, and to maintain the honor of the clergy. And being
now at the last gasp, he said Anno 1411. in the viii. month of his Popedom: I
protest by this death which I see to be at hand, all that was done at the
council of Pise was good and lawful. After he had said this the company
weeping and mourning, he breathed out very feebelye this saying of our
savior: I give you my peace, I leave my peace with you. Thus presumptuouslye
durst he being even at deaths doare, take upon him the power of Christ to give
ye peace of Christ (being peace of conscience though he did not so understand
it) which he could never do. And thus he gane up the ghost in his sin never
asking mercy of God for it.

After this Pope had thus at his departure bestowed his charitable blessing,
there followed both dearth and pestilence, as if that God had turned his
blessing into cursing.

150. John the xxiiij.
John the xxiiii. was borne in Naples, called Balthazar Cardinal of S.
Eustace, a canonist, and yet most given to warlike feats. He having caused
Alexander to be poisoned gat to be Pope. And some say that by scuffling and
manhood he wanne the Popedom, and not by free election. For (says Stella)
while he behaved himself in Bononia, more like a Prince then an Ambassador,
and was liefetenaunt over a great army, the elders meeting there to choose a
new Pope, he threatened to trounce them terriblye, unless they would choose him
a Pope according to his mind, and thereupon many were brought forth to him to
be approved, but he would allow none of them. Therefore he was entreated to
signifye and appointe who^ he would have to be Pope, hereupon give me (quoth
he) S. Peter's roabe, and I will bestow it on him that shall be Pope, to the
which they consented. He then taking it put it upon him self, and having it on
his shoulders said thus (as it is used in pronouncinge him that is elected: In
the name of God Amen, I Balthazar Cossa am Pope. This thing being done
contrary to all their expectacion they durst not yet reprove it, notwtstanding
they much mislyked it. And thus Pope John beguiled the foolish Cardinals, and
bestowed liberallye the Popedom upon his own parson. He being crowned Pope
did forthwith send into Germanye to will them to make Sigismond Emperor
according to the custom: he having obtained his purpose, held a counsel at
Rome to crown Sigismond Emperor there. In the first session or sitting of the
said council, the mass of the holy Ghost being done as the Pope sat aloft
in his throne, by and by an owl came in, which sittinge upon a beam of the
Temple and fastening her eyes steadfastly upon the Popes grim countenance, did
with her irksome shriking and horrible noise salute the Pope. The by standers
were much amazed thereat, and some of them said in their whispering: Lo the
holy ghost is come, to who^ our Pope prayed so earnestlye to aid him
according to his hope: Othersome lookinge one upon another and upon the Pope,
fell to grinning and laughing. But Pope John good man was in a sore
perplexitye, for he blushed very red, he sweat, he freated, his grease melted
within him, and he chafed inwardlye above measure, and at the length because he
could not devise how to remedy this his foul confusion, he brake up the
council and went away. Then followed another sitting, in the which he was in
the like agonye again, and that with more distress. For the saucye owl
without any su^moning presumed to come into the counsel place again, and could
not be desired away with hysshing, whopping, and hallowinge, neither scarred
nor terrifyed with coodgiels and bats, so that in that Sinode likewise nothing
was done but chasing of the owl, and not yt. Hereupon many said that such
spiritual doves had long time been the chief birds in the Church. This
historye is written by one Nicolas Clemanges in an Epistle of his. Furthermore
for the mutenyes and debate that was among the Italians, whereof he was author,
Sigismond and his train could not come safelye to Rome. He therefore being
cited (as Massaeus says) by all nations almost to appointe another place for
the assemble, he choose Constance a Cittye in the province of Men's, and
appointed the day to be the Ralendes of Noue^ber Anno 1414. Some in ye mean
time persuaded him not to go thither, least perhaps he should be vnpoped ere he
returned. Notwtsta^ding he went thither with ye most subtle advocates and
lawyers, to answer al obiectio^s yt might come. But in ye midst of his
voyage he tombled headlong out of his chariot, which he took to be a token of
ill luck to ensue. When this Pope John came to Consta^ce, he began the general
counsel with the consent of ye Emperor and other Christian Princes Anno 1414.
The Emperor Sigismond came thither upon Christmas eve, and as soon as after
the first mass of the said night a deacon had song the Gospel beginning thus:
There went forth an edict from the Emperor Augustus etc. and they being set
in council in the presence of Sigismond, every man having liberty granted to
him to speak freelye, there were above fourtye heinous articles put up and
proved against Pope John. As that he conspired the death of his predecessor
Alexander, in byringe his Physician Marcilius to poison him. etc. Therefore he
was compelled by the voice of the council to give up his Popeship, because he
was an heretic, a simonist, a liar, an hypocrite, a poysoner, a dycer, an
adulterer, a Sodomite, and of all kind of trecherye shamefullye attainted.
Therefore he changing his apparel, began to steal away the xxi. day of
March followinge to Scafuse a town in Austria, and from thence to Friborow.
But the council provided so that the xxix. day of May in the v. year of his
Popedom, he was uncased of al offices, sought out, found, and committed to
prison in a strong hold in Germanye: where he was locked up three years and
had none that assisted him, but only the Germaynes, who to their great damage
did not understand neither the Latin nor the Italian tongue. It it also noted
in the storye of Albanus, that this Pope John was spoiled of al his riches at
his deposinge, which amounted to 75. Thousand Flore^ces of gould and silver. In
the meanetime (says Massaeus the presidents of ye Sinode published a decree,
wherein they showed that a general council being lawfullye gathered together, is
above the Pope, and that it has power and auctoritye from Christ (who is ye
head of the Church.)

In this council whereas many things might have been done, both for the
glory of Christ and for the common wealth, yet nothing was done but canons
devised against those that sought to revive the light of the Gospel, to
suppress both it and them. In this counsel John VVicliffe a famous, godly
and learned man was excommunicated and condemned for an heretic, because he by
the Scripture in preachinge and writing, detected the delusions of the Pope,
and his monks, friars, nuns, and such other, and many years after his
death, his b^dnes were taken out of his grave here in England (where he was
buried) and were burnte. Also John Husse and Ierom Prage having a safeconduct
to come safe and go safe, were cited to this council, and when they were come
because they had inueighed against the Church of Rome (notwithstanding their
warrant granted and sealed with the Popes bull,) yet they were taken and
cruelly burnt. Platina says they were burnt partly because they avouched that
the clergy ought according to the example of Christ and of the Apostles live
poorelye. Such is the liberty which the Pope grants those that come to his
councelles, such is the warrante that he gives for safetye, and thus he
keeps his faith. Among other Popelike pageants played by this Pope John, he
also broched and styrred most cruel and bloudye war against Ladislaus, and
held a conspiracye at Rome to drive him out of his kingdom. He commanded yt
they should say service with S. John Baptistes head set out in show the whilst,
the which he did for this pollicye, because he purposed to sell it to the
Florentines.

While Martin the fifth who did succeed him and supplied his room was at
Florence, this Pope John being delivered out of prison against all men's hope,
to the great marvel of the people he came thither to him, and kissing the
feet of Pope Martin he did acknowledge him to be his Pope, to be Peter's
successor, and honored him like a worldly God. Pope Martin being moved with
this his great humilitye, did make him Cardinal within a few days after and
made him bishop of Tusculan, but within a few months after he ended his
doleful life, through sorrow and grief of mind Anno 1419. where his
Physician Cosmus that did ever love him hartelye, caused him to be buried in S.
John Baptistes Church with great solemnitye, where this Epitaphe was made on
him in Latin Uerse.

First Balthazer and then the name of John I did obtain,
But being now vnpoped I am Balthazer again.
Of late I was the vvelthiest vvight within the heavenly cope,
But in one hour all I lost deposed from being Pope.
While I did sit on Peter's chair as sovereign for a space,
Then many men with lovvlye looks were humbled to my face.
The greedy plague of covetousness so bleard mine eyes with gould
That for to staunch my hungrye mind all holy things I sold.
Alas my loathed life has stainde and tainted very fore,
The spouse of Christ that neither spot nor vvrinkle had before.
For this my filthy treachery Saint Peter's council pure,
Would suffer me in hauty trone no longer to endure.
Then let all Popes by me bevvare that shall hereafter live,
Do not with me for cursed bribes your holy matters give.
151. Martin the fifth.
MArtin the fifth was borne in Rome and called Otho Columna Cardinal of S.
George: he was made Pope by the decree of ye council of Constance, which to
establish him did deprive three other, that is Benedict, Gregory and John. He
being brought up by his parents in learning from his youth, when he grew to
years attended upon ye Popeship still at Peruse in such order as he might
creep forward toward it. He returning to Rome was made Rememberer unto Urban
the sixth, which office he discharged with so great show of humilitye and
courteous nature, that Innocent the seventh made him Cardinal. For in all
controuersyes he would agree to neither part, no not to the truer, but so
keep in a mean yt he pleased all, and offended none. For this cause he was so
in favor with the Emperor and Cardinals, that in the foresaid council he
was made Pope. At whose election the Emperor Sigismond was so joyful of it
that he thanked them all for chusinge such a Pope, and humbling himself to him
kissed his feet. The Pope again embrasing him like a brother did thank him on
the other side, because his diligence had at ye length restored ye peace to ye
Church. After this salutacio^ ye Pope mounted on his palfreye, his coronation
being also ended with great triumph he passed pompously (from the place where he
was crowned) through the City of Constance with his horse trapped in skarlet,
and all his abbottes and bishops in roabes and miters rydinge after him, and
his Cardinals with their horses trapped in white silk. But the Emperor on the
one side of the Popes horse, and the prince Electour on ye other side waited on
foot upon him through the City. And yet soon after he conveyed himself
away, and as ( Volateranus says) maugre ye Emperors head, he returned in all
poast have into Italy. He passed through Millen, Mantua, Ferraria, Rauenna, and
other towns til he came to Florence: but mistrusting danger he shonned
Bononia. He abode at Florence two years living in all fleshlye pleasures,
pomp and idleness, and preached not the Gospel so much as once. Furthermore
while he was before at Constance, when the Emperor and other Princes made
often complaints to him of naughty behavior, and detestable manners of the
clergy, he deferred the time to redress it, saying yt it was a matter that
required both leisure and good advise. For (quoth he as Jerome says) Every
province has his fashions and customs, which cannot be altered without much
hurlye burlye. And now because it was feared, that the general councels
auctority should be taken to be above the Popes, he made this decree concerning
councels, yt none should be sommoned again till five years were expired, and
then from that time it should be continued for ten years, and so from ten
years to ten years the general council should be kept. Therefore Pope Martin
having spent in his iourneing (as is said) two years, after he had been much
desired and longed for, he came to Rome and repaired ye City in outward
buildinges and Popish traditions. He demanded the Church inheritance with
cruel war. He established Lewis son to Alouicius in the kingdom of
Naples, and deposed Alpho^sus Arrogan: he appeased certain sciesmes in ye
Church: he caused the Germaynes to war upon the Bohemians, for heresye (as
they call it). He hired VValdenus an English Cardinal, to write against those
that defended the doctrine of Husse and Wickliffe. He made more Cardinals, and
condemned all those decrees which the Popes had made in the time of the
sciesme. He had a nephewe (as they call their sons) called Prosperus Columna,
and caused him to succeed him in his Cardinalship of S. George. He published a
certain form for bargeninge, byinge and selling. He heaped up store of
treasure: he entering into Rome and finding it all ruinous, did repair not
only ye houses, streates and Churches, but the walls also with great and
sumptuous cost and gorgeous work diversely. Beside he bestowed much cost upon
Churches and cloisters: and repaired old ruinous houses dedicated to the xii.
Apostles. He held two Sinodes one at Seen, and another at Papia: and confirmed
by his decree that the next council after ten years should be held at Basil.
Finallye he dyed of the falling sickness at Rome Anno 1431. and was buried in a
bras^n tomb in Lateran.

152. Eugenius the fourth.
EVgenius the fourth was a Venetian borne and a Coelestinian canon, called
before Gabriel Condelmerius: his fathers name was Angel. He being a Cardinal
gatte the Popedom by this means (as Platina says) For when Gregory the xii
a Venetian was made Pope, his nephew Antony Corrarius a canon of the order of
Coelestines goinge to Rome, took this Gabriel with him being of ye same
profession. Whom Gregory lyking well did first make his treasurer and afterward
bishop of Seen, and made Antonye prelate to the Bononians. Afterward he
mistrustinge his estate, and departing from Rome to Luca minding to augmente
the number of Cardinals, he made both his nephews Cardinals. For first Pope
Gregory and afterward Pope Martin were much ruled by the council of Gabriel,
especially in embassages: whereby he succedinge them did trouble all the world.
Certain cauiling parso^s were very busye about him to put into his head that
Pope Martin his predecessor being a great hourder up of treasure, had left
great abundance thereof: whereby they brought him to this point, that he
commanded that his kinsmen, friends, and vicechauncelour, should be taken,
and their goods be confiscat. Hereupon the Romans mindful of their
libertyes, raised a maine cry, and put themselves in armor, and dryuing out
all the magistrates of Eugenius, and taking Frauncis Candelmerius his nephew
prisoner, they choose new officers whereof vii. were Citizens of Rome whom
they called governors, who had power of life and death. In the mean time
Eugenius amazed in this stir devised to run away. And therefore disguising
himself in his apparel and puttinge on a monks weed, he entering into a
fisher boot with one Arcenius a certain monk beguiled his keepers, and was
transported to Hostia. But the Romans understanding thereof did pursue him
with arrows and stoanes. But he gat from thence to Pisa, and from thence to
Florence, having his galleyes ready for the purpose: where he dwellinge for
the space of certain years, made xvi Cardinals. Afterward he went to
Bononia and there builded certain sumptuous houses. He refused to come to the
council at Basil Anno. 1432. because it was said that a council was above the
Pope, and again because he being cited should have been called to aunsweare
such faults as were laid against him. And therefore he was deposed and
condemned for an heretic, and Amadeus Duke of Sabaudia and an heremite was
placed in his steed. In this council were condemned they that kept
concubines, and walkers in the Church in service time. Also the communion was
allowed under both kinds in the xxx. session. They yt were cosins to the Pope
or Cardinals, were depryued from being Cardinals. The feast of our Ladies
co^ception (as they term it) was then decreed. But Pope Eugenius to overthrow
this council of Basil, did summon another at Ferrara, and afterward at
Florence. There were at Florence the Ambassadors of the Gretians, Aethiopians,
Asians, Armenians, Indians, Danes, and other Legates out of the East, who did
there give their consent to many things of the Popes religion, because they
were (as Stella says) al maintained upon the Popes charge. But the Legates
being returned home especially the Danes, were not allowed of their country
for that wherein they had yielded to the Pope as the chronicles of Polonia do
testifye.

It is worthy here to be mentioned what a miserable destruction fell upon
Ladislaus king of Hungary. Pope Eugenius compelled this king being a young man,
to break his oath and not keep the league which he had sworn unto Amurithes
the great Turk. But while this young Prince Ladislaus being xxii. years old,
does vnwarelye seek to obey the Pope as his most holy father, he was
worthelye plagued by Amurithes. For while Amurithes bringing an houge host
warred upon him, he having his army slain, at the length being beguiled by
Eugenius was also slain.

They say that this Pope Eugenius was maruelouslye delighted in wars, and
that he being moved with great grudge, did stir up Lewis the Dolphin of
France son to Charles the vii. against the Basilians. Whereof great
mischief ensued. And afterward when he came to Rome he bestowed many things
on the City, as buildings and reparations, with diverse superstitious works,
to the enriching and pleasuring of monks, friars, and such like. He first
tormented cruellye Thomas Redonensis and William Estonteuill, and afterward
did burn them most terriblye: for Thomas said that there were many
abominations in Rome, and that the Church had need of great reformation.
Furthermore he said that the Popes curse for the quarrel of Christ is not to be
feared. This Eugenius canonized one Cyril that wrote many fantastical visions
under the name of Revelations. Touching the foresaid Thomas, Il^iricus says
thus in his Catalog: Thomas Redonius a white friar borne in France in ye
Dukedom of Britain was a famous preacher flourishing (says Antonius) Anno
1430. He in his preaching tought through France and Italy yt great
abhominatio^s was used in Rome, that the Church wanted great reformation, and
that the prelates forsakinge their pomp and royat, ought to live more
modestlye, according to the example of Christ and his Apostles: and that the
Popes unjust curses are not to be feared. For these opinions Pope Eugenius
caused him to be burned at Rome Anno 1436. This Thomas also thought
reuerentlye of the marriage of the clergy, for he wrote that it was against the
safetye of many souls, if they were not suffered to marrye according to the
manner of the Greek Church, who ha^ not the gift of co^tinencye. Because at
that time they were dishonest and blotted with unlawful conjunction. Of this
Thomas Mantuan says thus: A certain Frenchman called Thomas, who as yet
fostred in heart the zeal of old faith went into Italye accompanied with a
few. For so it pleased God yt the same countreye which in all things
excels other, should also enjoy this parson being a mirror among men. But
God provided not only for Italye, but also for this holy man: for he gave to
Italye such an one whose life it might follow, and to the said man he gave a
crimsen crown of martyrdom. For while he lived well and in godly order, he
was accused unto the Pope of heinous treacherye by certain spiteful fellows,
and after he had suffered prison, torments, vexation, at the length when they
could find nothing in him worthy of death, they sifted him more narrowlye,
and armed themselves stoutlye with iniquitye to fulfill that which by equitye
they could not do. And so committed him to the cursed fire. Of this man were
many Uerses and Epitaphes written to his great praise, and bewayling of the
tyranny used toward his innocent body. Furthermore Eugenius ere he were Pope,
did repair S. Agnes Church at Ancon, and the gate of the City, and in his
Popedom he Crowned Sigismond Emperor at Rome. He also after Boniface
confirmed the annuities of all benefices. At length he dyed at Rome Anno 1446.
and was buried at S. Peter's. He carried the Miter of S. Syluester (being brought
from Auenion to Rome) out of Vatican to Lateran, with great worship and a
procession. He punished certain priests that had pilfred certain precious
stones out of Peter's and Paul's head. One Lewis Cardinal of Aquilegia was the
first of his order that began first to maintain hounds and horses, in steed
of the poor.

153. Foelix the fifth.
Foelix the fifte borne in France was an heremite called Amadeus before his
Popeship, He being first Duke of Sauoy, having a wife and two children (Pope
Eugenius being deposed) was advanced to the seat by the voices of xxvi.
Electours. And notwithstanding he were chosen and by the auctoritye of Basil
Synod confirmed in the Papal chair, yet he being hindered by the faction of
the said Eugenius, could never set foot in ye Roman seat, which they call
Peter's chair. A sciesme rose hereupon that lasted ^ years, and many tumultes
sprange in the kingdoms of Christendom, because some would obey Eugenius,
some Foelix and other some would be counted neuters. And in this sciesme it
made much controuersye, because some held opinion that the Pope was under the
jurisdiction of the general counsel, and othersome maintained the contrary.
And of this arose another waightye and bitter controuersye whether the Pope
were head of ye Church or no, which continues to this day. This Foelix being
an aged man ere he came to be Pope lived to see the day, that the sons of his
sons matched in marriage with kings daughters. And in the end giving over all
worldly charge, ^e purposed to go into a wilderness to lead an heremites life
with 6. knights. But as soon as he understood that he was chosen Pope by the
auctoritye of the general counsel, he shaued himself both crown and chinne
and came thither with a train of noble men, and being consecrate Pope took the
function upon him, and did all things that belonged to the Pope to do, to
give orders, minister Sacraments, excommunicate etc. and played the Pope x.
years. He was so bountiful to the poor, that being demanded whether he kept
any hounds and to show them: he answered that he would show them another day.
But when they that asked this question were with him the next day, he showed
them a great company of poor and needye people that sat down together at
dinner: saying, these are my hounds which I feed dailye, with the which I
hope to hunte for the glory of heaven.

It liked this man at ye length for unity sake Anno 1447. to vnpope himself,
and give place to Nicolas the fifth: who^ he therefore made Legate of all
Germanye and France, and also Cardinal of Sabin, but he dyed sone after.

154. Nicolas the fifth.
NIcolas the fifte was a Genewaie borne of a base stock, Barthelmew Sarzan:
and so this Nicolas was first called Thomas Sarzan. In this one year he gatte
to be bishop of Bononia, Cardinal, and Pope of Rome. This Nicolas being made
Pope after the death of Eugenius, did hang up on the walls of Angel Casteli,
Steven Porcarius a Roman knighte, with other conspiratours raising a tumult for
the liberty of ye City. He celebrated ye Iub^lie for lucre sake Anno 1450.

At the time of this Iubelie while they chanced once with the crucifixe to
return from Vatican to the City, it is very certain to be true that ye
preace of people followinge was so great, that the Mule of one Peter Bardus a
Cardinal could not pass by, because of those that came to and fro: so that
the people also were so thronged that there was no passage, but in the end
they fell upon the Mule first one and then another, til the beast was even
perforce borne down with the crowde, and ere it was ceased two hundred parsons
were trodden to death and smothered upon Adrian bridge: and many fallinge
beside the bridge were drowned, which were about 136. men. The Pope whose
pompous superstitious and idolatrous Iubelie had caused this miserye to fall
upon the fond people, did in this manner redress ye case: He was sorye (says
Platina) for the death of them yt were slain, and therefore he removed certain
cotages that made the way to be strait and narrow entringe to the bridge.
For the enryching of his cofers he spent all that whole year in this kind of
solemnitye, and he himself with his troop of Cardinals did vewe the stages.
He provided both by curse and wayters, that roages and vagaboundes coming to
the City, should not misuse strangers and rob them of their money. In this
Popes time ye Turk wanne Constantinople, to the great grief of all Europe.
This Pope crowned Frederick the third Emperor, and his wife Leonor He builded
a sumptuous library in Vatican. And revived with great dillige^ce learning and
knowledge, which was then almost drowned with grossenes and barbarous
sophistrye. He appointed stipendes for learned men. But among these his
virtuous doings and good affection toward learning, he had his vices withal
and those notorious, namely he was greatly given to dronkennes, and so much
delighted therein, that he sought for all kind of wynes from every place. He
bestowed great cost upon buildinges both of ye town walls, Churches, Palaces
and Castles. Concerning his building ( Platina says) he began to fortifye with
strong walls the gates and towers of the City, the Capitol and Angel
Castle. He builded sumptuouslye and magnificentlye both in the town and at
Vatican, as in the town the Popes house: also he repaired the house of S.
Steven in Celius hill. He raised even from the ground S. Theodors Church. He
covered with lead an old Church in Rome called Panthion He transported the Popes
house in Vatican, and brought it to a statelye form. He began to lay the
walls of Vatican with greater foundation. He restored Right bridge, and
builded a great and large house beside Vi^erby bathes. He aided diverse with
money, that builded in the Cittye. And at his commandment almost all the
streates in the City were strowed. There are yet remayninge certain Uessels
of gould and of silver, crosses beset with Pearls and precious stones,
certain priests roabes gorgeouslye decked with golden owches and pearls: also
certain coueringes and hanginges wouen of gould and silver, beside a certain
pontifical Miter, which remain as monumentes of his plentiful pomp and
magnificencye etc. Finallye he being troubled with an agewe and the gout, dyed
Anno 1455.

155. Calixtus the third.
CAlixtus the third a Spaniarde borne in Valentia called Alphonsus Borgia, his
father was called John and his mother Frauncis: Pope Nicolas being dead, this
Alphonsus being an old impotent man was chosen in his steed. This Pope as
writers do testifye of him was very ^unning in the Popes canon law, but
whollye ignorant in the Scripture as it appears by his deeds. He was first
Secretarye to Alphonsus king of Aragon, and made bishop of Valentia by Pope
Martin the fifth, and Cardinal by Eugenius the fourth. As soon as he was Pope he
forthwith provided and addicted himself (not to preach to nations) but to
follow wars against the Turk, proclayming it out of hand as he had vowed
before. And to further this purpose he sent out a rabble of friars with bulls
and pardons, to encourage the Christian nations against the Turk. Among these
Johannes Capistranus and Robartus Licius were of most renown, being both
minorite friars and notorious hypocrites: who to draw the more fish to their
net, and to the greater filling of their purses, used many shameful shifts
deluding men with dissembled and counterfaite holiness, Letanies, penance,
fasting, false merits, shryuings, relics, images, crosses, songs,
canticles, notes, ringing of belles, and singing cakes. The Pope also for his
part was busye to stir up all Princes by his letters to take the quarrel in
hand, as a matter very needful and godly. Also he commanded the priests
every day at noone to ringe the sacringe bell, and at night with an Aue
Maria: that (says Stella) they might by this holy prayer, help them that
fought against the Turk. Certain sillye countrymen seeing this folly in ye
Pope laughed thereat, whereupon ye Pope caused them to be hanged for it. He
decreed that no man should appeal from the Pope to a general council. He
suffered his nephews and bastards to live licenciouslye. He poured out (says
Valerius) his letters of pardon in pure fashion, whe^by selling them then for
five ducates which now are sold for cryfles, he left to his successor in
treasure, an hundred mill^ns and fiftene thousand ducates. At the length he
dyed for age Anno 1458. and was buried in Peter's Pallaice, or the round Church.

156. Pius the second.
PIus the second borne in Hetruria called first AEneas Picothomineus, Basil he
was the Popesscribe, and did with his Epistles and orations stand against ye
auctoritye of Eugenius. Afterward he was made Poet Lawreat of the Emperor
Frederick the third, and being called to attend in his Court, his first
promotion was that he was made counselor and Secretarye. Afterward he being
sent Ambassador to diverse Princes, was first made bishop of Tergest by Pope
Nicolas, then of Scene, and finally Cardinal by Pope Calixtus. In the end he
attayning to the Papacye did as his elders, he began to proclaim ye wars
against ye Turk, but he dyed ere he could proceed in his purpose. He sought
still to enlarge the dominion of the Church, for ye which (says Stella) it
appeared that he feared neither king, nor prince, nor duke. If any man
offended him he would sore molest him with war and taxes, till he made him
satisfaction. And therefore he was an heavy enemy to king Lewis the xi. of
France, because he went about to abridge ye licentious liberty of the clergy
in his Realm. He warred upon Borsius duke of Mutina, because he did favor
Sigismond Mala^esta, and the estate of France against Frederick: for he set
Ferdinandus bastard of king Alphonsus in ye kingdom of Naples violentlye with
auctoritye and men of arms, against John of Angewe son of king Renatus. He
cursed Sigismond duke of Austria even to the pit of hell, because he bridled
the polling of Cardinal Cusan: furthermore he did even as an angry Uiper (says
VVolphamus VVissemburgius) spit out the poison of his curse upon his
Ambassador George Haimburg a worthy lawyer, and did so persecute him with his
thondringe letters, yt he was feign to fly into Bohemia, and live there. He
chased Deitherus Archbishop of Maguntia like a mad man out of his diocese,
and planted another in his steed: whereupon great discord arose between
Frederick the Palatine and duke of VVittenburg, with other in Germanye, by
means whereof ensued great slaughter and bloodshed, and the City of Mentz being
before a free City lost his freedom then. The cause of the Popes displeasure
against Deitherus was, first because that Deitherus would not consent that
the Pope should charge his country with certain great taxes and tallenges:
secondly because yt he would not be bound unto the Pope, that he being Prince
Electour should not as the Pope required without his license, call the other
Electours together: Thirdly because he would not suffer the Popes Legate to
call together the clergy within the diocese of Mentz as the Legate listed:
but as he being bishop thought best. For these causes the Pope disquieted both
him and Germany. Also he removed the Archbishop of Beneuent for making new
orders against his will. He commanded George king of Bohemia to aunsweare
upon an appointed day touching his faith, upon peril of le^sing his kingdom,
because he favored the opinions of Husse. He deposed many bishops for his own
lucre. He subdued many towns of Campania, and increased maruelouslye the
revenues of the Church. He was very beneficial to his friends and kindred. He
caused an head to be translated from Peloponesus, which was said to be S.
Andrews head, beside he wroughte diverse other Popish pranckes. He powered out
riches upon diverse vain, sumptuous and prodigal buildinges. He made Corsian
the town where he was borne to be a City, calling it after his own name
Pientia, buildinge a statelye Church of wrought stone in it. In the end he
dyed of an agew at Ancona, goinge thither about his wars. He was much
troubled with diseases while he lived, as with the coughe, the stone, and the
gout. Volateranus says that ambition did ouerwhelme many virtues in him: for
he was ever greedye of promocion, and therefore he took great pains and sought
the favor of Princes.

This Epitaphe was found written of him in an old book.

Frigida membra Pij retinet lapis iste loquacis,
Qui pacem moriens attulit Italiae.
Sum Deus, quantum mortalibus alme dedisti,
Fulmine cum tetigit hoc caput aequa manus?
Vendiderat precio gentes, and crimina multa
Virtutis ^pecie gesserat ille Pius.
Impius hic fuerat, quamuis sub nomine pulchro,
Crediderit falsis posse iuuare fidem.
Nunc fidi comites, scelerataque turba clientum,
Ingemuere Pium: nam scelus orbis erat.
CONCLVSIO,
Impius hic situs est, crudelis, raptor iniquus,
Aeneas, fatue quem genuere Senae.
Platina and Sabellicus do testifye, that among other his prouerbiall sentences
he left this in writing: There is a great cause why the clergy should be
deprived of marriage, but greater cause why they should be suffered to marrye.
He has the same saying also in his second book of Counsel: Perhaps (says
he) it should not be worse if most priests were wedded: because that in married
priesthood many should be saved, that in unwedded priesthood are dampened.
This Pius the second (says Coelius secundus) did break up diverse nooneryes,
co^mau^ding them to come out of their cloister and to burn no longer in
co^cupisce^ce, and not to play the strompets secretelye under pretense of
Religion. John Maria Polutianus says yt in these days the Minorites and
Bullistes in Italye fell out bitterlye, stryuing whether of them should visit,
keep and rule the nuns.

157. Paul the second.
Paul the second was borne in Venice called first Peter Ba^bus, nephewe to
Eugenius the fourth: he being Cardinal of S. Mark succeeded Pope Pius. He
before his Papacye purposed to fall to the trade of merchandise, but when he
heard that his ^nckle Gabriel was created Pope, he began to apply his mind to
his book: and so arose from one degree to another, till in the end he gat the
Papacye. He was a man of a goodlye parsonage, but of a hautye mind: he was
very covetous and bestowed benefices for rewards. Touching his pontif^call
pomp, ye need not doubt (says Platina) that he furnished it in such sort as
he excelled all his predecessors, especially in his royal kingdom. Touching
his Miter he bestowed infinite treasure thereon, procurin^e to have brought to
him from every place of great price, Diamants, Saphyrs, Carbuncles, Chrysolits,
Iasperstones, Pearls and all other kind of precious stones. He being thus
royallye attyred like Aaron with Jewels, showed himself abroad in such a
majesty, as never did any earthlye creature. Then his desire was to be gazed
on and to be worshipped: and for this cause he stayed strangers often in the
City, shewinge his handkerchiffe in the streate, that the greater company
might behold him. He commanded also that none should presume to wear a
scarlet hat but the Cardinals, on whom he bestowed much cloth of the same
color in the first year of his Popeship, to make them trappinges for their
horses and Mules says Platina. He practisinge both by word and by sword to
advance the majesty of his seat, did nothing all his life time but move
war in Italye suddenly when he spyed his aduau^tage. Among diverse others
Cities he assaulted Arminium, and caused both Suburbs and City to be
myserablye shaken, rent and torn, with force of gunneshotte and other engines.
He abhorred even from his heart the decrees and deeds of his predecessor
Pius. He restored the regular Canons whom Calixtus had expulsed out of Lateran
abbey: and bestowed great buildinges at S. Marks and at Vatican. He condemned
all chose to be heretics that should make any mention of universities, for he
was a very doult and of gross capacitye, and therefore he loved neither
learning nor virtue. He being whollye addicted to ambition, royotousnes and
pleasure, spent the whole day either in feasting (as Volateranus says) or in
taking up his money, or else in searching out and vewing of old coins,
images or Jewels. His greatest care was that the City should never lack
victuals. Finallye after he had created ten Cardinals whereof Frauncis
Ruerius was one, and assured himself to live long, Anno 1470. he dyed of an
Apoplexy suddenly by him self alone, after he had supped meerelye. After his
death his cosins the Cardinals bestowed on him a wonderful rich and costlye
tomb.

From this time forward the estate of the Papacye began to impair and decay.
Stanislaus Ruthenus reports this one notable thing of this Pope Paul in
these words:

When Pope Paul had seen certain latin Verses written against him and his
daughter, it is reported that he wept, and cried out against the hardness of the
law of single life among his friends. Because that he who ought to be not
only the head of the Church but also of chastlife, should see his daughter
live in the face and countenance of the City, with great shame and disdain:
who although she were very beutifull, yet it grieved his heart that it should
be said he begat her in whoredom, because he knew that there was a law of
God, whereby she might have been borne in wedlock, unless this law of
single life had disanulled it. They say therefore that he took council how he
might restore again the marriage of the clergy: but being prevented by death
he could not attain to his purpose.

158. Sixtus the fourth.
SIxtus the fourth was borne at Sauona in Liguria called Frauncis Ruerius
before, and general minister of the Franciscans, succeeded Pope Paul. He being
at a time of solemnitye carried in an horselitter to Lateran, there arose a
sodein tumult, so that the Pope was in great danger of loosing his life being
so pelted with stones, so that the dryuers did almost forsake him in the
Litter. This Pope used to grant one benefice to diverse and sundry parsons. He
loved his friends so well, that to gratifye them he did many things against
all law and equitye. He promoted his companion Peter Ruerius both of his own
order and cou^trye, whom with his brother Hierome he brought up for purpose to
be a Cardinal, a man otherwise borne to wast riches: for within the space of
two years after (then which time he lived not longer) he spent of himself
alone by his royotous living* two hundredth thousand Crowns, beside this he
endebted himself three score Thousand, and spent in silver three hundred
pounds. He dyed being wasted through his incontinent life, when he was but
xxviii. years old Anno 1474. His death was most hinderaunce to handicraft men,
for he ever filled their shoppes with store of knackes. John Textor in his
officine says thus: Peter a priest and Cardinal in the time of Sixtus the
fourth, wasted about vanities and luxuriousnes, three hundred Thousand Crowns
within ye space of two years. Again John Riueus in his book De erroribus
pontisiciorum says, ye Fulgosus reports of the incredible prodigality of the
said party. It were to long to rehearse all his words for breuitye sake
these few may suffice, which I think is the least to be spoken of: namely
that he ware goulden roabes at home in his house, that he had his couerlets of
gould for his beds, his Chamber stools and pottes of silver: Also he provided
for his concubine Tyresia, shoes covered with Pearls. By this a man may guess
the rest of his unmeasurable pomp and prodigalitye.

But Hierome brother to the said Peter, being made chief of Liuius court and
Cornelius court, after him did rule and order the matters of the Church: being
a man of more severe nature and less lascivious, sauinge one way not to be
named. After these Sixtus advanced the children of his brethren and sisterne,
among whom he made one Julian Cardinal and his brother John President of the
City, and Prince of Sora and Seuogallia. He loved (says Platina his kindred
above measure, bestowing and lauisshing on them that which belo^ged both to man
and God against all justice. And by the judgment of many he plonged all
Italye with bloudye broils, and that without cause. Therefore says
Volateranus, when he was driven to necessitye having wasted his wealth upon
these tumults, he was the first that began to practice this shifte: He devised
to pick out certain Colleges. Again Agrippa says of him thus: among the
bawdes of late years that set up and builded stews, Pope Sixtus ye fourth
was most famous, who builded a notable stews at Rome and (as he says in his
declamatio^ to the Louanians he shows at large) not only for harlots, but
otherwise horrible to be thought upon. He following ye example of Heliogabalus,
did maintain his train of harlots, and bestowed them on his friends and
servants. Beside he had his fee coming into his treasure of that money,
which the harlots earned by their misdemeanour, to the enrychinge of his
cofers: for ye strompets of Rome do yet pay their July tribute (as it is
termed) every week to the Pope, which in yearly revenues has oftentimes
amounted to xx. Thousand ducates, and now by report arises to fourtye
Thousand. And so ye treasurers of the Church are bound to make account as
well of harlots tribute, as of the Church lands.

VVesselus Groningensis (called the light of the world) in the discourse of the
Popes indulgences writes of this Pope Sixtus, that at ye suit of the foresaid
Peter then Cardinal of S. Sixtus, and Patriarch of Constantinople, and of his
brother Hierome, he granted the whole familye of the Cardinal of S. Lucia
(who in his former young years had in like manner yielded himself to the
detestable lust of Pope Paul the second) to file their bodies lawfullye, in
most unlawful, unnatural and unspeakable manner for 3. hot months June Iulye
and August, which he granted with this clause: Fiat vt petitur, Do according
to your request. O horrible and monstrons men, more saluage then brute
beasts, wear it not but that malice of Antichrist and the devil (sparing no
blasphemye to slander ye Church of Christ) dryueth me to detecte their
loathsome treacherye and nakedness, I would rather help to burye these
villanyes in silence then to utter these their filthiness, which I cannot but
with blushing remember. Loath were I to pluck of the sheet of their shame,
and to reveal their ribaldrye, but that under such roabes lurketh hidden so
many foul soars enfecting Christian souls, and deceauing their simplicitye
with an outward visard of innocencye. And yet while I for bear even for
honesty and ciuilitye sake, to discover their filthye commedyes and stewishe
pranckes at large, as they themselves are not ashamed to do, sportinge thereat
with ballades, songs and sonets, and other unhonest ways. Mantuan and other
have spoken and uttered thereof enoughe, and to much, writing of this Pope
Sixtus and his nephew, and of Alphonsus. But as touching Sixtus (says
Volateran) he being disposed to exercise him self in warrefare, whereunto he
was of nature more inclined then to religion, moved quarrels of war as he
might right or wrong. He invaded without any cause Vitelius Tiphernates, the
Florentines, the Venetians, the Columnians, Ferdinand king of Sicilia, the duke
of Calabria, and other nations and Princes. It was his chief delighte to have
Christian Princes at commandment, whom at his pleasure he did both set up and
put down: He set his confederates the Heluetians with fire and sword upon the
Lombardes whom he had cursed, and gave the Heluetians a pardon and an ensign,
to encourage them to the slaughter of the Lombardes. He aduau^ced his cosins
and bastardes (to the shame of the Church) to all that he might: for he made
two of his nephews Leonarde and John to be Presidents of the City by course
one after another, beside other dignities diverse and many yt he bestowed on
sondrye of his kindred, and among other one Raphael his sisters son was made
Cardinal. But one Laurence Medices honge up the said Raphael and Saluatus
Pisanus and diverse other, because they had murdered his brother. He was very
beneficial to the begging sect of religious roages, grau^ting them revenues in
this life, and heaven in the life to come. He is counted as it were a new
builder of Rome. He bestowed cost of pauinge the streates and repayring the
ways, appointing skauingers to look to ye streates: beside diverse other less
necessary and more vain and superstitious deeds about Churches, Chapels, and
Palaces. In the xv. year he celebrated the Iubelie for the increase of his
lucre and gaynes, and to pleasure his friends. He divised many polling and
bribing offices of scribes, abridgers, sollicitours, waighters, and notaryes of
the escheaker, to enriche his cofers, which offices are to be bought of ye
Pope. He made diverse new holly days, and diverse Saints, and many decrees to
enriche the clergy. He excommunicated and cursed to hell Laurence Medices of
Florence, for hanging his nephew Raphael. In the end he being sick of ye
gout dyed through rancour and malice, the sooner because the duke of Ferraria
had taken peace with the Venetians against his will, Anno 1484. And therefore
diverse men made these Epitaphes of him.

Of his death.
Non potuit Seuum vis vlla extinguere Sixtum:
Audito tandem domine pacis, obit.
No force was forceable enoughe to make Pope Sixtus dye,
But when the name of peace was heard it killed him by and by.
Of the peace that ensued his death.
Dic vnde Alecto pax ista refulsit, and vnde
Tam subito reticent praelia? Sixtus obit.
Say hag Alecto whence have we this peace? and how are fled
The bloudye broils so suddenly? Pope Sixtus now i^ dead*
Again another wrote this.
Mortuus est Sixtus, gaudet nunc Roma: trahatur,
Vt dignum est, vnco mortuus in Tiberim.
Pope Sixth is dead and Rome is glad: therefore as it is meet,
To Tiber draw his carcass with an hook fast to his feet.
Another.
Sixtus obit, gaudent omnes: nefunere sicco
Transeat, amissa plangite glande sues.
Pope Sixth is dead, all men are glad: but least that noone bewail
While he is buried: weep ye hogs and howl your acorns fail.
Another.
Extulit auratas sed postquam maxima glandes
Ecclesia, innumeris patefacta est ianua porcis.
When mighty mother Church began once her goulden acorns yield,
It was set oape to howgy herds of swyne that have it filled.
Another.
Sixte iaces tandem, fidei contemptor and aequi:
Pacis vt hostis eras, pace peremptus obis.
O Sixth thou were a foe to peace, and peace has thee now slain,
That did long in life both faith and equitye disdain.
Sixte iaces tandem: laetatur Roma, tuo quae
Passa sub imperio est funer, bella, famem.
Now dead is Sixth: and Rome is glad who while as he did reign,
Often burials and wasting war with famme did sustain.
Sixte iaces tandem, nostri discordia secli:
Saeuisti in superos, nunc Acheronta move.
Now Sixth is dead that noyde this age with discord and with evil.
Thou raged have against the heavens, now wrangle with the devil,
Sixte iaces tandem, fraudisque dolique minister:
Et sola tantum proditione potens.
Now Sixth is dead that did contriue such falsehoode craft and guile:
And only bare so great a sway by treason all this while.
Sixte iaces tandem, pressa est quo sospite virtus,
Leges, sacra, pium, relligioque, fides,
Now Sixth is dead: who while as he did live did keep in awe
Religion, faith, zeal, godliness, all honestye and law.
Sixte iaces tandem, deflent tua busta cinedi,
Scortaque, lenones, alea, vina, Venus.
Now Sixth is dead, upon whose grave there does lament and howl,
Bauds, stro^pets, bankruts, ribaulds, stews, and eke ye dro^ken nowle
Sixte iaces tandem, summorum imfamia, fexque
Pontificum, tandem perfide Sixte iaces.
Now Sixth is dead: the shame of those that hye in honor be
The scoom of Popes: most faithless wretch now dead at length is he.
Sixte iaces tandem, vos hunc lacerate Quirites,
Dentur and impastis membra scelesta feris.
Now Sixth is dead: his carcass then ye Romans rent and tear,
And give the gubs to carrayne crows, and to the saluage bear.
Quid pia profuerint functo solemnia Sixto?
Tradita sunt celeri vota precesque noto.
What does it boot to pray for soul of Sixtus being dead,
Your prayers are but blastes of wind that in the air are fled.
Riserat vt viuens coelestia numina Sixtus,
Sic moriens nullos credidit esse Deos.
As Sixtus in his life did scorn the God celestial,
So at his day of death he thought there was no God at all.
Sixte iaces tandem, superis inuisus and imis:
Inclusus grauido ventre necandus eras.
Thou Sixth at length art dead whom heaven does loath and also hell,
If murdered thou in mothers womb, had been: it had bin well.
Stupra, famem, strages, vsuras, furta, rapinas,
Et quodcunque nefas, te duce Roma tulit.
Thou being Captain wretched Rome, no mischief could escape,
As robbing, murder, usury, theft, famine, whordome, rape.
Magna licet tardae soluenda est gratia morti:
Omne scelus tecum, Sixte cruente, iacet.
Much are we bound to death though long it were ere she thee sped,
For now with the O cruel Sixth all villainy is dead.
By these Uerses which were made upon Pope Sixtu: after his death, it may
appear what opinion men had of his holiness in his life. But to proceed,
Leander and Tritemius say that about the year of our Lord 1470. Alanus de
rupe a dominican, after he had seen certain diuelishe visions and illusions,
contrived his work called Rosariu^ out of our Ladies Psalter, and preached it
in steed of the Gospel: which James Sprenger did advance with counterfaited
miracles, and at the length Pope Sixtus did confirm it to be holy and
autenticall with his bulls and indulgences. Whereupon a certain book was
published, in the beginning whereof it is written that upon a time the blessed
Uirgin came into the Cell of the said Alan it being shut, and made him a ring
of her own hair, and betrouthed her self to ye monk, that she kissed him,
giving him leave to handle and milk her breasts: and finally to be as
pleasant and familiar with him as a woman would be with her husband. And these
gross monkishe miracles are yet defended by the Popish priesthood. Of this
Alan came the order of religious loyterers called after his name.

159. Innocentius the eight,
INnocentius ye eight was a Genewaie borne, his fathers Aron, and his name
before was John Baptist Cibo: he being Cardinal of S. Cicilia was chosen Pope
after the death of Sixtus. He was sometime a poor boy but of excellent
beautye: and brought up among those that waighted upon Alphonsus king of
Sicill, where he learned perfitly courtly fashions. Afterward he coming to
Rome, continued a long season in the company of Philip Cardinal of Bononia.
In time he was made prelate of Sauon then of Melphit, afterward Secretarye by
Sixtus and so came to be Cardinal, and last of all Pope. He was tall of
stature, fair of complexion and of a comely parsonage: but of a gross and dull
wit, void of learning, and so heavy headed that sometime even when he sat
busye about public affairs, he would take a nap and fall a sleep. He was
well-beloved of Sixtus for his comlye behavior and curtesye, wherein he excelled
all other. But verelye he fawned upon all men with flatteringe face, but was
friend to no man in deed: and being of nature addicted to covetousness, yet he
would shift it and color it with mirth and pleasant ieaftes. Even at his
entrye almost to his Papacye, he conspired with the Princes of Sicill against
their king Ferdinand, sending for Robart Seuerinates to be Captain of the
enterprise: So well does the Pope requite his bringinge up in the king of
Sicils house. He said that a man ought to make war for the dignitye of the
Church, for the defense of subjects, and for procuremente of peace to ensue,
contrary to the Apostle saying: Do not evil that good may come thereof. But
at length he seeing himself disapointed took peace perforce, and yet with these
conditions: that a tribute should be paid due unto him, and that the rebels
should have no harm. But yet ye wise Prince king Ferdinand kept neither of the
conditions: though the Pope sent thither his stout champion Peter Vincent to
challenge them, and his Secretarye with him. Also he deposed George Boebracius
king of Bohemia from his kingdom, for favoring John Husse, and bestowed it
upon Mathias: but because the Emperor Frederick would not plant this Mathias
therein, great war ensued thereof to the subversion almost of the said
Emperor. After this, Innocentius being wearyed with wars, gave him self to
pretensed peace: and applied him self whollye to ease and idleness, which
breeds al wickedness. He following the example of Sixtus, did erect a
College of s^cretaryes for his greater gain, increasing the number of them.
He beutifyed the Papacye with a new Pallaice. He did openly lauishe out
re^hes and treasures upon his bastards, giving them honors without all shame:
for he bestowed upon one Frau^cis his bastard certain towns adjoining to the
City, and gave a great dowrye with his bastard daughter Theodorina, married to an
exceeding wealthye Genewaie. He made his base begotten children his
chamberlaynes, and his companions Cardinals. He sold pardons for ye quick and
the dead. He bestowed great treasures superstitiously on diverse Churches in
Italy, and on religious houses. He granted leave by his bull to those of Norway,
to say mass wtoute wine. He diuising a new trade to fish for money, because
yt neither ye aduau^tages of his pardons, nor of his Iubelie, nor the tax
against the Turk could suffice him, he found out the title that was set up
over ye Cross of Christ by Pilate, written in three tongues Jesus Nazarenus
rex Iudeorum, which was hidden within a wall: also he found out the iron head
of the spear where withal the side of our Savior was wounded, and ere a man
might see or kiss these Jewels he must pay well for it. But after long
sickness this Pope dyed Anno 1492. Of whom this Epitaph was made. Quid quaeris
testes, sit mas aut foemina, Cibo?
Respice natorum, pignora certa, gregem.
Octo recens pueros genuit, totidemque puellas:
Hunc merito poterit dicere Roma patrem.
Spurcities, gula, auaritia, atque ignauia deses,
Hoc, Octaue iacent, quo tegeris tumulo.
About the year of our Lord 1464. Baptist Mantuan being then xviii. years old
wrote his ix. Eglog calling it Post religionis ingressum, entreating of the
corrupt manners of the court of Rome: and his tenth Eglog of the controuersye of
ye friars Obseruants and not Obseruants. Also he wrote a Diolog in praise of
the blessed life. In his ix. Eglog he painteth out ye treacheryes of Rome,
saying that all kind of naughtye parsons are had in honor and are promoted at
Rome: and that none are there advanced but such villains as deserve rather to
be imprisoned and driven out. His sayings are partlye thus: Quo magis
approprias, tanto magis omnia sordent.


And after he adds.

Fama est Aegyptum coluisse animalia quaedam,
Et pro numinibus multas habuisse ferarum.
Ista superstitio minor est quam nostra: ferarum
Hic aras habet omne genus, contraria certe
Naturae res atque Deo, qui dicitur olim
Preposuisse hominem cunctis anima^tibus vnum, etc.
160. Alexander the sixth.
ALexander the sixth was a Spaniard borne in Valentia, Rodericus Borgia,
succeeded Innocentius: his deeds were so opprobrious and wicked, as has been
sildome heard. He was a very royotous tyrau^t and in league with the devil to
obtain the Papacye. He being long vice-chauncelour in his Cardinalship, did
search and boult out all the estate and trade of the Court of Rome, and all the
councelles and secrets of all the Princes and encorporations of Italye. And
therefore being Pope by the help of of his bastard Valentinus (whom of a
Cardinal he made captain calling him Caesarius) he did almost destroy them
all: and rooted out and banished the most mighty and honorable houses of
Rome, so that afterward he stood not in awe of any of them. Iu^the which
bickeringe (says Valerius) the garrison of Frenchmen and Heluetians being
murdered both man and woman, this proud Captain Caesarius being by means of
his wife duke of Valentia, purposing to get a bootye of money, gave to certain
Cardinals a pocio^ of Aconita whereof his father also drancke, so that he fell a
sleep with the rest, and then ye son with the stroke of a weapon quenched
the undeserved honor of both. This Alexander held ye Iubelie at Rome Anno
1500. whither infinite multitudes of people resorted: but for those that either
would not or could not come, ye Pope by his bull imparted to them the blessing
and benefit of ye Iubelie if they would give money for it. He spared no
shameful shifte to make money withal: and therefore he did found yet another
new college for clerks of briefes (for so were they called that write the
abridgements of all matters) and these were in number four score, of the which
every one paid for his place vii. hundred crowns. He cited al Princes by
auctoritye of his bull to come to the Iubelie, and appointed standings in every
country in the streates, whither the people should resort to send their money
thither. By his Legate John Borgia he crowned Alphonsus king of Naples, and
(says Platina) made him swear to be true to Rome in paying his yearly
tribute faithfullye. He bestowed infinite riches in repayringe and garnishing
Churches, Castles, towers, hyewayes and houses in Rome. Volateranus says that
he murdered many virtues by his notorious vices which are not to be named,
only (says he) I will touch those that were known in the eyes of the
people. If he were at any time at leisure, he had no regard what kind of
recreation he used without respect of his estate. He flitted often to Adrian
castle because he might the better come out openly to behold such shows and
delights, as maskers, mommers, daunters, harlots and strompets, and other
worse kind of people using these braueryes upon hollydayes and other times: he
delighted much to see the lascivious co^medyes of Plautus and other like
enterludes played. At the marriage of one of his daughters he procured
extraordinarily to have it solemnized with running at the tilt and hunting.
Fensers and roisters were never so suffered in Rome, neither the Citizens so
bridled as in his time. Beside, the City was much encombred with vagaboundes
so that men could neither walk safe in the City by night, nor without the
City by day. Now was Rome become a slaughterhouse, which has sometime been a
refuge and defense for men. All these (says Volateran) he suffered for his
bastards sake, to who^ he granted all things at pleasure etc. But as ye have
heard before he dyed in ye end of the same poison which he caused his son to
provide for other: farther of his doi^ges and of his sons wars by him
procured and maintained, Volateran writes at large.

Platina says how that when Charles the eight king of France should pass
through Italye to Naples with an army to challenge it as his enheritaunce,
this Pope Alexander fearing the puissa^ce of that noble king, did for fear of
him make a league with Alphonsus king of Naples against the French king, and
planted a garrison of soldiers in Rome least the king should invade it. For it
is ingrafted in the Italians that they enuieng the prosperitye of the
Frenchmen, do always detest even ye very name of Frau^ce^ so that they
swearing and vowing freindship with them, are not nothing abashed in despite
of God and justice, to break their leagues. And yet notwithstanding this the
Popes power, yet king Charles prevailed in his purpose maugre their hearts and
came to Rome, where for fear least he should by violence break away from
himself to their greater damage, the Pope commanded that he should be
curteouslye let in, and that none of the Roman soldiers upon pain of death
should make any stir, and so did Charles likewise command his army. And
yet the cowardlye Pope with a band of men fled dastardlye into Angel castle:
but after he perceived that quietness was kept in the City, he makes a
league with Charles, se^ding home to Alphonsus his soldiers again. But after
this when Charles had been in Apulia and conquered it, he prepared to return
home into France: but the Pope forgetting or neglecting his league and oath,
thought to cut him short of his purpose and to take the advantage of Charles
while he trustinge to the league, should not mistrust any such falsehoode.
And therefore the Pope making another league with the Vetenians, Maximilian the
Emperor, Ferdinand king of Aragon, and Lewis Sfortia, prouidinge an army lay
in wait for Charles his coming at Fornonium not far from Parma, even in the
way where he should pass. But notwtstanding this ambush were fourtye
Thousand men, and Charles had with him but vii. Thousand trained soldiers,
wearyed with traueling and want of necessaryes, yet the bickering continued
sharp and doubtful a long time with great slaughter of the Popes army, and in
the end Charles with little loss of his part gat the victory. Thus reports
Platina or rather the author that continues the historye of Platina where he
ended it, who wrote but to the time of Paul the second, though yet he
hears ye name of ye whole work for those yt follow are added by other. In
the time of this Pope an Angel yt was placed aloft in Angel castle, was
thrown down by the violente force of thonder and lightninges, which as some
think might well prognosticate the fall of the Popes estate. John Tisseranus
a Minorite founded at Paris an order of harlots, as if Christian religion were
to be edifyed by such orders.

Uerses made upon Pope Alexanders death.
Fortasse nescis cuius hic tumulus sict,
Adsta viator, ni piget. etc.
Perhaps whose tomb this is (my freinde) ye do not know,
Then pause a while if that ye have no haste to go.
Though Alexanders name upon the stone be graven,
It Is not that great: but he yt late was prelate shorn and shaven.
Who thirsting after blood deuourde so many a noble town,
Who tossed and turnde the ruthful states of kingdoms vpsidedowne.
Who to enrich his sons so many nobles slew,
And wast the world with fire and sword and spoiling to him drew.
Defying laws of earth and heaven and God himself ere while,
So that the sinful father did the daughters bed defile.
And could not from the bands of wicked wedlock once refrain,
And yet this pestilent prelate did in Rome ten years remain.
Now friend remember Nero or else Caligula his vice,
Or Heliogabals, enoughe: the rest ye may surmise:
For shame I dare not utter all: away my friend with this.
Another Epitaph upon Pope Alexander.
The Spaniard lies hear that did all honestye defye,
To speak it briefly: in this tomb all villainy does lie.
Another.
Least Alexanders noble name my friend should the beguile,
Away: for hear both treachery does lurk and mischief vile.
Another.
Though Alexander after death did vomit matter black,
Yet marvel not: he drancke the same and could not cause it pack.
Diverse other like ill favored verses according to his il favored manners were
made of him, which for modesty sake are partlye to be suppressed, because it is
not to be doubted but that chaste ears would be ashamed to hear those things,
which Pope Alexander was not ashamed to do. But among other John Functius
reports of him out of Volatera^, that the Cardinals which chose him did first
find him vntha^ckfull: for he plagued them all with diverse myseryes, thrusting
some into prison and punishing some with imprysonmente. He warred upon the
Vrsins and conqueringe them laid them in irons and fetters. His greatest care
was (as Innocentius did) to bestow great honors on his bastards. He made one
of his youngest sons Prince of Sicilia, and another called Caesareus a
Cardinal, and his eldest son a duke in Spain, who wtin a while after was
murdered in the night and tumbled into Tiber. His other son the Cardinal
after the death of his brother, renounced priestcraft and ran into France
with a mighty mass of gould, where he married a kinsewoman of king Lewis,
having with her the town of Valentia: then by the aid of the king being at
perpetual league with him, he purloyned to himself great dominion in Italye,
being therein much furthered by the Pope his father. The daughter of this Pope
Alexander called Lucretia, with whom the monstrous father had used carnal
company, was married to 3. Princes one after another. First to John Sfortia
duke of Pisauria, then she being deuorced was matched with Alosius of Aragon
bastard of king Alphonsus: he being slain she was wedded to Alpho^su^ duke of
Ferraria. What her honestye, religion, and modestye was in the Court of Rome
during her fathers estate, it may be gathered sufficientlye by these two
Uerses made upon her death, by John Iouianus Pontanus. Hic iacet in tumulo
Lucretia nomine, sed re
Thais: Alexandri filia, sponsa, nurus.
Here lies Lucretia chaste by name, but Thais lewd by life,
Who was to Alexander Pope both daughter and his wife.
The Uerses of Actius Sannazarius upon the year of Iubelie kept by Pope
Alexander.
Pollicitus coelum Romanus, and astra sacerdos,
Per seelera and seeds, ad Styga pandit iter.
The Roman priest that promised both heaven and stars to sell,
By treacherye and murtheringes has made a gap to hell.
The Uerses of the same auctour again Lucretia the daughter of Pope Alexander
the 6. reproving her horrible incest with her father.
Ergo te semper cupiet, Lucretia S^xtus^
O fatum diri numinis: hic pater est?
Ierom Marius in his book Eusebius Captiuus speaking of this Pope Alexander
has these words: What should I disclose ye detestable treachery of Alexander
the 6. whereof the like has not bin heard? He making a league with the devils of
hell, bequeathed him self body and soul unto them if by their help he
might attain^ to the Papacye: which when the devils had performed, Pope
Alexander began so to refourme his life, that he never went about any business,
but that he did first take council of the devil.

Other pranckes of this Pope Alexander were partlye written in these Uerses
compendiouslye.

Vendit Alexander cruces, altaria, Christum:
Emerat ille prius vendere iure potest.
De vitio in vitium, de flamma transit in ignem,
Roma sub Hispano deperit imperio.
Sextus Tarquinius, Sextus Nero, Sextus and iste:
Semper sub Sextis perdita Roma fuit.
Pope Alexander sells Christ with aares and crosses store,
And reason good yt he should sell the things he bought before. etc.
In the time of this Pope the pall of the bishop of Mentz was enhaunsed, to be
paid for it for ever heareafter unto the Popes Chamber xxxv. Thousand
Florences. Among other enormities wherewith this Alexander swarmed, he poisoned
Gemen brother to Baiazetes the great Turk and prisoner at Rome, receiving for
the same deed wherewith he was hired by Baiazetes two hundred Thousand Crowns.
Furthermore to maintain his tyranny he joined league with the Turk against
the French king and craved his assistaunce, using both the kingdom of Naples
and Rome it self for his own royat sake: as the fortresses to ye Empire of
Ottomannus. Beside he commanded ye tongue of Antonius Mancinellus and both his
hands to be cut of, because he in a learned and eloquente oration reproved his
licentious and loathsome demeanor. But as he lived wickedlye so he dyed
myserablye, for he preparinge a feast for diverse Senators and Cardinals,
purposing to poyso^ them with the same bane, that he poisoned Cemen: but by the
providence of God one of the wayters ignorantly gave the Pope the same bottell
wherein the poison was, whereof he drinking dyed with the rest. Finallye in one
thing this Alexander matched ye wickedness of his predicessours in granting
leave to a Spaniard Petrus Mendoza Cardinal of Valentia, to use his bastard
son Marquess Zanatensis otherwise then becomes vowed chastitye: but hereof
enough. And beside this Mendoza was well known greatly to dishonor ye
spowsall bed of his sovereign king Ferdinand.

Anno 1499. one Ierom Sauonarola a dominica^ monk with other his fellows were
burned at Florence, for defending the communion under both kinds, condemninge
the Popes pardons, and for reproving the loose life and negligence of the
clergy generallye. They denied also ye Popes supremacye: saying that the keys
were given to the whole Church, and not to Peter. Again yt the Pope followed
Christ neither in life nor doctrine, because he attributed more to his own
pardons and traditions then to ye merits of Christ: and yt his cursinges and
exco^municaio^s are not to be feared. He prophesied also of certain things to
come as of the destruction of Florence and of Rome, and the restoring of the
true Church at length: for the which Picus Mirandula calls him an holy
Prophet, and defends him in his writing against the Pope. Also one Marsilius
his neighbor, and Cominoeus in his French historye, do attribute to him the
spirit of prophesyinge: and diverse other learned men do defend that he dyed an
innocent.

161. Pius the third.
PIus the third borne in Hetruria and nephewe to Pius ye second, called first
Franciscus Picolhomeneus after Alexander.

Valentine Borgia after ye death of his father purloyning his treasure did
beset yt Vatican with xii. Thousand soldiers, it being the place where the
Pope was elected, thinking by this drift to make the Cardinals stoop to his
purpose: but they to avoid this danger did forthwith conueye themselves into
the Temple of Minerua, where they were forthwith enclosed by him. Hereuppon a
rumor ran through ye City that the elders were apprehended, that all the
City was molested with ^laughter and spoiling, so that all men were amazed.
This being heard doares were shut up, men took them to their weapons, the
streat passages were stopped with timberlogs and iro^ chains: and thus was all
in an hurlye burlye and a great uproar, as if the host of Hanniball had bin
battringe the gates of Rome. But Valentine because he saw that he had
attempted an hard matter, being requested by ye Cardinals to give over his
wilful purpose, did promise to cease by and by and to obey them. Then when
this Pius was chosen, Valentine abating his courage, did thank the Cardinals
because they had chosen him Pope whom he most desired. He being Pope did
forthwith raise an army to drive out those Frenchmen that dwelt in Italye,
taking it in dispite that their king had subdued Apulia and a great part of
Italye: but the Pope hoped for a day to gall the Frenchmen to enclose them in
a trap, and in the end to hunt them utterly out. But while he purposed these
things he dyed of an ulcer in his leg, the xxvii. day after his creation
Anno 1503. the same year also that Alexander also dyed, the xv. of the
Calendes of November.

And here ends the sixth book of these prelates, containing in it 41. Popes
from Innocentius the 4. to this Pius the 3. whose corrupt lives as is partly
showed though not so larglye as might be, do argue of what spirit they were
and how far from Christian conversation. But if their fantastical and
superstitious decrees were joined hereunto, where withal they loaded the
Church and choked the Gospel, their doctrine would appear to men of any
judgment, as vnsauorye as their trade of life: but it would be over tedious,
and pertayneth not so much to our purpose.
THE SEVENTH Book contayninge the fifth part of the third sort of Roman
Popes, in whom appears the wayninge of Antichrist and imparing of his usurped
estate, wexing still weaker and weaker till the end of the world, according
to the Prophecye of S. Paul in the second Chapter of the second Epistle to
the Thessalonians: that Antichriste must be reveled before that Christ come.
IT appears by these former Popes how ye Prophecies (in the Revelation of
John of Antichrist, that he should be an Abadon, which being an Hebrewe word
signifies a Destroyer or Conqueror) have bin abou^dantlye and in perfect
measure fulfilled and verifyed in them. In the rest that follows may appear
the diminishing of that seat, for so much as many people in their times have
and do from day to day renounce the Popes auctoritye. Many parsons first
began in Germanye openly to detect him as Luther, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius,
Melancthon with diverse other till in the end the whole countries forsook him,
so that (God be thancked) at this day a great part of the world does
acknowledge him to be Antichriste, and defyeth his doctrine: as England,
Scotland, Denmark, Sweden, the dukes of Saxony, the duke of Brunswick, the
Palsgraue of Rhene, the duke of VVittingberges, ye Lantgraue of Hessia, ye
Marquess of Brandenburg, the Prince of Russia: and all other Earls and noble
men with their dominions and great Cities through the whole country of
Germanye, beside the great commo^wealthes of Heluetia, Rhetia, Vallis, Tellina,
with many hundred Thousands more of al estates in Flanders, Italye, Spain,
and France, and in the kingdom of Polonia. Thus especially from the year of
our Saviors incarnation 1503. under Pope Iulye the second, the credit of the
Roman Sea began to crack and dailye ryueth more and more, and shall by Gods
grace so continue till it be clean rent in pieces and torn away. Whereof
God has given certain signs and tokens, plainlye prognosticatinge the great
fall of this proud Babylon, which with these reuoltinge of regions from him
being compared, may comfort those that rejoice in the aduauncing of the Gospel
and in the ruin of Antichriste: although it is not to be wished that any man
should ground any doctrine or point of religion barely upon these
prognostications. The observations that the Papacye shall melt away, decresing
more and more till the day of Judgment are these. First the forenamed
Prophecye of S. Paul in the 2. Chapter of the second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, that Antichriste must be revealed before Christ come: with
diverse other Prophecyes of the holy Scripture in the Revelation and other
places. Other proofs hereof may be those strange things that have come to
pass of latter times in the Church of Rome: as ye Pope John the 24. was
wonderfullye vexed by an owl in open consistorye, as is before in his life
declared: again that going to Constance he fell out of his chariot by the
way. Afterward he was in the same council of Constance reprochfullye
deposed, and it was there declared that a council ought to be above the Pope,
and the Pope to be subject to the controlment of the counsel, which thing gave
a great pushe to the overthrow of his supremacye: and surely from his time and
the time of Paul the second, the Popes majesty began to shrincke more and
more. Again in the time of Alexander the sixth by a tempest of thonder and
lightninge the Augell set on the top of Angel castle in Rome the Popes
chief place was beaten down into the river Tiber. Furthermore it appears
that it was not so much the fond furye of Iulye the second, as fatal
providence, ye Pope Iulye the second when he could not prevail by Papal
authority, did hurl away into Tiber S. Peter's keys (as they term them) the
counterfaite evidence of his supremacye: for as he cast the keys away, so
other rejected his supremacy ever since. Furthermore in ye time of Pope Leo it
came to pass that he created in one day 31. Cardinals, and the same day while
Leo and his Cardinals were in S. Peter's Church, there fell such mighty storms
of winds, tho^der and lightnings upon the Church, that it shook down a
little idol made for the picture of Christ in the lap of the virgin Marye.
Also it stroke ye keys out of the hand of S. Peter's Image in the same
Church. These and many other such matters as have come to pass, are to be so
construed as they may best serve to the glory of God and signification of his
will, which is that Antichriste shall be destroyed with the breath of his
mouth, that is the power of his holy word, and not by the might and arm of
man. Joining therefore the success that Christ has given to his Gospel, with
the shaking of Antichriste his kingdom foreshewed by the spirit of God, it
shall not be amiss to take these signs as witnesses that God shows hereby
that he is mindful of his promise made to his elect, that the days are at
hand when Babilo^ must fall, and our Savior Jesus Christ come again in
glory to the subuerting of him. The Lord hasten it for his mercy sake, and
make us ready to receive it with joy. Amen. Amen.

162. Julius the second.
IVlius the second was a Genewaie borne (who as Erasmus A remo ad Tribunal
says) was in his youth a whirrye slave, and yet at length preased up to the
Papacye. And yet (says he) not contenting himself with that estate as he
found it, did enlarge his dominion and would have made it larger but that
death prevented his purpose. Vicelius says that he was rather given to wars
then to serve Christ. John Functius in his Co^mentaryes writes thus of him:
Pope Julius being borne of a base stock rising by degrees through good luck
and craftye wit attained to the highest. He being a fellow of a subtle and
compassinge head, and most given of nature to play the warrior, did like
Nimrod enlarge his portion by the dint of the sword: so that by his
procuremente within seven years were slain and destroyed to the number of two
hundred thousand Christians. He besieged Rauenna cruellye, and in the end
preuayling made it subject to his Empire. And with the like violence he
wrested Seruia, Imola, Fauentia, Foroliuium, Bononia and other Cities from the
Princes with great bloodshed. Sleida^ says that when this Julius was Pope, he
took an oath that he would have a council within two years. But when he
troubled and disquieted all Italye with wars being enemy one while to the
Venetia^s, another while to ye king of France, now to the Duke of Ferraria,
now to the Bononians: certain Cardinals ix. in number steppinge a side and
assembling at Millen, do summon a counsel to be held at Pisana. The chief of
these were Bernardin Cruceius, William of Praenoste, and Frau^cis Cossetinus,
with whom were the proctours of the Emperor Maximilian and of Lewis the xii.
king of France about the same purpose. This council was called the year
1511. the xix. day of May, to begin in September next following. The cause
hereof is said to be, because the Pope had broken his oath and for sworn
himself: for notwtsta^ding he had reigned so many years, yet contrary to his
oath they could get no hope of having a counsel. And furthermore for yt they
had heinous crimes to charge him with all, they purposed to deprive him of his
dignitye which he had gotten by bribery. But Julius charge all men upon pain
of great punishment, that no man should obey them, and summoned another counsel
to be held ye year following in April in Lateran at Rome, whereunto xxi.
Cardinals subscribed. For this from time to time has bin the practice of the
Pope when any council has bin assembled against his doings, then to assemble
another Synod against the other in some place meet for his purpose.

There was at this time a famous Lawyer at Papia called Philippus Decius, who
published a book defendinge the doing of the Cardinals against the Pope.
Diverse other wrote against him some in prose and some in verse, as Hulricus
Huttenus in certain Epigrams to this effect in English translated verse for
verse.

This Iulie, who by long descent did sit in Peter's seat,
Through new co^ceite does vvo^ke these broils, with many a monstrous feate.
He neither prays for his flock, nor living yet in peace,
He seeks not as Peter did their knowledge to increase.
But kindles vvarres, and iets in arms, and does delight in goare,
Yea Peter back he puts, and needs will set S. Paul before.
S. Paul yet smites not with his svvord: but therevvithall was slain,
But Iulie does his hands with blood of many Christians stain.
The description of Pope Iulie by the said Auctour.
Why goes Julius in steel, and in his coat of plate?
With griselye beard and ouglye looks upon his bussshye pate.
Whose frounced forhead hides deep his loathly steaming eyes,
From whence with helhou^des threatening look the sparkling fire flies*
This terror unto Western men by sea and eke by land,
With bitter bovves and bloody bills and shaking svvord in hand.
That unto all the kings on earth has wrought such vvarlick harms.
And is a scourge toth world which he has raised up in arms.
The author of such ma^glinges made such slaughter and such spoil,
That did both Prince and people all in danger put of foil*
Who both with hand and head does put all vilanye in ure,
A creature borne the ruin of mankind for to procure,
Whose work is death: whose leisure is fulfilling filthye lust,
And plucking peace from every man has broached war unjust.
What is there in him why that any man dare give his dome,
Why such a caytiffe may deserve the name of Pope of Rome.
The French king understanding that the Pope with the help of the Venetians,
went about to disturb those whom he set in garrison, did summon a counsel
at Turney in September, where he propounded these questions to be discussed:
Whether it were lawful for the Pope to war upon any Prince without any
cause: Whether a Prince defen^inge his own in that case may set upon the Pope,
and withdraw himself from obeing him? And au^sweare was made that the Pope
ought not to do so, and that a Prince might do according to the question: and
that unjust thondring boultes of excommunication are not to be feared. Hereupon
the king sent his Ambassador to Pope Julius to declare the determination of
the council, and to desire him either to be content with peace, or else to call
a general counsel to bulte out these matters the better. But the Pope would
grant to neither request, but did excommunicate Lewis, and gave his kingdom
for a pray to those yt would make hauock of it. Of this Julius it is written
in a certain Commentarye of the masters of Paris against the Lutherians,
that he did most villanouslye commit yt which is not to be spoken of, with two
noble young gentlemen who were put to a certain Cardinal called Roba^t
Nauetensis to be brought up, by Lady An Queen of France. The like thing is
reported of him by another writer, where upon Conradus Gabriel wrote these two
Uerses.

Venit in Italiam spectabilis indole rara,
Germanus: redijt de puero mulier.
It were not tolerable to set out all the treachery wherewith this monstrous
Pope defiled himself. In his time among the religious men began diverse gross
and vnreuerent opinions touching the incarnation of Christ, and the conceptio^
of the blessed virgin moving many vnnecessarye, unprofitable, and dishonest
questions, and meddling impudentlye with matters belonging to midwiues and not
to scholedoctours, and therefore rather to be suppressed then hear revealed:
only this may suffice to the wiser sort, to consider what sects were among
those holy siers and what diuinitye they studied. One of these busye brayned
sophisters was called Ptolomeus Lucensis a monk, who preached his filthye
fantasyes touching ye manner of Christ's conception, in a Church at Mantua.

This Pope Julius being a lustye warrior, and goinge forth on a time with his
army out of the Cittye, did hurl Peter's keys into Tiber with these words:
Because that Peter's keye is able to do no more, let the sword of Paul help
to do it. By which deed says Bibliander) Pope Julius has resigned all his
power unto the river Tiber, if yt the Pope have received any power of Peter in
that Christ said unto him: Behold I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom
of heaven. For he that casts away the keys being ye testimonye of
auctoritye, does deprive and spoil himself and his successors of S. Peter's
inheritance. Of this mad prancke of Iulie hurling his keys into Tiber,
diverse men wrote verses, as Mela^cthon, Brusichius and one Ducherius, the
English whereof does follow.

While Julius to mischief framde did bloody war prepare,
He marched forth, in armed hand his vveapon thus he bare.
A svvord hong by his side which out courageously he drew,
And Peter's keys into the deep of Tiber flood he threvv.
With blustering thus: if Peter's keys in war cannot prevail,
Then with the svvord of Paul we will our ennemies assail
Huldericus Huttenus made this Epigram of Pope Julius pardons.
By craft Pope July all the world thou merchant do intvvine,
Thou sellest heaven and yet no part thereof by right is thine.
Sell me the thing thou have: great shame will else thereof proceed,
When thou do sell the thing which thou thy self do want and need.
O saluage soil why bidst thou not an hundred giants fell,
To help July to beat out Jove, that he the heavens may sell?
Fortill an other God get heaven, and thunder from the skies,
Friend July I Will not bye of you such weighty merchandise.
But after he had made many great slaughters, he died Anno. 1513.

163. Leo the tenth.
LEo the tenth was a Florentine borne, of the noble house of Medicea, and
called ere he were Pope John Medices. He being Deacon and Cardinal of saint
Mary's, contrary to all hope was chosen to succeed Julius. He being
diligently from his youth trained up in learning under learned schoolemaisters,
and especially one Angelus Politianus, did afterward greatly favor learned men.

When he was but.xiij. years old he was made cardinal by Innocentius
the.viii. and at the years of xxxviii. he obtained the papacy. This Leo was of
his own nature a gentil and quiet person: but often times ruled by those that
were cruel and contencious men, whom he suffered to do in many matters
according to their insolent will. He addicting him self to niceness, and
taking ease did pamper his flesh in diverse vanities and carnal pleasures: At
banqueting he delighted greatly in wine and music: but had no care of
preaching the Gospel, nay was rather a cruel persecutour of those that began
then, as Luther and other to reveal the light thereof: for on a time when
cardinal Bembus did move a question out of the Gospel, the Pope gave him a
very contemptuouse answer saying: All ages can testify enough how
profitable that fable of Christ has been to us and our company: Sleidan says
he sent letters and hulles of pardons into all nations for such as would
give money for them, the effects of his pardons were diverse, some especially
to sell license to eat butter, chese, eggs, milk, and flesh upon forbidden
days, and for this purpose he sent diverse treasurers into al countries, and
namelye one Samson a monk of Millaine into Germany, who by these pardons
gathered out of sundry places such hewge sommes of money that the world
wondered at it, for he offered in one day to give for the Papacy above an
hundred and twenty thousand duckates. Ma^^in Luther being singulerly well
studied in the scriptures, and continuing at Wittemberge in Germanye (where
these pardons polled maynely) began to inform and teach the people how much
they were abbused, to give such great sommes of money for such trifles as
were nothing profita^le, and wished the^ to be better advised in bestowing
their money, whereupon he purchased the Popes bitter curse against him and his
adherents, to the no littell disturbance of the whole estate of Germanye: for
because by the preaching of Luther, and his books painting out the treachery
of the court of Rome, the princes of Germanye, as the Duke of Saxony, the
Lantgraue and other would not yield so much as in time past the Pope had
commanded by usurpation. The Emperor and they in the end fell together by
the ears, by the Popes procurement, as at large is set forth in Sleidan, and
can not so aptly in this place be reported. Other enormities which in the Popes
pardons moved Luther were these: The people were persuaded that if they bought
these pardons they need not to seek any further for salvation, and that no
sin could be so horrible, but that by these indulgences it should be
forgeuen, and that the sowles that lie tormented in Purgatory should fly
into heaven forthwith, as soon as the money received for these pardons at the
charge of their friends should be put into the Popes cofers. But to return
to Pope Leo: he made xxxi. cardinals in one day, whereby he gat great bribes
and much treasure, but the same day appeared many horrible sightes and great
tempests arose, with vehement winds, thonders and lightninges, vehementlye
rushinge upon the Church where the Pope and his Cardinals were with such
force, yt it shook down an idol made for the picture of Christ like a child
in the lap of the virgin Marye: also it stroke S. Peter's keys out of his
hand. These things were enterpreted to prognosticate the decay of the Popes
kingdom, and thereupon many wrote bitter verses.

Anno 1521. the same year that in Christmas hollydayes Solomon the Turk wan
the Rodes, as the Pope went out of his closet to morrow mass, a great roof
of Marble stone fell down sodeinlye behind his back, and slew many of his
guarde. This Leo did enriche above measure his bastardes and cosins, aduauncing
them to dignityes both spiritual and temporal with robbing and undoing
other. For he made Iulianus his sisters son duke of Mutinensis, and
Laure^tianus duke of Vrbin, maryinge the one to the sister of Charles duke of
Sauoye, and the other to the duchess of Polande: for he deposed the duke of
Vrbin to the entente to advance the one of these in his place: which also he
attempted against the duke of Ferraria, but was disappointed. He made one of
his nephews called Julius a Cardinal. In the year of our Lord 1571. and the
first day of December, as soon as this Leo in deed a Lion heard it reported to
him that the Frenchmen were by hi^ means slain, taken and driven out of
Italye, he reioysed and laughed at this news so vehementlye, that therwithall
he fell down dead at his table, being a man that in his life time thought that
there was neither heaven nor hell, and countinge the Scripture sa is aforesaid
to be but a fable. One Actius Sannazarius wrote these verses of him.

Sacra sub extrema, si forte requiritis, hora
Cur Leo non poterat sumere? Vendiderat.
Pasquil against Leo.
Pastor vt ambiguo Proteus dignoscitur ore,
Et dubious liquidis saepe vagatur aquis:
Sic Leo nulla fides tibi* nec constantia rebus,
Factaque promissis sunt odiosa tuis.
Nec bona, nec mala sunt dubio credenda Leoni,
Est etiam in verum vix adhibenda fides.
Quum ventrem imprudens auido natura Leoni
Fecisset, rimas praebuit huic geminas.
Non excrementis fuerat satis vna: sed harum
Altera nunc clausa est, nec minus illa vorat.
Gaude Roma, breui hac solueris peste: fatiscet
Aluus, tam magni ponderis impatiens.
Differat a Decimo quam Julius ipse Leone,
Dis^ere ab amborum nomine Roma potest.
Julius est hominis, bruti Leo. Julius egit,
Quae suasit ratio: quod libet, iste facit.
In the time of this Leo doctor Benbrick an Englishman Archbishop of York and
Cardinal, lyeng Ambassador in the service of K. Henry ye eighte, was poisoned
by report at Rome and dyed there.

164. Hadrian the sixth.
HAdrian the sixth was borne in Holland of a base stock: Charles the Emperor,
and afterward made a Cardinal and by this means obtained the Papacye, and
still kept the name that he received in Baptism being called Hadria^. He
promised Princes by his letters that he would do his endeavor whereby the City
of Rome (being the mother and welspringe of mischief) should be first
reformed with all seueritye: But this was but an hypocritical dissemblinge.
For he being once placed in his dignitye, did even as the rest trouble and
sharplye molest those that any way debased his pardons or reproved his ambition
as Luther, Ecolampadius and other did: but in the fourth year of his
pontificalitye he dyed Anno 1523. the tenth day of September.

165. Clement the eight.
CLement the viii. borne in Florence nephewe (at ye least) to Pope Leo the
tenth, and called before Julius succeeded this former Hadrian, And that by force
of arms as Valerius says. But as he gat the place by violence, so had he it
as troublesome as ever any before him. For while this Pope putting himself
valiantlye in armor did skirmishe among the Emperors soldiers and those
that fought for the government of Italye, his City Rome was taken, sacked and
spoiled, and made a bootye to Germans and Spaniardes: and the Pope himself
also was apprehended, mocked and scoffed, and reprochfully used. And from
thenceforth the greater Churches in Germanye detesting ye Papacye as the
bloody kingdom of Antichrist, have ever defied and despised his souerainitye.
But this subtle man bring afterward by his pollicye aided with ye help of
diverse Princes and people, did purpose to persecute the Lutheraries with fire
and sword. But in September Anno 1534. he was poisoned by such a strange
practice as was never heard of: for both he and certain Cardinals with other
his friends, were poisoned with the smell and smoke of a Taper, which was
poisoned for that purpose by a strange confection.

Of this Clement thus writes Vulteius touching a fault vvherof he was
mistrusted.
De Clemente, quod est co^scriptum carmine, crimen,
Id verum, aut fallum protinus esse scio.
Si verum est, verenam possum dicere, mundi
Vrna breuis vitium claudit, and omne scelus.
Si falsum est, vere iam possum scribere, mundi
Dux, pax, lux, paruo contegitur tumulo.
Et falsum esse reor. Quis enim co^mittere summum
Pontificem Rome talia monstra putet?
John Tillius says in his Chronicle, that this Pope being taken prisoner by
the Emperors army, (as shall be at large declared) was redeemed for fourtye
Thousand Flore^ces. Also of this Clement it is reported in a certain
Commentarye upon the articles of the masters of Paris, that he was one that
practiced poysoninges, a murderer, a baude, an unclean liver, and that in such
sort as for offending of chaste ears is not to be named. Also he is charged
there with simonye, adulterye, rauishing of women, periurye, coniuring, and to
be a Church robber fraught with all kind of vill^uye, and therefore a certain
Poet wrote thus of him.

Clementi nomen dedit inclementia fati,
Bellorum hic fomes, cunctorum Lerna malorum.
Valerius Anselmus writing of this Clement says thus: Clement being of a
dissembling wit, in the last year of his Papacye repaired to the French king
at Massilia: where they two agreed so together, that the king took Katherine
nice unto this Pope Clement at his motion, with a great dowrye of
Ecclesiastical dignityes, and married her unto his second son Henry duke of
Orleans. This the Pope wrought to arm him self the stronger against the
Lutheranes, whose blood he hunted after. But in September he and other of his
Cardinals and familiaritye were prevented by the strange poison of a charmed
Taper. etc.

Clement in making this marriage would first have had the said Katherine
bestowed on the French kings eldest son if it could have bin. But it came
to the same effect in the end, for soon after the eldest son dyed, and
then her husband Henry duke of Orleans was next heir and king of France:
and by this means the Popes nyce according to ye desire of her uncle became
Queen of France, being the same woman that yet lives in France in these
bloudye days being mother to Charles that now is king.

For this her advancement she has showed herself very thanckfull unto
Italye and unto the Court of Rome, both in plantinge Italians in diverse great
offices in the Realm of France, and also fortifyinge the Popes auctoritye to
the uttermost of her power, with greater benevolence to her own country
Italye, then is thought profitable to the country of France.

Johannes Baptista Folengius in his Co^mentarye upon the 105. Psalm has these
words: For it is reported that in our days Pope Clement the seventh dyed of
that most loathsome and filthye disease called morbus pedicularis, yt is to be
eaten with lyce: and some say that he was poisoned. He was a mortal creature
and therefore subject to infinite miseryes and diseases as other men are. etc.
Clement being dead, this Epitaphe was made on him, whereby it appears how the
world judged of his life.

Clementem eripuit nobis clementia fati,
Humanum toto gaudeat orb genus.
Hic est qui fuerat iam dedecus vrbis and orbis,
Et fuit aetatis magna ruina suae.
Hic est, si nescis, qui iam tibi, Roma, parauit
Excidium, pestem, funera, bella, famem.
Hic est, per quem tot prostrant and in vrbe puellae,
Per quem pulsus honos, virgineumque decus.
Hic est, qui molles euexit ad astra cinaedos,
Formosum a tergo munere iuuet Hylam.
Hic est, qui fuerat viuens infamia mundi,
Imperij labes spurcitiesque sui.
Contemptor diuum, scelerum vir, publicus hostis,
Perfidus, ingratus, raptor iniquus, atrox.
Exosus vitam, and morbo tenuatus amaro,
Stabat Paeonia non reuocandus open.
Mortem implorabat, nec mortem fata sinebant,
Gaudebant longa sed cruciare mora.
Hic vidit mortis centum tormenta futurae,
Poena tamen mortis non fuit aequa suae.
Ex ista tandem migrauit luce tyrannus,
Quo nullus toto peior in orb fuit.
Pasquil to Rome.
Roma vale, vide, satis est vidisse: reuertar,
Quum leno, aut meretrix, scurra, cinaedus ero.
Under this Clement Nicolas Machiauel Secretarye of Florence and a famous
Historiographer did flourishe, who in the first book of his historye of
Florence says: that for the most part the mischiefs that happen among the
Christians, proceed of the ambition of the Popes. And that before the time of
Theodoricus king of Lombardes, that is till about the year of our Lord 500
they were ever subject to kings in civil matters. But (says he) they
encroached by little and little the civil jurisdiction, and finallye do usurp
Lordship even above the very Emperors. They have grown to this height (as he
shows) by three means, by excommunicating, by giving pardons, and by the
sword. Furthermore in his discourses upon the fifth decade of Live Cap. xii. he
shows, ye contempt of Religion is cause of the overthrow of al common
wealths, and namelye that the occasion both of discord and evil success in
Christendom, is because that Religion is contemned, whereof there can be no
greater conjecture (says he) then that those people which are nearest to the
Church of Rome, ye head of our Religion, have least Religion. And he that by
experience would know the truth of this matter, (if he were of sufficient power
and auctoritye to transport the Court of Rome into Zwitzerland, where only at
this day the people do live both according to Religion and warlicke sort of
antiquitye) he should perceive that ye detestable demeanor of the Popes
Court, would cause more disorder in ye country then any chance else that
might happen at any time, etc.

166. Paul the third.
Paul the third, borne in Rome, was first called Alexander Farnesius: He
b^inge a Cardinal and bishop of Hostia, and a man almost spent in years, was
chosen to succeed Clement, and yet he reigned fiftene years. Valerius writing
of him says: This holy man did his endeavor according to the custom of his
ancestors to advance his children and to suppress Luther and his
adherentes. He was very conning in astrology, southsaying, and coniuring, by
means whereof, being a young man he did many strange feats. He caused his
own sister to yield her self concubine unto Pope Alexander the sixte, that
he might thereby obtain the red hatte. But in his Papacy, being an aged man,
he devised a new profession of religious men: He purposing to reform the
estate of the church of Rome, sommoned a general council at Mantua, but to no
purpose: and likewise in the later Tridentine council he could not prevail.

Valerius Anselmus, Paulus Vergerius, John Sleidan, and other late writers do
report these things that follow of him: It were to long to speak all that
might be said of this miserable man touching his heinous faces, as
manslaughter, theft, poysonings, treasons, tyrannies, incest, fornication, and
such other. But yet it shall not be amiss to disclose a few of his practices.
This Paul was an Astrologian, a Magician, a wyzard: He made one Dionysius
Seruita a practiser of Geomancy, that is a kind of coniuringe with earth clay
and sand, or such matter, also he always used as his familiar companions
^anricus a Portugal, Cecius, and Marcellus being coniurers, and raysers of
evil sprites in the bodies of dead men: He acquainted him self with these,
because he would have them to cast the natiuities and destenies of him and his
children, by constellations. By playing the bawd he first got to be made
cardinal. He delivered his sister Iulia Farnesia unto Rodoricus Borgia a
Spaniard, otherwise Pope Alexander the sixth, whereby he might obtain of him to
be made cardinal and bishop of Hostia, and so gat money to pay his debtes. By
such means have many fished for the fattest benefyces in the court of Rome, by
serving the Popes fleshely appetite, and says ( Cornelius Agrippa) there is no
way redyer to get preferment there then this is. Furthermore this unnatural
and wicked Pope Paul could not with hold his mischeuous hand from his own
kindred, no not from the womb that first gave him breath and life: for he
poisoned both his nephew and his own natural mother, that he might thereby
enjoy the whole inheritance of the Fernesians. Beside this he lived carnally
with another sister that he had: and because he perceived that she loved other
better then him (which in the end the harlot showed openly) his iealouslye
was such, that to revenge the despite as he counted it, he so watched his
oportunitye, that in ye end he poisoned her for it.

He being Legate under Pope Julius the second in the province of Ancona, did
villanouslye beguile a noble young gentlewoman of the same City. For he shifted
his apparel and counterfayted himself to be a noble man of the Legates
company, resorting to her as a woer, and craftelye under color of marriage
lay with her. But in the end when the poor gentlewoman had understanding of
him what he was in deed, and saw how she was deluded, being made not a lawful
wife but a priests co^cubine (according to the Popes law) she was so
greuouslye wounded with grief hereof, that she was almost mad and ravished of
her wits. But she conceived by him and was delivered of a son called Peter
Aloysius, who afterward showed himself to be the liuelye image of such an
adulterous father. At another time this Paul having a nyce called Laura
Fernesia, committed incest with her also: but her husband Nicolaus Quercaeus
took him in the deed doing, and in a great rage so wounded him, that the skar
thereof remained till his death. Again he had a daughter called Constantia,
with whom he was so enta^gled and bewitched, yt (O most sinful man) to
enjoy her the more freelye as his concubine, he poisoned her husband Bosius
Sfortia. Such is the double corruption of their single life: such villanye
ensues of their vowed chastitye. Thus does God give them over to their own
lusts that presume upon themselves, and thus does he detect the man of sin,
suffering him to come to ye fulness of iniquitye: who nevertheless is so
blinded in his own fantasyes, that wallowing in this wickedness, he thinks
yet himself to be perfect holy, and the general Uicar of Christ upon earth.
Yea and for so much as he is able to forgive unto other (as he thincks) greater
sins, if greater may be then these are, why may he not dispense with
himself in the like: Or rather why should it be counted sin in him. For so
says one Ennodius, to speak but of one among many such sayings: The Pope
together with the power of teaching, has received free liberty to do ill
without controlment. And such is their affiaunce in the holiness of their
chair, that the presumption thereof has caused them thus to decree: Distict.
40. Non vos in Glossa Papa de homicidio vel adulterio accusari non potest: vnde
sacrilegij instar esset disputare de facto fuo Nam facta Papae excusantur vt
homicidia Samsonis, furta Hebraeorum, adulteria Jacob. The Pope cannot be
accused of adulterye or manslaughter: Therefore it was as much as
Churchrobbing to dispute of his doing. For the Popes deeds are excused as the
murders of Samson, the theft of the Hebrews, the adulterye of Jacob. And
again it follows in the same place: In Papasi desint bona acquisita per
meritum: sufficient quae a loci praedicessore praestantur. If ye Pope lack
good deeds gotten by his own merits: the good deeds which his predicessour
(S. Peter) did, do serve his turn. This being considered it is less to be
marueyled at, that the Pope should thus embrewe his han^es with the blood both
of his freindes, kindred and parents, and defyle his body most shamefullye
with his own sister, nyce and daughter. But to return to the historye. After
that this Paul gatte the Popedom he created two Cardinals, whereof the one
was Alexander son to his bastard son Peter Aloysius, and the other was
Ascanius son to his bastard daughter Constantia. By his tyranny he oppressed
the Perusians: and in a madness he drove Ascanius Columna out of his kingdom.
He cloyned into his own hands by vile treacherye a town called Camery,
dryuinge out and dispossessing the Queen thereof being a godly, wise and
virtuous Lady. By his craft he so inuegled ye College of Cardinals, that he
brought to pass by their consent to change Camery for Parma and Placentia
two noble Cities, and to make his son Peter Aloysius Lord and Prince
thereof. But the just vengeance of God did afterward plague this their
pollitick packing, for this aduau^cement of Aloysius fell out to his
destruction in the end.

Oftentime this Paul consulted with his Cardinals how he might hinder the
national council holden in Germanye, and he commanded his Legates to inflame
the minds of other Princes against the king of England, and he purposed to
give his kingdom away from him, and to make it a pray and bootye to those
that would make havoc of it. Anno 1542. he summoned a general council to
be holden at Trent, against the Gospel, the preachers and fautors thereof: But
because he could not there have all things according to his own mind, he
removed it to Bononia, pretending that it was done only for choice of better
air, which was but a shifte, when as his purpose was by this means to defeat
many of giving their voices in the sinode. He oppressed with all force the
professors of the Gospel, some with sword, some with fire, some with poison
were destroyed He spared not so much as his Cardinals if they did once but
savor of that sect, whereof Cardinal Fulgosius and Cantarenus felt the proof:
And but yt it pleased God otherwise to provide, his own brother Paulus
Vergerius bishop of Iustinople had not escaped his rigor. ^e sent out his
marcials as cruel persecutours on all sides, who tormented ye Gospellers with
fire and sword, burning and drowning, banishing and imprysoning, confiscating
their goods, and pyning their carkases even to death. The ^^iefe of these
tormentours were Alexander Farnesius Cardinal, and Octauius his brother duke
of Parma, who were the sons of the forsaid Peter Aloysius the son of this
Pope. These two with great blustering and threatenings, came out of Italye and
entered into Germanye Anno 1546, vauntinge and boasting very arrogantlye, that
they would shed so much blood of the Dutche Lutherans, that their horses
should be able to swim in the stream thereof.

In the mean time the wicked Pope at home was more pleasant with his daughter
Constantia then the use is: and beside this (like a sinful wretch) he
provoked to incest and most detestable whoredom another being his nyce, a
young gentlewoman in time past commended as well for womanlye modestye as
beautye.

He had a book kept of 45. Thousand harlots, who for the lib^rtye of their
stews did pay unto him a monthlye tribute: These dames (says Eusebius
Captiuu^) are had in great honor with the Pope, these kiss his feet^, these
have familiar communicatio^ with him, these are his companions both by day and
by night.

In the time of this Pope Anno 1534. the Franciscan monks played a cruel and
bloudye pageant at Orleans in France, in despite of a dead woman being the
Majors wife of the City, who in her life desired that she might be buried
without any funeral pomp. The woman being dead the monks in whose Church
she was buried received of her husband vi crowns, and because the gift was
not greater they grudged much at it. And therefore they set a certain nouice
aloft on the roof of the Church who should in the night time counterfaite to
be the woman's spirit, and should cry out and say that she was dampened
perpetuallye for Luthers doctrine. At the length the matter came before the
kings council at Paris, where in presence of the Chancellor Antonius
Pratensis, these two Coleman and Steven Atrebatensis being found giltye and
convicted of this villanye, were condemned to be put to open shame. One
Vulteius Remensis wrote these Uerses against this illusion. Cum clamat laruas,
furiosa caterua leonum,
Infestare suam nocte dieque domum:
Res vera est, falsi, laruati denique fratres,
Quos vestis sanctos prodigiosa facit,
Sunt lemures* larue, furiae, vulpesque lupique,
Qui infestant vitijs seque suamque domum.
One Pontacus a Popeling in his Chronicle set out ye last year, being the year
of our Lord 1573 printed at Louany by an English fugitive called John Fowler,
reports in the 153. leaf thereof that this Pope Paul the third, did openly
excommunicate and curse the most renowned Prince R. Henry, the eyghte, and
donauit regnum primum occupaturo, gave his kingdom to him yt would first
invade it.

Now follows it to speak of Peter Aloysius duke of Parma and Placentia, and
bastard son to Pope Paul the third, who because he was proud, cruel and a
most lascivious tyraunte was murdered by his own nobles Anno 1548. the tenth
day of August. When this wretched villain (as both Vergerius and Sleida^
report out of certain Italian historyes) being lie^etenaunte general of the
Roman army arrived at Fane, and found there Cosmus Cherius bishop of the
same City being above thirtye years old, a man of great wisdom, learning,
and of godly life, he committed upon him such an horrible villanye, that I
think since Sodom and Gomorra were by the hand of God for the same sin
destroyed with showers of fire and brimstone rayninge from heaven, the like
has not been heard of. For even by force and violence he caused his vassals
and pezauntes, to hold the bishop while he (mauger his heart) in the mean
time without all shame committed that deed, which shame will suffer no civil
pen to put in writing. This treacherye and infamous filthiness struck such a
grief in the heart of the good bishop, and was such a corsey to the innocent
man, that for sorrow and shame together he dyed within three days after. And
(as some think) the same Aloysius perceiving how greuouslye he took it, gave
him poison to dispatche him out of the way, least he should have made
complaint thereof to the Emperor. For so unadvisedly in great anguishe of
mind he had threatened Aloysius. Beside this Aloysius being priuye to the
incest of his father, presumed to commit the same deed often with his sister
Consta^tia. And thus, while his father was Pope having power (as he thought) of
heaven and hell, he presumed that he might do any thing lawfullye and without
fear, and thereupon bye licentious lust did often defile him self with either
kind. He committed many robberyes and murders, spoylinge of Churches, and
thondring out his blasphemies against the majesty of God. And notwithstanding
all this the Pope made of his son as his dear darlinge, and whollye
endeavored himself to advance him to honor, and when any made complaint of
his wicked conversation, the Pope would little or nothing be moved therewith,
but would say after a smyling manner: that, He learned not this of his father.
Other correction of his son he used none, no not for that notorious crime
upon the body of Cosmus.

O what a miserable estate is this, that he who cou^teth himself to be the
vicar of God (that is ielous over ye least sins, and a severe revenger of
iniquitye upon his own elected people) should thus against ye majesty of
that God as it were in defiance of his justice, wincke at such an horrible
treacherye and suffer it to be unpunished, which Paganes and heathen led only
by the light of reason have loathed. Yea even ye brutishe beast taught of
nature commits not, and as I may plainlye say, if the devil himself has
any remorse to be touched with the hydiousnes of sin, I am sure he would
detest and abhor such an act most of all, If any man be so vain to repose
his Religion upon man, and to measure the truth of doctrine by the conversation
of the person, (As many misled by Popish traditions refuse the sinceritye of
the Gospel for the corruption of them y^ profess it): If those kind of
parsons look upon this one Pope (a mighty pillar of their Religion) I hope
they would root out that affiau^ce in his doctrine which is planted in their
breasts, or else be taught to measure the power and truth of the Gospel, not
by the frailtye and weakness of man. But if this waywarde reason be so beaten
into their brains that it cannot be dug out, but that they will still
affirm the doctrine is not true, and say: I will not accept of it because the
professors thereof are wicked men, Then let them behold this Pope Paul a
mighty patron of their undoubted Religion, and they shall be compelled by their
reason to say and speak with their tongue as the fool said in his heart:
Surely there is no God, no Jesus Christ, no holy Ghost, no Gospel, no
heaven nor hell: I will not believe any such thing, because that eue^ the
Pope himself the great professor hereof is become a sincke of sin, and a
puddle of all filthiness, to commit in his own parso^ adulterye and incest, and
to foster those evils in his son, and suffer him to be as it were Prince of
Sodom. etc. Thus (I say) if a man will judge Religion by men, he shall be so
far from attayning to the knowledge of God and from faithful seruinge of
him, yt he shall rather defye utterly his glorious majesty, and think that
there is no God at all. But thus we see yt as no people have attained so much
to the true understanding of God, as they to whom it has pleased ye mercy of
the father to reveal him self by his son Jesus Christ: so again no people
have at any time swarued farther from his holy will and pleasure, and bin more
fowlye polluted and stained with all kind of abominable wickedness. But to
return to the historye of Peter Aloysius.

This outrageous villanye against the said bishop together with other matters
of iniurye, extorcio^ and crueltye, but this chiefelye, emboldned diverse
parsons of all estates to grudge his doings. And among other he being on a
time at his own City Placentia, sone after this former fact Anno 1547. he
did cease into his own hands all the goods of sondrye parsons, and among them
one Jerome Palauicinus, and when as he to avoid the danger of displeasure
fled to Crema a town subject to Venice, Peter Aloysius apprehended the wife
and children of the said Ierom, and imprisoned them all. This being a matter
whereof greater trouble might ensue, the Cardinal of Trent bearinge good will
to the Fernesians, wrote his letters to Aloysius in ye behalf of Ierom, but
Aloysius gave him a light answer. Afterward Octauius son to ye said Peter,
came from ye Emperors camp to Trent purposing to return home: The Cardinal
of Trent came unto him and could him the whole matter touching Ierom, and
desired him to be a means to his father for him. He made him promise to do
it: and afterward sent word to the Cardinal that Ierom should be received
into favor if he himself would come and crave his own pardon in humble
manner. But because it was feared that promise being broken, he should be put
to some grievous punishmente, therefore the Cardinal with a train of men went
to Crema, and called for Ierom. He mistrusting treason, would not appear till
he had good proof that the Cardinal was come in deed. After they had long
talked in counsel together, and the Cardinal had at large promised his help,
they took their journey together: The Cardinal sent one of his men before to
give knowledge to Aloysius that he and Ierom were coming, by whom Aloysius
returned this message contrary to that which his son Octauius had showed
before, that if they came he could not restore Ierom. And although that both
diverse Legates, besides other wise and grave men, did both entreat and use
persuasions to appease his wrath, yet he persisted obstinately in his purpose:
And now certain of the nobility that had hated him for his former pranckes,
conspired to murder him. They having entertained for their purpose certain
ruffians for their sauegarde, watched a conueniente time for their purpose, and
being guarded with this their train, they diuidinge them selves into diverse
companies, came now and then out into the streates, every man pretending that
it was done for private quarrels towching him self: and therefore every man
demanded of those whom he had hired to attend on him, whether they would
faithfully take part with him to revenge his injury, which he had sustained
at the hands of Duke Aloysius: the serving men made answer again that they
would do their endeavor not only to revenge an injury on him, but further, if
it were to kill him.

About this time, Pope Paul ye third wrote to his son Peter Aloysius,
willinge him to take heed to him self, and to beware of the tenth day of
September, for he said that the stars did thretten great mischief toward
him: for this Pope by constant report was skilful, not only in Astrology,
but also in Necromancie: upon the sight of these letters Aloysius was very sad
and pensive for fear. And when the same tenth day came, he passed out of his
castle, being borne in a horselitter, and accompanied with a great train, to
view the fortifiyng of the city, which he had appointed to be done: The
conspiratours were also there in a readiness, but because they could not then
obtain their purpose, therefore they made no slurre at al, but when he should
return home, they gave attendaunce on him, and as it were for duty toward
him, they went before him.xxxvi. in all, and when he with his horselitter was
entered into the castle, forthwith they drew up the bridge after them (for it
was a draw bridge) so that none other could follow them in: where, even
presently they set upon him with their swords, and after they had rated him
and vpbrayded him bitterly with his tyranny, they slew him in his litter, and a
certain priest, beside the groom of his stable, and five Germans. This
being done, they ran up and down in the castle, and made spoil of al
things, where among other things they found an hewge mass of money, which he
had laid in store to maintain the charge of fortifiyng the city. In the
mean time the people of the city ran thither, demanding what the matter
should be, because they hard such criynge, weeping, and howlinge, within the
castle. The murderers spoke out to them again, saying. we have slain the
tyrant and recovered the liberty of our city. But because that matter could
hardly be credited upon the warrant of the people, promisinge to save them
harmless, ye murderers tied the dead body of Peter Aloysius to an iron
chain, and so hong him out over the castle wall, in sight of all the people,
and after they had there let him hang a while, they threw him down into a
dike. As soon as he was down, the people ran thither, drew him out, stamped
on him and spurned him with their feet, and thrust their daggars into his
body, so desirous they were to work their malice on his hateful carcass.
This being done, the people forthwith submitted them selves to the obedience of
the Emperor, to whom they uttered the shameful demeanor of Aloysius and
causes of his death, as has been said. Thus he whom the Pope his father
fostred in his villainy was plagued, both with loss of life in his own person,
and alienation of his dominion from his children. So always the justice of god
awaketh when the justice of man sleeps.

167. Julius the third.
IVlius the third an Aretinian borne, before his papacy was called John Mary
of the mount. After the Cardinals Julius because he was a melancholy fellow,
and one that hated from his heart the doctrine of Luther, was admitted into the
college of Cardinals, by the former Pope Paul the third, and was president
for the Pope in the counsel of Trent, against the Lutheranes. As soon as he
had the Popedom he renewed the Iubelye to make money for himself. And
therefore there repaired apace to Rome minstrils, pipers, harpers, fiddlers,
players, ieasters, iuglers, ruffians, bawdes, harlots and Sodomites, with all
kind of rascal people. The Papists conceived a great hope that this Julius
would reform Religion and clergy according to their desire. But his delight
was to feed like a glotton. Peacocks, porke and bacon and all kind of swines
flesh were his ordinarye fare that he most desired. He promoted none so soon
to ecclesiastical dignityes as young and wanton Ganymedes, especially one of
that sort called Innocentius in whom was no good qualitye. Beside that with
his detestable doings did stain the Popes Pallaice, he was as wicked in his
words: for in his talk he was so uncivil and such a ruffianlye ribauld and
blasphemer, as among all the varlets in Italye was not a worse.

Pantaleon, Vergerius, Sleidan and other late writers do report this of him
that follows: Anno 1550. the seventh day of Februarye John Marie of the
mount after great wrangling among the Cardinals was chosen Pope and called
Julius the third. And because this new Pope might bestow his Cardinals hat by
custom one whom it pleased him: he made one Innocentius a boy whom he
fansied carnallye above measure while he was Legate at Bononia. Against which
deed all the Cardinals much repined and cried out on it, yet the Pope did it
and furthermore made him his companion in his house. But to rifle this matter
farther modestye will not suffer, it is better to ouerpasse both the rumors
and talk of the people touching it: and those abominable speeches where with
the Pope himself was neither afraid nor ashamed to jest of his own
villanye, and to displaye it openly. Neither could any honest ears endure to
hear the contents of certain lewd amorous letters fraught with all kind of
ribauldrye and wantonness, which one Camillus Oliuus companion to the Cardinal
of Mantua, wrote to one Ha^niball Cotiuus: there loathsome letters being in
their vulgar tongue written in most dishonest and amarous verse, were
intercepted the same day that the Pope was chosen, the Cardinals being together
in the consistorye. These rimes were copied out and seen of diverse both in
Italye and Germanye, who reported of them that they never saw such detestable,
vilanous and abominable wrytinges. By this the Reader may judge with what
spirit this Romish clergy is endued in whom lies the election of Christ his
vicar (as they say.) But so far they are from being (as they boast)
exempted from sin, that these treacheryes are common among them, and by
their own shameless tongues and pens detected to all the world, which gave
occasion to one Velteius to write this Epigram of Rome. Roma quid est? Quod te
docuit preposterus ordo,
Quid docuit? Iungas versa elementa, scies.
Roma amor est. Amor est? qualis? Praeposterus. Vnde hoc?
Roma mares. Noli dicere plura, scio.
Touching the making of that boy Innocentius Cardinal, Vergerius says thus:
Pope Julius purposed to make a certain lad called Innocentius Cardinal. This
boy was not only of very base parentage, and endued with no good qualitye,
but also was one of vile life and evil behavior. Therefore when the Pope
propounded the matter to the Cardinals and every one stood against it, one of
the Cardinals more boulde then the rest said to the Pope: Sir I pray you what
do you see in this yonker, that you would thus honor him with the scarlet
roabe? To whom the Pope said again: And I pray you what did you se in me, yt
you should thus advance me to this pontifical dignitye? And therefore as this
is the game of Fortune yt she should advance whom it pleases her, so ye have
promoted me unworthily: and so let us I pray you promote this boy and create
him Cardinal.

Because that Paulus Vergerius, Bernardus Ochinus, and Hieronimus Marius did
inueigh against the monstrous blasphemies and horrible treacheryes of this Pope
Julius: therefore he suborned Ierom Mu^ius to defend and maintain these
things in public books. And auctorised him by his bulls not only to
apprehende these reprehenders of the Popes treacherye and Sodomitrye, but also
that he should by his wrytinges defame and slander with all kind of bitter
and dispitefull reproach, the Cittyes and Princes of Germanye. Thus may every
man see how the bishop of Rome does not only fall into this filthy sin,
but also defend them and uphold them as well and lawfullye done even in open
wrytinge.

Furthermore the said Vergerius in a certain wrytinge among other things
says this: Where as the name of Pope Iulye the third is foulye tainted with
this former offense, and in such sort that he refrayned not from his Cardinals
etc. I have hither to forborne to detecte his doing touching this notorious
enormitye. But seeing every man does co^stantlye report that he does ordinarilye
utter those same kind of blasphemies that vile bauds and other such leude
parsons are wont to use in contempt of God: men ought rather to condemn such
an ouglye monster and not Christians etc.

In the time of this Pope Johannes Casa a Florentine Archbishop of Beneuentum,
Deane of the Chamber Apostolical, and in all the Dominions of Venice the Popes
Legate with full power and auctoritye did flourishe. This Johannes Casa wrote
in the commendatio^ of that most unnatural and abominable filthiness of Peter
Aloysius, setting forth with most loathsome words, flourishing Retoricke and
wicked eloquence in Italian rhyme, that matter which is not to be named among
men: yet he has so praised and commended it as no man without sin may
report. This cursed work and detestable book was imprinted at Venice by
Troianus Nauus. In his records of malefactors made in the time of his
Legacye, he reckneth none but such as professed the Gospel. Whereupon
Vergerius says unto him: Art thou not ashamed thou abominable Archbishop?
Dare thou show thy face abreade and burn holy books? Even thou that have
written those ^imes, even thou that have advanced the ouglye sin of Sodom as
an heavenly deed. etc.

Such was the tyrannical rigor of this Johannes Casa against the professors
of the Gospel, that one Franciscus Spiera a lawyer for fear of his crueltye
did revolt from ye Gospel and subscribe to the Pope, but upon the same deed
he fell into desperation and so continued a most miserable man to his death
tormented in conscience.

Paulus Vergerius did also hardlye escape the rigorous hand of this John Casa.
But to be short it were a tedious thing to declare at large all the demeanor
of this Pope Iulye the third in the time of his Iubelie, and in the Tridentine
council in establishing the idol of Lauret: and in his quarrel and braule
with the bishop of Armin comptrollour of his house for one peacocke, and other
such like trifles. For he delighted much in the eating of peacocks and swynes
flesh: but when his Physician had given him warning that he should forbear
swines flesh, because it was hurtful for ye gout his disease, yet Julius
would not forbear. The Physician therefore gave council to the Popes Steward
to take order that ye Pope should have no such meat served at the table.
Whereupon the Pope wantinge his dish asked, What is become of our bacon? The
Steward answered that the Physician willed him that he should not set it on.
The Pope forthwith violently brast into these words saying: Fetch me my
meat hither Al di spetto di Dio as he might say in English, In spite of Gods
heart. This blasphemous outrage is a common phrase among ruffians and varlets
of Italye in their rage, and as common with Pope Julius as to other, beside
other lascivious and uncivil speech. On a time he had at his table a peacocke
which was untouched, and therefore he commanded that it should be kept for him
til Supper: for I will (quoth he) have certain of my freindes with me at supper
in my garden. When supper time came the Pope was served with hot peacocks, but
his cold peacocke came not in according to his commandment: And therefore he
began according to his custom to blaster out his blasphemies raginge and
raylinge. One of the Cardinals that sat at the table said: I beseech your
holiness not to be so highlye offended for so small a matter: No? (quoth Julius)
If God were so offended for one apple that he threw our first parents out of
Paradise: why should not I that am his Uicar be angrye for my peacocke, seeing
a peacocke is of greater value then an apple.

This Julius caused this sentence to be printed on his coin: Gens and regnum
peribit quod mihi non inseruit. That nation and kingdom shall perish which
does not serve me.

When he should create one Peter Betauus Cardinal, certain of the Cardinals
stood against it, vrginge especially that the said bishop was infected with
Luthers heresye: What then quoth the Pope, were it not better for us by putting
on him the Cardinals hat to purge him of that uncleanness, and by that bond to
knit him unto us, rather then to suffer him by escaping from us to join with
our enemies in Germanye as Vergerius has done. After six years reign this
Pope Julius died Anno 1555. the xxiii. day of May. Upon whom these verses were
made.

Quo ventum est superi? quo vis progessa Diones?
Quo gula? quo luxus? quo genus omne mali?
Ambrosie foetent epulae, mareotica sordent
Vina, nisi Iliacus porrigat illa puer.
Caetera men's horret meminisse: ea discat ab vno
Crimine, me quisquis legerit, atque gemat.
Among diverse other Epitaphs this was written of him and sent from place to
place as follows.

Johannes Maria ^ Monte. etc. John Maria of the mount by haphazard obteining
the papacy in the time that the Cardinals were at a great braule, which he
durst never presume to hope for? In 6. years he did shed more Christian blood
then any other Antechrist has done at any time.

Fex sacrificulorum, grex Episcoporum, armentum
Cardinalium gratitudinis ergo monimentu^ aeternum posuit.
Civil ears perhap will be offended that a man should ^ere set down the
sluttishe behavior used in three points by this Pope July, even at open
table, otherwise then any person of mean modesty would do in private chamber:
As Beza shows in this Epigra^ made of this Pope July. Ebrius ad mensam quum
Julius ille sederet, Theod. Beza in poem a^ fol. 172.

Impia quem potuit Roma nec ipsa pati:
Tres pariter fertur pelues habuisse paratas
Vt triplici triplex vase leuaret onus
Vna alui pondus, vomitum altera peluis habebat
Tertia uesicae concipiebat onus,
I nunc, pontifices Germania dira negato
Omnia clausa suo iura tenere sinu.
And yet this Pope was he whose authority and supremacy was with all
humility and devout reverence restored here in England in the year of our
Lord 1554. by queen Mary. From this man Cardinal Poole, who before was
outlawed and vanished for high treason against king Henry the viij. came into
England, and brought with him this Popes blessinge, pardon, and absolution. For
the which Cardinal Poole was made Primat of England and Archbishop of
Canterbury. Thus the Popes blessing and pardon was received by the estate of
England. And Pontacus in his cronicle published Anno. 1572. printed in Louany
by John Fowler an Englishman, that blotteth much paper to publishe gross
untruths, for the defamynge of his country by him forsaken, is not ashamed
Folio 179. to report, but boastingly writes it, that king Phillip and Queen
Mary, with the whole Parliament house did humbly kneel upon their knees to
receive the Cardinals blessinge and absolution from the Popes holiness. But it
is well known, and the knowledge thereof dearly bought by England, how that
noble Queen being otherwise of great wisdom, and godly mind, yet ouermuche
deceived by ignorance in scripture, and putting too great a confidence in the
Popes authority, the antiquity of her religion and the professors thereof, did
even of simple zeal yield the disposition and orderinge of her affairs
overmuch to the crafty clergy, who with fire and faggot followed in England
the rygorous example of July practiced in Italy, against those that dissented
from the Popes doctrine. But this is both at large set forth in the acts and
monuments of the Church, and further is not pertinent to this purpose, and
therefore not here to be mentioned at large: Only this is that which I note*
to what kind of person of life and conversation England in these later days
submitted it self as to his general Pastor, and the vicar of Christ. Of what
manner of man we received blessinge and absolution so devoutly, whom we did so
highly commend, honor, and reverence, above our natural prince with heavenly
title of our most holy father the Pope. To whom and to whose servile yoke our
prince did yield her self to be at his commandment, whose curse we feared,
whose love and favor, we sought to purchase with infinite treasure, whose
displeasure caused both prince and people to quake as it were at hell fire. If
the person that thus bleared us be considered, I doubt not but we shall first
be ashamed of him, secondely ashamed of our selves, that we have thus fallen
down and worshipped the beast, and finally hereafter detest him and his
successors.

The self same thing is declared in Graftons Cronicle Folio. 1346. Where he
at large shows how Cardynall Poole was received by king Phillip, Queen
Mary, and the Parleament, and how he persuaded them to be reconciled to this
holy father the Pope, and how upon their submission he gave them absolution in
these words following. Our Lord Jesus Christ which with his most precious
bloudde has redeemed and washed us from all our sins and iniquities, The
Popes absolution set by the Cardinal.
that he might purchase to him self a glorious spouse, without spot or
wrinckle, and whom the father has appointed head over all his Church: he by
his mercy absolve you, The Pope and the Cardinals fellows in co^missio^
with Christ for remission of sins.
and we by the Apostolic auctoritye given unto us by the most holy Lord Pope
Julius the third, his vicegerent on earth, do absolve and deliver you and
every of you, with the whole Realm and dominions thereof, from all heresy and
schism, and from all and every judgments, censures, and peines for that cause
incurred. And we also do restore you again to the unity of our mother the
holy Church, as in our letters of Commission shall more plainly appear. etc.

This being done, the king and the Queen and all the rest went to the
Chapel, and chaunted Te deum for joy of this sweet blessyng of so holy a
Pope. It may be that those burgeses and the rest of the Parleame^t house, at
the time of this absolution, thought better of his person when they received
his blessing: but I wyshe those that are yet remaining of them, and read this
his loathsome life, now to consider what a stinking idol they honored
ignorantly at that time, and what a villains blessing they received so
devoutly. Consider also what benefittes every way followed this blessing: for
sone after there fell so great extremity of rain (as though the heaven had
bewept our iniquity) that the abundance thereof raised great and perylous
fluddes, doing much harm in diverse places: The Thames swelled so high, that
for the space of four or five days boats and barges rowed all over saint
Georges field, and so at Westminster a boat might have rowed from one end
of the Hall to the other. Also that year and the year following there reigned
hot burning fevers, and diverse other strange and new disseases so
contagiously, that many people perished in all parts of England, especially
of the most ancient and grave men, for in London between the.xx. of October
and the last of December there dyed seven Aldermen: Also the year followinge
there ensewed a great dearth and famine throughout all England: And again the
year after that, Newenam bridge, Ryce bank, Callice, Hammes, and Guynes were
taken by the Frenchmen, and the Englishmen driven clean out of that part of
France, to their perpetual damage, which they had so long enjoyed before: Ad
unto this also, that where as Queen Mary provided a sufficient power to be
transported for the rescewe hereof, which might have saved it, there arose
such terrible tempests of winds and weather continuing four or five days,
until such time as the Frenchmen had wrought their purpose, and the Englishmen
in the mean time by means of the terrible tempest were kept of mauger their
hearts: and such ships as did adventure the passage were so shaken and torn
with violence of weather, as they were enforced to return with great danger,
with loss of all their tackle and furniture. Finallye every thing went so
to wrack, that (as it was thought) the noble Prince Queen Mary seeing her
Realm so to go to decay, conceived such an inward sorrow of mind that by
reason thereof about September she fell into an hot burninge fever, which
sickness also was common that year through all the Realm, and consumed a
marvelous number (as Grafton notes) both noble men, bishops, Judges,
knights, gentlemen and farmours, and in the end the Queen dyed thereof and
also ye Cardinal in one day, the 17. day of November Anno 1558. And this was
the success of the Popes blessing, therefore God send them plentye of the tree
yt like the fruit thereof.

168. Marcellus the second.
MArcellus the second borne in Hetruria was first called Marcellus Ceruinus:
he was Cardinal of the cross of Jerusalem, when with ye consent of all the
Cardinals he was made Pope. He being created the ix. day of April, would not
change his Christian name but would be called Marcellus the second, and the
next day he received all the Papal ornaments in Lateran Pallaice.

Charles the Emperor and his brother Ferdinand on a time thought it meet to
prepare an army against the the Turk, and wrote to the Pope to move him
therein: This Marcellus answered by his letter, that the army should rather
be addressed against the Lutherans, for these men he said were worse then all
Turks, But this he did before he came to the Popedom. But in his Papacye he
was an hot defender of the Romish superstition, and a strong enemy to the
Lutheranes: but he being one that was long troubled with the iaundies, his
disease took him so sore that he dyed thereof the xxiii. day after his
election, being the third day of May.

Theodoricus Gresmundus of the royat of Rome writes these Uerses followinge.
Roma caput scelerum, niuei iactura pudoris,
Exitium fidei, luxuriaeque parens.
Sola Venus dispensat opes, dispensat honores,
Sola facit serua quicquid in vrbe libet.
Extollit, magnosque facit sapientia turpes:
Sit procul, in tenero cui sedet ore decor.
Tartara sunt molli potius adeunda iuuentae:
Si non est alius, sit tibi barba comes.
Marcellus Ceruinus was borne at Mount Publican in the field of Florence, who
when he had well studied humanitye, began to be a scholemaister. Afterward when
Pope Paul the third had created Alexander Farnesius (his nephewe by his
bastard son Peter Aloysius) Cardinal being but a boy, he made this
Marcellus Ceruinus his scholemaister. But sone after Alexander the Cardinal
leaving his learning and forsaking his book, addicted himself wholly to
other affairs, wherein both he and Pope Paul the third used the service of
Marcellus as of their Secretarye. When the bishopric of Nicaster fell void
he was created bishop thereof, but yet he lived still in ye court and as a
retchlesse non reside^t repaired not to his Church at all. Pope Paul the
third appointed the foresaid Cardinal Farnesius to be Ambassador to the
Emperor and to Ferdina^d being both in Bulgarye: but because he was as then
but a boy, he joined in commission with him this Ceruinus to direct the whole
order of the Embassage. At that time the Emperor and Ferdinand were most
busye to make war against the Turk, which matter they moved earnestlye. But
Ceruinus did then publishe a book which is yet extant in print, wherein he
showed that they ought rather to set upon the Lutheranes: and that they were
more detestable then any Turks. Paul created him Cardinal when he was absent,
and sone after sending for him to Rome again, he ordered all things by his
advise. He gave him the title of the holy Cross in Jerusalem, also he made
him general Inquisitour of heresye and commissioner with Cardinal Burgensis,
whereby much crueltye and intolerable dealing was used. When an Embassage
should be sent to the Tridentine Council, Pope Paul joined to Cardinal de
Monte and to Cardinal Poole, this Ceruinus as third in Commission. The first
of these was sent as a man cunning in the Law, Poole was sent as one that did
desire to have reformation in the Church, although it appeared afterward yt he
never wished it in his heart. Thirdlye Ceruinus was sent as one in whom the
Pope reposed all his trust. Therefore he charged him especially that he should
suffer nothing to be spoken in the Church, yt should tend any way against the
majesty of ye Church of Rome. And therefore when one James Nachiantes bishop
of Clodia Possa said that he could not allow the decree, wherein it was
written that Tradicions ought to be received and kept with as holy affection
and reverence as the Scripture and Gospel, Ceruinus procured that he was
driven from the Counsel. Furthermore because one of S. Dominicks order called
Don William of Venice said in the council, that the council of Constance was
above the Pope: Ceruinus called him to him and taunted him very bitterlye. But
when the monk answered that the thing it self would testifye it to be so,
that the council was above the Pope, because the counsel deposed him,
Ceruinus answered that it was not so, but that the Pope gave over of his own
accord, for proof whereof he could show a ^eaden bull: and so he charged him
to be packinge forthwith out of the council. About that time Paulus Vergerius
bishop of Iustinople, who had served ye sea of Rome in sondrye Embassages in
Germanye, came from Mantua to this Tridentine council. But because he was
vehementlye suspected that he favored the Lutheranes in some points, yet the
two other Cardinals Poole and de Monte, and with them Tridentinus and Paciecus
were content to allow him to sit with them least they should bewray that the
council was not free for every man, if they should exempt this Vergerius being
so well known in Germanye. Yet Ceruinus would not be quiet until he saw him
put out. Many of the bishops when they saw how it was purposed to drive
Vergerius out of the council, did determine to write to ye Pope thereof and to
admonish him not to suffer it to be done, because many would say it was not a
free council from whence bishops were forced to depart. Hierom Vida bishop of
Alba an eloque^t man had penned the letters in his own name and the rest of
the bishops, When Marcellus heard thereof he charged Vida with sore words,
that he should not in any wise send those letters to the Pope* Saying, it
was an evil example that bishops summoned in council should write such
letters to ye Pope, as though they would appointe him what he should do, which
was a matter so heinous, that the suspicion thereof were to be avoided. Vida and
the other bishops being terrifyed herewith, suppressed their letters and sent
them not. Vergerius when he should depart out of the sinode came to Ceruinus,
and demanded of him for what articles especially he would have him cast out
from the company of ye other bishops? Ceruinus aunsweared him saying: because
I have hard that thou deniest that the Legendes of S. Gregory and S.
Christopher are true. So it is (quoth Vergerius) I have denied them and do
still deny them to be true, emboldning my self herein by ye auctoritye of
Pope Paul the third: for when he commanded both these Legendes to be taken
out of the Breuiary, he shows in that preface that he commanded that only
such Legendes should be razed as were not true. Ceruinus being thus entangled,
made answer that they were not to be counted good me^ which would agree with
ye Lutheranes in any one point, and therefore auaunt out of our council. Such
was the rancour of this Ceruinus against the Gospel, and yet he was one void
of all knowledge in diuinitye, but peuishe in retayning superstition. But
otherwise he was a man of good discretion, of very honest life, and of great
wisdom, and therefore he was had in great estimation and reverence, so yt if
he might have reigned Pope, it was to be hoped that he would have reformed many
things in ye Court of Rome, and especially that he would have eschewed all
royotousnes. And so it came to pass for Pope Iulye ye third being dead
Ceruinus was chosen Pope. But whereas he was long before sick of the yelowe
iaundise, then the disease began to work so sore upon him that he died the
twentye day after the election. The report was that he was poisoned but there
was no such thing. A little before he would have bin crowned but with moderate
cost. Cardinal Farnesius with his friends in election gave his voice to this
man although he had long before had a brawle with him, because he hoped that no
man would more diligently aduau^ce him as Paul the third did determine. But
especially he hoped that he would maintain ye house of Farnesia that they
should not be deprived of the dukedom of Parma and Placentia: For Cardinal
Farnesius debated it with Iulye the third, to make promise thereof before he
would assist him to obtain the Papacye. Some said that many Cardinals did
therefore chose Ceruinus Pope, because they saw him so decayed by sickness, that
there was no hope of long life in him: For that is their practice of old.

169. Paul the fourth.
Paul the fourth borne in Neaples, called first John Peter Carapha, the same
year Anno. 1555. was chosen Venice, called by an holy name Jesuits, of the
name of Jesus, but this he did before he was Pope: but after this deed he
being made Cardinal, applied his mind to other matters, namely to scrapinge
richesse together. Before his Papacy he publyshed a book concerning
reformation of the Church, but in his reign he regarded it not. All his mind
was on wars, delightyng rather in battle then in peace, and so he played
rather Saul the persecutour, then Paul the preacher of the Gospel.

Caelius Secundus and Vergerius do thus report of him: Paul the fourth, a
Neapolitan, called John Peter Carapha, was chosen in May to succeed Marcellus,
by the consent of the Cardinals, desirous therein to gratify Henry king of
France This Pope says Caelius did found a sect of priests at Venice called
Jesuits, but afterward having obtained his purpose, which by this means he
aimed at, he gave them over. For he so cast his net, that forsaking a
byshoprike he fisshed for a Caldinalship, and caught it: Thereupon when he
should depart from Venice, the Jesuits demanded of him whither he went: to
whom he answered saying. Whither I go ye cannot come, meaning thereby that
he went to the Pomp and dignity of Rome, as to an other heaven, and that he
should leave them in wretchedness and beggerye: Thus it pleased him to dally
and sport him self with the phrase of the holy ghost. Many things are
reported of him, as that he was a stout Champion for Purgatory, and that he
knew the secrets of some minds, and that he did many wonders. Vergerius
says, he dedicated a book of reforminge the Church to Paul the third, and
yet he made no reformation in his own time: But says he, who so ever
reads that ^ooke shall see that he confirms al those points almost, which
we reprove in the papists: that is to say, that the Church is so decayed
among them, as it is rather the Church of Satan then of Christ. For he
says that the Popes do for their own lust store them selves with masters
having itching ears, that the name of Christ is blasphemed among the
Gentiles, through Cardinals and Bishops, that the power of the keys is
wiped away with money, that lewd persons are made priests, that Simonie is
used as it were in open fayres, that the prelates do swell with Ambicion and
Covetousness, that horrible villainies are practiced in monasteries, yt Rome
swarmeth with shameless harlots and stru^pets, beside many like matters only
towching their detestable manners: but of their manifold superstitions, of their
butcherly slaughters and cruel tyranny raging at that time in Italy, England,
France, Spain, and other countries, he speaks not a word. And yet says
Vergerius (who made faithful search thereof) wtin less then thirty years
their inquisition of heresye, has devoured and destroyed by diverse kind of
torments an hundred and fifty thousand Christians. This acompt Vergerius made
above twenty years ago: And since that time (saving only (God be thanked for
it) in England) in all the former countries this bloody persecution for Religion
has not only continued, but mightily increased. Italy daily tastes the
bitter gall of it, as occasion serves, Spain finds that the heat thereof
burns more fervently in the midst of winter, then the scorching Son in
the midst of summer at noone day, the flame of the one turns and tanneth
their skynnes to black: the coals of the other burns their bodies to graye
ashes. And as towching France, al Europe knows that as yet the worm in the
ground has scant taynted the karkases of thousands, which within these few
days have been martyred. Thus we see how that proud Prince of Babylon has
made all Christendom as it were his burning furnace, to destroy those that
will not fall down to worship his golden image: and yet how that this littell
Island walks as it were in the myddest of this universal flame, and not so
much as our garments are once cinged therewith. And yet it is well known
how careful and busy the bishop of Rome with his accomplices has been to
stir coals among us, and to enkendle that fire in England, the smoke
whereof were sufficient to destroy us: who knows not how that if his hot
thunderboltes of excommunication could any thing harm us, we had therewith ben
beaten to powder long since. If the rank breath of his black curses might
have prevailed, we had bin blown to hell, bequeathed alive both body and
soul to the devil and dampnation long since. If holy leagues (as they term
them) and conspyring vows of sondrye estates by his procurement, could have
bin stronger against us then ye hand of God with us: how many are we that
should have tasted miserye, but how few should have bin left to be wail it at
this day? When foreign invasions have bin to weak, has not that Roman
prelate ^ought to procure treason among us hear at home, to delude the simple
with bulls and pardons, entising them to renounce their alleageaunce, to
revolt from their natural Prince, to raise rebellio^s against their own
country? Has not his bulls roared at Paul's Church gate discharginge
subjects of their duty? And how they have wroughte in huggur mugger to
steal away the hearts of English subjects, many poor widows and
wretched orphans at this day in the North part of England with heavy hearts
ran testifye, who have lost their parents and husbands through detestable
rebellion and sedition, the root whereof is the Romish religion. But because
that these tumultes, treasons and broils wroughte since the reign of our
most Gracious Queen against her majesty and royal estate, have bin practiced
not in ye time of this Pope Paul the fourth, but by those that have succeeded
him, as Pius the fourth and Pius the fifth: the gentle Reader is to be desired
not to look for the perfect discourse hereof as yet, neither the historye of
their lives, treachery and hurlye burlyes sturred in Christendom, for so much
as yet they are not to be sufficiently gathered by those Chronicles yt have bin
latelye set forth or augmented. As for Onuphrius who has written their lives
added to the historye of Platina, because he is one hired by the Pope to put
his pen in ure for the cracked credit of their estate at this day, there is
just cause to think his writing to be parciall, as one that turns the best
side of his Popes face outward, and that which is blemished either he hides
it, or paynteth it with a fair color to cover the foul blots thereof. And
therefore seeing master Bales travail does stay hear in Paul the fourth,
this may suffice till it shall please God to give occasion of proceeding in ye
lives of those yt have succeeded during ye reign of the Queens majesty. In
the meanetime good Christian Reader, consider those treacheryes which by thy
own experience thou may know since her highness came to ye Crown, of the
Popes dealinge against her Majesty and her Realm, weigh whereunto they tend
by the example of these former historyes set forth in this work, and then I
doubt not but every one shall find that he has just cause to say: Blessed
be Almightye God that has thus preserved us from the mouth of the Lion, and
from the wolf in a Lambs skin.

I doubt not but they that have been false hart^d against our most gracious
Queen, will consider their own folly, their own iniquity and madness, in
enuyinge ye good estate of so noble, merciful, godly, and most lawful a prince:
whom it has pleased Iehoua to make our Debora and a most blessed and worthy
instrument, to the aduau^cing of his glory, the comfort of his Church, the
preservation of the happy and quiet estate of all true English hearts, the
which great treasures of Gods mercy so plentifullye powered upon us the Lord
give us grace to use them more thankfully then heretofore, to glorify his name
with greatter zeal, to love honor and serve, with all humility in Jesus
Christ, our most noble sovereign, to pray for the most blessed continuance of
her majesty's raygne over us, to grant us as true subjects to hate her
enemies, as those that wyshe our confusion, especially the Pope of Rome, and
all such, even to the death, as in his behalf or for any jot of his
accursed superstition would forbear but to wysh well unto her majesty. The
Lord give us the hearts to beware, renounce, and abhor, the secret society
and friendship of all those that seek to trouble her quiet government, as
the ennemies of gods glory. That neither one affection nor other, cause us to
wink at their sedicious words, nor to judge favorably of the corrupt doings
and sayings of such hollow hearts, which two things have much emboldned
leude attempts, but that having such proof of their practyses we may
henceforth become even jealous in the behalf of Religion and of our most
gracious Prince, and be ready every man lawefully in his vocation, to beat
down blasphemy against God, and to suppress the brood of sedition in the
shell before it be hatched ready to fly. That England may never hereafter
become a neast and filthye cage of those foul birds that are bred in the
bosom of Rome. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.
Laus Deo.
Diverse cases wherein the Pope does sell Dispensation contrary to Gods Law and
his own Canons, and the price of the dispensation according to the rate in his
Courts.
Dispensations for dronkards.
IF a dronkard will have a congregation in his own house, he must pay for his
license xxx. Turons or pounds of Towrs, vii. ducates and vi. Earlines.

If he will have license to erecte a new public Synagog, three score Turons,
xv. ducates.

For license to heal with assistaunce, a dronkard pays vi. Turons

Dispensations for such as have bin or are to be promoted being under age.
If a boy of six years old will take that step to priesthood called Prima
Tonsura, the first clyp: he must pay.ix. Turons, two ducates: ix. Carlines.

If one at sixtene years or as soon as he coms to be xvi. wylbe Subdeacon his
fee is.xii. Turons, iii. Ducates: viii. Carlines: At xvii. years.vi Turons: ii.
Ducates: At xviii. years to be Deacon.xii. Turons: At.xix. years.vi. Turons:

To be Priest at xxii. years.xii. Turons: ii Ducates: x. Carlines: At.xxiiii.
vi. Turons;

For license to take Orders.
He that takes the first clyppe and the four lesser orders, not of his
ordinary, pays* iiii Turons: one Ducate: ix. Carlines.

To take all holy Orders, or but ii. or only one of any body, the fee is xii.
Turons: ii. Ducates: x. Carlines.

To take orders without the time, either one or more, or al.x. Turons: ii.
Ducates.

If any come to receive Benediction to the use of an Abbot.xxiiii. Turons: vi.
Ducates. To the use of a Bishop.xxiiii. Turons.

Dispensations for those that want some of their lymmes, to take Orders.
If any wantinge some member be admitted to Clarkeship in any of the lesser
orders, he pays vi. Turons: ii. Ducates.

If any such be admitted to orders, or to executiue function, he paies xvi.
Turons: iiii. Ducates.

If any that lacks fingers be admitted to a single benefice, his fee is.xii.
Turons: iii. Ducates: vi Carlines.

If any be blind of the right eye, xvi. Turons: xii. Ducates.

If any be blind of the left eye, so as he may hold the book in the
midst of the altar, and the blemishe be not great: xxx. Turons vii. Ducates:
vi. Carlines.

He that having but one stone or none will be priest, pays.vi. Turons: ii.
Ducates.

He that has gelded him self.xii. Turons: iii. Ducates: vi. Carl.

Dispensations for vvilfull murders.
He that is a wylfull murderer may have a Dispensation to enjoy one
benefice: but if that suffice him not then for the second: if that serve not,
then for the third, and together with the absolution, he pays.xii. Turons:
iii. Ducates: vi. Carlines.

And that he may enjoy the privileges of the clergy.xviii. Turons: iiii.
Ducates: ix. Carlines.

And if he require iii, benefices.xviii. Turons: iiii. ducates: ix. Carlines.

A Bishop or Abbot, or the head of any Order, or one of S. John's knights paies
to be absolved from wilful murder fifty Turons: xii. Ducates: vi. Carlines.

That a wylfull murderer may be secretly admitted into holy Orders, and to
mynister at the altar by dispensation, or to any ecclesiastical lyuynges in the
court of conscience only paying.xxxvi. Turons: ix, Ducates.

If one man be gyltye of many murders at one fraye and one time, he pays,
xxxvi. Turons.ix. Ducates: But for.ii, murders in diverse frayes, he paieth
fyfty Turons, xii, Ducats, vi, Carlines.

He yt kills his father, mother, brother or sister, pays for his pardon for
any one of them iiii. Turons ^. Ducate 8. Carlines. And so he that kills his
wife, and if he ask license to marrye another, he pays viii. Turons, ii.
Ducates ix. Carlines. And for all they that assist a man in murdering his
wife, the pardon is dearer by ii. Turones for every such.

For murdering of priests.
If a lay man kill a priest, vi. Turons, ii. Ducates.

If he kill a single clearke or a priest in holy orders that is forbidden to
execute his office, vi. Turons, ii. Ducates.

If one man kill many priests at one time and in one fraye, he fines but vi.
Turons. If diverse at diverse times, for the first ye whole fine and for every
one of the rest half.

That he who has bin a priestkiller may obtain ecclesiastical liuinges, the
dispensation is ii. Turons, ii. Ducates.

For killing a lay man.
For one lay man only.iii. Turons, i. Ducate, iiii. Carlines.

If one kill diverse in one conflict, he fines but for one.

For murdering of children.
If the father, mother or kinseman, murder a child, iiii. Turons, i. Ducate,
viii. Carlines. If a stranger do it, iii. Turons.i. Ducate, iiii. Carlines. If
the husband and wife both do it, vi. Turons, ii. Ducates.

If a woman take a pocion to kill the fruit in her womb. Or if the father
give it to the mother, the price of their indulge^ce is iiii. Turons, i.
Ducate, viii. Carlines. If a stranger offer it, iiii. Turons, i. Ducate, v.
Carlines.

For charminge and vvitchcraft.
A woman witch or enchantresse after she has renounced her sorceryes pays,
vi. Turons, ii. Ducates.

For heretics.
For absolution from heresye before a man have renou^ced it by oath, so as he
may be received again to enjoy all privileges as before in ample manner, the
price is xxxvi. Turons, ix. Ducates.

For sacrilege, theft, fyring houses, rapes, periurye and such like.
Absolution with restoring of the parson in ample form in every one of these
cases, is xxxvi. Turons, ix. Ducates.

For frailtye of the flesh.
Absolution for fleshlye frailtye in any Uenerius act committed by one of the
clergy though with a nonne within and without the abbey walls, or with women
of their kindred or af^^ntiye, or their ghostlye daughters etc. with
dispensation for retayning his orders is (if he ask absolutio^ together with
them) xxxvi. Tur. iii. Ducat. But if with them he sue also for absolution of
sin against nature, and sinning with brute beasts in former sort, the price
is fourscore and ten Turons, xii. Ducates, vi. Carlines. But if he sue for
absolution only of sin against nature etc. as above the price is xxxvi.
Turons, ix Ducates.

The price of a pardon for a nonne which has lain with diverse men within or
without the abbeye walls, and to be restored to her former estate in the
nonnery, or to be Lady Abbess, is xxxvi. Turo^s,.ix. Ducates.

Absolution for him that keeps a concubine with dispensation for orders and
spiritual living, xxi. Turons, v. Ducates, vi. Car.

For a lay man offending in any carnal lust in the court of conscience, the
dispensation is vi. Turons, ii. Ducates.

For incest, iiii, Turons, for adulterye and incest both, vi. Turons,

Of diverse transgressions.
For buryinge, an excommunicated in Church soil.vi. Turons: two Ducates.

For him that has concealed the carkas of a dead priest, whereby to obtain
his benefice.vi. Turons, two Ducates.

For a priest that says mass ignorantly in an interdicted place, vi. Turons,
two Ducates.

For a priest that blesses man and wife at the second marriage, which were
blessed in the first.vi. Turons and two Ducates.

The absolution for a merchant that transporteth Artyllery to Infidelle^ and
returns without gaynes.xii. Turons.iii. Ducates. vi. Carlines.

If he return with gains the fee is all one, and he must agree with the
Datary to the Pope.

Were it not gentel Reader that both I my self am even tired already with
s^ttinge forth to show this the Popes paltry ware, and that beside I think
this may suffice both to fill the eyes of the gredie chapman, and to give
knowledge what the rest is like to be, I might yet open the pedlers pack
much wyder, and bring out stranger stuff, fonder toys and knackes then
these are, yea what peddler is he though his boochet be never so byg that is
able to show so great store and so many sorts of fine feats as is the rich
peddler of Rome, There are in the same pack, from whence I culled these
about.400. sondrye cases wherein he gives free dispensation for the love of an
old friend of his the good lady money* for what can man devise between heaven
and hell, yea heaven and hell both, but he has it to sell: If any of his
friends be offended that I should thus boldly take upon me to rifle his shop,
and to publishe his secrets, or will say yt I charge him with some kind of
baggage and riffe raffe, that is none of his, If I may know so much of their
minds, that this my doing does not please them If it might please god to
give me time, I will to content them open other of his boxes, and show such
workemanshippe of him and his underlings, that I hope any man, that loves his
own honesty, will for ever be ashamed to buy and sell with such a shameful
makeshifte, such a cosonynge broker, or to fight under the banner of such a
bloddy Prelate. In the mean time the wise may be warned by this how they
meddle with any of his cou^terfayte marchaundise, though it has never so fair
a floryshe.

FINIS.
IMPRINTED AT London in Fleetestreate near unto S. Dunstones Church by Thomas
Marshe.

Anno. 1574.


