THE MIRROVR OF HVMILITIE: OR Two eloquent and acute Discourses upon the
Nativity and Passion of Christ, full of divine and excellent Meditations and
Sentences. Published first in Latin by the worthy Author Daniel Heinsius, and
since done into English, by I. H. Master of Arts in Mag. Coll. Oxon.

(...):
(...).
Aeschin. erat. in Ctesiphont. LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop, and are to be
sold at his house by Saint Annes Church near Aldersgate. 1618.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL, his worthy friend, Thomas Nicholas Esquier, as also to the
virtuous and religious Gentlewoman, Mrs. Jane Nicholas his wife, and my must
loving Aunt, all happiness of this, and a better Life.
Worshipful Sir,
THe due respect I bear unto your worth, and the thanks I owe unto you for
the many arguments of your love, and incourageme^ts of my studies which I have
received from you, were the maine motives that induced me to tender unto your
acceptance, and to commit unto your patronage this little Pamphlet and Alpha of
my endeauours: Let me entreat your goodness to entertain it. It consists of
two discourses, upon the Nativity and Passion of our Savior. The Matter
thereof is as he spoke of the iron, borrowed: the Language is our own. That
wherein they both concenter and agree, is no less then CHRIST; then whom there
is no greater, no better. For if the pursuit of any thing besides the
happiness of Heaven be still without end, and never without danger: then may
we be fully ascertained, that CHRIST alone is the chiefest object, whereon we
may fix the eye of our perpetual contemplation, and embrace him with the
arms of our deuoutest Affection: who is a Load-starre to direct us unto
Heaven. I will not so much preiudicate your zealous intentions, as to persuade
you to read what I have written: but rather to pardon, if I have written
amiss.

Thus am I still jealous of mine own errors and inability, being no less
desirous to submit my self unto your judicious censure: hoping that
hereafter I shall address my self unto the perfecting of some larger project:
yet ever acknowledging that you deserve more then I can perform, and that you
have performed more then I can deserve. And therefore ever consecrating unto
you both my pains and my prayers: the one for your service, and the other for
your safety:

I ever remain, Yours to be commanded, in whatsoever, IO: HARMAR.

To the courteous Reader.
NOthing more hard then to please all, nothing more ahsurde then to endeavor
it. I am therefore (for my part) resolved to content my friends, and to
contemn my foes. They I know, will mildly judge, these will peruersely
censure: being far worse then the Basilisques, they kill before they see. Well,
it were impiety to flatter them, imbecility to fear them.

Thine as thou please, I. H.

THE MIRROVR OF HVMILITIE.
HOM. I. Upon the Nativity of Christ.
THe Epicurea^ Philosophers, (Reverend and right worthy Auditors) who never had
so much as the least relish of celestial joy and happiness, reposing their
chiefest felicity in brutish and corporal pleasure, were accustomed to
celebrate the twentieth day of every month in honor of their Archmaster
Epicurus, surmising a twentieth day to have been the day of his Nativity. And
not only so, but also they adorned their bedde-chambers with his picture, and
engraued his portraiture in their plate and ringes, that they might always
behold him whom they meant ever to remember. Thus much homage and duty did
those profane and effeminate Pagans perform unto him that was the patron of
their opinion of pleasure. No marvel then if the Church of Christ has
consecrated one day unto her Savior, for the solemnization of his Nativity,
and for the perpetuation of so ineffable a mystery. And yet howsoever the
mystery of the Incaruation of the Son of God be so great, and the benefit
of it no less; how lightly do we regard it, how perfunctorily do we
celebrate it? I doubt not, but we all plainly see, that by the coming of
Christ, God was united unto man, and man reunited unto God; the rigor and
severity of the Law abated, graces given, iniquities forgiven, and yet how
lightly do we regard it? how perfunctorily do we celebrate it? Some there
be that rather desire to be curiously inquisitiue into the mystery, then to
acknowledge the depth of it with modesty: and do endeavor to apprehend that
by natural reason, which far passes the flight of humane understanding.

But we (Beloved) that think it to be a more secure way, and of less
trouble and perplexity, rather to adore the supernatural excellency of it,
then to assay with a Scottish and a sottish subtlety, to diue into it; first of
all, let us think upon his cradle, and then afterward upon his crown: Let us
take our flight from his humility, that we may at the last so are unto the
chiefest height and sublimity. Let us consider his conception, his nativity,
his poverty, his infancy, his impotency; and let us meditate upon that
blessed, blessed time, wherein he took upon him not only the weak nature of
man, but also the weakest age of man.

Let us fix our thoughts upon that thrice happy and auspicious day, a day
farther excelling many centuries of years in goodness, then it does come
short of them in extent. A day, whereon Majesty invested it self with
despicable humility, whereon the Word became flesh, GOD became man.

And yet so, that the dignity and integrity of the Deity were nothing
impeached, although seemingly degraded and impaired; neither was there any
thing wanting to complete and absolute humanity which was assumed. Now if any
man be so audicious, as to pry into the secrecy of this Mystery, and
without wit or fear, to address himself to the discovery of the manner of
it, he may perchance quickly strike sail, and retire with an O Altitudo! and
still be as far from the fruit of his labor as from the end.

If we look upon the Divinity, God the Father is, and has always ^eene,
and is always said to be. Both which properties, always to have ^eene, and
to be, are as justly attributed unto the Son. For the Deity of the Son is
not distinguished from the Deity of the Father. The Son is ^ee that was
begotten of the Father, ^oequall with the Father, in respect ^f his Essence,
though not in regard ^f his office. Now if thou inquirest, when Christ was
begotten, then thou must of necessity deuolue thy imagination upon some
parcel of time, unto which the Deity can no way be ^onfined. And the Son,
being if I may so speak) parallel to the Father, is as well beyond the
bounds of time, as the Father. For how can the Son be limited by time,
which is, and has been with the Father before all time? begotten before all
time, as God; but borne in time as man.

As he is God, so he had no cause of his being; as he is the Son, so he
may in some sort be say de to have had his origination from the Father; but
such a one as is eternal. Here may man's conceit yield it self to be but
shallow; here against the marble of this difficulty, may the edge of all
subtilitie be rebated: here may the illiterate presume to know as much as the
learned. For whatsoever is, and has been before all time, well may it be
credited, it can never be comprehended. For that that has been eternally
before the existence or essence of man, is no less beyond the reach and
capacity of man. For as the imagination and understanding of man, cannot be
ever drawn beyond the beginning of time, or the extent: So neither without
time was ever any man begotten, besides Christ which was man and God, and as
upon this day was borne Man: whom if we surmise to have been made, that is
blasphemy: If we think that he was not begotten, we shall then derogate
much from the Deity: If we deny his Humanity, we then run the hazard of
losing our eternal safety, being the fruit and end of his Nativity. Thus (to
speak in general) must we acknowledge every thing in God to be far above
the strain of reason, but nothing beyond the reach of faith. No less ought
we to conceive of God the Son in particular. For he is also total God, as
he is total man; and yet not totally God because he is also man; nor totally
man, because he is also God. O ineffable union! Surely, this conjunction and
combination of the divine and humane nature, proceeded only from the immediate
and sole act of the Deity. And therefore now, O man, see that thou adore and
reverence this mystery, and upon this day think upon thy happy estate and
condition, purchased by the obedience and humility of thy Savior: who being
borne as upon this day, was notwithstanding begotten from everlasting: and
being God, for man's sake, became man: There being no way to save man but by
dying for man, and no way to dye for man, but by being man.

Here may, we behold both his Deity and Humanity: The one must worthily be
esteemed, because the other is worthy to be admired.

Man could not be made God, and therefore God became Man. And to this end and
purpose, that thou, O man, might acknowledge thy Creators power, and embrace
thy Sauiors lowliness; that so, although his Majesty confound thee, yet his
Humility may comfort thee.

It will be worthy our contemplation, if we think, how, as upon this day God
that is most purely immateriall, and free from all shadow of corporeity, was
united unto a body: how he that was invisible became apparent and evident; how
he that could not be discerned by the touch, was as upon this day encompassed
with the clasping arms of his tender mother: How he that never had beginning,
now began to be: and lastly, how the Son of God became the Son of man. So
that as upon this day, God and men, heaven and earth, mortality and eternity,
humanity and divinity were combined. In whom? in our Savior: Whom the Father
has appointed Heir of all things, by whom also he made the World, being the
brightness of his glory, and the express image or character of his person, who
being no less admirable for his humility, then incomprehensible in respect of
his power, descended far below the pitch of his eminency, that he might
preserve by his mercy, what he had created by his omnipotency. He that once
was clothed with the luster of glory and majesty, no less terrible then
admirable, whom neither Angels nor Archangels, nor Seraphims, nor Cherubims
could endure to behold; he that once was Lord of hosts, the God of glory, he
that once could with his only countenance turn the mountains topsie-turuie,
and wind-shake the foundations of the whole earth: He I say, as upon this day,
for us become as one of us.

The unspeakable Majesty of the Father manageth the mystery, the ineffable
love and affection of the Son assumeth our flesh, the incomprehensible power
of the Spirit resideth within the narrow limits of the womb; albeit it cannot
be contained in the vaste capacity and circuit of the world. On this day was
death vanquished, because life was produced: On this day was lying abolished,
because truth was mani feited: on this day was error abandoned, because the
true way was discovered: on this day was the Manna of mercy, and the dole of
heaven distributed, which he that eats shall not die; but live eternally. O
blessed day, O beautiful and glorious day! A day without evening or ending;
the very period of mortality, the beginning and alpha of eternity. A day of
our second Nativity and Regeneration, whereon, that man might be borne of God,
God would be borne like man. In the Creation man was formed according to the
image of God, but now God takes upon him the Image of man.

In the beginning God made man of the earth: but now even GOD himself is made
that that he made, that that might not perish that he had made. Now therefore,
let the wisdom and power of man be defaced, seeing the wisdom of God is so
clearly manifested. Henceforth, the lame shall walk, the blind shall see,
the deaf shall hear, the dumb shall speak, the dead shall revive, and that
with one word, because it is the Word that speaks, yea and without a word,
because it is God that commands. O joyful day! O happy halcyonian day!
whereon the Son of God by his voluntary humiliation, and by the assumption
of our humanity and humility has now affianced us unto himself, by entering
with us the league of brotherhood and fraternity. A day, whereon he was borne
which was before all days, even the Ancient of days; he that made the first
day: he said, Let there be light, and there was Genesis 1. 4.
light. A day, whereon Emanuel (whose name is sweeter then the sweetest
aromaticke odours of Arabia) being with man, amongst men; in man, for man
became man. A day that Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob foresaw. On Genesis 27. 23.
this day man ascended, because God descended; and our flesh was advanced and
ingraced, because the Word was made flesh. Ioh. 1.


Hitherto have we been the sons of Adam, now are we the sons of God: a
new people, a new nation, not borne of flesh and blood, nor of the will of man,
but of God. All things John 1. 13.
hitherto have been too transcendent, imperuious without entry, full of
horror and amazement: but now we may have free access unto God, the way is
neither chargeable, nor tedious: And therefore now, O man, come unto thy God,
and yet by the mediation of man. For on this day thy Savior, of God, became
Man; that he might reioyne man to God. O ineffable love! O incredible mercy! O
unspeakable grace and favor! we all acknowledge the invisible Essence, and
indivisible Unity of God the Father and the Son; insomuch that the Essence
of that one has not been like to the other only, but even identical: and yet
he that is one with God, was as upon this day made one with man; that man
might be made one with God.

Come now therefore unto thy Creator, O man: touch thy Creator, and embrace him,
touch thy Savior, and adore him. Come thou, O blessed Church, draw near unto
thy Bridegroom; O let him be folded within the arms of thy zeal and
affection. For he has taken a great journey, even as far as it is from
heaven to earth, that he might translate thee from earth to heaven. God he
is, that he might free and enfranchize thee: and man he is, that without
terror and amazement he might come unto thee. So that he has well tempered
his Deity with humanity, and his Majesty with humility: for as the one
confounds, so the other comfort; as the one amazeth, so the other
animateth. And therefore come boldly, and confidently meet thy Savior, and as
well with thy tears, as with thy words. O cry out and say, I have found him
whom my soul loves: I held him and would not let him go, until I had
brought him into my mothers house, and into the Chamber of her that conceived
me. O let him kiss me Cant. 3. 4.
with the kisses of his mouth: Draw me, we will run after thee because of
the savor of thy sweet ointments. Come Cant. 1. 4.
O blessed Church, and sing; Unto us a Child is borne, unto us a Son is Esaias
9. 6.
given; the almighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace. Come, I
say, and sing with the Psalmist; I waited patiently for the Lord, and he
inclined unto me, and heard my cry: In my bed I sought him whom my soul
loves. Tell me, whom my soul loves, where feedest thou? where lie thou at
noone? Let us beloved, go into our Saviors little and homely chamber of
repose, and let us delight and imparadize our selves with so lovely an object
as our Savior is. Away with those proud and insolent Pharisees, who presume
they know the Law, and yet know not the author of it. Away with Arrius, who
held that there was a time when Christ was not. O let him be perpetually
branded with the note of this his infamous and execrable heresy. Let him tell
me, when had he no being, which had being in a beginning without beginning?
In the beginning was the Word. When had Ioh, 1. 1.
he no being which is God from everlasting? And the Word was God, ibid. At
what time was he not, which is, and was the Author of time? All things were
made by him, and without him nothing was made, ibid. Away with the No^tians and
Sabellians, that confounded the Trinity of persons, that held but one person,
as there is but one Essence. Away with that ignominious Stigmatike Samosatenus,
that even when he reposed himself upon the prostituted carcass of a base and
odious strumpet, was so impudent and audacious as to detract and derogate from
the Deity of our Savior: and besides this, did not blush to affirm the
eternal word of God to be nothing else but a mere vanishing voice. Away with
Ualentinus, and Apelles, and Marcio, that labored to disanull Christ's
humanity. Away with Nestorius, that held, that the divine and humane nature
were separated and diuulsed: and moreover endeavored to maintain, that not the
Son of God, but one that was mere man, was for our redemption nailed unto
the Cross. Away with that wicked Ebio, that ascribed unto our Savior an
earthly father. Away with the whole rout and rabble of Heretics, or whatsoever
of that leaven, preiudicers either of his Deity, or his Humanity. Away with
those Ethnicke Philosophers and Wizards of the world.

But let us Beloved, confessing our ignorance, and professing our faith, enter
into our Saviors chamber, and sing, The stone which the builders refused, is
become the head stone of the corner. This is the Lords doing, and it is
marvelous in our eyes. This is the day that the Lord has made, we will
rejoice and be glad in it. Let us enter into our Saviors Psa: 118. 22
Chamber, and sing; The Lord is my strength and song, and is become my
salvation; Ver. 14:
The right hand of the Lord is exalted, the right hand of the Lord does Ver. 16.
valiantly. Let us enter into our Saviors Chamber, and sing; Sing O daughter
Z^p. 3. 14.
of Sion, shoute O Israel: Be glad and rejoice with all thy heart, O daughter
of Jerusalem. The Lord has taken away thy judgments: he has cast out thine
enemy; The King of Israel, even the Lord is in the midst of thee: thou shall
not see evil any more. Behold he that is Job. 11. 3.
higher then Heaven, and deeper then hell, for thy sake. O man, is become man,
that he might recover thee from Hell, and bring thee unto Heaven.

Behold therefore that sweet Benjamin, Christ Jesus; Behold him which is our
life on earth, and our way to heaven. Behold him that is sprung from the root
of less, him that is of the generation of David, the seed of the woman, the
arm of God, the virtue and power of the Almighty, and his well-beloved in whom
he is well pleased. Behold him that was begotten but not then born: Behold him
that is now borne, and not now begotten; being God by the Fathers side, and man
by the mothers side. Behold him that was, when he was not borne, being more
ancient, not only then the time of his birth, but even the birth of time.
Behold him whom Abraham the Father of the believing received as a guest, whose
father he was in respect of the Flesh, whose son he was in respect of
Faith. Behold him whose star Balaam Number. 24. 17
saw before the Wisemen, and foretold it also truly, although unwillingly.
Behold him that now powers forth his tears for thee, he will hereafter his
blood; and therefore he will shed his blood for thee, because now his
tears: who therefore weepeth that thou might rejoice, and therefore comes
unto thee, because he loves thee. The time was when thou, O man, did lie
floating in the stream of luxurious delights, when thou sacrificedst unto
strange gods that were not. Then did thou, O miserable man, run the hazard
both of Gods indignation, and thine own damnation, the sorrows of death
surrounded thee, the surges of iniquity overwhelmed thee. This Ps. 18. 14.
did the only begotten Son of God take notice of, as he lay in the bosom of
his Father, and as he sat in the throne of his Majesty. And therefore he came
down speedily, he laid aside his glory, and assumed poverty, and undertook
the heavy weight of misery. He came unto the earth, He came unto thee, he
came into thee, borne in the night, in the stormy winter, being naked and
distressed. He had no man to succor him, no man to attend him, no man that
regarded him. The best swaddling clothes his mother had to en wrappe him, were
but a few miserable rags. The best cradle he had was but a manger. Hence is it
that he cries unto thee, and protests, that he could not have done more for
man. O what guerdon, what recompense shall man bestow upon him? It is not
beloved, either the inuenting or venting of frivolous and fruitless questions,
concerning his wonderful Nativity, not those Myriades of quirkes and niceties,
which have been extracted from the drossie ore of earthy imaginations, that
can be in acceptable sacrifice unto him. Alas these things rather disturb our
tranquillity, then any way procure our safety: these abate our zeal toward
God, and set us at bate with our neighbor: Let us therefore abandon these
fooleties and fopperies. Let us put on sackcloth and ashes; let us sit in the
dust; let us sit near unto our Saviors c^atch, let us beat our breasts, and
weep for our sins, that our Savior may hear our sobs, and behold our
tears, that so we may testify how much we are engaged unto him, who being the
everlasting Word of the Father, for our sakes became silent: who being the
wisdom of the Father, seemed to be empayred: who being the Father of
eternity, became the Son of mortality. He came unto his own, but his own
received Job. 1. 11.
him not. See how he placed himself in a degree below man, that he might, lift
man unto God: and not only so, but as for man his sake, he became man; so for
man's sake he became miserable; and yet was not he whent hou wast not? Who Esa.
40. 12.
has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted out heaven with
the spanne, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed
the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance? O that my people were
wise, Deuteronomy. 32.
that they understood, that they foresaw their last end.

And how happy should we be, if, as Christ became like unto us in flesh; so
we would endeavor to be like unto him in Spirit! He is ours by the one; let
us be his by the other. There was a time when he came flying upon the wings of
the wind, when he came in lightning and thunder, when darkness was his
pauilion. Now may we find him wrapped in swaddling cloutes, lying in a manger.
Now may the Church cry out and say, As soon Luc. 20. 12.
as I heard him speak, my soul melted within me: I sought him, but I found
him not: I called, but he answered me not. Now cry out and say, Stay me with
flagons, comfort me with apples, for I am Cant. 2. 5.
sick of love. Now will I rest under the shadow of his wings. Ye are not now
come unto the mount (says Moses) that might not be touched, and that burned
with fire, nor unto blacknes and darkness, and tempest, and the sound of the
Trumpet, and the voice of words, which voice they that heard, entreated that
the word should not be spoken unto them anymore, for they could not endure
that which was commanded: and if so much as a beast touched the mountain it
shall be stoned or thrust through with a dart.

And so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and Heb.
12. 18.
quake. But we beloved may contemplate a more mild object, even our beloved
Savior which was contented to act the part of lowliness and humility, who
when he published his Law, he appeared then as it were, in fire: but now
manifesting his grace, and mercy, disdained not to repose himself on a pallat
of Hay. He whose sublimity is incomprehensible, dejected himself as low as
might be. He as he lay in the Manger, had notwithstanding the Angels of
Heaven about him, as his ancient attendants, and dependences, and the whole
quier of heaven singing about him at his Nativity, which sang about him in his
glory. And although he were confined to an obscure cottage, yet the rays of
such a candle do I say? nay of such a Sun could not be hidden under a
bushel; but were displayed even unto the remotest parts of the Eastern
climate. His Deity could not be defaced by his poverty, nor extenuated. By
the power of which Deity a star in the firmament was commanded to give notice
of Christ's humanity. Whatsoever in this mystery is achieved beyond the
capacity of man, plainly euinceth, that he is God, who notwithstanding was
thus humbled.

Let custom vanish, let nature acknowledge her self to be but shallow in the
conceit of the miracles which are wrought by the immediate finger of God.
Reason can hardly be brought to acknowledge that a Virgin was a mother. It may
at length come within kenne of this mystery: if so be it be furthered by the
stern of Gods word, and wafted along by the breath and gale of the Spirit.
Bare reason is faiths contradiction.

Now beloved, let us posse on unto that that has not yet been touched. And
seeing that we have consecrated this day unto divine and holy meditation, let
us with a zealous and modest curiosity take an enterview of whatsoever
pertains unto the birth of our Savior. Let us imagine whatsoever might have
then been seen, is now also set before our eyes. Let us go visit the child
and his blessed mother, the Virgin; and let us think upon all those to whom
so gracious a mystery was first revealed. Let us lay aside so many Centuries
of years, which have passed since his birth, and let our winged thoughts
trauerse the large extent of ground which is betwixt us and Bethleem, and let
us take an exact survey of that least, but not least blessed City: so that not
the slightest circumstance may pass unexamined. For if the infancy of all
children do much delight and please us, how much should the infancy of this
blessed babe rejoice us, which for our sakes, that he might be an absolute
and complete man, dayned to take upon him the impotency of our childhood? Not
far off from the manger sat the blessed Virgin, herself bearing a great
reverence to the miracle: who being not tainted with the contagion of any
inordinate lust, does ingenuously confess that, whereof the reason she cannot
conceive; to wit, that she is a mother; who having been ^etrothed unto
Iosph, had received his news from the mouth of an An^ell, that she should not
be the Spouse ^f man but the mother of God.

Now she evidently perceyueth, ^^at she is married unto heaven, and ^et her
thoughts are still transported, ^^ well by amazement, as by joy. She Luke 1.
13.
^eth, that even she poor despised ^aide is become the Mother of her ^^ther,
a Gouernesse to him that is the Governor of Heaven and earth: She sees, that
she has brought forth a mightier then David, a senior to Adam. She sees,
that she herself is both mother, midwife, and nurse: that none might touch
him, less pure then herself that bare him. She had oftentimes before
entertained many holy meditations upon the child, which was in so many places
of the holy Scripture spoken of by the Prophets and Oracles of God, and that
that child should spring from the root of David. She had often thought upon
the Virgin, admiring whom such great and transcendent happiness should
befall. She well knew, that Text of Esaias, Chap. 7. 14. Behold a Virgin shall
conceive and bear a Son She had often reuolued many predictions of the
Prophets, and in them had read the story of her self, and knew it not. She
sees many Prophesies fulfilled, many promises performed, many types and
prefigurations accomplished. She sees a light, and yet not borrowed from the
rays either of the Sun or Moon. She sees a night whose serenity surpasses
the brightness of the clearest day. Sometimes she being, as it were,
ouerioyed in her happiness, her eyes distill a sweet shower of cristall tears
into her yuorie bosom. Sometimes when she thinks that she is become a
mother, then a modest shame (a probable argument of virginity, and the tincture
of virtue) sets in her snowy cheeks a pure vermilion. Sometimes with a
chaste and composed aspect, she beholds her Son and Gods; and (yet being
solicitous for ^er Virginity) she puts on the most tender affection of a
mother, which notwithstanding is frequently ^nterrupted with the conceit that
she ^^ still a Virgin. Now she begins ^o nourish her Son, and to bring
him ^p, whom she had now brought forth: ^^staining him by miraculous milk,
^used in her not by the help of man; ^ut produced by the efficaeie of the
spirit of God. The great Founder ^^d Architect of Heaven and Earth, now rests
himself upon the neck of his mother and Spouse, and he himself that feeds
all things, deriueth nutriment from her sugared paps. Sometimes our Savior with
a pleasing countenance beholds his virgin mother, and seems to know her:
She again reflecteth a reciprocal Smile upon him, and confesses that she
is his mother indeed; and she parts her love (which she imparteth to no man
else) between her Son, and her Uirginitie; constantly acknowledging the one,
and still retayning the other. Depart ye from this holy and blessed Spectacle,
ye unchaste ones whatsoner ye are, either actually, or patronesses of
lewdness: You I say, that parget and sophisticate your faces; you that are so
nice and curious in your gates, you that with your itching and bewitching
fascinating glances discover the wantonness of your minds, and lightness of
your lives; you that so adorn your heads with borrowed hair, and your necks
with laces, and do lay open your milke-white paps as most powerful
allectiues, to attract the beholders eye, and to intrappe the Spectators
affection, giving him by this light taste of one or two parts, hope to enjoy
the whole body. You that by your sugered kisses, and amorous embraces set your
bodies in combustion; you that by your wanton and venereous thoughts deflower
your selves before you are linked to your husbands: you, I say, depart from the
blessed society of our Savior. For what else do ye, but that ye may be
espoused unto the Devil? who as he first cheated your grandmother Eve of her
blessed estate; so he continually attempteth by the like serpentine imposture
to dispoyle you of your purity and integrity. For his sake, and by his
inducement do ye dispose the tresses of your hair, burnish your faces,
consult your looking glasses.

And thus you give way unto the Serpent to creep through the crannies of your
eyes into the secret angles and corners of your hearts. If ye look upon the
holy Virgin, you shall find that she never fixed her thoughts upon any thing
but on God* and so first giving him a place in her heart, afterward she, most
happily entertained him in her womb. Her soul was as it were diuulsed and
separated from her body, by an intentive and serious contemplation of her
Creator; and the surrendering herself unto him alone, was no less wrapped in
the bond and ties of affection toward him, then she was rapt in admiration of
his love toward her* This is that that quenches and extinguisheth all the
flames of lust, and exorbitant love. This was that that so ravished and extased
the blessed Marie: This was that sacred fire that so sacrificed her heart unto
her GOD. This was that that made her (like a true and passionate Love) never to
turn her eyes from her Savior whom she totally and entirely affected. For
indeed that soul which is illuminated by the reviving rays of the Spirit, is
univocally made al eye, all light, all luster, all spirit; no otherwise then
combustible matter being set unto ^he fire is turned into the nature of ^ire.
So Elias in times past, after he had often fasted, and had given the fire of
zeal residence on the golden altar of his heart, was not long after rapt up
into heaven in a fiery Chariot. Thus is the operation of the Spirit as well
attractiue of what resembles it, as productiue of that it would have resemble
it. The Spirit is unitive and combining, it makes ^s agree together, and in it.
For as they that are married, are said to be one flesh; so they that are
linked unto Christ, are as truly said to be one in spirit.

And indeed the union of spirits is more near and strict then the coherence
and copulation of bodies. Great reference had Christ unto Mary, in respect of
his body: but she had more alliance unto him, in respect of the Soul and
Spirit.

Come now ye chaste Matrons, and pure virgins, which hitherto have scarce
defiled your selves so much as in thought; come I say (according unto the
custom of women) and visit this blessed Virgin Mother delivered of so happy
an issue. Here is nothing about her unclean or menstruous, nothing unworthy
your presence, nothing that may not become a Virgin. For this blessed Infant,
was not begotten in lust, but in entire chastity; Not by the will of the
flesh, but of the Spirit. Come therefore, I say, ye chaste maidens and
matrons, embrace this babe your Savior with the arms of zeal, apprehend him
with the hand of Faith. Deuote your whole lives unto his service, and endeavor
not so much how you may be fruitful in body, as faithful in soul. Come, draw
near, cast your eyes upon this blessed maid and mother of Christ, in whom we
see childe-birth not to have impaired her virginity, nor her virginity to
have hindered her childebirth. O blessed virgin, O happy Marie! Emblem of
virginity, pattern of Modesty! For, howsoever thou above all other women art
crowned with honor and dignity, in that thou art a mother unto thy Lord, as
thou art his handmaide; yet such is thy piety and humility that thou waxest
not proud or insolent hereby. Many were those gracious thoughts that she
continually entertained, many were those patheticall eiaculations which she
sent up unto heaven. Happy was Joseph that had so gracious a woman espoused
unto him, as Marie: and yet more happy was he, in that the protection and
tuition of his blessed Savior was deputed unto him. I doubt not but that he
was sorry that he had no fit room to receive him, that the place wherein they
soiourned was so mean, so vngarnisht, so unfurnished, so unprovided both of
meat and vtensiles. How carefully did he ponder every circumstance? How
cheerfully did he acknowledge that only faith must believe, what only God
does effect? Now (beloved) seeing we are proceeded thus far, let us also
think upon those that came unto this miracle. Surely they were no other then
simple Idiots: There were in the same country Shepherds abiding in Luc. 2.
the field, keeping watch over their stocks by night. Kings and Potentates were
ignorant of all this, and had no notice of Christ his Nativity. They sleep
whiles Christ comes. So secret and unexpected shall he come, when he shall
come the second time as a thief in the night. Now a chief thing to be
observed in this history, is, that the Angels made choice of Shepherds an
innocent and illiterate sort of men, and made the^ first partakers of the
blessed news of Christ his birth. The reason was (I conjecture) because they
might with more facility be induced to believe the tidings. For as Wool that
has received the die and tincture of no color, is capable of any: so these
blessed shepherds which were never before endued with any kind of secular
wisdom and knowledge, were more apt subjects to entertain celestial and
transcendent inspirations. The surest means to sore up into heaven, are the
wings of faith: that that soonest depriueth us of those wings, and depraueth
our affections, is nothing else but an insolent presumption, and an elevated
conceit of our own understandings. O how hard a matter would it have been to
have persuaded Aristotle, or any of that Leaven (I mean the Ethnicke
opinionating Philosophers) to have believed that the Soueraign of the whole
world should be borne man on earth? O blessed be that wisdom, which in the
mystery of our salvation, has excluded humane wisdom! For they that were
never guilty of any learning and extraordinary knowledge, they that could not
dispute, and could not but believe, were the prime and first that were
acquainted with a matter of so great consequence.

The great Clerks and Scholars of the world, who examined all by the
Touchstone of reason, who ever preferred understanding before belief, were
utterly discarded, and Heardmen admitted, whose plainness of simplicity was a
great cause of their mature and speedy proficiency: Unto you is borne this day
in the City of David, a Savior, Luke 2, 10.
which is Christ the Lord. First of of all, they learn that Christ is borne,
and then unto them. What follows? It is said (verse 16) That they came with
haste, and found Mary and Joseph, and the Babe lying in a manger. These
shepherds found that good shepherd, which was resolved to lay down his life
for his sheep. They find that universal shepherd, that shepherd, whose
sheepefold is of no less extent the^ the whole earth. They find that
shepherd, which hereafter Mat. 25. 21.
shall sever the sheep from the goats. Nay, they come unto that sheep, or
rather unto that immaculate Lamb of Ioh. 1. 29.
God which takes away the sins of the world. They come unto the Lamb, but
unto such a Lamb, as was also the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Who although he
then lay in the manger, yet not long after he was advanced unto his throne.

Hence (Beloved) may we collect how much God favors holy and modest
simplicity, and disalloweth all nice and scrupulous subtlety. The first that
heard the voice of the Angel, were the shepherds; the first that heard the
report of the good news, were no more then shepherds. And yet
notwithstanding, even these shepherds were far more happy then Caesar, who
having the third time barred up the doors of Ianus, and appeased all tumultuous
garboiles of war and sedition, which were then raging and predominant, both
on sea and land; yet knew not that Blessed, blessed peace and reconciliation
which was wrought between God and man. Go too therefore ye blessed
shepherds, unto whom the good tidings were fully signified; you that were
never ambitious of soueraignety, or a blast of fame; you that never studied the
insnaring sophistry of Monks and Friars, nor how to coin the copper
Syllogismes of the fallacious Jesuits; you can neither deceive, nor this day
be deceived, because ye believe only what has been delivered unto you from
the mouth of God: Go, I say, and relate unto your friends and acquaintance
what Christ has done for man. Go and sing an Hosanna unto your Savior; make
up your Cumaean Eglogue, and let your tongues as sweetly warble it, as your
hearts do soundly conceive it. For now you see the beloved Emanuel has
presented himself unto the world: now are the former ages renewed again. Now
are all things possessed with joy and gladness. O what sugared psalms and
celestial odes were written by David concerning Christ represented unto him
only in the dim glass of tipes and figures? why should not we that live in
these aftertimes honor him with our prime endeauours? Hitherto have we treated
of the shepherds which came to visit our Savior: now are we descended to speak
a word or two of the Wise men that gave the shepherds precedence in respect of
order, but not in regard of understanding. But what was that that drew the
Wise men hither? Surely a star in heaven, which was appointed to Blazon the
royal descent and pedigree of that infant that lay in the Manger. Hence was it
that those pillars and Atlasses of learning and knowledge, who coniectured not
future events by book, but rather fixing their eyes and thoughts upon heaven,
which they always beheld enchased with so many glittering stars as Diamonds,
were well ascertained of the nativity of the King of the Jews: For they had
seen his star in the East. And therefore now they repair with all speed and
officious zeal, unto that Mat. 2.
place whither they were directed by the star, which accompanied them even
unto the borders and confines of Bethleem. There they find him, there they
worship him: For so the Text says, When they were come into the house, they
found the Babe with his Mat. 2. 21.
mother Mary, and they falling down worshipped him.

In vain might they have sought in heaven for the Lord of heaven: seeing that
it pleased him to be found on earth, and that in an Inn, in a stable. Come
hither now all you that challenge unto your selves the titles of Wisemen., you
that would refuse to visit your Savior in so mean a place; you that look
big in velvet, and ruffle in silk and tissue; see that you confront not the
mysteries of God with an ouerweening conceit of your own ability: Pry not
into the Arc of his secresies, enquire not for the reason, why God the Son
so humbled, so emptied, so dejected himself. Do you rather with these Wisemen
adore, what you cannot conceive, and admire what you cannot comprehend.

This is an Epidemicke and catholic disease amongst us; We are too punctual
and pragmaticall in euoluing what God would have should lie hid; and we too
perfunctorily neglect what he would we should canuasse and discuss. For as
the whole project of our safety and redemption has been brought to pass on
earth, we make a tedious quest the wrong way, and ambitiously climb up into
heaven to understand the reason of it. Unwise, ungrateful persons as we are,
why do we so disdainfully pass by our Saviors cratch, wherein he was
reposed, his threadbare swaddling cloutes, and homely ornaments wherewith he
was invested? What are all these things but arguments of his voluntary humility
which he assumed, that he might readorne us with the robes of glory, and a
crown of blissful eternity?

O Beloved, you that are Artists, and archprofessors of Learning; you that are
graced with pues and chaires, come and learn one lecture of humility of these
Wisemen. Come and fall down before your humble Savior and adore him; offer
unto him a more acceptable Present then Gold, Myrrh, or Frankincense, even an
ingenuous confession of your ignorance.

And you learned Sages of the East, you that by the direction, and as it were,
manuduction of a star, have vndteraken so long and tedious a journey; return
ye now home again more learned and more happy then ever ye were before. Go
and relate unto your Countrymen the Chaldeans (or peradventure ye are
Persians) the news of this great mystery o^ godliness, without controversy
the greatest: to wit, that God was manifested in the flesh, justified in the
Spirit seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, to be believed in the
world, and las^ of all, to be received up into glory. God and tell them, that
there is nothing in heaven greater the^ that that ye found in the manger.

I have now sufficiently spoken o^ the coming of the wise men, which were the
last that came to visit our Savior. Many indeed they were that came unto him
besides, non were excluded. For he himself came humble, and as it were
degraded and set below himself, that all of what inferior rank soever might
be emboldned to approach unto him, and might have no excuse to tarry from him.

Now if you desire I should specific unto you those that presented themselves
unto our Savior, I shall easily accomplish your desire. There was first a
Quire of Angels, and they sang his birth-song. There were wedded people
Zachary and Elizabeth. There was the unwedded, Simeon. There was a widow,
Anna. There was a Priest, Zachary. There were the learned, the Wisemen. There
were the rude and unlearned, the shepherds. All which if we compare them
together, we shall find betwixt them a great disparitie: who notwithstanding
were all equal, and not one inferior unto an other: ^f we consider them as
they all worshipped and adored the newborn Infant, as they all submitted
themselves unto him, as they all celebrated the day of his Nativity. Would ye
how understand what virgin was at the birth of Christ? I may answer you that a
virgin was a chief agent, or rather a patient in the mystery. Such a Virgin
as brought forth her Creator, being notwithstanding no less a virgin then a
mother, and more a mother then he was a son: for in respect of his Divinity,
he was her Father; as only in regard of his humanity he was her Son. So that
Christ was not only David's son, but also David's Lord: and not only the Son
of man, but also the Father of man; not only of the seed of Abraham, but also
the Father of Abraham; being himself no less the promiser of the Messiah,
then the Messiah promised. O blessed and happy day! on which he that from
everlasting has had, and has his throne in heaven, descended even to the
society of men This day is the day of our Marriage, of our affinity, of our
restoration, of our reunition unto GOD, of our redemption from Hell. On this
day, he that is the eternal God, and still remaining what he was, for our
sakes became what he was not. On this day, he that without a Body was every
where, by the assumption of a body seemed to limit and confine himself unto
place; that we might obtain that happiness by grace, which he had by the
right of his nature.

O happy day much wished, long expected! the abrogation of the Law, the period
of all prophesies, the beginning of the Gospel, yea the Gospel it self: The
Gospel which was first proclaimed from heaven, and after published on earth,
to the end that there might not be wanting authority to confirm it, nor faith
in men to acknowledge it.

O how sweet is the remembrance of that day! how comfortable both to men and
Angels!

True it is, that we cannot conceive this Mystery; and yet we rejoice in it.
True it is, that we cannot diue into the depth and profundity of it; and what
though we cannot? Have not holy men that have totallie devoted themselves unto
the exercises of religion and piety, been as ignorant as we are? If ye
believe me not, let me entreat you to cast your eyes upon old Simeon, who,
howsoever the Scribes and Pharisees were buzzardblinde, and could not behold the
Sun of righteousness; yet he foresaw him Mal. 4.
long before he came. And when he saw that he was come, O how was he
transported with joy! How was he carried away with the stream and torrent of
ouerflowing gladness? O with what zeal of heart, with what swiftness of foot
did he fly unto his Savior, so long expected, and now at length exhibited?
how earnestly did he embrace him, not only with the arms of his body, but
also of his affection? How willing was he to pay his tribute unto nature? How
desirous to shake hands with the world, and its empty vanities, and to resign
himself into the hands of God? With how relenting a soul, with what sweet
showers of tears in the instant before his death, did he warble out his
Swan-like funeral song? Now besides holy Simeon, may we behold many of the
sacred retinue, as first of all Joseph, a continual spectator and obseruer of
the mystery. Besides, Joseph, there was John the forerunner of Christ, and a
Preacher in the wilderness: And besides those, many holy women more religious
then learned.

Moreover, besides the Women, there were the Apostles of Christ, who were
instructed with divine wisdom by the inspiration of the holy Spirit, not by
anticipation of secular knowledge, which we commonly term the Handmaid unto
Divinity. Near unto these Apostles stood blessed Peter, and not far off were
the glorious Angels, who though they were completely endued with variety of
knowledge, yet now they could neither sing nor say any thing, but Glory be to
God on high, and on earth, peace. Alas, it was not their ambition to purchase
unto themselves a blaste of fame, and applause of the World. Their chiefest
intent was to praise him who was then borne.

Let no man therefore sooth himself in his learning, and multiplicitie of
knowledge. For this day is a day whereon we ought with modesty to confess our
ignorance. This day belongs chiefly unto the unlearned, and unto those that
are but punies in the School of Christ. On this day the Wisdom of God
vouchsafed to descend below its most elevated and transcendent pitch of
knowledge. On this day the Word of God vouchsafed to speak as inarticulately
as man in his childhood and infancy.

Let no man therefore take on, or think himself disgraced, in that he is not
furnished with the abilities of nature, or not garnisht with the rules and
precepts of art; seeing that God, that he might disappoint those that were
well seen in the points of learning, made choice to disclose himself unto
those that were but mean and simple. It shall therefore be best for us, not
to soar too high into the mysteries of God, lest at last, we flag and fly low
with a broken pinion. Let us, beloved, rather settle and rest our selves in a
sober and safe ignorance, which will not only not prejudice us, but also be
much available to procure our salvation. Farther then this, never aspired any
of the learned Divines that ever were.

The end of the first Homily.
UPON THE PASSION OF CHRIST. HOM. II.
Reverend, and right worthy Auditors: We solemnize a day, whereunto never any
former lge beheld the aike, never any future time shall second it. A day
whereon the eternal Son of God, having formerly assumed our nature, that he
might thereby restore it unto its prime and first state, and as it were,
reimpatriate us, and inuest us with the glory of a better Kingdom, was, not
without the horror and amazement both of heaven and earth, most barbarously
slain and put to death by those, for whose sake he came into the world; by
those, to whom he had often sent his Legates and Ambassadors; by those, whose
salvation he had resolved to purchase by the effusion of his most precious
blood.

Such is the weight and gravity of this theme and argument, which by my future
discourse I determine to pursue, that it may easily inaudience the Hearer, and
procure in him ready and favorable attention (a thing that Orators usually
entreat in the Proeme of their Orations.) And therefore for my part I will not
be so prodigal of my breath or unnecessary pains, as to importune you to
hear me: for I am well assured that you expect not the enchanting flourishes,
or sugared blandishments of Rhetoric, being solely contented to entertain a
bare Discourse upon the Passion of our Savior; the remembrance of whom will
rather resolve us into a stream of tears, the^ any way give us occasion to wish
for the fluent and harmonious strains of wit and eloquence.

For if we duly consider all those tragical Scenes, and doleful passages of
his life, even from his cratch unto his cross; we shall find them to have
been nothing else but a Map of misery, or a sea of calamity. For he was
no sooner borne, but he endured the sharpness of a bloody circumcision: he
was no sooner circumcised, but by and by he was designed to the slaughter; he
had no sooner published his heavenly doctrine, but forth with he was accused
of sedition, impiety, blasphemy, fury; and not only so, but he was termed
even a Devil, and that of those, whom above all the Nations of the world he
had vouchsafed to style his peculiar people.

Thus whither soever I cast mine eyes, I can behold nothing but misery and
reproaches, and poverty, and hunger, and thirst, and weakness, and weariness;
so that it seems, that our blessed Savior upon his Cross made up the full
measure of that grief and anguish, with which he labored and was perplexed
all his life long, and then to have sucked out even the very dregs of that
bitter cup, which he had but formerly tasted. Insomuch that when we
meditate upon those many troubles and torments, with which he was voluntarily
afflicted, to the end that he might pacify his Fathers wrath, and satisfy
his Fathers justice: we may well imagine, and be ascertained, that he alone is
the absolute emblem and pattern of patience and perseverance.

The strict Stoickes that so pleased themselves in their obdurate indolency,
came very short of him. Whom that ye may the more admire and wonder at, I will
endeavor with the pensill of a large and ample discourse (the matter and
substance whereof shall be borrowed from the Penmen and Actuaries of the holy
Spirit) to Limme out, and Delineate him unto you.

After that our Savior had sent up many frequent and fervent eiaculations unto
God the Father, in the behalf of his dear and distressed Church; (for whose
sake no less willingly, then valiantly he endured the weight of so many
grievous afflictions;) by and by after, having retired himself into a shady
private garden, he was most impetuously affronted by Judas, and a barbarous
troop of Soldiers. And that nothing might seem to be done rashly or
accidentally, even this very assault was prophesied by Zachary, Chapter 13.
ver. 7. Smite the Shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered. And thus he
being surprised by so violent a gust of fury, was notwithstanding left alone
by his Disciples, and forsaken by all his familiars and acquaintance, forsaken
even by those, unto whom, not long before he had imparted the true Manna of his
body, John 6.
and refreshes their languishing spirits with a cordial of his most precious
blood. He that had been always reputed his constant friend and follower,
most basely prized him at thirty pence: and as if he had been a vile and
infamous malefactor, by a false and Syren-kisse, delivered him into the hands
of his cruel and malignant enemies. O gross impudency! O heinous impiety!
Now may ye behold him led away captive, his arms and hands being fast bound
and manacled: Now may ye see his beloved, gracious John, who had often leaned
upon his heavenly besome; who had often learned from his sacred lips many
transcendent mysteries and oracles of wisdom, and had formerly best
understood, that the Word was in the beginning, and that the Word was made
flesh; him, I say, may ye see lamentably dejected, and overflowed with the
waves of sorrow and pensiveness. Now may ye see the blessed Saint Peter,
whose soul was as it were the mint of Heroical and holy resolutions, follow
and pace aloof off; being much appaled and affrighted at the view of so
doleful a spectacle.

As for the rest of our Savior his dependences, those, I mean, whom he had
either peculiarly instructed, or any way relieved, either by restoring of their
sight, or by staying the flux of a bloody and menstruous issue; or by
reuniting, and as it were, cementing the crazed members of those that had been
possessed with a shiuering palsy. All those, I say (whereof the multitude was
almost infinite) basely hide their heads, and withdraw themselves clean away.

Thus was our blessed Savior forsaken by those that should have rescued and
supported him. Thus was he exposed to so many perils and hazards. By and by
after, he that (by the eternal decree of his Father) was to become the
universal Judge of quick and dead, was conuented before the petty punie Judges
of the earth; being posted from Annas to Caiphas, from Caiphas to Pilate, from
Pilate to Herod, from Herod to Pilate again. O turbulent and tumultuous
people! how do they bafle his doue-like innocence? how do they delude his
ingenuous simplicity? how do they oppose his truth and sincerity by false and
suborned testimony? How do the reprobate rascals, the very froth and scum of
baseness, audaciously dominere and insult over him? How despicably do they
veyle and hud wink him? How contemptuously do they strike him? enquiring of
him, whether he can tell who it was that did strike him? and not only so, but
also by the injurious command of the High Priest, he himself being the
High Priest of all mankind, is disgracefully whipped. The ignorant and arrogant
Pharisees, and Doctors of the Law, despitefully accuse the author and publisher
of the Law. Herod with his officious glozing Courtiers and accomplices deride
his silence, and that they may the more expose him to laughter, they change
his garment. The Soldiers that had embrued their blades in the blood of
Innoce^ts, most impiously batter and buffet him. And not only so, but they
also discharge their filthy foame upon his most glorious face. And that they
may heap sin upon sin, and yet add more maturity unto their full blown
impiety, they set a crown of thorns upon that head of his; wherein (as in a
casket) all the Jewels of divine wisdom and knowledge were inshrined. There
was not scarce any part of his whole body, that was not either exposed to
reproach, or tormented by grief. His head pierced with thorns, beaten with
fists, bruised with staves; his face beslimed with spittle, his cheeks swelled
out with blows, his tongue and palate offended with distastefull vinegar and
gall, his ears surcharged with loades of disgraceful contumelies. How think
you did Christ behave himself in this case? The story informs us, that his
silence was no less then his patience. His adversaries on the contrary side
press upon him, and with vehement exclamations and outcries press him to
speak something for himself, and yet (maugre all their fury and
exagitations) he replies not so much as a word unto them. Why do thou O
Infidel, enquire the reason and cause of this patient silence of our Savior?
Why do thou after his death recrucifie him again? Let me but ask thus much
of thee? To whom should Christ have returned an answer? To Pilate? Alas he
knew but little in the state of the question. To the Jews? No, they were his
accusers. What should he have answered? He had already made known unto them
that he was the Son of God. This was the only motive and impulsive cause why
he was co^uented. This was that that his Adversaries so earnestly pursued;
should he have denied him self to have been the Son of God? No. That he
would not, he could not do. Truth cannot lie.

Thus much he had both intimated and professed. As for his allegiance unto
Caesar, which they would have induced him to have denied, it was to no purpose,
to make any mention of that. For alas, it was not his ambition to sit upon the
throne, and to be placed in the honour-point of an earthly Kingdom; it was not
that he intended. No, he came into the world for no such purpose. He rather
came that he might gather together his Church, dispersed and driven to and fro
upon the surface of the earth, that he might, as it were, reedifie the decayed
race of mankind; that he might save his people by his blood, and by his word;
by his miracles, and by his oracles. The obdurate and perverse Jews were
ignorant of this, and much more the Romans. They knew not what he meant by the
destroying of the Temple, or by the repayring of it in three days. And
therefore they are with no less fury then blindness hurried against him; who
after they had lashed him almost unto death, and most cruelly divided those
azure channels of his blood, they bring him in public being overflowed with
gore, and most disdainefully expose him to the view of the scornful
multitude, with an Ecce homo, Behold the man! Oh my Soul, stand here erected,
fix the eye of thy contemplation upon the countenance of thy blessed Savior.
Shake off the multitude of thy fruitless vanities, with which thou art so
encombred, and bestow all thy time and meditation upon him alone, a person so
much to be honored, so highly to be regarded. Ecce homo, Behold the man,
behold the man of sorrow. Behold him that was the fairest among men, being both
white and ruddie, the chiefest among ten thousand. His head is as the most fine
gold, his lackes bushie and black as a Raven: His eyes are the eyes of doves
by the rivers of waters, washed with milk, and fitly set: His cheeks as a bed
of spices, as sweet flowers; his lips like Lillies, dropping sweet smelling
myrrh. He that was thus set out, and embellished with so many graceful
ornaments, lies now disfigured with wounds, weltring and panting in a crimson
river of his own blood. O blessed Savior! what havoc do those tyra^ts make
of thy life? How lavish and prodigal are those Canibals of thy blood? How many
wide sluices and passages have they opened for the venting of it? What full
streams and torre^ts gushed out at his nostrils? And that that was most
lamentable and grievous unto him, he was so captiuated, as that he had not
means to wipe away either his blood or his Tears, that trickled down all
about his precious body.

Ecce homo: Behold the man; This is that most glorious Face, at whose Majesty,
men and Angels stand aghast!

This is he, who although he now stand mute and silent, yet is his voice
heard in the clouds, and the rattling of his thunder is able to strike terror
into the stoutest heatts.

Ecce homo: Behold the man; Behold him that is Lord Paramount of whatsoever is
inclasp't within the circuit of this spacious World: and yet now he stands
poor and unfurnished of all things. He that freeth us all, and is the only
author of our liberty, leading Captivity captive, is himself apprehended as
a Malefactor, and led away as a Captive. He that cures us all by the precious
Balm and Panacea of his blood, is now himself miserably wounded. And see now,
here he stands before the Judge, before us all, yea, and for us al; He
stands naked and disrobed, that the wounds and gashes which were inflicted by
the enemy, and endured for us, might lie hid to no man. All which, me think,
might easily soften and intenerate a flintie heart, and yet the Jews were
nothing moved at it. Who being transported with fury and madness, they now
go about to deprive him of life and all. And that they may make his grief
parallel to his disgrace, they charge his weary shoulders with the weight of
his burdensome cross. And not only so, but they appoint their malepert
officious Sergeants to attend him, and give in charge, that if he pace it
slowly, or falter under his carriage, they should with bloody scourges force
him on amain.

Our Savior being brought to this grievous straight and exigent, his strength
fainting, his heart panting, his voice failing and even drops do I say? nay,
floods of water and blood springing from all the pores and passages of his
body, does notwithstanding vouchsafe to direct his dejected countenance and
languishing eyes unto us miserable and most unthankful caitifes, that neither
sympathize with him in his calamity, nor so much as remember, that he himself
stood in the vantguard of the battle, and with his helmet of Patience sheltred
us from the gunneshot of his Fathers indignation. And as his eyes are directed
unto us, so is his voice also.

Let us suppose him speaking unto us with these words: O my people what have I
done unto thee, and wherein have I wearied thee? testify against Mich. 6. 7.
me. When I created thee of the dust of the earth, I made thee like unto my
self. But thou by the allurement and instigation of the Devil, did most
disobediently desire to be like unto me, in what was not fit thou should,
and so becamest like unto the Devil, that arch-lyer of the world, the
patronizer and abettour of thy ambitious enterprise. Thou, sinful as thou art,
have almost razed out the sacred impresse of my Divinity, set with mine own
finger in the crystal table of thy soul; and yet notwithstanding, I so much
disparaged my self, as to take upon me the form and shape of thine abject and
contemptible nature: For thy flesh I assumed, and yet not its impurity; but, as
it were, in its prime integrity, refined and purged from that dross and
menstruous corruption which resided in it. And yet for all this I affected no
state or pomp in my coming unto thee; howsoever the Fathers and Patriarks in
the Nonage and infancy of the World longed for it; and the Prophets after the^
often mentioned it. Moses did foresee it, David did did fore sing it, Solomon
did foresay it. The Evangelical Prophet Esaias did most plainly and punctually
express it, having then no other means to relieve the discon solate minds of
the Jews, but only by assuring them of my coming. But when I came, I found
my entertainment not squaring to my expectation. Where I looked for amity, I
found enmity; I received hatred for my good will; and for casting out of
Devils, I was accounted one for my labor. O senseless ingratitude! Thus was
my humility no less misconceyued, then my majesty vnconceiued! and yet
notwithstanding, it was my daily endeavor to do good unto all men. Either I
cured the bleeding wounds of an afflicted conscience with the balm of
consolation; or I reclaimed the straggling sinner, and brought him again unto
my fold; or I gave eyes unto the blind, or feer to the lame, or speech to the
dumb, or health to the diseased, or bread to the hungry: and, if at any time
bread were wanting, there never wanted a miracle to supply it. If a mother
lamented the death of her only son, either I restored life to the dead, or
consolation to the suruiuing. If any woman wanted water, I gave her better then
she thought, Even the water of life. I abhorred not John 4.
so much as Publicans and Sinners, I was familiarly conversant with all men.

Now therefore, O Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, Judge I pray
Esa. 5. 34.
you betwixt me and my Vineyard. What could have been done more unto my
Vineyard that I have not done unto it? Wherefore when I looked it should have
brought forth grapes, beought it forth thorns, with which now the Temples of
my head are wounded? Wherefore, when I looked for Wine, brought it forth
vinegar to offend my taste? Why had she nothing but myrrh and gall to quench
the thirst of her drooping Lord? These and the like doleful complaints, the
Jews had both heard and read; they had noted and observed all the holy actions
of our Savior whiles he breathed upon this Theater of earth. They had often
heard him teaching in the Temple, teaching in the Synagogue, teaching upon the
Mount, teaching in the highways and thorow-fares. His goodness would not
suffer him to conceal or masque us any thing in darkness and silence: that
might make any way to the safety of the hearer. For now the time was come,
wherein God had determined to dispell the thick fogges of error from the
minds of his people, and clearly to instruct them in the mysteries of his
truth. And not only so, but he had also decreede by one sole Hilasticall and
propitiatory Sacrifice, to purge and expiate the sins of the whole world.
This was that pure and unblemished oblation, free from all stains of
corruption and impiety.

Thus much even the very adversaries of our Savior could not but auerre, who
continually yielded unto him honor and regard suitable unto his person. For
indeed nothing was done in vain, nothing by chance or accidentally, nothing
without the directing hand of him that was afflicted. Who as he stood bound,
and in the hands and power of others, yet notwithstanding, he himself
disposes whatsoever he suffers. O the hidden secrecy and providence of God!
whatsoever appellation or title the Church does seriously give unto Christ, the
same do the Jews attribute unto him by way of mockery and illusion. The
profane Soldier derideth our Lord and Savior, and yet in the mean time he
adoreth him, bowing his knees unto him, Unto whom every knee shall bow. He
denies Christ to be a King, and yet by and by, he crowns him. After he had
crowned him, he gave him a reed for a scepter; and that nothing might be
wanting, they put a purple garment upon him, the chief ornament of Kings and
Princes. Lastly, whiles the people play upon him, and contemn him, yet
notwithstanding they confess him to be a Prophet; for by that name they
saluted him.

Thus the enemies of Christ acknowledge him to be both God, a King, and a
Prophet. But by what means, I wonder came the Romans to know thus much of our
Savior? Certainly, to say no more, it was the will and wisdom of God so to
dispose. It was also by his just permission, that the false accusation of
Christ, who was truth it self: and the injurious condemnation of Christ, who
was innonocency it self, should be revenged by the desperate and voluntary
death of that debosht Stigmaticke Judas, who had formerly engaged himself to
betray his Lord and Master with a kiss. O how was that candide Devil, that
varnisht hypocrisy, that outside of a friend, that coppergilt Apostle tortured
in soul by the rack of his raging conscience? How earnestly did he desire to
set a period to a covetous base life, by an infamous and miserable death?
Pontius Pilate, unto whom the judgment and arbitrating of the cause was
assigned, had oftentimes witnessed and auerred, that our Savior had not
deserved any punishment at all: And that he might the better confirm his
assertion, he endeauours to clear himself from the aspersion and imputation
of injustice, by washing his hands in the view of the multitude. By and by
after he constantly affirms, that Christ was no seducer of the people.

Herod, who had formerly derided our Saviors silence, dares not to condemn
his innocence.

Joseph of Arimathea, being one of the chief Senators, retires himself into
his private chamber, and will not be seen at the Bench, lest peradventure he
should be forced to determine something contrary unto his conscience.

The malicious Jews, although they suborne false witnesses against our
Savior, yet notwithstanding they testify publicly before the Judge, that he
is not guilty of any crime. The same Jews that exclaimed against him as
against a seditious person, do now style him their King by that writing upon
his cross, whereon he was adjudged to die.

Caiphas the high Priest, by enthusiasme prophesies of Christ, whom he
persecuteth; and with a loud voice both accuses and absolueth him,
pronouncing the mystery of our salvation; to wit, that it was necessary that
one should dye for the people.

The last and worst of our Saviors adversaries, was the Devil, who although
he earnestly and constantly endeavored by all assayes to vex and trouble our
Savior, yet (as the Ancients conjecture) he could not but incite Pilates wife
to tell him, that surely the man that was thus maligned, accused and condemned,
was a just and righteous man, who although at length he suffered death upon his
cross, yet he suffered it not as an impious and infamous malefactor, but as a
glorious conqueror. God the Father together with his whole family and Court of
Heaven, stood and beheld the pangs and passion of his beloved Son, on whose
shoulders he had laid the weight of the punishment which every one of us in
our own persons should most deservedly have endured. God, who is termed of
the Prophets, a devouring fire, an ouerflowing torrent of wrath, as violent as
a rough storm of hayle, as impetuous as a tempestuous gust of wind makes our
Savior the only butte to receive the shafts of his fury and indignation. Who
lying thus wounded and pierced with the sharpness of his extreme agony, (in
respect of which all those tortures invented by tyrants, all those massacres
and torments of the holy Martyrs, were but dreams and loue-trickes) is forced
not to a duel or single combat, but to encounter a multitude and throng of
adversaries.

Amongst the which he was to conquer the Devil, that old Hydra, and
arch-enemie of mankind. Who as he had been the cause of the first Adams
expulsion, so does he now attempt no less to inthrall and captiuate the
second Adam, and to cast him into utter darkness.

In the second place he was to vanquish death, that had a long time tyrannized
over all mankind. Our Savior being to enter the lists with these furious
Antagonists, was publicly brought along to an infamous place, where all wicked
persons were put to death, which place the people that lived thereabout, called
it Golgotha, a place of dead men's sculs.

Now the reason why he was to conflict in this place, was (as we may imagine)
that he might give death the foil, even in its strongest hold, wherein it had
so long triumphed, and erected so many trophies of its victory; that, where
the first Adam had been interred, even there by the force of the second Adam,
the sharpness and sting of death might be rebated.

And yet, howsoever death was there conquered, yet not without the death of the
conqueror: for even there Christ himself was nailed to his cross, in the
view both of men and Angels. Who although he was brought into that lamentable
straight and exigent, although he lay groueling and gasping under the heavy
burden, both of the pangs of death, and the pains of Hell, and the wrath of
his Father; yet notwithstanding the love he bare unto man, was even then no
less entire then ever it was. For even then I say, he saved the thief at the
cross, and prayed for his enemies. By and by after, he surrendered his blessed
Soul into the hands of God.

What shall I now say unto you sinful Jews, by whose barbarous fury, and
fatal blindness the Son of God was crucified? What pen can express, what
pencill can decipher your heinous and execrable fact? ye have slain, ye have
slain the very Author of life, the first begotten of God, the Creator of the
world, the King of Israel: ye have slain that innocent and immaculate Lamb,
in whom there was no deceit: ye have slain the Prince of Peace, the Herald
of grace and of our reconciliation unto God. Oh that my head were waters, and
mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep Ierem. 9. 1.
day and night! I will bewail with the weeping of Iazer, the vine of Sibmah; I
Esaias 16. 9.
will water thee with my tears, O Heshbon, and Elealeh. For the righteous
perishes, and no man lays it to heart. The Lord of Heaven and earth was
slain, and Esa. 57, 1.
no man considers it.

O hateful and hated Nation! O cruel and abominable people! destitute of
wisdom and understanding, how forgetful were thou of him that begat thee?
You have slain him that brought you out of the land of Egypt, that Ier. 2. 6.
led you through the wilderness, through a land of deserts and pits, through a
land of drought and of the shadow of death, through a land that no man passed
through, and where no man dwelt. You have slain him Psalm. 78, 24.
that fed you in the wilderness, even with the bread of Angels. Him, that
found you in the desert land, in the waste howling wilderness, that led you
about, that instructed you, that kept you as the apple of his eye. As an Eagle
stirs up her Deuteronomy: 32. 10
nest, fluttereth over her young, spreads abroad her wings, takes them,
bears them on her wings: So the Lord alone did lead thee, and there was no
strange God with thee. Be astonished O ye Ier. 2. 12.
heavens at this, be ye horribly affraide, be ye very desolate. Tell it not
Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askalon, lest the daughters of the
Philistines rejoice, and the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.

That face that upon Mount Horeb the people could not behold without
astonishment, nor the Angels themselves with horror and amazement, the wicked
Jews defiled it with spittle, and bruised it with staves. And not only so,
but they even killed the Lord of Hosts, whose name is Jehovah. O fanaticke and
furious miscreants, how could ye dare to murder his Son, whose Name ye
could not utter without trembling? O extreme and sottish impiety, no farther
to be remembered, then detested! O perverse and wicked generation, how are your
rebellious hearts wrapped in the filme of ignorance? See ye not all the
creatures of the world standing aghast at the sight of your cruelty? See ye not
the earth shaken, the rocks rent a sunder, the graves opened? See ye not the
glorious beauty of the Sun masqued with prodigious fogges, as defying your
dismal fact, and not enduring to behold the sad estate and distress of its
Creator? Alas, why stand ye gazing up toward heaven? why stand ye wondering
to see the brightness and luster of the day turned to an abortiue night?

Here is no defect of nature, no ordinary or usual Eclipse of the Sun. This
unexpected darkness cannot be excused, either by the head or tail of the
Dragon, unless ye mean that old Dragon the Devil, by whose incitement ye
have cut off your own hopes, and the life of the blessed seed of the woman.
And therefore because ye destroyed him in whom there was both light and life,
ye are now overwhelmed with Egyptian and palpable darkness; darkness not
caused by the course of time, but by your own iniquity. Darkness accompanied
with fear and horror.

This is that ye have read in Esaias, The windows and cataractes of Heaven are
opened, the foundation of the earth are shaken. The earth shall reele to and
fro as a drunkard, and shall be removed like a cottage. And all this shall
come to pass, because ye have slain him, who commands the Sun, and it
arises, who seals up the stars as under a signet.

The earth acknowledged him its Creator; the rocks that claue asunder
confessed him to be God; the Temple to be a Priest; who after the abrogation of
the ceremonial Law, and the disanulling of all superstitions whatsoever,
placed his true worship in the spirit of man, and his chiefest Temple in the
soul of man. Now besides this, not only the rending of the body of the
Temple, but also of the temple of his body, plainly manifests that all
sacrifices ended in that one self-sacrifice, being both the abolishment and
acco^plishment of all oblations whatsoever. This Sacrifice was the most
Hilasticall and propitiatory of all others.

This sacrifice was a most perfect and absolute Holocaust, for it was totally
consumed by the flames of Christ's fervent love unto man. And as it was burnt,
so it sent up a most sweet savor unto the nostrils of God. This sacrifice
consisted of the purest meal, neither was it ever sowred with the leaven of
any iniquity. Part whereof was offered unto God upon the Cross, and part was
reserved for the Priests, that is, for all us, that thereby we might be
nourished to eternal life.

By this was the wrath of God appeased, and our peace procured. Never was there
such a sacrifice as this before offered, that could so fully mitigate the
displeasure of God conceived against man, whose sin was so heinous and
notorious, insomuch that either the Son of God was to dye once for man, or man
eternally. But if peradventure any man be so incredulous as to demand, how
Christ being the Son of God could suffer, seeing that the Deity is not
subject unto passion; he may be fully resolved by the Church, whose assertion
is, that Christ suffered not in respect of his divine nature, but his humane.
For though the Deity was in the Sufferer, yet was it not in the suffering;
though it was in the body of Christ's passion, yet was it not in the passion of
Christ's body: so that the Humanity only suffered, and the Deity only
sustained it, and made it able to endure the affronts of its impetuous
adversaries. The impotency of the one required the omnipotency of the other.

When I think upon my Saviors Humanity, then me think, I see him faultering
under the burden of his Cross; When I think upon his Deity, then me think,
I see him walking upon the Galleries of Heaven. When I think upon his
Humanity, then me think I see him lying in the dust, and weltring in his own
gore: When I think upon his Deity, then me think I see him flying upon the
wings of the glorious Seraphims. Oh how different are these two natures of
Christ! And yet howsoever the (...) betwixt them be so great, and the
disparity so evident, yet notwithstanding in him are they both combined. For
although he be not one nature, yet is a one in Person, one Christ, one
Mediator, one Redeemer, one Savior. For even as the body and soul of man
being two diverse things, do notwithstanding constitute one man: So the Deity
and humanity of Christ, albeit they be two diverse natures, yet they make up
one person. Christ in regard of his humanity, died: in respect of his Deity,
he still remained entire, untouched, impassible, invulnerable. This was that,
that rowsed up the interred carcases from their graves, (for many of the Saints
that slept, arose, and came into the holy City, and appeared unto many.) This
was that that rent the veil of the Temple. This was that, that as it were,
sealed up the Sunne-beames under a Signet of Cimmerian clouds. This was that
that caused that general conquassation of the earth. This was that that made
the Centurion auerie, (maugre all the peoples vehement reclamation) that Christ
was the true and essential Son of God. It was the flesh that tre^bled, that
stood so affrighted and appaled at the grimme visage of death.

It was the flesh that would have hindered the Word, and have fore slowed the
purchase of our eternal salvation. It was the flesh that suffered upon the
Cross; and it was the Deity that triumphed over the bitterness of death. It
was the flesh that was the sacrifice; It was the Deity that was the Priest that
sacrificed it. It was the flesh that in the anguish of its passion groned and
breathed out this sad and doleful complaint, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? And yet howsoever the flesh was thus perplexed and afflicted, yet
its union with the Deity remained still entire. Neither could it possibly be
cast off or forsaken by that, unto which the links and ligaments of love had so
strictly obliged it. O that our dull and mistie understanding were so
illuminated, our zeal and affections so seruent, as truly to conceive the
Majesty, and earnestly to embrace the humility of our Savior!

Oh that we could sufficiently meditate upon the grievous wounds, that he
suffered; upon the gracious words that he uttered! If we reuolue all the
Annals and records of time; we shall never find his parallel, never any man
that spoke as he spoke, that suffered as he suffered: Never any man that so
loved his friends, that so pitied his foes; never any so kind to the
religious, so merciful even to Publicans and Sinners. Who a little before he
drank the bitter cup of his passion, ministered a sweet cordial of
consolation unto the thief that was to suffer with him: To day thou shall be
with me in Paradise. Thus was that miserable sinner acquitted from the death of
the soul, although he suffered the death of the body. Thus was he by the
power and mercy of CHRIST, of a malefactor, made a martyr. Surely so strange
and sudden a conversion could not but be immediately wrought by the
efficacy of Christ's Deity: which even in this act showed its intensiue and
superlatiue love toward that Flesh of ours, which it assumed.

Oh blessed and happy day, whereon our frail and forlorn Flesh was united
unto that nature which was neither obnoxious to Corruption, nor subject unto
Passion!

But, Oh, more blessed and happy day was that, whereon our Flesh being joined
to the Deity, so died in Christ, as that we not suffering death, were
notwithstanding restored unto life.

For as CHRIST took upon him our nature in the womb, so he undertook our
death upon the Cross. For whatsoever he suffered as man, he suffered for man:
from whom he can be no more separated or divulsed, then from his Deity, with
which he joined our humanity, that he might save and secure it from the
hazard of eternal death and damnation, etc.

Oh infinite love! Oh incomprehensible mercy! Oh blessed and happy day,
wherein the head of the Serpent was broken, the Leuiathan wounded, the vast
Behemoth ouerturned, the powers of Hell subdued, the Grave conquered, the sting
of Death rebated.

Oh blessed and happy day, wherein the force and guilt of Sin was taken out
of the world, and the sinner taken up into heaven. O blessed and happy day,
wherein by our Saviors passion, the gates of heaven were opened; wherein it so
came to pass, that we that were once exiled and banished from the celestial
Paradise, may now again be freely therein instated, and reimpatriated.

Now there is no Cherubim to hinder us, no flaming sword to affright us. Now
may we all be easily admitted, and be made free denizens of that heavenly
Jerusalem.

O let not our impenitent insolency, and insolent impenitency be the cause of
our exclusion.

Let us consider that the incredulous and proud Pharisees that challenged unto
themselves so much purity and piety, were the first that were rejected, their
Synagogue neglected, and even thieves and malefactors preferred before them.

And this was that that so discouraged the Devil, when he saw those that had
been his slaves and vassals to be rescued and absolved from death, by one
that was condemned to death; when he saw that Christ was more powerful in his
death then ever any Emperor was in his rule and soueraignety; when he saw not
from stones, but from the gallows, even from hell it self, children raised up
unto Abraham.

When he saw the Son of God after his buffets and his bonds, last of all,
even in his death, to erect the glorious building and edifice of his Church;
when he saw that blessed inheritance of Christ being but a little part and
moytie of Mankind, still to flourish as the Palm Tree under the burden and
weight of its afflictions: when he saw the Church of Christ, which was created
by his power, now redeemed by his blood, united by his Apostles, instructed by
his Prophets, comforted by his Evangelists, and freede from that heavy yoke of
ceremonies, with which it had been long oppressed: When he saw it, howsoever
divided in body, yet combined in spirit; Having nothing, and yet possessing all
things in Christ, which is all in all. In whose passion it gloryed, whose
patience it imitated.

Which Church of his, although it seem to wither by the heat of persecution,
yet does it still grow and wax green by the dew of grace, and sap of
consolation.

True it is, that the Saints on earth are frequently perplexed with variety of
exquisite torments; and yet these are not of force and validity to divert their
zealous and constant resolutions, to separate them from their grand-Captaine
Christ Jesus, whom they follow, not as being confirmed in their purposes by
the irrefragable perverseness of the Stoickes; nor as being induced thereunto
by the Sophistry of Logic, or by the enchantments of Rhetoric; but as it
were, being bound by oath, and deeply engaged unto their Savior: by whose
blood they are refreshed, by whose flesh they are nourished, by whose Spirit
they are revived, by whose promises they are invited, by whose precepts they
are directed. The chiefest scope they aim at, is, that they may be one with
Christ, as Christ is one with God.

For thou sweet Savior art our head, and we thy members: Thou our shepherd,
and we thy sheep, thou the Vine, and we thy branches. By thy death we live,
by thy life are we raised from death.

And although we are here sorted and mixed with the world, yet our cogitations
and our conuersations are in heaven, whither our Savior is gone before.

Oh that we could follow him, that we could waft our selves unto that Haven
of joy; unto that secure rode of felicity.

But seeing that as yet we cannot follow thee (sweet Jesus) with our bodies,
yet we pursue thee with our desires, with our sighs, with our affections,
with our tears.

In this interim, whiles we here suruiuing, seriously ponder those
tra^scendent afflictions of thine, which for our sakes, and yet not for our
deserts, thou sufferedst upon thy Cross; whiles we meditate upon those griefs
and torments which were as propassions unto thy passion, how are we rapt into
admiration of thy love? Then do we abandon all our fruitless and frivolous
cogitations, then do we discard all our ambitious Babel building thoughts;
then do we disclaim the insolent selfe-conceites of our own abilities, then
do we deeply lament our supine and stupid negligence; then do we grieve
that we have been so prodigal of our precious hours, and that we have not
embarked our selves in those actions which most of all procure our safety and
indemnity.

Then are our eyes become fountains of tears; then cry we out and say; O
Lord, thou have ascended on high, thou have led captivity captive. Then cry
we out, O Lord, what is man, that thou art so mindful of him, or the Son
of man that thou so regardest him? Oh good JESUS, what is man, that thou so
regardest him? Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh, and have fenced
me with bones and sinews, says Job, Chapter 10 11. Remember, I beseech thee,
that thou have made me as the clay, and wilt bring me into the dust. Have thou
not powered me out as milk, and crudled me as cheese? Chapter 10. ver. 9. and
10. Am I not to be consumed as a rotten thing, and as a garment that is
moth-eaten? How then can it be that I, being of so abject and corruptible a
constitution, should be saved from death, by the death of the Lord of life? O
strange and admirable love! as far beyond comprehension, as end and measure.
I have sinned, and thou (sweet Jesus) have suffered; nay, and I have also
suffered in thee, which sufferedst for me.

Thus by thee am I liable neither to death nor punishment. My nature which I
had corrupted, thou have refined; that that happiness might re-accrew unto me
which I had lost by the fall of my first parents. What now therefore shall I
say? How shall I sufficiently either admire thy power, or praise thy goodness?
Thou that art infinite, thou that art neither confined to time or place, thou
that art subject neither to death or passion, did out of thy most entire and
intensiue love unto us, cloathe thy self with our frail flesh incident to
both. Which flesh of ours (maugre the Devils malice and malignity) thou have
highly exalted it, and placed it above the Angels, the Archangels, above all
the glorious Hierarchies of Heaven, even at the right hand of thy Father, where
is the fullness of joy and pleasures for ever more. But before thou could
ascend unto that vertical point and Meridian of thy glory, with what massy
loades of calamities were thou oppressed?

What Hunger, what Thirst, what Nakedness, what Iniuryes, what Reuilings, what
Spittings, what Stripes, what Wounds, what contumelyes, what disgraces, what
Death, and Crucifying did thou most mildely and patiently endure for us!

And therefore, Oh sweet JESUS, give us grace, that as thou dyedst for us, so
we may live here to thee, and hereafter with thee. Grant we beseech thee,
that thy Passion may be our perpetual Meditation.

Oh let us always reflect our Eyes upon thee, and let thy sufferings take a
deep impression both in our Memories and in our affections.

And grant Oh sweet Savior, that we may put, not the bodily finger with
Thomas, but even the finger of Faith into thy side, and into thy wounds, and
with the hand of Faith apprehend thy merits.

Grant that we may crucify all the inordinate Lusts of the Flesh, all our
wanton and Lascivious cogitations, and that we may be like thee in sufferings,
that we may be like thee in glory.

That we whom thou have reconciled unto thy FATHER, we whom thou feedest with
thy Flesh, we whom thou refreshest with thy Blood, we whom thou perpetually
reuiuest by the celestial influence of thy grace, may hereafter be one with
thee, as thou art one with the Father.

To whom with thee and the Holy Spirit be ascribed and rendered all power,
might, majesty, dominion and praise, both now, and for evermore, AMEN.

Gratias tibi Domine IESV.
FINIS.
LONDON, Imprinted by Bernard Alsop, and are to be sold at his house by Saint
Annes Church near Aldersgate. 1618.


