The Confutation of the Abbote of Crosraguels Mass, set forth by Master (...).

Math. 1^. All plantation that is not planted by my heavenly Father, shall be
rooted out: leave them, for they be blind guides to the blind.

(...), Lib. ^. Epist. 2. If in the Sacrifice (...) is Christ, only Christ
is to be followed, then must we here and do that, that Christ did and
commanded to be done, since he in his Euangell, says, if ye do that I command
you, now call I you not setuandes but freindes. And the Father out of the
heaven testifies, saying. This is (...) most dear Son, in whom I am
completed, (...) Christ is to be herd, we oght not (...) him before us
judged to be done, but what (...) before all, Christ, first did for the
consuetude of man must not be followed, but the truth of God.

Imprinted at Edinburgh by Rober^ Lek(...)k, and are to be sauld his house at
the nether Bow.

Cum priuilegio 1563.

The Prenter to the Reader.
AS I have at all times been ready to employe and bestow my labors, to the
auancement of the glory of God, and vtili^ie of his Church, so the brute
rising of this that I now present unto thee good Reader Confutation of the
Abbote of Crosragnels Mass, I was most diligent, and traveled most
earnestly with the Author of it, that it might come to light. Hard it was unto
me, amongst many others, to obteane it of him, a man shamefast of his owen
nature, yet by the inopportune and continual sure of the Church, and freindes
being mollified and moved to yeald and remitte ^omwhat of his will, in end
oppenned up his mind, that he has only written this by manner of declamatio^,
and so has used some Greik words, as expressing the matter most lively and
sensibly, which words I had no Carracters to expres: this moved me somewhat at
the beginning, yet finding them few in number, and so serving to the matter, as
I could not well suffer them to be taken away, yea, and no impediment to the
unlearned, the sentence being most plain, I could not those the learned to
be frauded of so great a help, and so vndertuke the matter. Wherein I have used
the help of a most excellent young man, well exercised in the tongue, yet the
travel being wearisome in the hait of his occupatio^s the ordour and reule by
him laid, I was driven, and content to borrow the labor of some Scollers,
whom I judged to be most expect. Whom unto it must be imputed, if either fant
shall be in lacking of a letter, or otherwise in accent, and others such
accidents. This I speak no but to the praise of the great good will of the
children, wh^ are ready and willing to gratify the Church of God: b^t to
^^^dicat the name of the Author from all calumny (...) and wicked tougues. If
I should have su^ help (...) Church, as I have oftentimes implored, the shou^^
^ot the ingynes and labors of the learned in the country be retarded by any
such impediment, yea, and I will promise further, we should not be troubled to
send here and there, abounding in all things necessary within our selves. And
so fair thou well in the Lord Jesus. At our buith, the penult of July. 1563.

The Epistle. To the most Noble, potent, and godly Lord James, Earl of
Murray, the Author wishes grace, mercy, peace, and increase of heavenly gifts
of the Spirit of God.
THis consuetude has of long antiquity obtained, most mighty Lord, that in
weighty matters, and arguments of consequence, ever the Patrociny, favor and
authority, of some great and princely man, has been implored. The occasions
and causes hereof, althoght they may appear many and diverse, yet always may
be comprehended in a certane number: for some traveling in an haitefull
argument, subject to inuy, and tongues of many, judges the help and protection
of such, as placed in authority, are most reuere^ced of the people, and either
by wisdom in judgment, or by prowes in warrely effaires, has co^ciliat
creadite and benevolence of the stronger, judged the help (I say) of such,
most requisite and necessary: promising to themselves security and quietness
under there shaddowe, as it were, authority and power: as that we observe
commonly, and be teached by experience in all aiges, ever the muses to have
followed the impire, dominion, and monarchy, yea, and with them flitted and
removed. During the impire of the orient, that is, Assirians, Chaldeans, and
Persians, the Gymnosophistes were in price, the Magians authorished, and Egypt,
and east parts, most frequented: but this power being deuolued to the
Grecians, we read, how suddenly amongst them, all sciences and ^nowledge
florisheth, that (as it were out the horse of Troy) starteth up hundrethes and
thousands, most eloquent in tongue, most witty in judgment, yea, and most
solid in erudition. This their zeal and emulation continues so long as they
had the upper hand, whereof they being spoiled, it was not so lamentable and
grievous their decay in power, and fall from dominion, as the lose of those,
wherein their principal glory and rejoicing did consist, sciences, to wit,
and erudition, which altogether with the impire flitteth. This, no dout, as it
proceadeth of the cairful providence of our God, erecting, and over whelming
Realms at his good pleasure and will, so is it, as it were, most kyndely and
natural, that the muses delicat, tender and Daines loving of quietness, still
pursue to be in greatest security and honor: which taken away, then do they
incontinently vanishe.

Others, to whom the horn of abundance is shute up, are driven to dedicate
their lauboures, to such as they have found merciful and beneficial toward
them, to witness their gratitude and thankful mind, on that one part: and on
the other, to satisfy the most just and reasonable desire of their
manteiners, who preafed hereby to redeame their memories* from eternal and
everlasting oblivion.

Alexander the great, howsoever he has exceaded and excelled all, that has
passed before, in amplytude of impyre and conques, yet in this judges and
pronounces him self vainquest, and inferior to Achilles, that he never culde
have such one as Domerus, to write the history of his valiant Acts, and to
set forth his praises. Penury and lack of mantenance, as they be great
enemies to good letters, so is there nothing in this earth, whereby we are
encuraged more nor by the esperance and thriste of that glorius immortalytie,
which makes the Fathers, howsoever deprived of this life of many aiges past,
yet to live still, and their memories to be most happy and blessed.

This is the glory of the children of God, seeing the caire of their God, to
vendicat their Names from darcknes, committing them most diligently and
faithfully to Register, that albeit their staire and condition be most
deplored and miserable, yet their memories are at all times in Gods presence,
most recent and bliss^d. All do trauelle to be spoken of, but in the means
stands the diversity: the tyrra^ne preaseth to this: what obteineth he? He
is called a proud tyrra^ne: the bloodthristy, cruel: the ambitius receaueth
the same hyre: and the same reward proponed and abides all the wicked: the
solid glory apperteaneth to the godly. Others causes may be gathered besides
these two touche^ by me, yet because they may be referred to these two heads,
I will not weary my pen in recyting them.

Some, and of them a great number, we know to have abhorred this, containing
them selves, as it were, within their owen walls, and determined to sing to
them selves (as is in the Proverb) and to the muses: which sort of men, as I
darre not damn, so had I proposed with my self to follow them. For being
young in years, and void of experience, nether yet at any time before
exercised in the like a^gument, such hours as I might cut of from the
publicque charge and occupation, my mind was to bestow in such kind of
Declamations, as Quintilyane terms by the Greik word (...) and there
appoints and reco^mendeth to them, as are not yet able for the son and the
feildes, whereby they shall prove them selves, and try their forces. But as
commonly comes to pas, that, are we rathest disapointed of, that we most
ea^nistly conclude with ourselves, before that ever I could put any part of
my deliberation in practeis, the charge came to me, and most straightly, to
undertake the matter, and procead with all dil^gence commanded.

This command^ment, at the beginning, albeit it was somewhat fearful to me,
understanding hereby the Church utterly to repugne to my mind, yet because I
was determined to examine my self in the same argument, I refused not plainly,
resolved, that, that matter should not come to light, which I had chosen to my
particulare exercise. The work is not yet finished, when the bruit ryseth of
the abbotes great danger of death, the ^eicknes being so inualessed that he
could not escape. Here is herd the complaint of the godly, thinking and laying
before their eyes, the wicked speaking and braling of his favorers, who of our
continual silence, should have taken accasion to blawe up, and if caice any
thing should come to light after his death, would seem to have inst cause to
accuse our long and fearful silence. Then were the eyes of all turned and
fixed upon me, hearing that the charge has been laid to me, and that I had
proceaded therein. The matter was very fore, and heavy unto me, ravished in
sindrie, and they contrarious thoghtes: hard it was to me, who has still
been, as it were, in the shadow, to come to the light, to euenture my fame, to
expone me to the tongues and judgments of all, to enter in a fearful and
terrible battal, with a proud and wide blowing Goliath: on the other part, I
was no les moved, at the earnest sutte and request of the brethren, the
commandment of the Church, and most of all, touched in conscience, with the
staite of the cause and condition of time. The word still increasing of his
suddane death, yet suffer I not my self to be vainquest utterly, but this far
I inclyne that I show my labors to the brethren: which way, as it was subtilie
divised by them, so did it wholly disapoint and frustrat me of all I had
determined. For never could I obteane it of them, no^ procure q^ietnes to my
self till it was copied and send to the Abbote.

Thus was my silence broken, my purpose dissolved, and I pulled forth to the
son: and as it comes oftentimes to pas, that there is none bolder nor the
cowarde, when all way and evasion is foreclosed, so did I feale my self moved:
for the charge being laid to me, to pas in Carrick, I glaidly obeyed, thinking
that I could not, but refute that by tongue, which I had convicted of Idolatry
by pen. In that journey, what was protected, I refer the judgment to others.

Now that this my travel, comes laitter to light nor that either my opinion
was, and the earnest desire of the godly: either yet the staite of this action,
and the iniquity of the time, yea, and the loithsome stomaches of a great
number, weareing and abhorring all good things did require: the causes are, my
continual occupations, which (God be praised) grows and increases: being
first appointed to Carrick, and immediately after my returning, called to the
same office in Court, before you my Lord, and my Lords of Councile: wherein,
what relaxation I have had or can have, your Lordship may be a most suthfast
and faithful witness,

The other impediment was, and that greater nor the forma^e, that seeing I had
delivered the answer to the Abbote, necessary it was to awaite upon him, and
tarry til he should reply, least I should be driven to make two of one.
Whereof, being now dispared, and assured by some of his familiares, that he
myndeth no such thing, at the earnest request of freindes, and commandment of
them, whom I reverence I have committed the Sailles to the winds (as
Quintiliane speaks Elegantly) and will call to God for a good and prosperus
viage, to them that louseth in insist still in the similytude. The counsel of
Horatius (...) Quintiliane, is not to be contemned in such caces, desyring us
to lay aside our works, for a certane time, till that the hait of the
invention be culed, and we spoiled of the Fatherly affection, as it were,
toward our owen works, may take them again, and so judge of them, as of the
works of others.

Well this, whatsoever it has been, my travel, I have caused appear in your
Name, my Lord, partly to rid me of the false and calu^nius speakinges of a
great mainie, who as they be altogether borne, and do wholly live to their
Bellies, so repleanished with inuy, and Idill do delight theme selves in
preposterus and wicked interpretation of every manes labors and occupatio^s:
partly that it may remane with you at all times, as a sure pledge and monument
of my great ready mind toward your Lordeship, ceading in faculty and power
to many, but in will, giving place to none. The gift is not so much to be
esteamed and mesured, by the quantity and excellency of the gift it self, as
by the free and liberal heart of the giver. A cup of cold watter lacks not
the praise at some time, and our Master pronounces, that the poor wife that
has offreth two small peaces money, has been more liberal, nor they who has
casten in most. These then my first fructes* I offer unto you, my Lord,
whereby ye will know that I have not been Idle, in this my short absence from
Court, but as I aduertest your Lordeship by writing, faithfully bestowing my
labor and time, in that action, that oght to be more dear and precius unto
us, nor all the dignities of the earth, riches, honor, pleasure, voluptie,
yea, the life it self. I dout not, but in what part soever the judgments of
others shall inclyne, yet your Lordeship shall (as the Poet speaks, and after
him Plinius to the Emperor Domitiane, esteame these my ^owes to somewhat. If at
any time, it should please the goodness of God, to move the heart of the Queen's
Majesty, to take this Treaty in hand, and read it, then had I reported the
full price of my labor: then were I fully satisfied. In reading ye know, my
Lord, how we oght to lay aside all affection, weye the arguments, consider and
examine the pith of them, hereafter pronounce and judge, for there can be no
greater inimie to the treuth, (...) A foreconceaued opinion of error, confirmed
by long antiquity, and a certane progres of years, and yet we know, as
Peregrinus the Philosopher says, that the treuth is daughter to the time,
howsoever it shall be suppressed and buried, as Democritus says, in the pit,
yet will our God bring it to light, and declaire that, that is not the treuth,
that is approved of many, but that, that he has reueiled. If thus, I say, our
Souerane should enter in work, then I dout not, but she should consider the
equity of our cause, then she should have a flourishing common wealth, then
should her G. Liges be assured of tranquilytie and obedience, that as she
craves the service of our bodies and substance, so we may most hartly and
glaidly discharge our selves before God, and the whole earth: our hearts being
joined together in unity of doctrine, which is the only and most sure band
(as Augustine speaks) whereby the hearts of all are conciliat, joined, yea,
and retained together.

Thus I commit her Majesty to the protection of the most heigh, who has in
his hands the hearts of Princes, and turns them to and fro, at his good
pleasure; and will: and wishes likewise to your Lordeship, the increase and
abundance of the gifts of his holy Spirit, that as he has begun the work
in your hands, so he will assist you to the end, as we may luke continually
for the like conforte. And so fair well in the Lord Jesus Christ. At
Edinburgh, the penult day of July. 1563.

Your Lordeshipes most humble and obedient Seruiture. George Nay.

ACcording to the approved, laudable, and received use of writers, that do
travel in any argument of consequence, I have judged it very necessary, to
admonish thee good reader, of the fyle, ordor, and manner that I have followed
and observed, For three reasones it may seem strange, why this Author should
undertake this charge.
in this my answer and confutation of the Abbote of Crosraguels mass. For it
may appear strange at the first face, that for a small tractie and volome, not
exceading the bounds of threttie small leaves, direct forth and sent by him,
he shall receive hard by forty sheites of paper, in greatest and fullest
measure.

Secondly, it may be asked pereuenture, that in such abundance of flourishing
ingiues, in such wealth of solid judgments, in such plenty of eloquent men
and perfection of letters, tongues and erudition, as I may treuly affirm,
either was never at least these thousand years was not, that this charge should
be laid to me, or by me undertaken. For in that one, may appear temeritie and
rashness, in that other arrogancy and lack of judgment. Something thridly may
be inquired of our long silence in consideration, that this our Abbote has
continually barked from the beginning of this mercyful visitation of our God,
and reformation in Scotland, yea, and set forth some things that be plainly
red, Ane answer to the first reasone, wherein is declared why this Author may
seem prolixt, and the Abbot brief and short.
and every where to be found, that the rest of his works which be no les
pernicious be neglected, and this only has been judged worthy of answer.

To satisfy thee good Reader, in the first head, thou shall understand my
study and travel to have been, to make all things plain and sensible, as well
of Scripture, as of antiquity: for in this, no dout, lies the cause of his
shortness and of my prolixetie, not that I have been any ways long in this
argument, which undoubtedly requires an ample tractation: but in respect I
speak of his compendiousnes and obscurity.

In the matters of Scripture it can not be denied, but he has been (as I note)
in some places, ^ther sleuthfull, negligent, and obliuius, or else so addicted
to his own judgment (wherein he confidis not little) that whatsoever he has
judged of any place, the same should the Reader immediately approve, and
without any stay or impediment, esteem it for a very undoubted treuth, To prike
forward to this, the imprudent and unskillful Reader. We observe his craft to
be, to allege and cote in the margen the authorities of Scriptures, Fathers
and councils, as should appear to the Lector, that all, that is alleged by
him, is spoken out of the mouth of such Authors as he there notes. In this
part I am driven to produce every place, Why the author must insist on every
place.
oppen up the mind, sense and vnderstandi^g of it, and satisfy to every
thing can be objected, because the danger is so great that if I should pas by
any thing with silence, that inco^tinentlie should be judged to make for his
party.

In the Fathers and councils I foresaw somewhat more, that they having almost
continually in mouth, solemnities of Masses, Sacrifices, Hosts, Oblations,
worshippinges, Myrackles, and suchlyke, I feared that these things should be
interpreted, and understand after the superstitious use that we have seen,
rather then according to the mind of the Author, and the practice and custom
of that time. Here am I constrained by conferrence of places, to shaw the mind
of the writer, and by the consuetude then used, to declare the natural
intelligence of every thing, which part as it has been to me painful and
tedious, so I dout not, but it shall not only be to the unlearned confortable,
where they are assured of the antiquity, but also to the learned, they being
releaued of the werisome wadi^g through the Doctors, and to both shall this my
lauboure serve for a Mirror to behold the great purity, the godly life, the
care over the poor, and the liberality of the primitive Church, and the old
Fathers which being conferred with the exemples of those that vanteth and
brageth of the tytles of successors, may be known, how far they be not only
fallen from the purity of the doctrine, but likewise horrible declined and
degenered in all good vertuus and manners. This shortly for answer to the first
head.

In the Second head I shall not be very long, Ane answer to the second head.
the ordor of reformed persons we know, to be subject to the commandment of
the Church, without all shift, tergiuersatio^, or repugnancie. What is the
judgment, and opinion of men of letters of me, I have not to inquire: the
occasions, moving the^ to lay this charge to me (most unable among many
hundredth) ar vnknawen. But always God be preased, my duty I know, which is
all particulare respects and considerations laid aside, to give and dedicat
my self holy to the service and proffect of the Churh of God, Iudgeing it
rather my part and office in obeying there honest charge, to euenture my fame
and estimation then in disobeying and schif^ing, to be esteemed contumatious and
fearful.

The argument I know to be vnplausible and odious till a great noumbre, and
they not of the lawest sort. But under protestation, I speak of the
particulare offense of any: that simply I prosecute my matter and declares my
judgment frelie, wherein I dout not but every man will tak in good part, that I
gently and with a liberale heart does offer ever submitting my self to
judgment and correction.

In deid the raling and babbling forth, without all modesty upon the ministers
of God, hes moved me to be somewhat scharper then my nature bears or yet the
Law of amity requires, with the Abbote. But in that let every man be assured,
that nether have I been so hoite as he most justly haeth deserved nether yet
do I mean any thing but of the quality of his mind, without any further
respect. Which vnfeynedlie I protest every where, does displease me with all
the learned and Godly.

As to the speaking somtymes in the singular somtymes in the plurale nombre
that my lord knows well yneugh, to be the manner of speaking in all tounges
and of all writters in such case.

In the third point, i^ very deid I may say that before this book was
delivered to me, Answer to the 3. head.
I never had seen none of his works, yea, and I believe that the most part of
his writtings be either unseen to the rest of my brethren, or at least, they
that they have seen, they have judged unworthy of any answer. The causes of
their silence may be easelie gathered out of Lipriane, against Demetrianus,
whom he along time barking and continually inueying against God, did contemn,
iudgeing it better to wink at his ignorance, the^ by answer to stir and
provoke him to a greater phrenesie. We know well yneugh the nature of such men,
that rather by answer they be kindled and inflamed to burste forth, the^ to
receive any instruction, or be moved to conteane themselves within the bounds
of modesty and shame fastnes.

Cypriane adduceth sindry places out of the Scriptures, as. Prou. 23.9.
Thou shall say nothing in the ears of the unwise, least when he shall here, he
mock at thy witty speaking: and in an other place. Thou shall not answer to the
foolish, according to his folly, Prou. 26.4.
that thou be not like unto him. We be warned by our Master, not to cast holy
things before Swyne. Math. 7.6.
Many other causes may be adduced of their silence, which should move any man
to bear with these me^ for a certane time, in esperence of some amendime^t.
But where the evil is incurable and danger appearing to the simple, Why
cheiflie the Abbotes book is answered.
then the bridle is ^o be loused to the tongue, and the pen sharped to the
battle, not for the satisfaction of such me^ that given to contention, be
endured and wrapped up in all blindness and obstinacy, but in consideration of
the good and unlearned Rearder, who may here be seduced and carried out of the
way by a blind guide.

I have traveled here to comprehend his whole book in this my answer, I have
brought forth his arguments, word by word, wherein if any faut shall be found,
let it not be imputed to me, but either to the author him self, or else to his
scribe. To the arguments I have answered formally in my judgment, his words
be noted in the margin, with this marck "so that the Reader may easylie
discern betuix his text and my answer. Somethings in the latter part of his
book as nothing aperteni^g to the matter, by his own confession, I have only
touched, and not fully recited. The matter is ^fortable, seeing as it were two
adversaries, Iuning hand to hand in a field, and contending for the victory.

These were the principal things I had to forwarne thee good Reader, praying
thee, to tak in good part, this my travel. Thus I commit thee to be guyded by
the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, in expectation of better, when God shall give it
unto me, and when the occasion and opportunity shall serve. At Edinburgh, the
15. of Iulie. 1562.

Heir follows the Confutation of the Abbote of Crosraguels Mass, made by
master George Hay,
TREV it is, that before this book of the Abbote of Crosraguels was set forth
and published, sindrie and diverse were the opinions of men concerning it. What
was the fame and estimation amongst the Papists of the abbottes book.
For the sort of them that be commonly termed Papists, adversaries to all
true Religion, thought in very deid that they should receive such a confort,
yea, such a Gun, as no munition might withstand, no strength resist, nether
yet any manner of force repel. They were encuraged by the brute and fame of the
man, who only would appear in these times to have dexterity of ingyne,
helped and auanced by long progres of time spent in good letters, yea, and
besides the Scriptures of God, will also appear to have the conference,
judgment, and authority of the ancient Fathers and councils, which it may
seem to the Reader that he feadeth (not unlike to the nine Muses) in his
bosom. I my self having hade some times credit and acquentence of the man,
looked for somewhat that might have troubled the consciences of waiklinges, and
of such as stayed them selves upon a glistring and semely Ymagination of man's
heart, rather then upon the written and reueiled treuth, by the spirit of God.
For it was not unknown to me how familiare he has been with the scolastike
Sophisters, their thornie questions, and scabrus conclusions yea, and some of
the ancient Doctors, whose writings, what by ignorance of time seduced, what
by affection carried away, I thought well he should wreist to his ungodly opinion.
So that I was driven not without sobing, groaning, syghing, and bitter tears to
lament and bewale the state of the simple and unlearned, who in such
repugnancie of contrarious opinions, could not wit whereunto to cleave, nor
what they should follow. And to speak freely on the other part, in respect of
the amity that has other times interceded betuix the Abbote and me. I was not
little moved, that he (for I can not tell what applausion and fame to be
reported of the wicked and ungodly) should hasserd and euenture his
existimation in so impius, foolish, and vain a purpose, that he not unlike to
the Gya^tes, should oppugn the manifest treuth of God: and so to give him self
forth a baner man to all the wicked in a disperate cause And finally that he
should give and bestow his time so, that it might seem, rather that he
proceadeth from the horses, to the Asses (as is in the Proverb) then from the
Asses to the Oxen.

This my querimonie was common to all the learned and godly: who as they
compleaned upon the entreatment of the simple, so did they wonder, that a man
of his own study, without all conference with men of letters, yea, and never
having hard the doctrine teached: but separate out of the Tents of the people
of God, to a certane corner and Celle aside, to be ravished to such a
phrenesie, as to damn the eternal verity of God, to declare war to all
godly men, and under the cullor and pretext of knowledge, to shaw his own
infancy, and oppen up his ignorance, and so to expone him self to mockage and
derision. On the other side it was somewhat confortable, that we perceived god,
as it were, ready bent to have his verity examined and tried, and for this
cause to have it stoutly assailed and violently invaded, that the victory
enseuing, may be the more tryumphant and glorious. But whatsoever was the
expectation of this golden birth, before it was brought to light: Always it
that is most confortable I do marck, the curages of them that did most brage
of it to be fallen, The curages of the depe^deces vpone the abbotes book,
rebated.
being altogether frustrate of their expectation: the simple to be nothing
moved: the learned and the godly to compleane of the time ociusly and
profanely spent, which is so precious that the Apostle Paul wills us to
redeame it by all means.

To the tryfles that be gathered out in this treaty, albeit answer be made
every day in the Sermons, and every boy that has seen the Catechism is
able to refell them: yet seeing the desire is of many that they be confuted by
writing: the charge being lade to me, I could not refuse it, nor deny my
lauboure to the Church of God, iudgeing it rather to stand with my deutie, to
obey the commandment of the Congregation, in the defense of Gods cause and the
treuth, the^ to have respect to an withered and intermitted amity, yea,
although it were never so strait and dear.

Now before I enter into the matter, let no man look for such horrible and
blasphemous imprecations of me, as this Author makes in syndrie places of his
Famous work of the mass. For such imprecations, as they procead of an
obstinate and contumatious heart, so they be altogether Deuillish, to deceive
and draw back the simple ignorant and unskillful Reader, unto utter distructio^,
although they be without all authority of Scripture, or exemple of the godly
Fathers.

The authority of Paul shall be found so far soght, and so impertinent to the
purpose, that I trust our holy Abbote will not lean thereto. And albeit he
shall so do, we know with what Spirit Paul was led, and his pen directed.

Do we reid at any time, that Cypriane, Augustyne, Hierome, Chrysostom,
Theophilactus, Tertuliane and the rest of the ancient wariors, stirred up from
time to time, The abbot without al exemple of any godly, renu^ceth gods
mercies.
by Gods holy Spirit, for the auenging of his cause aganist the unhappy sead
and members of Satan, having to do with no les pertinacious and wicked enemies
to all treuth and Religion, nor we instantly: do we reid, I say again, that
ever thus madlie, and blasphemuslie they do renounce Gods mercies, and submit
them to his severe judgments: I am able to say: not.

But I can shaw you, Sire, of what fontane, these your blasphemies do flow. We
reid in deid that the Prophets of Baall, 1. Reg. 18 28.
ordinarlie did smite them selves with knyues and Lancettes, and that (as
appeared to them) was no vain cerimonie, but used to this end, that the people
might be hereby moved to credit them, and they getting authority to their
fond dreams might be judged most strong in defense of their opinion.

And this shall we observe, in all Authors of vntreuth, and forgers of lies,
that continually to affirm their impious doctrine: either shall they use
prouocations to Gods judgments, either to such corporal chastisment shall they
submit them, as may seem to declare in the inuenters of a falls Religion, an
zeal to justice and equity: a bold confidence in their opinion: and a will to
suffer the extremity, for the defense of that which they manteane.

Thus has God most justly permitted the devil to blind men in all ages,
who more delyteth in their own imaginations, then in the treuth of God
plainly revealed. The Analogy and similytude, were very proper betuix the
Preistes of Baall, and the Popes shauelinges: A comparison betuixt Balams
preistes and the Popes.
in the discurs of the whole, if I should dishiffer to the particulare: of the
dum and deaf god of the one: the caike god of the other: the incantations of
the one, the sorcerie of the other: the stoike gravity of the ministers of the
one: and the stubborn morositie of the other: the dissolute life of the one:
and the ryote of the other, and so forth, as were most easy to draw to him
that should set his ingine hitherto, and that not without fructe to the Reader.

Thus then let us gather this note, whereby we may discern the rauenus and
disceatfull wolf, from the godly and religious Pastor, to wit, by these
extraordinary and horrible imprecations: An great swearer, is always suspect
of great falshead.
by such profane and barbarous renouncing of Gods mercies. For as in
judgment the deposition of him that swears most enormely and haynuslie, is
not of greatest faith and authority, but rather is the more suspected. So have
we to judge of his preposterus and inuerted Silenus who regards nothing the
profanation and abuse of Gods holy Name, and so to make him author of
vntreuth: speaking only to draw the people vnwarres to his deuillish fantasies.

My purpose is then to procead through the weighty arguments (for so he will
have them seming) and shawe to him with all modesty, wherein he deceaueth him
self, what is wrongously and preposterusly drawn to his purpose, wherein he
abuses the Text of Gods word and authority of the Fathers. If the Abbote
appears enraged in writi^g what would he show himself in speaki^g.
Finally to supply the part of James, who as he is introduced very simple,
so he tholeth him self to be to hastily vainquest. To such an Capitane, shall
I never commit my hold in keaping, nether yet to such an aduocat, the defense
of my just cause.

To that I have passed through the whole, I will not speak of this, that our
Author does wonder the mass to be called Idolatry and witchcraft, and
pronounces boldly, all them to be possessed, that so does affirm (it
appears well that the man has been in an great rage of sever: for if the
words, he here infarceth, should have been pronounced by mouth, Lord what
scheikes should he have shewe^: I am assured he should have passed Coruet,
Chalme and Trompet) how treuly this is said by him, in the end the Reader will
perceive.

Now to june with this Doctor, and susteane the part of James. How are ye able
to imprufe this argument? All worshipping of God invented by the brave of man,
is Idolatry, the mass is of that nature, ergo it is Idolatry. Let us
consider how this Sophister, new start up out of Sorbone, A bold and shamles
assertion of the Abbotes
goes about to impugn the proposition of this Syllogism. It is expres
(says he) against Gods word, for Abraham and syndrie of the Fathers had
invented ways and means to worship God, without any commandment.

Thus, this new Doctor plays him with his mirrie concept, but the matter were
of light value if he should not travel to draw the godly Fathers allowed, and
having testimony of the Spirit of God, into the same impiety, and so to make
them as it were Authors hereof. This is the fructe that is to be looked for, of
the vain fantasies and fond Ymaginations of the wicked hearts of men, when
they take upon them impudentlie the part of God. The man I can not tell what he
thinks of the matter, always he recites no Text. True it is, that some
Cotation is in the Margin: the 22.8. and 4. Chapitures of Geneses, places as
appears to him so facile and pertinent, that they neid no rehearsal.

In deid I will not werie to bring forth the words of the Text. It is written
in the 22. Chapiture the. 9. verse. When they were co^ing to the place which God
had shawen to him, in the which he builded up an Alter, and laid the wood
orderly, and bound Isaac his Son, and laid him on the Alter upon the wood.
This I take to be the place ye mean of, for there be no other in that
Chapter, whereby ye may any wise help you. Now then let us consider how proper
this Text is to the purpose.

To make this Text to serve your purpose, ye will (I believe) affirm that
Abraham had no commandment so to do, yet if we consider the Text aright, there
shall be found an plain commandment of God, God to be the conductor of Abraham
all the way, and finally his whole fact to be approved by the Spirit of God.
The commandment is plain in the Second verse. Take now thy only son Isaac,
whom thou love best, and get thee to the Land of Moriah, and offer him there
for and brunt offering, upon one of the Montanes, Whither Abraham had a
commandment to make an Alter.
which I shall shaw unto thee. Can there be an more plain charge of God then
this? But ye will say pereue^ture, there be nothing there spoken of an Alter:
that I deny: for it is plain that he is commanded to offer him up for an brunt
o^ferring, where plainly the Alter is commanded, or else if it be not
co^mmanded, it follows well that it had been co^^anded from the beginning to
the Fathers, and so to have had place from time to time, that no Sacrifice was
offered up, but upon an certane Alter, erected to that use, which may evidently
appear in this, that the erection of the Alter is recited in the fact of
Abraham, The manner of offerrings of the fathers, always o^ Alters.
which is all whole allowed and likewise shall be declared in the fact of Noie.
It is no ways to be believed, that this holy Father, who does all by the
direction of faith, yea, and whose fact is altogether allowed of God, as we
reid plainly in the Text the. 16. That this holy Patriarch, I say attempteth
any thing in the work of God, without his commandment. This I trust James
might have replied.

In the eight Chapter it is written. Then Noie builded an Alter to the Lord,
and tuke of every clean beast, and of every clean foul, and offered brunt
offeringes upon the Alter. Here starteth up our Carrick Doctor, and says,
Noie has no commandment this to do. Where is the charge to build the Alter?
To offer up the Sacrifice?

First if I shall ask this Doctor, if Noie had any commandment to buyld the
Arcke to receive therein of all sorts of beasts, and mo of the clean, then
unclean, A similitud of the knoweledge of the clean and unclean beasts, and of
the ordinance and will of God, known in the alter making.
to enter into it. I think he will not deny it, yea, and that to testify his
obedience, he would not depart out of the Arcke, till he was commanded, and
besides this, reid we not plainly? that he was commanded to take a greater
number of the clean beasts, then unclean? and that for the Sacrifice cause?
which altogether may appear vain. If the counsel of God herein had been kept
secret and back from this holy Father, who was to be the Priest for offerring
up of sacrifice. Attour Moses says plainly that the sacrifices were
appointed to be of the clean beasts, wherei^ it is most certane that Noie
could make no defference, nether yet was it in the pleasure, or power of man,
for was it able to Noie think ye? to descerne betuix the clean, and the
unclean, and it that was meit for Sacrifice, and it that was not. If the
Spirit of God had not this revealed unto him? it is not to be believed.

Shall we conclude now that this which he does to the praise of God, for his
deliverance and reports such an testimony of the allowance, and approbation
of God, that the like is not given throughout all the Scriptures to no
Sacrifice? Shall we conclude this to be done without the ordinance of God, either
by revelation in dream, or else by an Angel. For these were the two ordinary
means whereby God uttered his will, to his Elect and chosen: which ways being
now pretended by Papists and Anabaptists can have no place. The eternal
Son of God, who is the fine and end of all propheci^s, being already
manifested in the flesh, ascended to the Father, and his Scriptures shute up
and closed.

I believe Sire ye will not deny, but this work was done in faith, being thus
allowed by the Spirit of God, Romans 1^.
faith comes of hearing, as the Apostle does reasone out of Isayas, Isay. 53.
which hearing, is subject to the word of God. So thus then it may appear
manifestly that this godly fact of Noie, leans to the commandment and
word of God.

A^toure we may observe the manner of proceading of the Spirit of God in his
Scriptures, that in so far as he is given to a certane sententious brevity,
he passes by the commandment of the fact which he so earnestly allows, and
that immediately after, yea, and sometimes in the precept it self,
pretermitteth some circumstances of time, place, Alter and suchlyke, whereof
after is made mention.

Further do we think it to be of no authority and weight that which is spoken
in the conclusion of the 4. Chapter. In deid for my own judgment, as I most
willingly subscriue, to the interpretation of them that hereby understands
the erecting of Gods true Religion, that heretofore by the impiety of the
time, and the wicked manners of men had been suppressed and adulterated. So will
I affirm that the worshipping of the eternal, was redacted to a certane form
and ordor, not that every man shall do that, that does seem best beutiful and
pleasing in his sight but use him self according to the Laws and precepts of
the Spirit of God, who is the Author and modirator of all godlynes.

Who then darre be so impudent or malapeart to deny this Sacrifice of Nose to
be here commanded, or that it shall not ^e^e to this form, here spoken and
mentionat? I trust none.

The answers made to these two, may serve sufficiently to the refutation of it
that is alleged out of the beginning of the 4. Chapter, which is of Abell. If
I should not bind and astrict my self to the answer of every perticulare,
that this Authore hereafter shall have no shift to avoid nor pretext to cloak
his wilful and barbarous obstinacy. The words are these. And in process of
time, it came to pas, that Cain brought an oblation to the Lord of the fruit of
the ground, and Abell also him self, brought of the fructes of his sheep, and of
the fat of them, and the Lord had respect unto Abell and his offerring, but
unto Cain and to his offerring he had no regard.

In the answer to this, where it is pretended by this reasoner, that there is
no commandment given in the Text to either of the brethren so to do: albeit the
place of the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, Hebr. 11.
may serve to the refutation hereof, yea, and the Text it self new rehearses,
allowing Abell and his work, and the Author to the Hebreues, ascribing the
praise of faith unto it. Lauboring of the ground and reping, and bringing up of
cattle by God, and vertious exercises pleasing God.
Yet will I travel somewhat further, and prufe by this Text, that no dout they
were thus instructed by their Father. The manner and kind of life which they did
follow, was no dout, godly and laudable, for the manuring of the ground was
commanded of God, and prefered to all other exercise and lauboure, by the
antiquity. The feading of the Cattle was no les honest then profitable, yea,
and this whole life, as it is most simple and clean, and impolluted, so it is
most natural. Whereof we may collect, that they did both exercise them
selves in lauboures approved of God, and most necessary to the releif of the
common use of the life of man, so that there can be no dout, but they were well
instructed by their father. Seeing they do exercise them selves, both in
offerring up of Sacrifices, so that in the life of Cain, to the outward
appearance, no man shall find faut, using himself deuly to his God, and winning
sustentation, wi^h all leafull and honest means to him self and his household.
For how shall we think that ever it should have ascended in the gredy and wicked
heart of Cain, to offer up in Sacrifice to God, of the fever of the ground, if
the Father had not teached him? Yea, and coacted him as it were.

This I think ye will not deny, but if ye ask where is the commandment given
to the Father. To answer hereto we shall rehears somepart of the Chapter,
preceading:: principally that notable and confortable sentence, where it is
said. I shall put Inimitie betuix the sede of the Serpent, and the sede of the
woman, he shall break thy head, and thou shall bruise his heill. in the which
words, no dout, the promise of the Savior is contained, and the means
signified, whereby Salvation was to be procured unto man, and that by the
Sacrifice of his death, whereof all Sacrifices were figures.

Do we then think that God, having thus rased up man, from the pit and the
goulf of death, giving to him some certane smelling of life, being new casten
out of paradise, having lost the sight and contemplation of that tree which was
a Sacrament unto him, and a pledge of immortality, The tree of life in
paradise, was a sacrament of immortalytie
do we not think (I say) that he appointed him these ordinary exercises of
Sacrifices, whereby they might be reteaned in continual remembrance and
protection, The Sacrifices were commanded by God unto Adame, and not inverted
by him self, although no expres mention be made thereof, when, nor, how it was.
of that Sacrifice of the croice, offered up by the Savior, and out of the
which Salvation flows unto all? God forbid that we so shall think that the
Sacrament of Gods fauore being taken from the Fathers, when they were eiected
out of paradise, exiled and debarred from the tree of life, that then there was
no esperance of releif and succoure leaft to them, and their posterity, but
altogether denuded and spoiled of all confort? God forbid, I say that we should
think so, but rather in the Sacrifices (which were not vainly and rashely
invented by man, but commanded from above by God) but rather in the Sacrifices
(I say again) there was a sure infallible and undoubted argument of esperance
given of our reconciliation again with God, and how we should atteane to the
life, lost before by our rebellion.

For plain it is, that the Apostle ascribes the praise and worthynes of this
Sacrifice, which is offered up by Abell to faith, whereof it follows most
certanely and necessarly, that it was not done without the commandment and
expres word. Further we know ever true obedience, to be more acceptable and
pleasing to God then any Sacrifice, God is not delyted with only externe
worshipping. Therefore the godly Fathers worshipped him i^ Spirit in their
sacrifices and Ceremonies.
for out of obedience we may well affirm all virtue to flow and procead,
which being astricted to the word (as we have heretofore said) it follows
well that nothing ca^ be approved of God, but that which he has commanded.

Thridly, since our God is constant, and ever like unto him self, darre we say
that at any time he praises and deliteth in any outward and external
worshipping or oftentation? How can it then but follow necessarlie this, thus
allowed of God, thus approved by his holy Spirit, but it was offered up unto
him, spiritually, so that we shall not here say that the Fathers were mocked,
their Sacrifices being but naked, empty and vain ceremonies, which were
prescribed to them. For undoubtedly these ceremonies signified an hier matter and
that most comfortable, which can not be separated from the word, seeing that
the only thing whereby the natural, lively, and approved honoring of God, is
decerned and tried, from the bastard and superstitious, is the inuard treuth
and symplicitie of heart.

The allowing of the fact declares that which otherwise is omitted.
Thus may we plainly se that God expelling us from the tree of life, in the
which he had first sealed the certitude of his benevolence toward man, and
assured him hereof now by other means and ways, declares him to be a
merciful and a propitious God again: for in these offerringes besides that
they declared them, to receive all at the hands of God, there is further
included, in the slaughter of the beasts, and spilling of the blood, to wit, a
respect unto that which is mentionat in the sentence recyted.

Because it was accustomed of al me^ to offer, therefore their was no dout of
the precept there of.
But these things can never be understand, if the ordor of Moses in the
writing of the history be misknowe^, who in consideration of that treuth and
constancy that lies in our God, is not very curyous to rehears every thing,
precept, and commandment in the own place, but rather remitteth the charge
which is general unto the allouance of a certane fact, proceading of it as is
in this case.

But ye will say there is no mention hereof. I answer, that albeit it be not in
plain terms, yet in that, that we reid the promise, yea, and likewise we reid
that it was an ordinary thing and accustumat, as well by the wicked, as the
godly, let us assure our selves that it was not without the commandment of God.

But these matters, this cunning clerk passes by, The nature of hypocrites, is
greatly to esteem their own inventions, and to content the ordinance of the
Almighty.
affirming things to be most true, which are declared to be most falls and
impious, and goes about to refell some exemples which godly preachers used to
imprufe the vain and fond inventions of Ypocrytes, who thinks God to be
appleased with whatsoever thing they invent to his worshipping. And yet
contrarily there is nothing acceptable to him, nor that he seaketh more of man
then obedience in simplicity without declyning to the right or left hand,
which sentences as they are most certane and true, so be their most notable
exemples in the Scriptures, for the confutation of them, but specially besides
these that this Author has brought forth of the Sacrifice of Saul, and
preservation of Agag. etc. To wit, of Nadab and Abihu the sons of Aron. The
Ephod m^de by Gedeon. The fact of Michias, concerning the Molten Images, Leui.
10. Iudi. 8. Iudi. 17. 2 Samuel 6.
and of Osa in the upholding of the Acck, and others which were to long to
recyte.

These acts says this Doctor, are wicked, because they are done against the
commandment. Which he is not able to prufe in all, but to go with him in this,
1 Samuel 15
what is he able to adduce against the notable and godly sentence of the
Prophet Samuel? Obedience is better then Sacrifice, which obedience can not be
without commandment given. Obedience can not be without commandment.
Seeing then that obedience is preferred to all, and is that which only our God
requires of us, and it again is restricted to a certane precept, there can be
no place to our ine^utions, without the warrant of the word of God. All that be
of us, thinks that we would have our serua^des so framed, that at their own
hand they should attempt nothing, A similitude of our seruandes.
unless they be bidden, they ca^ not be assured of weldoing. Shall we not think
us this far astricted and oblift to our God, who pronounces all to be sin,
that is not of faith, who likewise has teached us to pray for the performance
of his will, even as in the heaven, so in the earth, that is, Romans 14.
that (according to the exposition of the most godly) as the Angels are ready
at all times to execute such charges as shall please God to derect them,
attempting nothing without the warrant of his commandment, so man to submit
stoup and how dune his will, appet^t^ and effection, to his godly pleasure,
taking nothing upon him self, but wholylie randering and giving him over to
God, to be guyded, reuled and conducted by his holy Spirit.

To this may be added that, that is written by the Apostle to the Collo. where
he in plain terms condemns all voluntary worshippinges, Collo. 2.
using the Greik word, which is most proper, (...) what outward apperance
soever they shall be decked with.

The work of Saul (say ye) is ungodly, because it is expres against Gods
commandment, where by we may perceive that it is a great deffere^ce and the
zeal appear never so good to do any work expres against Gods commandment, be
to do A good work of godly zeal without the command of God.

These be your words faithlly recited out of the exemplare that has comin to
my hands. The inue^tions of men amongst Papists are most perfyte service of
God.
This I darre not pas by with silence, because ye will seem to put a great part
of your probation herein. The fact of Saul is ungodly, because it is done
against the ordinance of God, yea, and the first part ye infer thereupon is
true, but in this ye are miserabilly deceived, that (besides that the parts
and members of your comparation are improperly and ineptly joined together) ye
will invent to us a new kind of work which is good, and done of a godly zeal,
without the commandment of God. For this I hald to be most sure, that their
is no good work done of a godly zeal, but it is commanded by God. And I will
add this more that all good works done of a godly zeal, Whatsoever is not
commanded us in worshipping of our God the same is forbidden.
are commanded by God, and contrarly all works that are not commanded by God,
are mere wickedness. For this reverence and perfection we have to attrybute to
the ordinances and Law of our God that all that is good, is by him commanded
perfectly. It that is not commanded i^ the worshipping of God albeit it shall
appear very glorius in our eyes, yet in so far as it has not the cercitude
of Gods commandment, being committed by us, it is utterly wicked, and to be
placed i^ the rank with the works that be expressly forbidden, because we have
no assurance nor warrant. But here we may mark it to be true that is commonly
said, one error engenders an other. The ignorance and misknowledge of this,
casts you, Sire, into an greater and more gros error.

True it is, that Cornelius was a Gentile, and did many good works acceptable
to God, no dout, but that your argument may procead, ye have to prove that they
were done without the commandment of God, which ye are not able, nor all your
ignorant, wicked and ungodly sect: for the Spirit of God pronounces plainly
that he was a religious man, and fearing God with all his whole house, so that
he has expres testimony to have been instructed in the Law of God, of the
Revelation and coming of the Messiah promised, and Salvation proceading of
him, and to have teached the same to all his house. Now I trust ye are not able
to prove any thing done by Cornelius, but by the commandment of God.

But all your sayings being most falls, ye assume them without any probation,
It appears that ye have been so co^mered with the matter ye had interprysed,
to refell, that ye cared not how to pas by it, so ye might appear to the
Reader, to have done something not unlike to the wower, The abbote is like a
wower in this sclandering of the preachers.
who having been a while in house with a young maiden, and she now ready to be
contracted with an other in marriage, rather then he should be called the blaite
lover, be sclandereth the damisel. Yet am I not little conforted in this, that
ye make (good, and acceptable to God) to be of equal and of a value, a thing,
ever denied by the Sophisters and scoole men. Take head that they be not be the
ears with you, for this, and conceive some opinion of Apostasy and defection,
as ye ar a man in deid that can direct your course to the wind, if ye should
not be carried away with the wind of ambition and pride.

Thus, this subtle reasoner concludes the oppugnatio^ of the Mayor, putting a
defference betuix the works that be done of a good zeal, against the
commandment of God, and such as are done with a good intent, The abbote
tryumpheth before the victory.
without the commandment of God. The one never to be reputed acceptable,
because they can not aggre with the Scriptures, but the other does aggre, and
so this glorious Doctor sings Peana* never having passed through the field,
never having troubled him self, nor yet swet. Much easyar had it been to have
said shortly this proposition is erroneous, and needs no refutation, and to
have proceadeth to the assumption. This manner of reasoning, albeit it may seen
to refell any thing that will be alleged by Thome armors men in the contrare:
yet think not that ye will blind the eyes of such as may abide the Son, and
are tried thereby.

And therefore Sire, yet we say to repeat the su^me of the whole in few words,
that all worshipping of God, inverted by man's brain is Idolatry, and
altogether displeases God, Deuteronomy. 4.12.
because it is done against his expres commandment, for Gods expres
commandment is this: not that thing, that appears good in thy eyes, shall
thou do to the Lord thy God, This was spoken by the holy Ghost, for a
perpetual precept, in the serving and worshipping of God.
but what the Lord thy God has commanded thee, that do thou, thou shall add
nothing thereto, nether shall thou deminish any thing there fro.

Consider now Sire in what rank, works done without Gods commandment are
placed, and take better head to distinctions and defferences invented to avoid
a treuth. Thus far might James have gone with you, if ye had been minded to
have led him the right way. But now let us consider the answer made to the
Second part of James argument, called in the Scooles somtymes Assumptio^
somtymes minor. Here our Kynnishe Doctor trauelleth, exceadingly to prove the
mass, not to be inverted by man, but instituted by our Saviors Christ Jesus,
at the latter Supper, at the least the effect and substance of it. And to
confirm this, he gives a deffinition of the mass, concluding all the other
Ceremonies, prayers and orations to be added by the Apostles, and their
Disciples, most faslie and vntreuly, as shall be after spoken, when as we have
ended and proved that part that he Subiunis of the name of the mass. For this
is his ordor, to fall from the substance, to the appellation immediately,
introducing James, and making him to prove the mass no ways to be instituted
by our Savior Christ, seeing there is no such name in the new Testament. I am
not ignorant, what weight and force the argument is of, that is drowen A nota
nominis: in the Logique Scooles, to wire, that it is more probable to persuade,
then strong and pithie to convict. Yet if we shall consider the Scriptures of
God, Of what force, Argumentum, a nota nominis may^e in the Sriptures.
the manner of proceading of the holy Spirit in them, no dout, it shall be found
as it were invincible.

For I ask of you Doctor, that takes upon you continual reading and meditation
of the Scriptures, where ye do ever find any ordinance of God, set forth, to
the which the Spirit of God gives not a certane name, Every ordinance of God,
in the scripture haeth a name proper to it self.
whereby lyuelie as it were he paynteth furthe the matter, and property
thereof. I am assured that the holy institution of circumcision is so termed
by the Spirit of God, the pashoner likewise: the Sacrifices appointed in the
book of Leui, as they by their ceremonies and oblations, are distinguished one
from an other, so every one has their own proper name, which no man durst
alter, change or innouate. In the new Testament the like to be practiced by the
same Spirit, it is most evident. Is not the Sacrament of our regeneration
called Baptism? and that most properly: the holy action of our Savior,
Cor. 10.11.
at the Table, before his departing from his Apostles, in the which he gave
bread and wine, the very signs and tokens, yea, the very pledges of his body
and blood, The whole action of Christ at the table that night he was betrayed,
has diverse names proper by it self.
is not this action called somtymes the Communion, somtymes the Lords Supper,
and such other appellations, drawn forth of the Scriptures, as the Sacrament
of his body and blood, and of thankesgeuing.

This then being cleir, that there is no institution in the old, nor yet i^ the
new Testament, but as most faithfully and cairfully the ceremonies, the rytes
and the manner of them are declared, so shall we observe the names to be most
properly attrybuted unto them. For this we may eissally observe, the travel
and study of the Spirit of God to be, that as the ordinances of God are most
clean and holy in them selves, so they be exempted from all match and patching
of the foolish imagination of man's heart. This rule therefore may serve to try
all strange and bastard i^stitutions of man, croppen in the place of the true
and faithful ordinances of God, which have obscured, adulterated, and defaced
the Germane ceremonies, left and deposed by our only Law maker, Jesus Christ
the wosdome of his Father.

What are ye able, Sire, I pray you to say against this argument? All the
ordinances of God are so set forth in the scriptures, that nether is there any
ceremony pretermitted, nor yet is the name of the whole action passed by with
sielenc^ Nether is the name of your mass contained in the Script^res, nor yet
the ceremonies used in it, prescriued by our Savior. The name of the mass is
not in the scriptures.
It follows then that it has nothing to do with the institutions of our
Master Jesus Christ.

To your subterfuge pretended of Clemens and Ignatius when as I shall answer to
the authorities of the Doctors cited by you, there shall be declared the meaning
of them, and how they used that word to no such thing as ye mean Clemens if he
was the Scolar of Peter, I know not, but sure I am that if he was his Disciple,
and these his works which be set forth in his name, that Peter should think
him worthy of the stryppes, for there is either nothing, or very little, that
sauoreth of the breist of that Apostle, in this Clemens.

This I would ye should receive, rather of the mouth of Eusebeus nor mine, who
writing in the sext book and. 11. Cha. of the Ecclesiastical history of
Clemens Alexandrinus, what unlawful testimonies he used, Here may be seen how
sure ground the papister have for their mass.
reckynneth this your Clemens Epistle. Ignatius writes in Greik, the
interpretors ignorant of that language, or else not thoroughly understanding
latin, yea, and not knowing the meaning of the Author, turns by this word,
Missas celebrare, where the godly writer Ignatius, uses these words, (...) or
such words signifeing, not else but to co^uene, assemble, and gather the people
together, to the service of God. This may appear evidently in the place of
Socrates, that is in the third book, of the tripertie history, writing of
Melitius. (...) which place is turned by Epiphanius, the followers of
Meclitius, made masses apart, the author meaning no such matter, nor yet the
turner of no such mass as we have seen, The abbote is deaceued through
ignorance of the Greik tongue.
but only that they conuened apart by them selves, and so abstracted them
selves from the rest of the Congregation The ignorance of this language,
deceaueth thee glorious Doctor, howsoever thou be puffed up in thy own consaite
and plays King harrad amongst thy own companions, like unto thy self: but
hereafter we will have better occasion to speak of this matter, in the conference
of the Doctors.

There is yet an other shift, pretty as appears to this Author, which is, that
the Fathers conuened at the council holding at Nicea, to refute the herysie of
Arius, inverted this word, (...) and an other, whereby they term the Virgin
to be the mother of God. (...) not Theothitos, as ye do write ignorantly, and
the thridt in our own tongue Trinity, which words says this Author, are not
found in the Scriptures, what if I shall deny this, unto this new start up
Doctor of Carrick: How is he able to prove it, if he understands not the
language, that the Scriptures were first written in, by the finger of the holy
Ghost.

But to come nerrer, what albeit these words be not found, seeing it is most
certane, we have the matter expressed by the words, at large declared in them,
so that any man that shall here these words pronounced, The papisticall Doctors
can not shaw fed what la^gauage the name of the mass is come.
inco^tinently knows the matter, being most properly and evidently shawen by
the words. But this word mass I pray thee, what affinity has it with the
matter signifies by it, which nether it self is found in the Scriptures nor the
matter signified by it. I pray thee, let me know the signification of it? or
what cuntrie language is it? I know that some of your men trauelleth to draw it
from the Hebrew, some affirms it to be an latin term, received in the
great dekay of the latin tongue* What ever it be the Authors can not conuene
upon it, some affirming one thing, and some an other. It is most probable that
it proceadeth from the ryte of the Sacrifices of the Greikes, who in the end
thereof used some certane solempnitie in giving leaf to the people to depart
saying. (...) according to the which ye say. Ite missa est. crossing the people
with an empty chalice. How ita missa est came in first.
I might take occasion here to speak somewhat at more large of this matter, if my
purpose were not to wait upon this Author, and nowayes to pas by him.

Now follows to entreat somewhat of the diffinition of the mass, The abbottes
first di^finition of the papisticall mass.
given by this glorious glosare, an he gives first, which is this.

That the mass is noght else, properly but the Sacrifice of the Lords body,
really contened under the forms of bread and wine, institute by Jesus Christ
in his latter Supper, in remembrance of, his death and passion.

Hereafter he interiectis this disputation of the name of the mass, and then
as new having digested his wine, he returns and assigns an other
diffinition which is this. The mass I understand to be a commemoration of
Christ's death and passion, in the which the bread and wine are consecrated,
The abbottes Second diffinitio^ of the said mass.
according to Christ's institution, and the body and blood of Jesus Christ,
under the form of bread and wine are offered to the Father of heaven, and are
received as the heavenly food of our souls.

This fare this Author, any man that conferreth the one with the other, may
consider easylie how necessary it was to this Author to assign this new and
last diffinition, because of the great imperfection of the formare. Always,
howsoever he is troubled with him self, to patche, sow, clamp and set together
such peaces as will never aggre, let us procead to the examination of the
treuth of his sayings.

This I understand to be the manner of teaching of the Logique Scooles, What
diffinition is required according to the scoole men.
and namely of Aristotle (whom to not without cause, the Scoole gives the
praise and prerogative) in the sext book of his Topickes, where he of set
purpose entreats of the conditions, properties, and qualities of a laufull,
diffinition, that it shall have it that they call Senus, which being as it were
confuse, because it extends the self to other members nor it that is i^
question, they do add differences, which shall so properly apperteyne to the
matter, that is spoken of that they shall declare the nature and the substance
thereof, so that there shall nether want nor be superflous any thing therein,
but divide, discern and separate it from all others, our inuerted Silenus, in
the former explication, takes the mass to be a Sacrifice, but because there
be many kinds of Sacrifices, therefore he adds the rest, that it may be
known to be a Sacrifice of such a kind, and thus separated from all others.

Now have we to consider how justly he does call it a Sacrifice. All
Sacrifices, whatsoever thou shall here of in the Scriptures, albeit they be many
in number, yet be they all redacted to this strate, that either they be of the
number of the^ that the Greik calls, (...) or (...) yea and so^tymes (...)
whereby men does testify, and oppenly witness them to receive all things out
of the hands of God, and for his wonderful and inestimable gifts and
benifites, offerreth the Sacrifice of thankesgeuing up unto his majesty. What
signification the sacrifices in the scriptures may have whereof the first, reid
here
Of this sort were they Sacrifices appointed in the Law, and called solid
offerringes libations, the first stuctes, oblations, peace offerringes and such
others, whereby the people sometimes did testify there Religion, sometimes did
use them in manner of supplication, to search the fauon^ of their God, now to
practice with them selves the obedience and love that they owe to their God, in
consideration of his liberality, yea, and now to stir up their hearts to the
true and vnfenyed fear of God, and all together most chiefly to renew the
remembrance of that blissed and happy covenant which it has pleased the
Eternal to make with them.

I do think ye will not minishe the glory and prerogative of this your own
doghter, whom ye flatter so busylie, as to put her in the rank of these, seeing
ye ascribe unto her remission of sins, Er opere operato. For thus speaks
your gostly Fathers the Scoole men, with the whole rabble of Sophisters, unto
that undefiled lady, who is ready to join with every shauilling, and also is
at all times ready decked to him, that has the price in his hand.

Of this kind of Sacrifices, ye do not tak the mass to be, as may evidently
appear by your book, where ye set her up, even with the Sacrifice of the
croce, as we shall after here

The other kind of Sacrifices be, The second signification that the Sacrifices
expressed i^ the Scriptures have
when an oblation is offered up for a sin, whereby it is redeamed before God:
and this is called a propitiatory, expiatorie an sacrifice of satisfaction, as
by the which the wraith of God is appeased, satisfaction made to his ^^ste and
ryghteous judgments: so that the sinner purged and restored unto purity and
justice is in favor with God, by virtue thereof, seeing it has power and force,
to wype and wash away sins. And this name had they offerringes in the Law,
that were ordained and appointed for remission of such sines as were committed,
every one in the own kind, not that they were able of them selves, or had
that force, but because they were appointed to this end, figuring that
Sacrifice which is only worthy of that name, persyted by our Savior Jesus
Christ upon the croce, putting end and syne to all Sacrifices. If this Iowel
and block of yours, shall be of this kind, it falloweth well that she forgiueth
sins. And not without cause ye beck and bow to her so earnestly, that is,
by virtue of that action that God remitteth sins.

But here would I glaidly inquire, whose sins are remitted, whither the
sacrificer or the beholder, of the which I am sure no man knows (for the
most part) any more, but that he sees the murgeons played, a disguysed
priest, somtymes pufting, somtymes blawing, somtymes dreaming, now as it were
walking out of his sleep, now turning his face to the people, now to the Alter,
now crosing, now bowing him self down, now murmilling, somtymes displaying
forth his hands, now co^tracting them. And finally does not else but gaseth
upon the swellowing over of a peace of bread, and the ugly and shameful
licking of a cup, without any ciuilytie. If in the beholding of this lies,
remission of sins, in deid they are easy to be pardoned. The harlot priest
^iceaued the simple people.
If we shall say that the priest as he takes the whole to him self, so only
obtained he forgiveness of his sins, then the people is heavily entreated, and
at an evil point, when the harlote and the ignorant priest shall have the
whole. This is mirrie to refresh the reader, and yet is most true, for this
wicked and deuillish opinion of remission of snies by mass, has enuennomed
all Christendom and drowned it up so, that she allone was esteamed to be the
lady, the plyght and souerane Anchor, yea, and the port of all benediction and
Salvation. What blasphemy and derogation, to the blood of Jesus Christ? To his
dignity, honor and preisthead, has proceaded hereof? as it is now manifest to
every one, so in the refutatio^ of this, we are driven to speak somewhat. And
first will I dema^d of this Romish Doctor: where did he ever here that theie
was any Sacrifice instituted without a Sacrificer? Christ alone is the priest
and none other.


We know that the Author to the Hebreues, Vendicates the dignity of
preisthead, wholly to our Savior, whose preisthead he calls there.(...) that
is to say, of that nature, that it can not be transferred into an other.

The argument of the Apostle is very cleir, in the 7. Chap. where he gives the
cause of the multitude and plurality of preistes, every one succedinge other,
Hebr. 7.
because they were mortal and subject to death, and so could not remane. Why in
the old Law there was many Preistes
But no such infirmity falls in our priest the Lord Jesus who has offered
up him self in a full satisfaction and recompense, for all our sins and that
ones, the virtue whereof remaneth perpetually, and yet desisteth not to execute
the other part of the office of the priest, ever interreading at his Fathers
hands, for the offenses of the people, ever living as the Apostle says, for
that cause. How then can this Sacrifice stand without a priest? How can there
be any oblation without a Sacrificer? There is no shedding of blood in the
mass and therefore no remission of sins


Secondly, we be plainly teached by this same author that there can be no
remission of sins without effusion and shedding of blood. In your mass there
is no shedding of blood, for ye call it on unbloody Sacrifice: but how justly
after shall be considered. How then darre ye promise to your selves remission of
sins thereby.

Thridly, if ye will pertinatiouslie insist, and will it to be a Sacrifice,
necessarly it shall follow, that it that is offerred shall be slain. If Christ be
Sacrificed in every mass, then shall he be most barbarously and cruelly
slain every day, in ten thousand places, for ye affirm plainly, If Christ
be offered in every mass, as the papists say, the^ must he be slain every
day, above a thousand times.
that ye offer him up unto his Father. This is not mine, but the Apostles
argument in the same Epistle, if it had been neidfull to him to have offered
him self ofter then ones, then should he have suffered oftentimes, since the
beginning of the world. It follows then cleirly that since ye take upon you
to offer him up at all times in every corner, that ye do that, that is in you
to put traterous and blody hands upon him. Your shifts and subterfuges are
well knowene to me, first that ye christ not successors to our Savior, as if
he were dead and utterly taken away, but suffraganes of his Eternal
preisthead. But if the words of the Apostle be well examinat and considdered
aryght, they do prove manifestly, that nether neadeth he a successor nor yet a
suffragane, seeing he is ever leuing, and ready to execute, yea, and executing
his office, ever present with his Church, and never intermitting the office
laid upon him by his Father. And this his Sacrifice he did ones offer up, by
virtue whereof remission of sins is obtened, to all that believed. In the
office of intercession, he is continually occupied, as we have somewhat touched,
so that in no part of his office, can he be either esteamed sleuthful, absent or
so occupied to require a Suffragane, either yet mortal and subject to death,
that he should neid a successor.

Hereby I trust it be sufficiently declared, your mass to be no Sacrifice, and
so your diffinition to fall in that point, and so have ye to lybell new again.
The papists subteltie and deceat in taking away one part of the sacrament.
To that ye say the Lords body is really contained under the forms of bread
and wine, I wonder ye make no mention of the blood of our Lord as well, as of
the Body, but in this ye shaw well where ye learned, to wit, at Sorbone, and
not at the Scoole of Christ: for Christ instituteth and uses two several
simboles of his body and blood, bread and wine, but you as ye are teached of
your master Satan; does think that, nawise neidfull. In token whereof ye
have debarred all Christianes, except a certane shauelinges, from the one part
of the Lords table, and has reserved the cup all whole to your selves, and
in deid, God be praised, it is not evil sent upon their boched faces. Albeit
that Jesus Christ the Author hereof does plainly command, that all shall
drink, and this was ever practiced in the primitive Church, yea, and ever
retained by the ancient Fathers, howsoever ye take upon you, in your stinking
diffinition, that it was so instituted by our Savior, in remembrance of his
death and passion: so lightly not only do ye pas by the holy ordinances of
God, but also the shedding of his blood.

In the Second diffinition which appears to contain a certane correction of
the former, Ane answer to the second diffinitio^ of the mass.
Ye call it a commemoration and remembrance of Christ's death and passion. In
deid it is certane that our Savior willed and commanded that action which he
had practiced, to be done in commemoration of him, and after him Saint Paul
gives charge likewise, that how so often we shall eat of that bread, and drink
of that cup, we annunce and furthshaw the Lords death till he come. But the
mass to be that action, either yet to have any affinity with it, being
altogether als contrarious as the heaven and the earth, light and darkness, the
day and the night, he is more nor mad, that tholeth hi^ so to be persuaded. But
of this repugnancie we will have more ganing occasion to speak, when as we
shall atteane to that place, where of set purpose, you do handle the aggreance
of the mass with the Lords table, and the diversity. Where ye pretend the
bread and the wine to be consecrated (execrated I darre say boldly for
consecration have ye none) according to Christ's institution. In the mass
there is nothing-lyke the Lords Supper.
I trust there be none that ever has seen the action of the Lord Jesus
practysed, either yet has red the words of his most blissed institution, that
will consent or aggre thereto, for in his action we read plainly, that he take
bread, gave thanks, brake it, gaiue it unto his Apostles, and likewise did
with the Cup. In your mass, what is like this? First there is no thanks
giving, or any that can be pretended, since it is in a forrane language, it is
eue^ as there were none: there is no breaking of bread, 1 Cor. 14.23.
nether yet distribution. What can it have then like unto the Lords
institution?

To the offerring up of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, under the forms
of bread and wine to the father of heaven, I am assured there is no such thing
in the institution of our Savior, shaw your warrant, produce your commission,
the action I have rehearsed, wherein there is no such thing to the judgment of
all. But if ye will say: it is here contained: There is no commandment in
Christ's institution to offer up Christ's body
do this in remembrance of me, this sentence is relative to the action
preceading, so that there can be no mention at all, in this whole institution.
By whom ye will the body and blood to be received, as the heavenly food of
our Souls, it is incertaine whither of God, or of us, be like ye would mean of
God, seeing ye have spoken of offerring immediately before: as ye should mean,
that as it is offered by us unto God, so likewise is it received of his part,
which in very deid is a strange manner of speaking and untrue: for who did ever
here that the Sacraments given and appointed unto us by God, as a most
special benefit and comfort, that ever they were commanded to be offered to
God, or so received of him? I am not ignorant that, that thing which is done
according to his holy ordinance, he is content with it, and in that
consideration receaueth it.

But here we speak of offerring of our part and receiving in that respect, of
the part of God. We are commanded to use and practice his holy Sacraments,
whereby we testify our Religion, and witness our obedience unto God, but to
offer them up unto him, this did I never here.

In deid the body and the blood of Jesus Christ, represented by bread and wine
in this Sacrament, being received according to his holy institution and
ordinance, and no ways else, I know to be the food and nourishment of the
Soul, of the faithful receauer. If this be your mind in the latter words of
your diffinition, then does the latter part most ineptlie and improperlie
aggre with it that preceadeth of the offerring.

This far have we traveled with your fond diffinitions, and als shortly as
was able, and more shortly nor the matter should require, if we should not have
occasion after to speak somewhat, as ye travel forward in the explication of
your own sayings.

It that ye add to your former diffinition, I can not tell what triflus
orations i^uented and devised as you say by the a^cient Fathers, and that as
seames to you most justly to decore the Mask. I answer unto you, that all
proceadeth of a Furnace and one Author, to wit, the Devil for as the
principal is blasphemous, so is all that is joined wi^h it, and pretex not
such godly orations, as be used in the holy Communion, for there is nothing
there, but it that is drawn out of the Scriptures of God, and practysed
according to Christ's holy institution and ordinance. In the communion there is
nothing added to, nor deminished away, by us, from Christ's insticution.


For the prayers which we do use before the table of the Lord Jesus, we repute
no part of that holy action, but only use them to infla^me and stir up our
dull hearts, to the due consideration of that great mystery, to the practice
whereof when we approach, we do nothing which the Lord Jesus did not, nether
yet omit we any thing which we find that he did, and commanded us to do, but
in your mass, if the Collettes Pro Pecore infirmo (I will not say for a seick
sow) Pro Partutientibus. Pro Defunctis. Pro na^uigantibus and such others be
omitted, Sire John is not worth his Six blankes.

Now have we to consider, the reasons and arguments, whereby this Romish
Doctor trauelleth to confirm his fond diffinitions. James as he is introduced,
requires a probation of Scripture, for justification of the which is adduced
an part of the words of the institution, out of Lucas and Marcus: do ye this
in remembrance of me. By the which words (says this Gospeller).

He commanded his Disciples to consecrate the bread and the wine, as he did,
saying, this is my body, and so he institute the consecration, and by the
consecration, the very body and blood of Jesus Christ our Savior, are
contened under the form of bread and wine, by the power of ye Lords word
which is omnipotent, according to this ye shall mark the godly Ancient sayings
of Chrysostom, written in this manner. It is not man that makes our Lords
body and blood of the bread and wine, and so forth.

Whereupon first we shall observe, the old practice and shift of satan in the
recyting of any place of Text, A craft of Satan always to punish and cut of
the scripture
alleged or brought in for his purpose, that ever he rehearses a certane
portion or part of the text, and never the whole sentence. Why is not the whole
action recyted? This has been a great occasion of these wicked errors, we are
now troubled with all, and principally in this matter we have now in hand, for
hereof has proceaded that there was nothing Judged to appertene to this
action, by the adversaries of the Euangle, but only this sentence, this is my
body, and that not pronounced plainly, Only the Papists tuk these words,
This is my body and left out the rest.
but mumled and blown upon the bread, and so of the Cup, as nether the
things preceading, nether yet the commandment ensewing, should have any place
in this action, the fructes whereof are, that not only the sentence is
utterly wryed and perverted, but the words altered, changed and adulterate
which no man of a sober wit can esteem to be attempted, without a great
Sacrilege. For as deprauing of sentences, brings in all corruption, so
innovation of terms, used by the Spirit of God, can procead of no sobriety,
whosoever be the Author and inuenter of them.

Of the one we have the horrible and monsters mother of all impiety,
transubstantiation and real presence, dinging Christ from the right hand of
the Father, taking from him the office of preisthead and mediation, in that
that it leaves not to him the proprieties of the manly nature, pernerting and
exstinguishing the ordor and effect of a Sacrament, ascribing unto our Savior
a fantastical body with Marrion, and finally affixing him to a certane piece
of bread at the appetite of a filthy whormo^ger, not unlike to that, that we
reid in Theotritus, and after him in Virgile in his (...) where they gave such
strenth to the versis of Inchanters, To who^ the Papists are like.
that they move Jupiter, the Son and Moan to fall out of the heaven and
descend in their bossomes.

I would this glorius gloser, should have red Bonaue^tura and Stotus, otherwise
called Doctor Subtilis, and such others in the impugnation of this wicked and
deuillishe impiety, set forth by Nicolaus Secundus, and Innocentius Tertius,
men replenished with all fraud and decepte Sons of the Devil, who expressly
after that they have impugned and defaced it, by all good arguments and
authority, against their own consciences and all godliness, are ravished and
carried away, to reverence that wicked saite, mother of al defection and
apostasy from God, rather then to declyne a jot from it with the manifest
treuth

Many other absurdities may be gathered, enseuing and following hereof, but in
deid my purpose is not to werie my pen any more instantly in this matter, but
will reserve it either to a particular treaty, The abbotes purpose is to
stablish the wicked (...).
when God shall send the time, or then to the conclusion of this book: always
I darre promise that the sober Reader shall have yneugh, even in this same
work to be satisfied with all, for as the matter shall require, and the
occasion serve, we shall bring in such things as shall be in any wise
necessary. For albeit this Author is ever at the body and blood, contained
under bread and wine, and so gnashing him, as it were, with his teith, yet his
principal purpose is not to establishe transubstantiation, but to flatter,
cullor, and trymme up his Leprose doghter, the stinking and filthy mass,

The papists always brage of Peter and Paul and yet ^ollow the^ nothing as
may well appear.
To return to our purpose, the sentences being thus boldie, without any shame
perverted, follows consequently the innovation of the words, with the
sembladle rashness and temeritie, that be like they have altogether con^pired to
destroy the whole form of Religion, planted by our Master and Savior. For if
Peter or Paul should now reuyue or, go a Thort, to se the manner and the ordor
of those that brageth most of the Apostles.

What should they find? Any thing like that, that they teached? any thing
aggreing with that ordour they planted? I am sure, nothing. For they should not
only perceive the form of the whole Religion perverted, but likewise the
words changed. Should they allow this empire that is cruelly exerted upon the
consciences of men? This importable burden of days, months, times,
ceremonies, rytes, customs, and such vanities which they did utterly damn?
This holy water, and burning of Candles at noune days (for even as the
inchanters and socerers can do nothing without Fire, All that the Papists now
use by the doctrine of the Apostles is utterly damned.
so always in your vanities Fire is judged necessary) this masking clothes,
in^ocacion of Saints, Purgatory, and your q^hispered and m^^led masses in
e^erie corner, would they approve? I am assured that by the exemple of their
Master Christ, they should wheip you out of the Temple, in most shameful
and ignominius manner.

Did they ever use this word, which thou continually has in mouth of
consecration, The Papists oght to be wheipped out of the Church of God.
either yet the Eu^ngelistes: They do use ever speaking of the matter of the holy
Supper, the words of (...) or (...) that is in our tongue, of benediction or
thanks giving. Shall these words, dyted by the holy Spirit of God, be so
brought in oblivion, that I can not tell what other words shall be received in
their place of the invention of man, whosoever is the inuenter of them, all is
a matter. Of this rank we have the ministers of God, called preistes, the holy
communion called the mass, or the Sacrament of the Alter, and to be short,
the whole ordinances of our Savior, not only in the opinion and form
adulterated, but the words changed and innouated.

This is the reverence that these holy Fathers bears to the word and
institutions of our Law maker, the wisdom of the Eternal Father. Now I ask of
you, what do ye understand by this word of consecration, for there is no such
word found in the Scriptures, at least, God has given no such power, to
words spoken by man, that they may alter and change the substance of dead and
insensible Creatures.

True it is, 13 Tract. upon John.
that the word passing or being joined to the Element the Sacrament is made,
but Augustie shaweth the reason, saying, not because the word is spoken ^ot
because it is believed, and I pray you who believes the word? The Element or
the faithful. I think ye will not be so impudent, as to affirm that the watter
in baptism believes the promise made in the same, and no more shall ye prove
the bread and the wine do, either understand, or yet believe the words which
ye quhisper to them. But to what end shall we dispute with you of consecration:
which we reid not in the words of our Savior, nether yet gives he any
commandment so to do to his Apostles and Church.

For in this that he commanded them to do that, in remembrance of him, Because
their offerrings wants the promise they be altogether blasphemous
as he assures them of well doing, when as they shall practice that action,
even as they had seen him do, so he binds them strictly to the observation of
every jot of that action, he had practiced in their presence, for if thou
shall transgres and break the commandment in any point, be it never so small in
thy judgment, thou, no dout, shall pervert the whole action, thou has no
promise (which taken away) there remaneth nothing of that, that is here
offered: so now thy whole action turns to a mere blasphemy.

We know, and I trust it be not unknown to you, that the ordinances of God
consists in two points, the commandment and the promise, as in the matter of
prayers, Psalm. 50.
call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and I shall here thee, the commandment
is given to call upon God, the promise is annexed: I shall here thee, if thou
shall break this commandment, darre thou, or can thou assure thy self of the
promise that is to be hard of God? I think not.

In the action of the Lords Table, the commandment is given to practice that
action, The actio^ of the Lords Table haeth a commandment, and a promise.
in remembrance of our Savior: that is to say, to take bread, give thanks,
break it, make distribution of it, the promise is subioyned, This is my body,
which is broken for you.

Thou deuiseth here and inuenteth, I can not tell what a consecration, thou
makes no distribution, and yet will thou assure thy self of the promise? How
vainly every man may judge. But here thou will say pereuentur, that this
word is used by some of the Ancien latin writers, it is a received word,
adding nothing unto the action, but only declaring it that is meant by these
words. This is my body. To this I have already toward the word, declared my
judgment, that in the action of God we oght with no les religion reteane the
words of the Spirit of God, nor the form and ceremonies of the action it
self.

In this I regard not the authority of any, what antiquity and estimation
soever shall be pretended. But to proceid to the matter I would not that ye, albeit
ye will seem to aggre with them that uses that word in the term, yet should
altogether disagre with them in the matter. For they (of the most ancient I
speak not of the Scoole men) in the great decay of the latin tongue, and
ignorance of the Greik, did use this word to expres no other thing, nor that
which the Eua^gelistes means and signifies by thanks giving or blissing, so
that they refer it not to the words of the promise, that ye call the words
of consecration, but to expres that (he gaiue thanks or blissed) which is not
altogether intolerable, albeit it lack not just cause of reprehension

Further it is a thing more then manifest, The hole proceeding in the papistrie,
wants not great profanation of the holy mysteries.
that all Sacraments consists in these two, to wit, the word and external
Element. This word, whereof principally depends the virtue and strenth of the
Sacrament, is not to be taken for a certane quhispered or mumled words, or a
son^, rather without all sense or faith, not unlike the magic incautions, but
rather oppenly and plain^ly preached, that may teach the auditorie, what is
meant by the visible sign: whereby it may evidently appear that your whole
proceadinges in the papistrie, lacks not a great profanation of these holy
mysteries: where it is thought suffic^ent, if the preiste, the people gasing
upon him, without all intelligence, should blow and br^^th out the words that
ye call of consecration. For it is plainly commanded, that all be recyted in a
strange tongue, yea, and that the words be not pronounced, The sound of the
word vanished but the vertew th^reof by ^eth.
but rather murmured with a rauk voice. But far otherwise we be teached by
Augus^ine. Let the word be joined with the Element* and then shall we have a
Sacrament, for whereof proceadeth this great virtue of the water, that when it
shall touch the body, it shall purge the heart, but by the working of the word,
not because it is spoken, but because it is bele^e^. For in the word it self,
the sound is an thing that p^s^^th, and the virtue an other thing, that
remaneth, this is the word of faith that we preach, says the Apostle, so in
the Acts of the Apostles, Romans 10.8.
by Faith purging their hearts. And Peter the Apostle says, that Baptism
makes us saife, not by the wyping away of the fylth of the flesh, Act. 15. 1
Pet. 3.21.
but that a good conscience makes requeist to God. This then is the word of
Faith that we preach, by the which, that it may have the strenth to clange,
Baptism is hallowed. So we may evidently perceive the mind of this godly
Author, to require and urge preaching, which engenders Faith. By preaching of
the word is faith i^creased.
We neid not to spend much time in this matter, seeing it is clear what our
Savior did, what he commanded to be done, what the Apostles practiced to his
imitation, what the godly Fathers followed and approved, yea, and what the
Church did ever reteane, so long as there remaneth any spunk of integrity in
it: and so shall we observe eue^ from the beginning, that continually when God
offered any sign unto the Fathers, to their instruction and confort, that ever
he joined the word with the Simboles So that we may clearly understand, that
the Fathers never did mean of no such magical consecration made by a certane
whispered words, rounded with the Element, after the abuse of the papistrie
but that the promise should be pronounced with a loud and clear voice, in a
familiare language, the which being preached to the people, might lead them as
it were by the hand, to that, that is signified by the whole action. For this
that is recyted by Augustine of Baptism, no dout, apperteaneth also to the
Lords Table, and to all Sacraments, practiced since the beginning.

Now consider with your self how miserably ye are deceived, how maliciously
being enuennomed with a wicked opinion, ye wrye and wreast, the sayings of the
Scriptures and Doctors, What the papists vnders^a^d by the word joined to the
Sacraments
out of their natural meaning, to establishe and confirm your fore conceived
error.

I know that by this word, ye will mean that as soon as ever these words:
this is my body, are spoken, immediately the substance of bread is taken away,
and the body of Jesus Christ ent^reth in really, naturally, and substantially,
even the same body that was borne of the Virgin, was crucified, scur^ed,
buried, ascended into the heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the
Father, which is a deuillish assertion, and expres against the Scripture
(affirming that the bread remaneth still bread and the wine, vine) and against
all natural reason, that a body may or can be in mo places at one time, and
also against the nature of a Sacrament, wherein the Simboles and Elements do
represent unto us the things signified, August. Tract upon Iohne. 50.
and are not the self same things, albeit the names be attributed unto theme,
against the authorities of the Fathers: and finally this detestable opinion of
the Papists sauoreth of the herysie of Mar^ion, who attributed unto Christ a
fantastical bo^y, which of necessity shall follow, if he thus shall be in
every ^omer, against the proprieties of the natural body, which being taken
away, his office of mediation and Preisthead must vanishe and fall.

Of the omnipotency of Gods word, ye have not to brage in this matter, for
howsoever his word is almighty, if his will be not joined with the word, it is
nothing. But thou will collect his will of the words: this is my body. In deid
if the words of the Scripture shall be always understand, even as they are
spoken, 1. Cor. 10
then shall we prove Christ to be a Rock Stone, according to the saying of the
Apostle, to be a wine tree, to be a door, and the way, and so forth. Let us
here then Augustine in this matter. To this answers Augustine in his Epistle
to Bonifacius. 2^. Augusts Eipstile. to Bonifacius. 2^.
If the Sacraments (says he) should not have some aggrement and similytude,
with these things which they represent, then shall they not be Sacraments.
For of this similytude, oftentimes they take the names of the things them
selves. Therefore, as after a certane manner, the Sacrament of Christ's body, is
Christ's body, the Sacrament of Christ's blood, is Christ's blood, August. con.
Adama^. Manichesi.
so the Sacrament of Faith, is Faith.

And writing against Adamantus Manicheus plainly, our Master Christ douted
not, to call it his body, when he gave the figure of his body. And upon the
third Psalm. wonderful (says he) is Christ's patience, Augusti. in the. 3*
Psalm.
in that, that he received Judas to the Banked, in the which he commanded, and
gave to his Disciples, the figure of his body and blood. Of the which
Authorities of this godly learned Father, we may easylie answer, this speaking
of our Savior, to be Sacramentale, Me^onymical: and so his will to perform
any such thing, as thou falsely gathered, in no ways to have been. For we give
that reverence unto our Savior and Master, that there is nether
inconstancy, lyghtnes, nor repugnancie in his word, nether yet do we think
these words spoken of the bread, to be otherwise understand or exponed, nor
they that after follows of the cup, where of necessity ye must grant als
many fygures, as there be words. Shall we say that the cup is the New
Testament^* Or the cup is the blood of the new Testament? Here thou can not
eshew, how good a Gladiator, or Fensare soever thou be, turn thy self in al^
many forms and shappes as ever did Protheus, here shall thou stick fast.

Shall these words be understand, even as they are spoken? I trust ye will
not say that: then must it follow that there is a figure, and howsoever thou
shall expone the words of the cup, thou shall be driven to grant the same of
the bread: As the cup is the covenant in the blood so is the bread the
covenant in the body of our Savior Christ.
for no thing can be said or alleged of the latter part of this mystery, that
is not to be understand of the former. So now then as the cup, by the
interpretation of Lu^e^s and Paulus, Is the covenant in the blood of our
Savior, the same shall we affirm of the bread, to wit, that it is the
covenant in the body. Now strive, cry out, laubour, travel, and do what you
list to inuert this, thou shall have to do with the holy Spirit of God,
declaring plainly that the will of our Savior is in no ways concurring with
such an omnipotency, as thou and thy fellows has forget, of these words,
this is my body, fondly and vainly exponed, after the letter. I pas by the
common manner of Scripture, calling the Circumcision by the name of the
covenant, the Pasouer likewise, whereof they were but Simboles and signs, and
such other places, serving to this purpose, and will pas forward to the
words of Chrisostomus, which this glorius Doctor, who will seem to be so beasy
and diligent, notes to be written in the. 48. Homily upon John, where I darre
boldly affirm there is no such matter nor words, for that homily is written
upon the. 7. Chap. of John, and is spent wholly upon the observation of the
Sabbath

Hereby it is easy to perceive how vainly ye ascribe such reading of the
Ancientes unto your self, as in your writings ye ^ake upon you, that ye will
seem in the eyes of the people, to be the only he in this Realm versed in
antiquity

And now to say my judgment freely, I trust ye have no works of such men as
ye draw your authorities out of, but only has, I can not tell what little
scabbed trea^^es of Eccius, Cochleus, Hosius Stanissans your new start up
Campion, Eccius, Cochleus, and Hosius Stanissaus be the abbotes companinos.
and of such others of your faction, and takes out of them, such things as ye
think may serve to your wicked and blasphemus purpose.

What credit now, or what authority oght to be given to such places, as thou
draws out of the Doctors, who ^elyke never has seen there works, nether yet
knows to what purpose they speak, if they speak of their own mind, or of
their adversaries, whither they speak by an interrogation or conclusiuely, and
determinatly, whither they speak (...) that is excessiuely, to extol the
dignity of the matter they have in hand (which is not ^^are in this Author) or
simply. Thus the Text it self is to be considered, that it that preceadeth,
being conferred with it that follows, the mind and sentence of the Author,
may be known perfytlie.

Not that I will hereby damn young men, It is most shame for him that takes
upon himself greatest perfection to be found an ignorant.
who either excluded by time, or else lacking books, must give credit to good
authorities, but in this man who will seem to be an other Anacharses Inter
Sordidds Scythas, it is intolerable, who is sequestrate from the common
society of men, and travel in the common wealth, having not else to do, but
that he has enjoined to him self, that is to ly by a pleasing bray, and cast
in stones to trouble the fair and clear rinning watter.

This thing I say again is not only intolerable, but most worthy of all
punishment. But to the purpose, I have said there is no such matter entreated i^
the place cited; by this diligent Reader. In deid in the same Author we shall
read not unlike to this, in his. 83. Homily upon Matthew, his words are. They
be not works of man's power propounded, who then made them in that Supper, the
fame works them now. We occupy the rouine of Ministers, but he that
sanctifies them and changes them is he (meaning our Savior) who did appoint
and institute this action.

This in deid being well considered, shall and may be understand, to be spoken
more by a Rethoricall amplyfication to extol the excellency and worthynes of
this so great a mystery, rather then spoken according to the simple treuth of
the matter. How the words of Chrysostom, oght tobe understand.
It is known well enough to any man that is but mid way familiare with this
Author, that he is somewhat excessive in such amplyfications, somtymes playing
the orator, rather then the simple Theologien.

This I were able to prove particularly by sindrie things entreated by him, if
the time should suffer, but yet I se no such things in these words, whereof
you have any occasion to brage or rejoice. For in this that he says, they b^
no works of man's virtew propounded. Who did eue^ think or teach other? We be
well teached by John the Baptiste of that defference, in ministration of
Sacraments, that is betuix the inward worker and giver of gra^e (who is
Christ Jesus) and the Minister, who onel^ works and serves outwardly, so
that howsoever (...) shall at the appointment of our Master, Minister and
practice the action: Yet is it not the work of man's strenth nor power, nether
is there an part thereof to be ascribed to him, but all whole to be vendicat to
the instituter, in that, that not only he commands it to be done, and
nothing is done, but at the prescript of his commandment, but also he is he,
who gives the power, the strenth, the energie to it, that it may profect and
frutrifie unto the receauer, and in this manner the cause given by Chrysostom
is very good, that he is he now that works, who wroght then. So that there
is no defference betuix that action, that was then practiced by our Savior,
and it that is now done to his imitation by us, we but have the place of
ministers, it is he that sanctifies and changes, that is to say, it is he by
whose ordinance and commandment, this whole action is hallowed and sanctified.
For the action it self, if it shall be considered, it shall seem and appear
very vile and of no price, yet seeing there is nothing done, but at his
commandment, practiced by him self, allowed by him, we as becomes well
instructed Children, does judge it to be worthy of all reverence, whereof we
have his warrant, being commanded so to do, in remembrance of him till he come.

This then is the sanctification that this Author speaks of here, and no such
deuillishe incantation, as thou would pretend, which dontles was unknown in the
days of Chrysostom.

But least thou shall insist upon the latter word of changing: what the ancentis
understand by changi^g in the sacrametes.
I will travel to oppen up the mind of the most Ancient Fathers in that
part: for they do use that word often, not to signify any such change, as ye
fondly have devised and invented: but only willing hereby, that we should all,
before that we shall offer and present our selves to this table, consider the
dignity, praise and prerogative of this heavenly banked, that we be here
called to, where the same is the banked, and the banked giver, as this same
Author says. We shall consider this bread, exhibited to us here, to be the
bread of life, Christ is boith the bankede and the bankede giver.
nourishing our Souls unto immortality. We shall consider these Elements
which he given, as sure pledges of eternal Salvation, and of all benefits
procured and obtained to us by Jesus Christ.

So that we must not go to this table, as to a common table, to farce and
stuff our bellies with bread and wine, but we must understand this bread to
be separated from the common use, and sainctified and dedicated to the holy
Communion of Christ's body and blood, We must consider the brad and wine in the
holy Supper to be dedicated to an holy are use then to feade our bodies.
to declare to us that we are not now leuing in our selves, but Christ leueth
and rigneth in us, we are no more the seruandes and slaves of Satan, but
members of Jesus Christ, that we are now made participant and partakers, of
his justice and ryghteousnes: and that by him we have remission of our sins,
so that now albeit we be in the earth exposed to all kind of tentation,
trouble, and persecution, yet our conversation is in the heaven with him, on
whom our Souls stays and feadeth.

This change then that they do mean of, is to extol this mystery as it is
worthy all praise, and declare with what trymbling, fear and humility, we
oght to present our selves thereto, because this that was common bread,
appointed for the refection of man's body, is now sanctified to an holy use, to
assure us of that conjunction, yea, and lively perticipation we have now, with
the Eternal Son of God, who joins him self so familiarly with us, that we
are now ingrafted so in him, that we now, as it were soucketh our very
substance, out of his body and blood He is now unto us, that, that he called
him self the wynetre, and we the brenches, he is the head, and we the members,
he is shortly he, out of whom life, ryghteousnes, justice, holiness, and
sanctification, proceadeth and flows unto us.

So that this whole change and immutation, is to be referred to the minds and
consciences of the receauers, The change is to be referred to the minds and
consciences of the receauers.
and not to any other change, that is in the substances of the Elements, that
be there proponed, but the bread remaneth bread, and the wine, wine, albeit
they be sanctified to an other more holy use, as we have said, and shall alter
declare in the conference of the Doctors.

This I take to be, and douteth not, but it is the very natural meaning of
the words of this Au^hor, and of all the Ancie^tes, when as they speak of any
change here. Yet I am not ignorant, that thou and thy fellows will apply the
former sentences, and refer them unto the commandment, do ye this in
remembrance of me, as hereby, the Lord should give us the charge to sanctify,
or as thou speaks, to consecrate the bread and wine, which as it is most
untrue, and co^trarious to the simple treuth of the Lords commandment, so the
Author do^th mean no such thing. For the lord did not command us to sanctify
bread and wine, and change them, but that we should take them, Christ
commanded us not to sanctify bread and wine, and to change them but that we
should, tak them etc.
give thanks, break, and distrybute them amongst us. and that with all
humilytie and reverence we should eat and drink them, in remembrance of him, as
the very Sacrament of his body and blood, which Sacramental ceremony,
passes not the reach and capacity of man.

And in this whole institution, ones made by him self, he still sanctifies for
ever, the Sacramental Simboles, to the perpetual use and confort of the whole
Church: which this Author Chrysostom signifies most clearlie, In that he
says: he that wroght then in the Supper, does them even now, so that he
still sanctifies them, by his holy institution and ordinance, that he made
then in the Suppere, where he changed not the substance of bread and wine, but
the natural use appointed to the resection of our bodies, he turned and
converted in a Sacramental use, to serve us by the inward operation of the
Spirit of God, to the nourishement of our Souls, and upholding of our Faith.

Ones he said: this is my body, this cup is the new Testament in my blood, do
this in remembrance of me. And in these words ones pronounced, did he ones
i^stitute and sanctify this holy action and ceremony, and changed these
Elements, from a natural, The use of the elements be changed at the lords
table but not there substance.
unto a Sacramental use, by vertew whereof, this whole action is sanctified,
throghout all, wheresoever it is practiced, which is the very meaning and
interpretation of this Author, and all the Ancients, wheresoever they use such
form and manner of speaking,

Here then thou sees plainly, that this Author ascribes nothing to the
words pronounced by the Minister, but vendicates and reserueth to Christ the
instituter, the whole strenth and power of sanctification, which was the^ done,
when as he instituted this action, and commanded it to be practiced in
remembrance of him.

But always here it is not to be passed by, that in these words, cyted out of
this Author, there is no mention of an Alter, but of a Table: Chrisost. makes
no mention of an alter but of a table
whereby thou may understand clearly, that this Author knew no such Alters,
whereof we have such a multitude erected every where (without the which the
Papists opinion is that no mass can be done) but only a Table, to the
imitation of our Savior which properly apperteaneth to the practice of his
holy Supper.

Whereof likewise we may collect, that there was no preuy masses, such as in
our days, and in the aige of our forebiers (that has been under Antichrists
authority, most profanely abused) has been: preuy masses I call all such,
where as the priest (the people wholly secluded) without any distribution,
deuoreth and swelloweth up all in a most reuinus manner, as in all masses we
have seen: which as they are contrarius to the ordinances of Christ Jesus, so
most justly they lack, and has no testimony nor approbation of antiquity,
but are most impius, blasphemus, Satan him self could never so impude^tlie
wr^s^ the scriptures as does this Abbote here.
and detestable.

When this inuerted Silenus has thus played him, with the words of this
Author, he infers and concludes. That not only said our Savior, this is
my body, where through he institute the consecration, but als he eaked these
words, saying, which is given and broken for you, by the which words
presently, as the same very time he declared his body to be an unbloody
Sacrifice, to be offered by the Apostles and all other Ministers of Christ's
Church, to the end of the world, in remembrance of his death, saying, do this
in remembrance of me.

In the answer to this conclusion, I will be very short, because afterward ye
entreat this matter as it were of set purpose, in the. 14. leaf, speaking there,
of the words that be used in the present time. As to the observation of the
time, and full understanding of those words, I will reserve to that place,
that I be not driven to make an unpleasing and loathsome repetition. Always
that, that may serve instantly, that we shall not seem to wink at the matter,
we can not have a more faithful expositor of these words, the^ the Spirit of
God, by the mouth of his holy Apostle Paul, who as thou recyteth, says,
which is broken for you. For it is most clear, that the Sacramental sign of
bread was not broken for them, but the only natural body of our Master upon
the craice, so that in no ways these words may or can be referred to the
pronome (...) the first word of the promise, where demonstration is made of the
bread, but apperteaneth to the latter word (body). It was not the bread but
Christ's natural body that was broken for us
For speaking of the bread, he says, he brake it, and he gave it to his
Disciples, and not for his Disciples, now meaning of his passion, and that his
body was to suffer, which is (says he) broken for you, as to the time we have
not to be curious, for we know the Spirit of God, somtymes in declaring that,
that is undoubtedly to be, either a long time, or immediately after, to use the
present time, yea, and the time passed. Like as here by the present he sets
forth that which was to be upon the morrow. Ye papist is mark the falset here
and be ashamed.
So the very sense of the whole is. This is the Sacrament of my body, which is
broken for you, that is to say, which body is to suffer, and to be broken even
the morrow for you: as shall be declared at more lenth, when as by Gods grace we
shall atteane to the place

But I pray thee, where shall we find in these words, such an unbloody
Sacrifice, as thou here brings in? I am assured the breaking of Christ's body
was bloody, and most cruel: where likewise shall we find this oblation? For
there is no mention of oblacion in this whole action, nether yet did our
Savior offer any thing there, nor yet to his Disciples gives he any
commandment to offer, but simply wills us to do this in remembrance of him,
which is relative to the whole action before practysed, of taking bread,
thanks giving, breaking of it, and distribution to be made, here is never a
sillabe of offering.

Well, let us go to the probation, which is drowen out of Malachy the Prophet,
and his first Cha. the words are I have no pleasure of you, says the Lord,
and as for the meat offering I will not accept it at your hand, for from the
rising up of the Sone, and to the going down of the same My Name is great
among the Gentiles, yea, in every place shall the Sacrifice be done, and an
clean oblacion offered up unto my Name, for my Name is great among the
Gentiles.

Here I may have occasion to speak somewhat of this interpreters faithfulness,
who thinks it nothing to turn by the future time, that which is spoken in
the present, for I am assured that all the textes that ever I did se, Hebrew
Greik, Latin, English, French, has the word in the present (is Sacrificed)
and not (shall be) and (an clean oblation is offered) and not (shall be) but I
will pas by that follows in this Doctor.

Mark says he, the words of the Prophet, and ye shall perceive that they are
not spoken of the Sacrifice of the Lords body, offered up upon the croice. For
why the Sacrifice of the Lords body on the croice, was only in Jerusalem, and
the words of the Prophet speaks of a Sacrifice offered up in every place,
and so forth.

Where this Author trauelleth, by an argument that ^e call in the Scooles A
sufficient enumeratione partium.

that is, when as we euert every particulare, to confirm and establishe an
certane thing, but as this argument lacks not the strenth, when as all is
properly euerted, so if any thing be pretermitted, either yet improperly handled
it proceadeth not.

Now to the matter, of the Sacrifice of the Lords body on the croice (say ye)
it can not be understand, for it was only in Jerusalem. I know that our
Savior was crucified in Jerusalem. Yet what shall be the cause that it shall not
be lefull to us to speak as the Apostle Paul in the. 3. to the Galth. where he
plainly witnesses that our Savior was crucified among them. Gala. 3.
Why shall the same liberty be denied to all places, where the death of our
Savior has been, or is lyuelie preached? Which no dout, has been every
where, like as the Prophet testifies, in the. 19. Psalm, Psalm. 19.
and the holy Ghost speaks of Paul, appointing him to bear the name of
Jesus, to the vttermoste parts of the earth.

Why then may we not expound this saying of the Prophet, of the Sacrifice and
oblation of the body of Jesus Christ, seeing he is every where crucified, How
Christ is said to be crucified i^ all places.
wheresoever his Euangel is treuly preached. And as touching thy stinking and
filthy mass, it has been (God be preased) at all times included and
circumscribed within a certane bounds, and that very small.

But thou will say pereuentur, that the speaking of the Apostle is
metaphorical. What if I shall say the same of the words of the Prophet? Even
as the Apls words may be taken metaphorically likewise the Prophets sainges.
For if he admonishes us of any thing to be erected after the abrogation of
the ceremonies of the Law, no dout, he speaks so by the fygures, then used
in the Law, that thereby we should understand an other sort of worshipping to
be planted, and received in place of those fygures. Thus thru the speaking can
not be proper. but always metaphorical from the vmber and shoddowe to expres
the verity. And thus may we have the sense of the words of the Prophet
properly that every where is there an oblation or Sacrifice offered up in my
Name, that is the Sacrifice of my Eternal and only Son, wherewith I am all
whole co^plesed and delyred, is offered up unto me, that is preached, for
whatsoever way thou can apply this saying to thy mass, that same way shall I
prove that it conueneth, and more justly to the predication of the Euangel, and
death of our Savior. For where thou restreines his death to the town of
Jerusalem, so will I affirm of the institution of his holy Supper, out of the
which thou soucketh most i^eptly and impiusly thy fond mass. If thou will
insist and say that the mass is done every where, I answer the same of the
Sacrifice of Christ's body more treuly. If thou shall reply yet, that, that is
only by preaching. I answer, that first thy mass has nothing to do with the
Lords table, and besides that the Author of the holy Supper, did ones
sanctify this action, which remaneth for ever, as I have shawen heretofore, as
our Savior died ones, and wills his death to be preached every where, and
so consequently to be crucified in all places, according to the metaphorical
speaking of the Apostle as I have already declared.

Now I pray you good Reader perceive with me the vanity of this new Author,
the strenth of his arguments, and the form of his proceadinges. Secondly ye
go about to prove that the sayings of the Prophet. Can not be understand of
the words of the Iowes, because the words does plainly declaire, that all
their Sacrifices were repudiat by the Lord God, from the time that the Lords
body was offered upon ye croice. This far our Author.

First if I should repugne, how shall ye be able to prove, that here we be
forewarned of any Sacrifice to be erected in the new Testament? of the
abolishment of the Sacrifices of the Law, and the institution of this your
exploded Sacrifice of the mass, which ye continually flatter and bear in
hand? For in this place there is no prophecy but a sharp rebuke and
reprehe^sion of the sacrificers under the Law who, by their horrible and
heinous sines, did so kidle the wraith of God against the^, that he most
justly compleaneth of them in this place, Iere. 7.
like as he does i^ the first Chap. of Isayas, rejecting their Sacrifices,
Prayers, fastinges, with all the rest of their Pompus works, Psam. 50
whereof they did so much brage, so that here there is nothing else but the
common querimonie of all the Prophets, to wit, that he declares their
Sacrifices in no ways to be acceptable unto God, but altogether abominable in
his presence, because of their filthy and vicius life.

For the reule is generally prescribed by Moses, that God did first luke to
Abell, and then to his gifts. And it is more nor evident, that of the horrible
and proud contemuer, he does not receive, no not his owen most holy
ordinances: so that the whole thing that is here rehearsed may be most
properly applied to the shame, rebuke, and utter exterminion of these filthy
massemongers, and of all that is offered by them, whose Sacrifices, albeit they
were appointed and allowed of God, as were those of the Law (as in very deid
they be not, but altogether are detestable in his presence, nether having
commandment nor approbation of him) yet are they of no value, yea, I say most
odius in Gods presence, by the plain testimony of the Prophet here. So that I
meruell not little of these masked Asses, that alleges ignorantly this place
for the prufe and confirmation of this whore most justly rejected of all them
that are not blinded with Satan.

God here in plain terms pronounces, that he is in no ways appleased in
them, he will receive no gift of their hands, so that he receaueth not the
oblatio^s of their hands, whose conditions and manners are haitful to him. He
is not contented with the Sacrifices and oblations of the Jews, being
institute and commanded, earnestly required and authorized of him? Not that
God is not content and appleased with that, that he commands, but that the
Sacrificers did not offer them of that mind, but of a mere hypocrisy did they
use and practice them, and turn them to a certane lucre again, and advantage
for them selves.

Now let us convert this querimonie of the Prophet unto our Sacrificers, do ye
not think that the Eternal may say the same, The principal cause of the mass
and of all heresy is the gredy belly
my pleasure is not in you, I will receive no gift of your hands, seeing their
filthy lives, their auarixius and gredie practices, their whole studies and
thoghtes are given to ambition and lucre, in such rage, that as our eyes
abhors the sight of it, so does the tongue shrink to expres it. I trust,
that not only by the judgment of the world, may it be prouen, but by the
testimony of your owen consciences ye may be convicted, all that be of you
Sacrificers, to refer all, and to Sacrifice wholly for your Belly, that is the
mother (as Ieronimus does most deseartly note) of all Herisie and fond
oppinion. I know your shifts ye object, Hiero. in Iere.* 4
that albeit that God be not appleased with you, yet the Sacrifice that ye do
offer, is pleasing, to wit, the body, and blood of Jesus Christ is acceptable.

But if God should answer, and say, I know, and acknowledges my Son, he is
be in whom I am pleased, I have placed and deposed with him the thesaures of my
wisdom, power, mercy and goodness. But what be ye? Who gave you any such
commission? He offered him self according to my determination and Eternal
Council, for the sins of the world, for satisfaction to my ryghteous
judgment, and for the reconciliation of man to me: but who required that ye
should offer him up again? But in deid good Master, if this place of the
Prophet shall be thus applied to your Idol mass, I perceive well ye do it upon
a great policy, for one of your principal things ye brage of (but how justly
it shall be after examinat) is a^tiquitie, thus ye shall have your holy Idol
much oulder nor ye take it to be, and to have been practiced in the time of
Malachias, for I am assured that all that is there spoken, is in the present
time, as I have warned you heartofore. Harken ye papists your mass is
olderthe^ ye know
And besides this ye shall have an universality for this that is spoken of
there, is said to be every where, in all places. This how justly may be said
of your mass let the wise and prudent Reader consider. I am assured, that the
mass was, nether so oulde as Malachias, nor yet that it was so universally
received, that it was published and authorized every where, and so pas thy way
with thy vanities and fond imaginations, and search some other place, to
confirm and establish thy wicked opinion, The words of Jerome expounding this
place alleged by the papists out of the ^. cha of malachie
for this can serve nothing.

Consider how Ieronimus exponeth the place, writing upon it: the words are
notable, wherefore I will not werie to recyte them. The reule of Scripture is,
where as there is a most manifest prophecy of the things to come not to
minish, nor extenuat the things that be spoken by incercitude of allegories,
so now properly to the Preistes of the Jews the Sermon of the Lord is
derected that offers the blind, the crouked and the mained, to be offer^ed
up, that they know, that Spiritual offerringes was ^o succead or enter in the
roumes of the carnal, and not the blood of Bulls and Bullockes, but incense,
that is the prayers of the Saints, to be offered up to the Lord, and that
not in an province of the world, as Iowrie, nor yet in a town of Iowrie, as
Jerusalem, but every where an oblation offered, and that not unclean, as by
the people of Israel, but clean, as in the ceremonies of the Christianes, for
from the ryssng of the Sone, to the down passing of it, my Name is great
among the nations, as our Savior plainly witnesses. Father I have
manifested thy Name to men. And now says he, when as my Name is to be great
among the nations, ye O Princes of the Iowes, have polluted it, and polluteth
it, for so he wrytith his prophecy, of the things to come, that he omitteth
not the present time, and so forth. Whereby every Reader may perceive and
understand, what was the judgment of that Ancient and well learned man of this
place, to wit, that it is to be expounded of the Sacrifice of oration, prayer
and thanks giving, whereby the Eternal is every where glorified by his elect
and chosen, as the Prophet should say, ye Preistes thinks that ye do some
great matter to me, in that, that ye offer up unto me, I can not tell what
beasts, and slays some Lambs, some Bullockes, Ra^mes, and so forth, even as
I were a small God, and like unto the Gods of the Nations, or that I were
circumscribed, compassed, and set about, yea, and the only bounds of
Jerusalem were prescribed to my service, honor and worship, or that my glory
should not extend the self, further then the bonudes of Judea.

This is not the words of the Couennat, that I made with your Fathers, what
time I brought them out of Egypt, I required no such thing of you, I soght no
such thing of your Fathers, but only the Sermon that I commanded them, saying,
here my voice, and I shall be your God. I am not so contemptible, nether yet
delight I in such vile meats and gifts, am I not Lord of the whole? Boweth
not every knie unto me? Shall not my Name be celebrated, yea, among the
Nations, and that from the rising of the Sone, to his down going? yea, and
with an other manner of Sacrifice, nor this your bludy, to wit, of a clean
impolluted and undefiled Sacrifice of thanks giving, which shall not consist in
ambition and avarice, nor yet shall be referred to any filthy lucre, but shall
procead of an ardent charity, and of an unfeigned mind, so that my Name shall be
sanctified, None of the Ancients ever knew this Papisticall Mass.
and the Sceptur of my kingdom auanced and promoted.

Does thou think the mind of the Prophet well oppened in this, and treuly,
according to the mind and inter^retation of Ieronimus, who suffers not that
we shall in any ways follow an incertane allegory, and as thou will an
ungodly and wicked declaration, where the matter is clear. I know that there be
(...) many things teached by the Spirit of God, to wit, the calling of the
Gentiles, the abolishment of the ceremonies, yea, Why the Ancients use this
word Sacrifice.
and the co^mutation and change of the Iowish manner of worshipping, gros: and
carnal, in it which is Spiri^uall of thanks, giving, and this not only is
the mind of Ieronimus, but of all the Ancientes, who did never acknowledge any
such mass, as thou introduces, being utterly damned by the Apostle, in the.
9. and. 10. to the Hebrews, as shall be after seen.

True it is, that they use the term of Sacrifice, What is offered to God by
the faithful people.
but that is because it is a co^memoration of that Sacrifice, by vertew whereof
all faithful are sanc^ified for ever, the Supper I speak of the Lord, the
which is not received of the only shauelinges, but co^municat to all faithful
people according to the institution and commandment of the Lord Jesus the
Author of it: to the Name of the Lord our God, we offer up, yea, and burns
the Sacrifice of praise and thanks, and that willingly, What is the offering
of the faithful preacher.
proceading of a certane charity, dilection and love we bear to him.

There be offered likewise, by the faithful preachers, most acceptable
Sacrifices, to wit, such people as be converted from their wicked ways, by
their predication, to the true and living God, maker of the heaven and of the
earth. Thus the Apostle speaks, and after him Ireneus as shall be declared in
the owen room. Romans 15.
There is yet a certane sort of Sacrifice commanded in the new Testament of
liberalytie, Alinus, mercy, well doing, as the Author to the Hebrews speaks.

(...) which thou here does pas by lightly, saying. That the words of the
Prophet can not be understand of the Sacrifice of oration and prayer, and Almus
deid. For in other diverse places are diverse orations and prayers, and the
Prophet speaks of a Sacrifice in all places, where we are compelled to say,
that their words war spoken only of the Sacrifice of the mass, quhair into the
may clean Sacrifice of the precius body and blude of Ies' Christ, hes ever
been offered up, under the form of bread and wine in all places, Satan
co^pelleth the wicked to abuse the holy scriptures.
professing Jesus Christ, sen the time of Christ, unto their our days.

I may be very short in the refutation of this last conclusion, by reason I
have shown the nature and the strenth of the argument that this Author uses
here, and have already reuerted the two former parts of it, and have also
prouen clearly, the vanity and blind ignorance of this divine, so that I neid
not to travel me any whit more, for any part of this argument, being impugned
and improue^ is altogether falls. The deuersitie of oration prayer, and almus
alleged by the papiste.
But he^e I darre not pas by the reason that is here adduced of the diversity
of prayer, of orations and Almus in all places, Will thou say to me glorius
divine, that Al^^s is diverse in all places? but wherein is this diversity? Is
it in the giuers? In the matter? or in them it is given to? And so will I demand
of prayers, and orations: will thou say the variety is in the giuers? This
same shall I ^ffirme of thy mass mongers: or will thou understand it of them
that be liberally entreated? shall not the same be found true of them ye sell,
your masses to? and miserably seduceth, The buyers of masses are miserably
deceived.
having nothing for their money, but the gaising upon your monstrous farce?

But I think thou will cleave to the matter, which says thou is one in all
masses. True it is, that in your masses ye travel to have bread and wine but in
this he is ^^ore then blind that s^yeth nor a great variety in sindrie
Regions. For in some we do se the bread, whiter (...), in some places made of
only wheit, in others melted and patched? of the wine semblably, here of a
starker kind, here we alter, hereof us^ed; there clean and natural, and God
be maised every where, that wone that was thought unable for the use and
service of man, was reserved and judged m^^te mere to that Idol, to refr^she
the throt of that shaking whore. Always we find little les variety in the
mate^ of this mass, nor in Alinus, prayer and orations, which are (...) of
God, m^ste (...) to (...) the nedy, of it we have granted unto us of Gods
liberalytie, to pray for such thing as we lack, according to the form
prescribed unto us, by our Scoole Master Christ. Pride blinds the Papists.


Now glorius Doctor consider wi^h me, the arrogancy of thy fond wi^, which
being putt up (...) the self, has carried thee so away, that thou could not
en^y thy owen vanity, I pray to the Eternal (...) tyrie eyes to consider the
deip pit of ignorance, thou art wrapped in and the dangerus state and condition
wherein thou consistes. It that ye conclude, to wit, the Sacrifice of Jesus
Christ's body and blood, to be most clean, none I trust will deny, but that
thou affirms then to be offered under the ^orines of bread and wine, in thy
mass, that we utterly (...) as wicked and (...) altogether abhor. The
primitive Church never ^^en the Popish mass.
And that thou affirms it to have been used i^ all places, professing Christ
(alas) this is also ^als, for the primitive Church utterly misknew it, yea, and
yet (...) the Euangell ^ath (...). (...) is not in (...) places of the Orient
among the Christianes we know no such thing to be (God be ^rassed) and we
hope in God* that all (...) shall be (...) delivered from her most tyrannus,
filthy, and insufferable abomination. And to be mar^y with you, for so I know
you of your nature, I know find i^ places in Scotland, that has ever (...)
clean of ^er filthynes* And I would be very sorry, that my stain or thy Jack
^ues wi^h reverence I say of the modest Reader* The church of god has nothing
to do with co^tentius Persons.
should be polluted with so (...) and vile ^harlote, as is the mass.

Thus thy arg^ment is refuted wholly, so that I trust every man shall be
satisfied, that is not altogether contentius, for to such I write not; not yet
will dedicate my layboures, for we know that the Church of God has nothing to
do with such men ones. True it is, that the Prophets forwarned us of the
coming and Nativity of our Savior, and painted him forth in his owen
cussors, that he might be known, to wit, by his wonderus works, and
infearciable wisdom and doctrine. But that thou hereupon would gather. That
this Prophet likewise did prophecy of a clean Sacrifice, to be offered over
all (hitherto in deid thou says not evil quhilk is the precius Body and
blude of Jesus Christ, offered up in the Sacrifice of the mass, be the
Minister.

In this thou speaks vainly, ungodly, and impiusly, yea, and unlearnedly,
which I have already declared, yea, and shall prove by the same, that thou
adduceth for thy wicked prufe, to wit, the words of the latter Supper, and the
Prophet Malachie expounded and declared by the universal consent of the most
Ancient Fathers, when as we shall come to the declaration of the sayings of
the Ancients, and will not now trouble the ordour of the book Here in deid this
glorius divine takes to him a fre field, taking upon him to prove and certify
James his brother. That this was (says he) the declaration of them that was
Disciples to the Apostles, It may be well seen that the Papists pride them
selves greatly in lyeng
and all other godly interpretors of Gods word, Greikes, and Latinistes,
together with the universal consent and declaration of the may Ancient and
godly general Councels, quhil^ ever hes been sen the time of Christ to the
our days.

But here thou recites none of the words of thine Authors. In deid there is
somewhat noted v^o^ the merg^^. Alexander Epistol^ prim^ Ireneus Libro primo.
Cap. 32. Damascenus Libro primo de Fide. Orthodoxa. Cap. 14. Augustinus Libro.
8. de Ciuitate dei Cap. 33. et 9. Cap. ^3. ^ru^erin^ ^uper exodum

(but here thou has no mercy upon the Reader, forgetting to note the Chapter)
and the two Councils of Nice, and Ephesus last of all. But hereof afterward,
because thou entreats somewhat at more large I will refer them to their owen
place, and will join with thee in the substa^^e of the matter, which I have
ever from the beginning longed to atteane unto.

But here I can not pretermit unobserved, that thou cyteth Augustine in the
eight book. 33. Chap. the whole book being contained and divided in. 2^.
Chapiters. But least ye should have forget your self in some of the figures I
have looked the. 23. Chap. where the ancient Father di^puteth of the judgment
of Hermes Trimegistus of Idolatry, and of the abolishing of the superstitions
of Egypt, and I can find nothing any ways apperteining to this purpose we have
in hand, but except that if some man may Iustlye think that the reprehension of
Hermes should most worthily ^uene to you. The words are these, vain
deceptful, pernicius, and Sacrilege things, Hermes the Egyptiane, because he
knew the time to come, in the which they were to be abolished, he lamented, but
he wept impudently, as he knew it imprudently: this part and these words may
be applied to you, and all of your faction, who trauelleth in disperate causes,
and lamenteth and bewaleth, the erecting of the true Religion of God, and
overthrow of that, that is impius and wicked, which no dout, as ye bewale
impudently, so have ye foresene these many years to come, with no les
impudency nor ignorance. Than cyteth the. 23. of the nynte book of the same
work, wherein is entreated, how falssy the Name of God is attrybuted to the
Gods of the Gentiles, The Papists wrest the Anciente Fathers sayings and
rehearses places out of them, that can never be found in them.
and yet it is communicate by the authority of the holy Scriptures, to holy
Angels and just men. And I am able to say, that there is nothing there can in
any wise serve to this matter.

Now Reader I beseech thee consider, what authority and faith is to be given
to the sayings of this divine, who not only wreasteth and throws the
Scriptures and sayings of the ancient Fathers, to his pernicius and ungodly
purpose (so that it might seem to the imprude^t Reader that looks no further,
that he has all for him) but also rehearses places that be not found, and to
utter his knowledge of the antiquity, adds Chapiters unto their works: so
liberally he deals with them. Now let us procead.

Here is introduced James, after his long silence, making an argument against
the mass. The words are.

Sen the Apostle Paul, in diverse places testifies, that Jesus Christ our
Savior suffered anes for us, and never is to suffer again, quhairby we are
assured, that our Savior was offered up anes in Sacrifice on the croce, for
man's redemption, and never to be offerred up again: and ze say he is daily
offerred up in the Sacrifice of the mass, how can their two stand.

This is the argument of James, gathered of the. 9. and 10. Chapiters of the
Epistle to the Hebrews. To this is answered of this new deuyne, in this manner.

It is true that Christ was offered up upon the croies, and is never to be
offered up again after that manner, as ane bludie Sacrifice, and it is true
that the Lords body is offered up after ane other manner in the Sacrifice of
the ma^se, conform to Christ's commandment, as ane vnbludie Sacrifice, The
nature of the treuth is to distroi falshead which is derect contrary thereto.
for why a verity makes not ane other verity falls.

The ^u^me of your answer is, that there be two. Sacrifices and oblations of
Christ's body and blood, upon the croc^ one, an other vnblody i^ the mass.
This your sayi^g, as it is without any testimony of the Scripture, or suffrage
of the antiquity, so is it most impudent, and most easy to be rejected and
refelled, whatsoever ye pretend of Gods commandment, wherein ye have none at
all.

True it is, as ye say, that a verity distroyeth, not an other, but I must say
for the part of James, and of the treuth that an established troth distroyeth,
and oppe^neth up all thing that is contre^ius, which is nothing but falshead
and vntreuth. The treuth of Godis word co^foundeth the blasphemus falshead of
the papists.


The Apostle writes plain, that our Savior offered up himself ones for the
perfect deliverance of man, and never is to those again^* Thou grants that he
suffered ones, and is no further subject to death, and yet thou will that he
shall be offered up again, yea, and is offered up in every corner. Is not these
two sayings plain contrarius? Shall not the manifest treuth uttered by the
holy spirit; distroy the plain vntr^^^h and manifest blasphemy, that
proceadeth of thy mouth.

But least it shall seem and appear to you that ye shall escape by your
stinking distinccions, which stands and depends wholly upon the diversity
of the oblation, that the one is bloody, and the other unbloody. I will ask of
thee, whom of has thou that distinction? Is it of the Spirit of God? Whom to
was it reueilled before the Scriptures was shute up? Papistis we may not
believe you, without ye show zour warrande of offering.
Or in what place of Scripture is it expressed? Where is the commandment? I am
assured ye can have no sufficient warrant to do any thing that the Lord Jesus
did not in his latter Supper.

Let all be red that is written by Matthew, Mark, Luck, and Paul, of the holy
Supper, and most diligently and manifestly conferred and considered, if our
Savior i^ his latter Supper, offered his body and blood, unto God the Father,
and commanded that we should do the same, he brake bread, gave thanks,
distributed it to his Disciples, saying: take ye, eat ye, this is my body,
which is broken for you. He did likewise with the Cup, saying, take, drink of
it all, this Cup is the new Testament in my blood, which shall be shed for you
and many, unto remission of sins, adiecting to both the parts, do this in
remembrance of me. What is here, I pray you, that may in any wise apperteane to
the oblation of the body and blood of our Savior, to be made in the mass?

For we know that the oblation of his body was made, and his blood shed the day
following. And I trust that no man will think or say, that he commanded us to
do that thing in remembrance of him, which he did the day immediately ensewing,
but that he willed them to do that, that he then practiced, to the perpetual
recordation and memory of him, without any further commandment. The Apostle
says playnlie, that without effusion of blood there was no oblatioun for Sin.


Thus then thou can pretend no commandment, whatsoever thou shall brage of it.
Secondly, we are plainly teached by the Author to the Hebrews, that the
oblation of the body and blood of Jesus Christ is of that nature, that ones
perfected upon the croice, it can in no ways be reiterate nor made again.

Christ in offerring up himself, died and rose again, and thus is no more
subject to mortality, and we know that there can be no oblation unto remission
of sins, but it that is by effusion of blood. So that now, whosoever goes
about to offer up him again, they do that is in them to crucify him of new.

Is not the argument of the Apostle, most evident and strenthy, shawing the
excellency of our Sacrifice of the new Testament above them of the old, in
that, that they not only were many and oftentimes repeated, yea, even the self
same, by long continuance of time, till they were altogether abolished, where
as we have but one, and that ones offered, never to be reiterated nor offered
again.

Judge with thy self, if that be not the introducting and establishing of a new
iudaisime, shaw me the defference, they had a certane Sacrifice, which in
consideration of the inhabilytie, was oftentimes reiterate, and in no ways had
been repeated, if it should have had sufficient force and strenth, The
difference betuixt the sacrifice of the old and new testament
what shall be of the Sacrifice of the croice? Sall it not be accused of
imperfection and inhabilitie, thus reiterate by you. Further we know, that
Christ can not be offered of none, but of him self, being the only Mediator
betuix God and man, never having resigned over this dignity to none.

Attour, what a monstrus and preposterus thing shall this be, that the
oblation, that is the thing that is offered, shall be more worthy, and of greater
value and estimation, then the offerer, more acceptable to God, nor he that
does offer it, which of a necessity must follow, if a shaueling shall offer
up Christ in his mass.

Moses does teach us, the oblation to be received of God, for his saike that
does offer it, for the oblation of Cain was rejected of God for Cain saike,
and the gift of Abell received not for the owen cause, The Papists bringing up
a Iudaisime, make the sacrifice of Christ improfyte.
but the saike of the offerer, like as is plain through all the Prophets, so
we have in this matter, the oblation of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, to
be most pleasant unto the Father, in consideration that it was offered up, by
his only and well-beloved Son. By these arguments it may appear evidently,
the vanity of thy pretended commandment, and captius distinctions, which in
your owen doctrine included, a very great contradiction. For ye do call this
your fond oblation an unbloody Sacrifice, if I had presently a notare at hand,
I should bestow an plack upon an instrument of this saying.

I ask of thee new divine, how can this be an unbloody Sacrifice, and yet thou
will affirm the wine, that is their drunk by the Priest, to be the very real
blood of our Savior Christ, that he received of the substance of the Virgin,
and that he shed upon the croice. The Sacrifice of the croice is called bloody,
because Christ's blood was shed thereon, in very deid, shall not this your
Sacrifice be the same argument be bloody, since ye drink and offer up the same
blood that upon the croice was shed. The Papistis affirm that they drink in
their masses, the blood of Christ and yet they call it an vnbloodye sacrifice.


Now either must thou renunce and recant the wicked error of transubstantiation,
or else thou shall, will you or will you not, grant it to be a bloody
Sacrifice, that thou so stiffly denies and haeth no otherway to declyne the
pithe of the argument. Now ones I pray the again oppin thine eyes and be not
still blind to considder how naroly thou are thrung in, and deliver thy self
if thou can. Considder last, if it be a thing consistyng in the power, and will
of man till alterre and change the ordinances of God, to change the nature of
Saccrifices, which be appointed i^ effusion of blood, for so shall fall all the
holy and inviolable ordinances of God, as witnesses the Apostle, effusion of
blood to be necessarly joined with remission of sins. Thus shall we conclud
with thee, that a verity distroyeth not an other, but in deid it oppeneth up
an vntreuth and lie, which, allace, does abound in thy mouth, what adiuration
soever thou shall cloike them with all.

These your sayings appears somewhat scabrus and obscure to James (as in deid
all vntreuth), masked, and cloiked with pretense of verity and simplenes, is
dark and hard to be understand the verity contrary ways is ever remaning
like to the self plane manifest and simple) and for this cause he is desyrus
that your sayi^ges be made more plain.

And hereupon ye take occasion to declaire the difference betuix the Sacrifice
of the Lords body on the croice, and the Sacrifice of the mass, quhilk in
sum part aggreis, and sum part defferis, first they aggre in so far as the
self same body in substance, and so forth. ad cloak with treuth is always is
scabrus and unclean.


The su^me of the whole is, that the Sacrifice of the massee has three things
common with the Sacrifice of the croice, whereof the two former be sufficiently
entreated, refelled and prouen, that nether is the same body in the mass, that
was offered up upon the croice, nor yet that the mass in any ways was
forewarned by the Prophets, and so will I omit those two parts, least I should
seem to do again, as lies in the Proverb, that, that is already done, and
will join in with the third, which is this.

Thridly, (say ye) they aggre that like as the Sacrifice of the croice was
prefigurat be money diverse signs and figures, so was the Sacrifice of the mass
prefigurat be the preisthead and oblation of Melchisedec.

In this I glaidly go with you, that the Sacrifice of the croice was prefigurat
in the Law, yea, and before the written Law, in the Sacrifices offered by the
Fathers, which did cheiflie serve to the exercise of their faith, teaching and
leading them, as it were by the hand, to the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, to be
offered upon the croice, which was most lively prefigured by the Immolation of
Isaac.

But that there be any fygur or adumbration of thy fond Sacrifice of the mass,
or forewarning, to the allowance of it, that I utterly refuse and constantly
deny. The place cyted by you, out of the.14. of Geneses, of Melchisedec
serves you nothing, Melchisedec not as the priest of God offered bread and
wine but as king of peace brought forth bread and wine to re^resh (...) and his
company.
how much soever ye shall brag of it, for it is plain that he offered no
bread, nor wine to God, but brought forth bread and wine, to the refection of
Abraham and his army, now weried and hongrie, by their great journey and
travel, and that not as priest of the most heigh God, but as King of Salem,
thus shall we have the most proper division and proportion of every part,
aggreing most semely with others, first that he as King, brought forth bread
and wine (for that is the meaning and signification of the Hebrwe word, and the
Greik. (...) and so used him self liberally toward Abraham and his Army.

Secondly, as priest, according to the deutie and office of the priest he
blissed him. True it is, that in the common Latin translation there is some
difference from the Hebrew in that he says ( Erat enim: for he was) giving as
it were a cause of the fact of Melchisedec before rehearsed, of the refreshing
of Abraham and his folks. And this no dout has given the occasion to the
unlearned of stumbling, but the Hebrew is plain, Et erat: and he was priest of
the most heigh God, and so that clause Et erat Sacerdos altiss. dei.
apperteaneth not to the fact preceading, but to the office of the priest,
recyted immediately after, of the blissing of Abraham, in the name of the Lord
of heaven. Thus Melchisedec being King and priest, no dout, was the lively type
and figure of the preisthead of our Savior, joined with his kingdom, as David
does forewarne and teach us in the 110. Psalm, Psalm. 110
and the Apostle in the.7. Chap. to the Hebrews, where he at lenth and of
purpose declares this matter. Wherefore I will not travel any more in the
explication of that place, but will send the Reader to the Spirit of God,
declaring it at lenth by the mouth of the foresaid Apostle.

I know that Tertuliane, and some of the Ancients will seem somewhat subtle, in
the explication of this Text, insisting upon the bread and the wine, and the
application thereof, to this that we do practice in the Lords Table. But I
pray you, what a sleuth should this be, in the holy Apostle of Jesus Christ,
in the explication of this matter, to pas this point, if it should have in any
wise belonged to the purpose, and specially seeing in speaking of the preisthead
(and that at large and of purpose he touched it not) what a gros oblivion
should it be, to pas the chief and pri^cipal Sacrifice,wherein the virtue of
the preisthead is included to your erronius judgment. By the benediction and
the receiving of the teindes only, clean leaving out your foolish new
invented offering, he proves his honor and dignity.

But this offering of bread and wine, wherein (as ye say) was prefigured the
Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, which is the very life of the
world, had been a matter more pertinent to the Apostles purpose and intent, then
any that he there alleged, if it were true (as is most falls) that ye allege.

Here we may clearly espy, that the Ancients can not be altogether excused nor
defended in this point. But in the words of Moses, Papists be ware of your
co^paring lest ye ourethraue your tra^substanc^ation
lies the most full perfect and plain refutation of this new invention,
where we read not that any thing there was offered to God, but rather given to
Abraham, so that not only he was blissed of him, but refreshed. For I trust
thou will not say that he Sacrificed to Abraham, and if this shall serve to
your mass, see we not all, that the figure of Melchisedec can not auale, unless
ye grant bread and wine to be offered there, and so shall your
transubstantiation vanishe and utterly fall, because therein ye susteane no
substance to remain, but the only accidents. Attour, what temeritie and
foolish boldness shall this be, to give the body of Christ to be offered up of
a shaueling, seeing that the only successor to Melchiseder, is our Savior
Christ, without any companion, collateral, successor, or suffragane.

Now pas thy way and search the argument else where, for thy mass i^ no ways
has any affinity with the Sacrifice of the croice, in the points rehearsed.
Yea, and I will affirm it boldly, that it can have no more similytude or
communication with it, nor light with darkness, godliness with impiety, God with
Beliel, nor the holy ordinances and institutions of God, with the fond, wicked,
peruerst and adulterat inventions of men.

Now ye descend to declaire unto us the defferences and disagrement of the one,
with the other, and first That they deffer, that the Lords body was offered
up upon the croice in the awin form, visible and sensible, and the Lords body
in the Sacrifice of the mass, is offered up under the forms of bread and
wine, invisibly and insensable, so they deffer in manner and form of offering
up, and not in substance.

True it is, that the Lords body was offered up in the owen form, and no
ways else could have been, nor yet can be, for this ca^ not be separated from
manifest impiety, contempt and mockage of God, to stufe up the hyde of a Bull,
What comfort the supper of our lord brings to the faithful.
and the skin of a Lamb with st^^, or otherwise, and so to offer it up in
Sacrifice, like as ye do brag of bread and wine, and calling them the Lords
body and blood, or at the least under the forms of them, the body and the
blood of our Savior to lurk, and so to be expossed to the doggishe appetite
and cruel teath, of a filthy harlote, what a masked Sacrifice is this?

Augustyne speaks more reverently giving us a general reule to discern
proper speeches and things that be spoken properly and understand, even as
they be written from improper and Metaphorical, that whenever we be
commanded to do that which includes no absurdity nor repugneth not to all
humanity and nature, then have we to take this commandment, as properly
spoken, and to be obeyed as it speaks. But where the commandment is given
against all humaintie nature and reason, as to eat the flesh of man, and to
drink his blood, The Papistis will not learn this lesson
then let us think well that the speaking is improper and Metaphorical. What
will thou answer to this saying of this godly learned man? Thou sees plainly
this godly Father, to grant manifestly, a figure in these words, this is my
body, and that they oght to be understand figuratiuelie and Metaphorically,
iudgeing it a great impiety, til a man to think that he shall eat the body and
flesh of man, and drink his blood in any ways, really and substantially,
Christ feleth not the barbarus cruelty of the papists.
as ye do fondly imagine. But to be mirry with you, ye do well, that howsoever
ye do use this haynus cruel, and more nor barbarus boucherie, upon the Son of
God, yet that he seals not your horrible intreatment, that he being a man
against the nature of man is made insensible and invisible some relief and
confort has he.

God give you his holy Spirit, that ye may ones consider the treuth, and
submit your self unto it in all humility. The last defference, is in the
consideration of the cause, wherefore the Lords body is offerred up in the
Sacrifice of the mass. The Lords body was offered upon the croice, to obtene
everlasting life, satisfaction for sin, redem^tion, and so forth. The
Sacrifice of the mass was institute by our Savior, in the last Supper, not as
a new satisfaction or redemption, but it is a new Sacrifice, in co^memoration
and rememberance of Christ's death and passion, be the use of the quhilk, we
are made pertakers of the fruct of his death and passion. This far.

In deid in the practice of the Lords Table, we be teached to celebrate the
Lords death till his coming, that is to say, to remember and meditat with our
selves, yea, and confess, preach and annunce, in presence of the whole world,
the benefits procured and obtained unto us, by the death and resurrection of
our Savior, and no dout, the faithful is joined with Christ, and made
participant of his justice, holiness, innocence, and so forth. Yea, and as
Tertuliane speaks, the bread and the cup are very pledges of our
spiritual life, resurrection and Salvation.

But we acknowledge no such thing to be received of thy wicked, impius, and
ungodly mass, which thou here decketh up with the ornaments of the Lords
holy table, not unlike to Esops Crawe. But since we are atteined hitherto, I
will not werie to shaw the defferences betuix the two, Christ accomplished the
office of his priesthead when he offered up his body in sacrifice on the cross
which shall not be altogether without fruct, nor yet from the purpose, and
shall conclude them shortly in four heads.

1. First we know Jesus Christ appointed and vncted of his Father, the
Eternal priest, according to the ordour of Melchisedec, then to have executed,
absolved and perfyted the office of his preisthead, when as at the will of his
Father, he offered him self up in a Sacrifice of sweit Savor upon the croice,
the only and Eternal Sacrifice, which no dout, was prefigurat long before in
Melchisedec, who being ones in the Scriptures brought in, is declared to be the
priest of the living God, without any further mention of him.

The Mass makes successors to Christ which is a great blas^^eme
In this blasphemus Sacrifice of your mass, ye spoil and rub the Son of
God, the only and Eternal priest, of this prerogative of preisthead, joining
to him Collateralles, Companions, successors, and suffraganes, to use his
charge, and execute his office, even as the same infirmity were in him, that
was in the preistes of the Law, who by their mortality, was driven to take
men till occupy their roumes, supply there absence, and so releif their
charges.

The Apostle affirms no such imperfection to be in our Savior, Hebr. 7.
the Eternal priest ever living, to execute his office of mediation and
intercession: whose preisthead is of that nature, that it can not be transfered
into any other. And if it be true that we be teached by the same Author, that
no man takes any honor upon him, but he that is called of God, Hebr. 4.
as Aron: Shaw the place and commandment of appoynting of these new
Sacrificers. And as I am most certane, that thou shall find none in the
Scriptures, so am I assured that thou can have no suffrage, nor testimony of
antiquity thereof. For Chrysostomus is plain, and Augustine plainly shows
it to be the voice of the Antichrist, Libro. 2. co^tra Pa^ men. Cap. 8.
if any man shall call a Bishop a mediator betuix God and man: so straightly
does he ascribe and vendicat the whole honor of preisthead unto Christ, that
not one ^ote he will thole to be taken or communicate with (...) other.

2. The Second difference is, that it wholly defaceth and distroyeth the croice
and passion of Christ. There was never so great multitude of sacrifices in
this world as the antichrist haeth iuented.
For that is most certane, that as soon as ever thou erecteth an Alter, that
the croice of Christ is utterly extinguished. For ye will not deny, but our
Savior Christ offered up himself, to purches and obte^ne perpetual
sanctificaion and forgiveness to his Elect and faithful, the vertew whereof is
Eternal and remaneth: other ways we could judge no other thing of this
Sacrifice of Christ, then of them under the Law, the which are tried by that,
to be of small value, that they were often reiterat. Wherefore we must conclude,
either that the croice of Christ lacks the force of Eternal p^rgation, or
else that it is a sufficient Sacrifice, whereby he has fully satisfied for all,
and that perpetually. Now then if place shall be to this thy Sacrifice, which
isso practiced, that a hundredth thousand of them are offered up in a day: What
can we think but that the passion of our Savior, wherein he offered up him
self to his Father, shall be utterly rased, defaced, buried, and quenshed? I
s^air to rehears the testimonies of the Scripture, because we will have
immediately after occasion to speak of them.

3. The third property and vertew of the mass is, The 3. property of the
mass.
that ^t burieth and obliterateth the death of our Savior, to the which is
attrybuted by the Spirit of God, the whole Salvation and Redemption of man.
For as commonly ^monges men, the Testaments and latter wills of men are of no
effect nor strenth, to the man that makes it, be deprived of life, so we know
our Savior to have confirmed his Testament, wherein we be written aires of the
Eternal kingdom, by his death. Weknow lykewayes, The mass is a new manner of
tastament.
what a Sacrilege it is, to alterre, change, vary and innouate any jot of a
Testament. Shall this then be suffered in the Tastament of our Savior, which
not only is innouated and changed, but altogether, cancelled, defaced and
distroyed by the mass, which is as it were a new manner of Testament, diverse
and contrarius to the other true and laufull Testament of Christ, writt^n by
the Evangelists, yea, and if I should affirm every mass to be as a certane
and new Testament, seeing they promise every one a new remission of sins, a
new conques and acquisition of grace, so that Christ must come again, and by
his death or by innumerable Thousand death is confirm these new Testamentes,
so that howsoever many masses they be, so often shall he die. For the mass
directly tender^ to that, that Christ shall die again, for the Testament
(...) have no authority, without the death of the Testator. The mass is a new
kind of Testament, promising large remission of sins, and incres of grace,
by the vertew of the work it self, Ex opere operato. as they say, then mu^^
Christ die, according to the multitude of masses, for there can be no
rem^ssion of sins, without effusion of blood, as we have heretofore
rehearsed, in every mass there is bragged remission of sins, there then
must be a Sacrifice ^^aine and blood shed. Christ then must be cruelly
murdered in every corner, at the appetite of a shaueling for tuelf pens, yea,
and has suffered oftentimes, yea, many million of times, since the Papists
begone to erect the monstrous mass.

4. The last is, that the whole fruct of the death of Christ is wholly taken
from us by the mass. For who I pray you, may think him self redeamed by the
death of Christ, seeing a new redemption is offered and proposed in the mass*
Who shall think his sins forgiven him in the blood of our Savior, a new
remission being offered in the hearing of a mass? Thou will say pereuentur,
that we have no remission of sins in the mass, but in consideration of the
passion of our Savior.

I answer thee again, that is as much to say, we be redeamed in this
consideration by the blood and passion of Christ, that now we shall redeame
our selves again by the mass. For this is your doctrine plainly, that ye
offer up Christ to the Father in the mass, that by the vertew and merit of
that work, ye may obteane remission of your sins. What have we further then
to do with the passion of Jesus Christ, seeing every man for tuelf pens may
hau^ remission of sins, by the hearing of a mumled mass, by a filthy
whoremonger, ^o the passion of Christ does serve only to t^a^h (...) shall
(...).

Our Savior wills his Discipl^^ (...) to be affixed to that action, but
(...) them in the ^^crifice, What Christ taught his disciples.
w^ereby ^erpetuall sanctification and re^^ssion (...) and purchased, he
teached them the holy S^pper, (...) and memorial of his (...) ^ame (...) never
to be after dou^ in his (...) as ^^riste is the only oblation to (...) he*
ones offered, that (...) mi^ht be all who^e (...) and a^^^ted to the ^^oice and
his passion.

These were the defferences then should have collec^ed, if thou should consider
the matter aright, whereby we may ^alylie espy that the holy table, by the
erection of the mass, (...) holy suppla^ed, trod under foot* overthrown,
an^ (...). For the Supper we do all acknowledge and receive, as a gift of God,
with all reverence, humilytie, and ^^ankes: the Sacrifice of the mass is a
price and a kind of sa^isfaction given to God, received of him, in recompense
of sins. What difference is betuix giving and receiving, the same difference
is betuix the holy table and the mass. Now consider what an ingratitude we
shall (...) this, tha^ where we receau^ all at the hands of God, and so are
wholly affricted to (...) to make hi^ ^e^ter to us.

The Sacrament assures us, that not only we be ones defr^e^^e^ from all
adversary powers, by the passion of Christ Jesus, The Sacrament assures us
of all manner of goodness in Christ
but that we have no life, but of (...) ^^ath, no strenth but in his
infirmity, no incorruption and glory, but in his mortality, reboke, shame,
and ignominy. ^his your Sacrifice sings an other song, that Christ is
daily to be Sacrificed, that we thereby may put God in our danger of
obligation, to grant and give us, what we shall call for, in so far as there
be no kind of man, beas^, herb^, sto^e infirmity* (...) disea^, put it
serves ^or a Salve for a (...) to all.

The holy Table is practiced in the whole ^ssembl^ of the faithful,
distribution is made to all; according to the commandment, to testify and
teac^, how we be all joined in Jesus Christ, in whom we live. This communion
is broken and dissolved by your masses, for we see plainly, that as the priest
takes upon him to Sacrifice for the people, so does they nothing else but gase
upon him, and as it were excommunicat, as we shall after here, when we shall
come to the proper count.

Now let us procead, where we will have occasion to declare th^se things
shortly touched at great large, for James makes the objection in this manner.

It app^^ires that the Sacrifice of the mass, dois posture and diminishe the
glory of the Sacri^ice of the croice* for (...) the Sacrifice of the croice
was perfyte in the self, o^ that should (...) a new Sacrifice, or any ma
Sacrifices.

If here it were repeated and added to this argument of James, that we have
spoken in the Second difference, betuix the mass and the Sacrifice of the
croice, it than^e not be altogether unfruitful.

Well the same of your answer to the argument, (...) that the mass obstureth
nor deminisheth not the glory and virtew of the croice, but rather aduanceth
it, being a commemoration of it, whereby the fructes of Christ's death, are
applied. The papists call their mass, a co^memoration and an applycation of
Christ's death and passion.


The Sacrifice of the croice (God be prayse^ say ye) is the Sacrifice of
Redemption, and of our full deliverance, perfect in it self. Nottheles it is
necessare, that the fructes of the same be daily (...) wit and applied, as by
Baptism the Supper of the Lord, the Sacrifice of the mass, and diverse other
maner^, as the Scripture do^s plainly teach.

It is certane that we be ^eached by the Scriptures, and assured of (...) the
blo^d of Jesus Christ, figured and represented by watter in Baptism, of our
(...) (...) with Jesus Christ, as the Apostle^^oeth teach us find i^ p^a^es.
Of the Lords (...) the Spirit of God, Gal. 6. Ephe. 5.
that all that (...) read and (...) of that cup, tha^ they are one, with
Jesus Christ, and he with them, that the (...) in themselves, but in Christ,
being made participant of all his justice; ryghte^usnes (...) and finally of
all benefytes pr^cured by the (...) course of his obedience, and specially for
that, (...) him self to the death, and that of the (...).

We know in the predication of his word, all his (...) to be offered and
declared, and to be (...) by us, (...) (...). These ways we be plainly
teaches in the (...) but of thy Idol mass there i^ never a word to the
Scriptures, nor yet of thy applying of the vertew of the ^^ath of Christ. But
(...) of this glorius Papist, what he does understand by this applying. I
trust thou will not pas from the doctrine of the ^omishe Church, since thou
cleanes to all the vain (...) (...), and beggetly ceremonies thereof ^o
^iftly. The romish doctrine co^cerni^g their Idol mass most abominable.


There ^^c^rine is plain, that the vertew and merit of the mass is applied
by this Sacrifice, three ways in a most special manner to him self, for his
most charitable motion, by the which he is ravished up to God, and so by the
saying of the mass, he merits the Eternal life, which is called by the
Scoole men, the essential reward.

This fruct he can apply to none other, says Gabriel* for albeit a man
(says he) may merit to an other, the first grace, yea, and augmentation of
grace, yet can he nor merit the essential reward of the Eternal life, which
respondeth and follows upon every man's owen work.

2. The Second manner of their application is most general, conueaning to all
and the whole Church, for it is nor the deutie of the Priest (say they) till
exclude any (...) from the virtew and merit of it, that is a member of the
Church.

3. The last manner is special, and so it serves to him or them, that the
Sacrificer applies it to, conceaueth certane orations and prayers, for
obteining remission of sins, grace, spiritual commodities, and temporal
benefits to the dead and the (...).

This is then the application thou means of heart, for this is the doctrine of
thy mother, the Roman Church, as I am able to prove, by the most esteamed
writers among you, which say in plain terms: that the priest may pairte
and distribute these graces ^^nalie, or otherwise at his appetite, to whom it
shall like him (...) yea, and that his wickedness shall be no hinderance thereto,
nether yet excommunication, not yet suspension. For these things safeth not
away the virtew of the Sacrifice, which it has, because of the worthynes of
the work it self.

Many other things I pretermit of set purpose, wearying to rehears them, in
consideration of the great (...), shame, and blasphemy, that lies in them, a^
the Reader shall now shortly consider with me.

First* seeing we darre not attempt, nor oght to take upon hand nothing, but
that we be assured of the allowance o^ God. I would inquire of them, whereas
this office appointed to them, to offer up Christ to God the Father, to apply
the merit of his death, together with all other graces* and benefits, at
their pleasure and appetite (which is the hiest matter and of greatest
importance in all the polycie and government of the Church) where is this
commandemen^ give by Jesus Christ, either yet practiced by his disciples.

Secondly, how shall we take this to be a propitiatory Sacrifice, meriting and
procuring such hie and excellent gifts and graces, which only is devised by
the fantasy of man, and whereof there is never a word in the Scriptures of
God, conform to the which, we acknowledge an Sacrifice of the croice, whereby
we have grace, remission of our sins, restitution to Gods favor, Redemption
and Salvation. Consider in what estimation we have our God, and what room and
prerogative we ascribe to man, if he shall usurp and take upon him to make
such Sacrifices at his owen appetite, which shall obteane and merit all
things to him, shall subdew the Eternal God to the pleasure of a filthy
whoremonger, taking upon him the dispensation of the benefits of God. Is not
this to make man redemer of him self? To spoil God of his owen honor and
dignity? To subject God to the will and pleasure of man? And finally, not
only to absence and demin^she, but utterly to deface and quench the whole
glory and virtew of the death of our Savior.

We know and teach, that the minister preaches the word, The doctrine of the
true and faithful ministers.
annunceth the Sermon of peace, and confort, ministereth and dispenses the
Sacraments: but the giving of the inward grace, the increas and augmentation
of it, we reserve all whole to the Spirit of God, who applies and
distrybuteth to every man, at his good pleasure, the merit of the Sacrifice
of the croice, together with all other gifts.

If it should be demanded of these gay teachers, if any massemonger priest did
ever pearish or was condemned. Filthy and detestable blasphimers ca^ never
confess the kingdom of God.
I trust they should answer quickly, no, for how can it come to pas, that a
priest, who by the m^bling of a mass, may conques and obteane the reward of
the Eternal life, that this man shall pearish? who may in the space of a quarter
of an hour, apply Salvation to him self: this man I say, can not but straight
go to heaven, yea, long before his ^ine be cold, as is said vulgarly.

Secondly, since it is in the will of the priest, to apply the virtew of this
Sacrifice, to whom shall like him, specially for the redemption of Souls,
what is the cause of Trentales of masses, and fundations made for the soul of
any certane man, seeing he may be redeamed and delivered by me. I know therebe
some stations i^ Rome, which gives that power and privilege to any man, What
power some stations in Rome, have by the pope.
by the saying of the Lords prayer, and the believe, to deliver any a soul out
of Purgatory, why is there now any mass said for this soul: I know that the
Pope sells the same privilege, as we have seen in our days, and I am able
to produce the exemple, if the time should suffer, or were otherwise neidful.
Besides, what month them to sing many masses yea, and continue them daily and
yearly, for the deliverance of the soul of the rich man, and but one for the
nedie and indigent?

We have seen (Helas) that if a rich and potent man, should have been called
upon, the Belles doubted, all the Altares and Church full of dule, masses sung
in every corner, continued so long as money was paid: scarssy one said for
the poor, what means this? it being in the plea^ure of the priest, to
deliver and redeame as lyketh him, Thefalshead of papists is here discribed.
either must we say that the priest has been inuius and anaritius, or the
mass is not of equale value to the rich, and to the indigent, but the more
money is paid for them they are of les value: this must of necessity follow.

Last of all, I would glaidlly be instructed of this, how it has proceaded,
that the Apostles never knew, nor teached the Churches, of this virtew of the
mass. It may appear to be a wonderful matter, that the Church of God should
have been defrauded of so great a treasure in those days, we reid nothing in
the Scriptures of this ryte of Sacrificing, for the dead and the quick. Of
breaking of bread in the Lords Table, and communion of the body and blood of
our Savior, many notable testimonies we have, but of this thy Sacrifice and
applycation of the mass, at the appetite of any man, or otherwise there is
never a syllabe.

I pas by sindrie matters, that might be adduced, and should serve properly to
this purpose, as why, at the beginning, when this opinion entered in of thy
Sacrifice of the mass, a long time there was but one in every Church yea,
among a great multitude of Monks and Freares, there was but a priest, and an
Alter, a mass, and that but upon Solemn days, as we see yet in these days,
but an Alter in the Popes Chapel, The popes chapel is yet a witness aganiste
the multitude of masses.
a mass, and that but at certane times in the year. By these things I trust
it may be easylie espied, of what mind this Author asceibeth the applycation
of the fructes of the Lords death, to the mass, even to foster and manteane
all wickedness and impiety, to the plain mockage, derision, and contempt of
God, peruersion and supplantation of his holy ordinances, defacing and burying
of the Sacrifice of the croice, and finally to thruste the Son of God, out of
his owen room, to spoil him of his prerogative of Eternal preisthead and
intruding a priest. The Apostle pronounces, that Christ the Son of God, by
his only oblatio^, ones offered, purchased Eternal sanctification, to all the
Elect of God. And in that disputation, not only abbrogateth and wypeth away
the Sacrifices of the Law, but also fully refuteth your vain dream of this
sacrifice of the mass. Ye affirm your mass to be a Sacrifice, by virtew
whereof, ye have remission of sins, and that als well to the dead, None can
offer Christ, but himself, wc is of the Father, thereunto appointed.
as to the quick. The Apostle affirms plainly, that there is no place now to
any Sacrifice, since the saying of Jeremy is accomplished and fulfilled: when
ye are thus urged, ye true to your shift, and cries that it is no new
Sacrifice, nor any thing different from the Sacrifice of Christ, but the self
same. The Apostle occurreth to this, and denies that it oght any ways to be
repeated or reiterat, and is not contented to call it a Sacrifice, but adioneth
that it was ones made, yea, and wholly vendicates the glory and prerogative of
the Eternal preisthead, unto the only anointed of God, so that it can co^uene
to none to offer him up, but to him self. Your craft to schift you of this, is
to say, that the words of the Apostle, are to be understand of a bloody manner:
your Sacrifice (say ye) is unbloody, but the Apostle affirms without any
exception, that there can be no Sacrifice, by which remission of sins is
obtained, without effusion of blood. The Apostle says generally, that there is
no sacrifice for sin, without bloodshed.


Last of all ye here affirm, that it is a certane applycatio^ of the fever, of
that a Sacrifice offered by our Savior. To this the Apostle answers for this
cause, and to this effect, the ceremonies and Sacrifices of the Law, have been
abbrogated and taken away, by the death of Christ, because in them there was
memory and mention of sins, which they were no ways able to take away.
Whereby ye are constrained and compelled, in dispite of your obstinat and
endured heart, to grant that no such kind of applycation can have place, as ye
have foolishely devised. Change and turn thee in als many forms and figures,
as the Poyet speaks of Prothe^s, thou shall be holden so fast and strait, by
the disputation of the Author, that thou shall in no ways escape.

He teaches us plainly, that none is able to offer him, but him self, what a
Sacrilege then is it, that every priest shall take this upon him in the
mass? Secondly, he pronounces this Sacrifice to be one, and ones perfited,
that it can not be repeated, in the mass howsoever ye affirm it to be the
same, yet is it offered up oftentimes, yea, many, mission of times, in an hour,
The papisticall Preistes committ horrible sacrilege daily in their masses.
nothing appearing but a priest every where. The Apostle pronounces give
rally that there is no Sacrifice, without shedding of blood, ye affirm youres
to be unbloody, as we have said heretofore The Apostle, when as we shall search
remission of our sennes, commands us to stay our selves on the passion and
death of our Savior, his Sacrifice, and shows the difference that is betuix
us and the Fathers, to be that they were astricted and bund to a continual
ryte, and ordain of offering up of Sacrifices, which we are exempted and
delivered o^, by the death of our Savior.

Ye affirm plain against this, that the Sacrifice of the croice of Christ,
can in no ways serve us, vules the virtew of it, be applied unto us, by this
your Sacrifice.

(...) judge I beseech thee godly Lector, of this do not repugne plainly to the
words of the Apostle, and does introduce a new iudaisme, by plu^alytie of
Sacrifices, The papists bring in a new iudaisme, by pluralytie of sacrifices
and heaping up of ceremonies. Thou goes about to declaire thy wicked opinion
by an exemple, drowen out of the medicine, where it repugneth nothing, that a
thing be propyned by sindrie instruments. This saying is true, but if the
medicin shall (...) proper instruments, to entreat and handle his patient
committed to his cure and charge, and yet shall take a poisoned Goblet, filthy
and stinking, always trimu^e decked, and very semely without, and in it
propine to his patient rank poysone, making hi^, who has wholly submitted him
self to his faith, to believe, that he shall receive the most pectoral and
confortable potion, what shall we think of this medicin? what is thy judgment
of him* Is he not worthy of the death? This is more proper and pertinent to thy
purpose.

Hebr. 10
Chrysostom uses the similytude of the medicine, but more properly then ye do:
as the medicine (says he) and it be strenthy and of virtew, ones being used
and applied, shall expel the sickness, and is no more to be used, otherwise
it shall declaire the owen imperfection, A very proper similitude of the
sacrifices, or offeri^g up of Christ.
if it shall neid to be after used: so says he, is the oblation of our
Savior, which in respect of the perpetual virtew and power of purgation and
sanctification, ones offered, is not to be repeated. In that they were
commanded to offer Sacrifices, as is contained, rebuke and reprehension of
sins, so in the multitude and repetition of them, is tried the infirmity of
the things that were offered. Take head now what thou does vrgeing this
Sacrifice so earnestly and defacing the vertew of Christ's Sacrifice, which
her^ by ^an not be but impotent, since thou will have it so often reiterat.
Thou neadeth not to oppen up our infirmities and subjection to sin and
iniquity, to prove the necessity of this thy blasphemus Sacrifice, as we had
no other means to be assured of our Redemption, but by it, we have God be
praised, Baptism and the Lords Supper, which we acknowledge to be the holy
institutions of Jesus Christ, whereby we are fully and perfectly assured (...)
our deliverance by Christ, and of our conjunction with him. Now let us
prosecute the rest.

Follows an other objection made by James.

Always (says he) all ze quha uses the mass dois not (this (not) is not in
the Text, that is come to my hands, but because the sentence requires it, I
have added it) as Christ did in the latter Supper, Communicate to the
multitude, and ze tak all to zour self.

How soever this glorius divine shows a bold and a thrown countinance, it
appears that he is moved with this argument, and in deid not without cause,
for all the Papists in the earth, can not excuse this great Churlishe
Sacrilege. Let us consider his answer. It is a soul thing for him that
reproves a faut, himself to do the same that he reproves in others


Be that same argument (says he) I will cut thy throat with thy awin sword
(the cause of this boiste he exponeth) for why (says he) Christ Communicated
after Supper, and ze of the new learning dois communicate other time of day.

I thought ye should have said, and we papists does play our masses at an
other time of day. For who should have believed, this man, who takes upon him
the defense of the Papistrie, should damn in us, that he allows in his owen
faction. His Second argument is.

Christ communicate to his tuelf Disciples allanerly, A wicked and damnable
cauilltio^ of the papists
and ze communicate to all men and women indefferently, swa ze do not as Christ
did. For why the Scripture makes na mention, that their was any women their.

Perceive the captius ingine, malicius and stubburne mind, preasing ever to
that, that he may damn in us all the most laudable and godly customs, that
has been since the beginning, yea, and practiced by them selves, albeit in a
wicked manner. He proceadeth.

Trewly brother and ze besa scrupulus Scripturares, that ze will do nothing but
(but) is not in my Text) as Christ did, toward the use of the Sacraments,
ze will subvert our hail Faith, and commend our awin doings (so I ride it)
(our owen doings or commonly I can not tell which should be red, or if there
be any other thing yet) For quhair find ze that Christ ever appointed ane man
to be Baptized. I darre bauldly say this ordinance was never of the Euangell,
nor zit of the Kirk of God, nor of any other have and just authority, ather
God or man.

My master here finds him so bound with the argument, that he can not tell
what way to escape. And in very deid it is no wonder: for in this they have
abused them selves so wickedly, against the manifest ordinance of God, the
practice of the Apostles, the co^s^tetude of all antiquity, and authority of
the godly Fathers, The reason why Christ instituted the Sacrament of the
communion of his body and blood, at his last Supper and yet astricted us not
unto that time
that they can pretend nothing. Yet nevertheless that he might not seem
altogether dume, and so to zeild to the treuth, thus blasphemusly he brusteth
forth and cauillateth the alteration of time, as our Savior thereby had given
an expres commandment, and so had astricted the practice of the holy action to
that time, in the which he did use it, moved by good causes and considerations.
For the Supper we know most assuredly that the intention of our Savior was
not, that it should be practiced and celebrated by night, but we know the
cause why he tarried and aboide the coming of the night, which was, that he was
to eat the Pasouer with his Disciples, the which Lamb of the Pasouer, was
under the Law of Moses, even as the holy Table is to us now, for therein the
Iowes had a certain visible sign, how that God had preserved them
miraculusly, when as his fury was disployed upon the Realm of Egypt. As
likewise there was a greater and more excellent Redemption proponed in this
vmber, ceremony and shadow to them, to pause most diligently and meditate
upon.

1. Cor. 5.
The Apostle Paul therefore declares our Savior Jesus Christ, to have been
this pasouer this Pashe lamb. he then with his Disciples received this
Sacrament, that was appointed for the Fathers under the Law, and so being
willing to abolishe this sign, he instituteth the holy Supper, now it was not
lefull to eat the Pasouer, before the going down of the Son. This is the
cause then, why our Savior did institute and practice this holy communion at
that time, so that this is not to make a certane reule, or to give a certane
instruction, so continually to do. Now then we have to aduert, and discerue
diligently, and to follow this as an infallible reule, that in the actions of
our Savior, we must luke, what it is that he wills us to take and follow,
as a certane and sure reule, to give, as it were, from hand to hand, what we
oght to follow, by Christ's commandment.
but in other things that are not to be drawn exactly to imitation nor
consequence, we have nothing there to move, as when our Savior says, having
received the bread, take ye, eat ye, this oght to be observed strictly. The
cause is, for it was not for a time that our Savior gave the bread, but he
wills that the bread, yea, even this day, and to the end of the world (the
bread I say) should be distributed in his Name, and even as he were in the
midst of us. And suchlyke of the Cup.

He wills that we eat the bread, to be thereby admonished and instructed,
that our nourishment is of his body, and when we shall drink the wine, that we
receive it as a figure, that his blood is our Spiritual drink, and it whereby
our souls and consciences are refreshed, to that heavenly immortality, that
is to be reueiled upon the Sons of God. To determine thus exactly upon the
time of the celebration of the Lords Supper, that we shall insist with all
rigor, having no necessity, as it were mere rashness, so we grant that the
Church may appoint some other time, since there is no commandemnt thereof.

The cause why the communion is distrybuted in the morning, it is easy to be
gathered of Cypriane. Cypryanes mind, that the Lords Supper should be
celebrated in the morning.
First that the morning is more commodius to the celebration of the holy
assemblies. For we observe many things to fall in the rest of the day, whereby
men are withdrowen from godly acts and interpryses.

Secondly, we are most sober then, and have our minds most able and ready to
conceive heigh and weighty matters. He adds thridly, that the morning time is
a certane monument of the Resurrection of our Savior, which is not to be
dispysed in this holy mystery. True it is, that the Ancients in the time of
abstine^ce and fasting, because they tuke no meat before night, they defered
the communion to that time, spending and bestowing the whole day in fasting,
praying, preaching, Psalms singing, and other godly exercise. At night was the
celebration of the Supper, when they offered them selves to the holy Table:
syne passed home to the refection of their bodies. But this consuetude was
abbrogated by the sext council of Co^stantinopole holden in Trullum. The
Decries we have in the Greik tongue, where plainly mention is made, that this
consuetude was observed in the Churches of Africa, yea, Augustine shaweth,
that in his time in many places upon the Thurisday before the Pashe tide, after
Supper, the Table was proponed unto the faithful, Christ bound us to no time
for the celebrating of the lords table
that there might appear no defference from the action of our Savior. But in
this we have not to be very cairfull, so we may have the Sacraments in their
owen simplenes and integrity: Since of such circumstances, there is nothing
commanded, and they touch not the substance of the matter. But in few words
plainly to answer our captius Momus, in appoi^ting a several time, to the use
of the Lords Table, other then at after Supper, in so doing I say, we do
rightly abiding in that liberty which our master and lawmaker has granted
unto us, In these words: do this as often as ye do it in remembrance of me: in
saying as often, our master makes all time fre unto us.

Now where it is here objected, that Christ did communicate only to his tuelf
Apostles, and that we receive all men and women indifferently. It is not
clearly declared by the Evangelists, if there was no mo then present with our
Savior. It is most probable that there was mo, for it is not to be supposed,
Christ gave a commandment to divide and distribut thebread and also drink
that the godly and religius ladies that continually did follow him, yea, and
in the most troublus and dangerus times did not leif him, that they were not
present then, when he gave and left to his Church the most quick and
confortable testimony of his conjunction with them. But all is a matter, for
albeit that it were so, that the only tuelf were admitted to the Table, yet we
know and reads a plain commandment given to them, so to do as he had done:
that is to divide and distribute the bread. Attoure we be well instructed by
the Spirit of God, speaking by Paul to the Corinthianes, that he received of
the Lord that, ^. Cor. 11.
which he gave unto them, he subiuneth that they should communicate, and without
any defference, all to be admitted, one tarying for another We have the
practice of the Apostles, the suffrage of all antiquity, yea, and ye your
selves, how durst ye take upon you to give the Symbol of the Lords body, if
ye pretend no commandment nor exemple of the Lord. But this is the continual
practice of Satan, to damn in all others, that which they do them selves. And
in this that we urge thus earnestly the communion which can not be with out
distribution, there is no such danger as thou pretendest, of subversion of our
whole Faith and Religion. For we affirm plainly, that our Religion can not
stand, if we shall not bear that reverence unto the ordinances and
constitutions of the same, that we decline not one jot from the reule that is
laid before our eyes, by the Lord Jesus. And howsoever thou understand this
that thou subiunest, that if we shall do nothing but it that the Lord Jesus
did, we shall incur the same danger of perverting of all. Whereby appearently
thou will affirm in outward ^^^nges and ceremonies, that the precepts be not
so firm and established, but they may be innouated and changed, yea, even in
this holy action.

To this answers Cypriane, in his Epistle, Contra Aquarios. where he
affirms the precepts of this Sa^arment to be of most great weight: and
Christ him self, does he not pronounce him to be the least (that is none) in
the Kingdom of heaven, that shall dissolve or break the least one of his
commandementes? Read I pray thee, the 4.and. 12. of Deuteronomion, and the. 15.
of Nombers, Read the Deute. 4.12. and 15. of No^bers
where we be plainly teached, that he will not suffer one of his ceremonies to
be changed. Yet we will grant that there is some defference in the precepts of
God. For some we grant to be of that nature, that no ways we can be absolved
from them, as all the precepts that commands and forbids, of the which
the whole Law and the Prophets depends, the sum whereof is, the love of
God, and our nighbour. Others there be that we are not oblist to, but when the
time, the place, and other commodities requires and urges, as the Hebrews
were not oblist to offer up Sacrifices in all places, nor yet at all times, but
in the place chosen by God, and the time appointed by his wisdom. But in
these, this is ever to be observed, that when the commandment is to be
performed and executed, then we inuert nor change nothing. We know how Nadab
and Abiu were entreated, and Oza for his temeritie and rashness, and also how
Ozcas was stricken with Leprosy and such others. Thus when thou practissest
the commandementes of the Lord, those the never to be drowen one jot from his
constitution. The papists cannot observe Gods ordinance, for fear of the
ruin of their owen inventions and ordinance
Ye take good head that nothing shall be pretermitted or broken in your mass, of
those things that ye call Cautele mess: the Pagaines in their Sacrifices, we
read with what Religion and attenda^ce they preceaded, and this liberty shall be
denied to us? Yea if we shall urge the observation of Gods holy commandementes,
then is it objected, that, that can not be done without the ruin of the whole,
whereby we may easylie observe and espy, whatsoever they brag of any
reverence to God, that there whole study is to dissolve and subvert all the
whole.

Now comes this glorius divine to affirm that we are not able to prove, that
we have any commandment to Baptize one man, which when he has written, I
fear that Thome Armor has been a foot. Aristotle in the first book of his
Topikes, says, that if any man should deny the Fire to be hot, or Snow
white, that we oght to procead against such one, with no argument or reason,
but rather by extremity and rigor of the whip, how then shall we entreat this
our new Scripturare, that denied no les impudently nor ignora^tly, that there
is no precept of baptism of one man, if he should have spoken of babes, we
should have thought he should have Sauored the Anabaptisme.

Eunuch of Ethiopia, the Queen of Ethiopians, chief governor was baptized
allone.
But what shall we say here, it appears well that thou art given over of God,
into a reprobat sense. But always that thou pas not away without an answer,
does thou think that the Baptism of Ihon was of God, or of man, and in the
wilderness that he did Baptize stones, or the wild Roes. The Evangelists
testifies that the men of war and others came to Ihon and were instructed of
him, of there deutie, and Baptized. Yea, and our Savior him self, belyke there
has been none other Baptized with him: and Jesus Christ did he not Baptize,
gave he not commandment to Baptize, was not this practiced by the Apostles,
Acts. 8.
and because thou speak of one, what does thou think of the fact of
Philippus, in Baptising the Ennuche of Candace, Queen of Athiopia.

But par^uenttur thou will make the objection, that there is no such
commandment of a singular man, given in plain terms. I answer, do ye not
think that he that commands all to be Baptized, The lord that commands all
to be baptized does not refuse one.
that he debarreth none. I trust thou will go this far with me, but thou
will insist, why shall it not be lefull in the Lords Table, that, that is in
Baptism allowed? one severally is received in Baptism, why shall it not be in
the Lords Supper, the same? I fear I seik further in thy writing nor thou
meanest thy self.

To this I answer, that there is a great diversity betuix the one and the
other, for the one is appointed for an other cause, and directed to an other
bute nor the other. The one is to receive us, of nature being strangers, into
the covenant, league, society and household of God: the other is to witness and
testify, that all those that be thus entered in the league, to them all is
common, they are all members of one body, they have all one faith, one
Baptism, one Lord, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, upon the body and
blood of the which Jesus, they do all fead, The defference betuix the Sacrament
of Baptism, and the Sacrament of the body and blood o^ Christ, and of the
use and receuing of them.
so that now herein is signified the great and heigh mystery of our
communication together, that they are all one body as the Apostle does
plainly testify: and these two Sacraments lacks not their figures in the
old Testament, we know Baptism to have succeeded in the place of circumcision,
and the Lords Supper in the room of the Pasouer. The eight day precisely was
appointed for ministration of the Sacrament of circumcision, so that now
supputation to be made from the day of the Nativity of the Child; either thou
most say that God provided them all to be borne in one day, or else they were
received according to the ordour of the Law, every one conform to the
calculation from his Nativity, so that now, one was received severally, or else
God provided mo. This can not be denied to us, but in the Pasouer thou will not
find that one did sit down alone and eat it, but that rather then any should
lack of the number, they should call upon their nighboures, and so go to that
mystery.

Now consider with thy self, first in the figures of the one and the other.
Secondly, in the effects, the defference betuix the one and the other, that
thy arguments can no ways procead nor have any place.

The su^me of our whole disputation is to attend and discern diligently,
betuix the commanded ceremonies of our God having and including certane
mysteries which can not be pretermitted without a certane sacrilege, yea, the
perverting of the hoill action and institution, as we be plainly teached, by
Paul 1. Cor. 11. and such other cercumstances as time place and such others
which in deed may be altered and changed, at the determination of the church.

Hitherto I have sustained the part of James, but heir he foolishlie tholeth
him self to be carried away, and thus says I perceive be your ressoning, it is
expedient that their be diverse ceremonies and customs used in the ministration
of the Sacrament, and als in the Sacrament of the mass, quhilk are not
contained in Scripture.

James mig^t most treulie thus have answered as is heir written.
I thought ye should have said in this manner, I perceive there be many
ceremonies, customs, bowinges, murgeons, and such others tryfles, not unlike
to a farce or an Aippes play used in your mass, which our Savior did not
co^mad, nor the Apostles practice, nether yet is allowed of any antiquity,
that it has no similytude nor affinity with the Lords Table, but rather
utterly repugnnig and contrarius unto it: yea, and in it ye blasphemussy call
the Sacrament of the Lords body and blood, ye have fraudfully spoiled the
people of God, of the one part thereof, and so not only impiusly has
perverted the substance of it, but in the action it self has proceadeth with
the same remeritie, rashenes, and Sacrilege, to the contempt of God, and the
bitter and grievous sobbinges of all godly, seeing the people of God thus
miserably deceived by you, and in the place of the wholesome and confortable
Cup of medicine, the bitter and horrible Goblet of vennome, Gal and
damnation, tyranoussy and vnmercifullie propyned. But this Soul hunter
i^troduceth James serui^g to his turn, and speaking at his appetite, I dout
not, against the mind of the gentilman, whom I take to be godly, and nothing
content of his part, in this farce. To this is answered freely of the parce of
the Abbote, in this manner.

True it is, albeit Jesus Christ our Savior hes appointed be his word and
Scripture, all things necessare for manis Salvation, The abbote will not abide
by the first part of his answer.
as toward the substance and effect, nottheles as toward the ceremonies and
manner, how their things should be used, quhilkes he hes appointed for manis
Salvation, he refered it to his Kirk and Ministers, to quhome he hes promised
the Spirit of verity to the end of ye world And so forth.

Would to God ye understood, what ye have here said, in the former part of your
answer, but I fear ye play here the part of Caiphas, The abbotes saying and
Caiphas saying, compared together
when he prophesied that it was meit and necessary that one should die for the
people, not knowing what he had said.

This, godly Reader, has been continually, and is the whole travel and study
of the godly preachers, to assure us of the infinite and perfect wisdom of our
God, vtterred in his Scriptures of the sufficiency of his word, which this
five or six hundredth years, has been kept in a most horrible bondage, by the
tyranny of them that vanted themselves, be the tytles of Pastors, to the soire
complaint of the godly in all aiges, and the haynus and horrible entreating of
the poor flok, redeamed with the precius blood of Jesus Christ. This good
word (that it may well and evidently appear that thou ever reteanest thy owen
nature) as it is fallen forth of a certane euenture, so it is wrapped and
suedled up with the vennemous dregge of Papistrie, and the fond imagination of
thy owen heart so, that scaerflie can it appear: for thou adiunest, I can not
tell what distinguo, toward the substance, say thou, all is contained in
scriptures necessary for our Salvation, and not toward the ceremonies. What
if I should say to thee, pas thy way with thy ceremonies that thou call, and
I will content me with the matter and substance, what could thou object? Thou
speak all Magistraliter and Sorbonice assuming all that thou say, without
any probation. What call thou ceremonies that thou vrgest here to be so
necessary, The exemple adduced by you will declaire? and I trust we shall
aggre, as by exemple.

Follows in our Text, our Savior when he institute Baptism, he commanded
his Apostles that they should Baptize in the Name of the Father, the Son and
the haly Gaste, he appointed nether time nor place, nor quha sold beir witness
to them that war Baptized. Circumstances by the papists, are called
ceremonies: so blind or impudent they be.


Here ye may observe, that this Author called the time and place, ceremonies,
which are not ceremonies, but as I have termed them heretofore circumstances:
the determination and appointing whereof, I most willingly submit unto the
wisdom and discretion of the congregation of the faithful and godly, not to
the wicked and pernicius, but to the true teachers, and not to the Reuenus
Volfes, to the humble and lowly, and not to the horned Bishopes, bloody
Cardinals, and the head and chief of that whole rabble the Antichriste of
Rome, who has so hemd in, and obscured the holy ordinances of God, with their
beggarly traditions, fond and blasphemus ceremonies, that they were altogether
hid and wrapped up. As Baptism, we know that our Savior ordained it most
simply in the word, and in the watter, preach, says he, and baptize, let the
word, says Augustine, come to the Element, and then shall we have a
Sacrament.

Thus we see what Christ ordained, we see what this godly Father Augustine
approved, and what was in the Church retained: The word was preached, and the
Sacrament in watter used, but what has our men done* They have added oil,
they have added spattell, and a thousand other fattras and beggarly things
that they call ceremonies: All was done by a shaueling, who knew no more the
dignity nor the nature of that Sacrament he ministered, nor does thy gray
horse, Abbot, and all was mu^bled in a strange langage Credis? credo quod he.
Vis Baptizari^ Volo quod he. Quid petis? Baptismum quod he. that nether ^e,
nether yet any of the assistance did understand nether yet what he required
that was Minister, nor yet what was promest on the other part. But otherwise
out Savior did ordeine, and otherwise speaks Augustine ^o^est verbum fidei
quod predicamus This is the word of Faith that we preach.

In the holy institutions of our Savior, we shall ever observe not only the
substance that thou tallest, What is to be observed in the ordinances of
Christ.
set forth by him self, but also the ceremonies, that be very ceremonies,
which we oght not to preterm it, being so joined with the substance of the
Sacrament, that if any alteration shall be admitted, the Sacraments are no more
Sacraments. For this cause plainly pronounces Paul that the Corinthians did
not eat the Lords supper, the cause is exponed in the Text, and clearly
declared by the Ancients, because they patched in somewhat of their owen, and so
perverted the purity of the Sacrament: what if Paul should now revive and see
how miserably and traterouslie ye have abused and deceived the world: I think
he should lay it sorer to your charge, nor he does to the Corinthians. I
regard not what intention soever they procead of, these your ceremonies: for I
am sure ye have no such cloik nor couerture, as had the Corinthians, to wit,
the releif and support of the poor: So neid full a thing as the supporting and
releuing of the pure culd not have place to be joined with the Lords Supper
So that not only their blissed communication in Jesus Christ was preached
unto them, but lively practiced, the poor and rich, all conuening together,
eating at one table, and the poor supported by the rich, without any contempt
or disdain. Of the time and place, and such others circumstances, that thou
call ceremonies, I have already protested, that I most willingly subscriue
with you: but I deny that the same proceadeth of the multitude for I affirm
that to be a substanciall ceremony commanded and appointed by our Savior,
whose institution, the heaven and the eareth may not, nor oght, alterre.

In the institution of his holy Supper, he tuke bread, brake it, gave thanks,
and distributed it, so that no person, how well disposed soever he shall
appear, may take upon him to change this: that is to say, to offer him to this
action alone, no more then one severally might have eaten the Pashe Lamb,
seeing it is the ordinance of our Savior, and the mystery of our conjunction,
consociation and unity with him, most liuelye set forth in it: no more nor
the bread is made of a grain of wheit, can there be a communion without
distribution: and in this no man can co^pleane that he is frustrat, iniuried,
or evil entreatted, but rather may have just occasion of complaint, where as
the institutio^s of God haynuslie contemned, he might be brought in a falls,
erronius, and wicked opinion. So these private masses, and quiet Tables, that
be appointed for one, are altogether against the institution of this Sacrament,
and the nature of it, and can not be without an horrible Sacrilege, injury,
and s^lander. Where thou concludest the Priest to be ready to distrybute to all
others, being disposed, that is most untruely pretended of you. For we have
seen, and may see in your Synagoges, great bars and chanceler walls made
expres to this end, that the people mitght be debarred: so that their whole
fruct is to gaise upon your Sacrificers swellowing up a piece of bread, and
most unseemly licking a Challice.

Besides this, if ye had any reverence of God in your breasts, or respect to
his holy ordinances, what is the cause that thretry or forty of you, being at
your masses together, he in this corner, and here an other Sire Ihon i^ an
other, why do ye not join your selves altogether, and set you down at a
Table, and there celebrate the Lords Table, according to his commandment. Now
shift thy self as thou can, thou shall not escape. For as the chief and
principal confort, we have of the Lords Table is, to assure us, that we fead
upon the body and blood of Jesus Christ, and that we are joined and made all
one in him: So no dout, they excommunicat them selves, and cutteth them of, as
it were, from Christ's body, that severally craves it, and of a wicked zeal,
offers them to it, since their deutie is rather never to o^fer them hitherto,
then to discern and divide that which our Savior has joined. For we are to
be assuredly persuaded, and think well that the grace of God is not so fixed to
his Sacraments, but the faithful mind may, and shall obteane it by Faith,
without the Sacrament: if there be no contempt, sleuth, or negligence.

James here desires to be more fully instructed, How our Savior appointed all
things necessary for manis Salvation, concerning the effect and substance and
shawed not be his word the ceremonies and manner how their things should be
used but refered to the Kirk.

To discuse and declaire this question asked by James, this glorius Gospeller
s^tteth us forth a rude exemple of a potent prince, A rude exemple proponed by
the abbote dish s^ffered.
directing forth his Ambassadoures, giving them a commission, containing
certane heads and articles, bearing the substance and effect of the whole:
which he commonly termed instructions. Yet says our Doctor. there is nothing
prescribed to them, of their garments in the day of their presence, nether yet
any kind of ceremonies necessary and expedient, appointed. Albeit this
similytude be not every where true, yet will I grant it partly to be very
proper, we know Jesus Christ to be this pote^t and mighty prince: his ministers
are teached by S. Paul, to be the Ambassadoures of our reconciliation, the
instructions of this ministry to be contained in the Scriptures sufficiently,
fully, and perfectly, so that there is not passed by a ceremony, substanciall
I mean.

To other things called ceremonies by thee, as the setting of the cheer, the
table, the foormmes and benkes, to the East or the west, the place, the time,
our owen garments, or such others of that Kind, Even as the Spirit o^ God
has pretermitted and passed by these circumstances with silence, so we may
luke herein to the commodity of the Congregation, providing always that we
decline not from the reule of Paul.

all be done says the Apostle, semely and in ordour. But that thou hereupon
interrest generally.

That quhasaeuer will use any other ceremonies in the ministration of the
Sacraments: nor the kirk hes ever observed be perpetual succession of time sen
the time of the Apostles till their our days: they ar worthy to be cried out
upon be all the godly.

Because hereby thou will establishe all these unseemly beggarly and wicked
customs, God is not delited in begerly ceremonies.
that be used in the Papistrie, to the great contempt of God, and profanation
of his mysteries, I answer thee, that nether can thou prove, so long antiquity
and succession of time, as thou pretendest, nether yet, albeit so were, would I
spaire to propnounce Anathema an accurse upon them, yea, and upon the inue^ters
and manteaners of them likewise. For our God delyteth not in such vanity
Pomp, and ostentation. Our God reioceth not in beggarly ceremonies, vain
app^tre^ and luxurius ryotnes: but in simplicity, lawlines, and humiliation of
our hearts, without hypocrisy.

He has appointed Baptism to be ministered in watter, How Christe-hath
ordained baptism and the Lords Table to be used.
his merciful promise, and see Adoption being before preached: his Supper he
has appointed in breaking of bread, thanks giving, and distrybution: the same
he has commanded of the Cup. This he has commanded, the cause the effect,
and fine of it being first uttered and declared: these things he has
appointed to be practiced in all sobernes and simplicity.

Brag thou what thou list of antiquity, yea, I say, if S. Paul him self,
should introduce or obstruse any other ceremonies, such as you have in the
pestilent Papistrie, which is nothing else, but a very mass of all heresy and
error: As the adoration of that bread, the bearing about and closing up of it,
as it were in a prisone, and then to conuoye it to the feildes, to take the
air. The papists god must some times be carried about the feildes to take the
air.
Either yet this Table, that is commanded to be A commoun Table, to make it to
be a several, erecting here an Alter and there an otherr: Then may I in deid,
most justly pronounce the words of S. Paul: if any man be contentius, we
have no such custom, nether yet the Church of God For no dout, all such
conuentions are to the wors, and not to the better, to remove that which God
has established, to set up the inventions of men, in the place of Gods holy
ordinances, and so to bring into the Church of God, contention, scisme,
division, debate, yea, and herisie, as the Apostle most plainly teaches: the
very mind of the Apostle being thus oppened up in the words adduced by thee,
Now will I travel to show how impertinently they are alleged by thee. nothing
would Paul command ^ Christ's name but that which Christ commanded.


The argument of that Chap. is to show the vices of the Corinthians. First in
their owen persons, when as they conuened: Secondly, how horrible they had
profaned the Lords Table, and haynusly declined from the institution thereof.
First he wills the^ to follow him as he did Christ, as he should say, I
propone nothing to you, but that which I have received of the Lord Jesus, yea,
in the least one jot that shall be commanded by me, ye are ass^red, I have the
warrant of his Spirit, I command you nothing but by his mouth, no not of the
covering of your women's heads, nor yet the uncovering of your owen heads,
that be the men, in your prayers and other godly exercises. Thus he having
prouen this by the very plain Text of Scripture, by the very ditement of
nature, here he concludes, saying, if any of you will be contentius, The
papists be co^tentius to auance wicked ceremonies, to deface the holy Eua^gel.
seaking further satisfaction, and so can not content you with the reasons
adduced by me, we have no such custom, nor yet the Church of God, as he should
say, we are not appointed to satisfy and make answer to all cauillatio^s that
I know captius ingynes can divise and invent, but to pacify and quiet the
troubled consciences of the humble and lawlie, in mansuetude, sweitnes, and
sobriety. And this conueneth most properly to be laid against you, seeing
your whole study is to pull back the simple ones, to deface the Euangell of
Jesus Christ, an to pervert his holy ordinances. Whither then oght ye or we to
be exploded? Ye that troubles all, be the manteaning of superstition and
Idolatry, with impius King Ahab? Or we that are followers of Christ an urges
not, They that m^tene falls religion oght to be exploded.
but the purity of the Religion with Elias? ye that obtruseth to the people
fond and wicked constitutions, traditions, imaginations, and consuetudes? or we
that seaketh God to reign by his word, and ministration of his Sacraments in
that perfection and simplicity that he ordained and left them to his Church?
Yea, ye that braggeth of nothing, but of a certane pretended antiquity (but
how justly shall be after declared in the convenient place) or we that cleaves
to the true and infallible reule of all true Religion, the reviled will of God,
in his most holy word?

I trust that ye, by the judgments of all, will be exploded, and exterminated,
as God he praised, the experience teaches us, how potently God has foghten in
the defense of his owen cause, to the extermination and roting out of the
bastard Religion, not only here in this cuntrie, but in the most part of all
Christendom. And I dout not, but he that has begun the work potently, will
continue and conduct it with an out streitched arm, to a prosperus Issue and
an blissed end.

Here James begins to grant him self vainquest in a manner. As it is very
easy to overthrow the man who makes no defense. Yet that this valiant
warrior, and proud Goliath shall not seem to take the victory to him, some
cullor of defense is ^^^cribed to James, confessing him neirby satisfied with
his answers, made toward all arguments moved against the mass, No man may
be co^uicted of any crime if his adversary shall accuse and answer as it
lyketh him best that is accused.
but yet is not sufficiently suaded that our Savior offered up his body and
blude in Sacrifice.To this dout of James, most justly conceived and moved,
our dimne replyeth and wills him to have recourse, and mark the diffinition
and declaration of the mass, already declared, and than should he have most
just occasion, conform to the Scriptures, to be persuaded. Not the les
(says he) to give zow further suasion, ze ^all consider that our Savior in
the latter Supper institute a Sacrament, quhilk ze call the communion, and als
the Sacrifice of the new Testament, called the mass, sa in the latter Supper
he institute both a Sacrament and a Sacrifice.

James in his answer to this, acknowledges with all godly, that our Savior
did institute in the Supper the communion, and understands no such Sacrifice
there to be ordained and appointed. For the understanding hereof our blind
Abbote leads us to the Sacrifices and preisthead of Aaron, and wills us to
consider that the preisthead and Sacrifice of Aaron, quhilk was bludy, ceased
by the bludy Sacrifice of Jesus Christ on the croice, quha was the fine of the
Law.

Very well spoken, and we glaidly go with you, all Sacrifices and preisthead,
to have been utterly abrogated and taken away by the Sacrifice of the croice:
ye add.

Now man we consider that Jesus Christ our Savior, knawing that the Sacrifice
of Aaron being the Sacrifice of the auld Testament was to cea^e and take ane
end be the death and passion, Where may he prove this sacrifice offered by
Melchisede^.
institute a new Sacrifice according to the ordour of Melchisedec.

As this latter part is wicked and falls, so our Author purposlie pretermitteth
the preisthead, making no mention of it, but of the abrogation of the
Sacrifices only, and institution of an other in their place, according to the
ordour of Melchisedec.

But here may be demanded of you, if he institute a Sacrifice according to the
ordour of Melchisedec, why did he not appoint Sacrificers? For there can be no
Sacrifice, without a Sacrificer, nor oblation, without a priest, as we speak
now. If thou will say that your shauelinges be Sacrificers, then will I demand
of you, their vocation, I am assured by the Author to the Hebrews, that the
dignity of preisthead apperteaneth to the Son of God, as also witnesses
David in the. 110. Psalm. which he never did communicate to any other, it being
of such a nature, that it could not be transferred. Marcke this we ye papists
that play fast and louse as it pleseth you, with the Scriptures.


If I should descend and shaw the manner of the creation and making of your
preistes, it might most justly appear that ye have brought again the very
preisthead of Aaron abrogated (as ye have confessed) by our Savior: so that in
the word ye grant it to be taken away, which by the fact it self, ye
establishe. Thus then ye pas by the preisthead of set purpose, in the latter
part of your answer* Because ye perceived that it should subvert your whole
fundation. James urges and thinks him not as yet satisfied, and so drives
this new Ingynour (that co^passeth matters so craftily, that he can make of
one, two) to bring again and repeat the words of the institution, do this in
remembrance of me. By the which words he ^ayeth, our Savior gave not only
commandment to eat his body, and drink his blood, but als to make an oblation.

James yet as before, grants the commandment of eating and drinking, given,
but believes that he will not prove properly by the words of the latter Supper,
that our Savior commanded to make any oblation of the body and blood. This
new divine according to his nature and use, takes the matter upon hand and
promises to prove it properly. That he maid oblation of his body and blood in
the latter Supper, be the words of the same saying, take ze, eat ze, this is
my body quhilk is given for zow, both in ane effect.

It appears that there lacks some word here: as to me, I give you your owen
words, as they be in the Text, which came to my hands.

Here James shrinketh with the matter, and is introduced, improuing the
allegatio^ of the words that our divine may seem, and appear able to expone,
and interpret the Greik Text, and the propriety of the word, time and other
accidents falling to the word, but how he is besene in the tongue, we shall
after here.

It appears (says James) to me that ze rehers the Text wrang, for the Text
sayis, this is my body, quhilk salbe given for zow, that is great difference
betuix, is given for zow, and salbe given for zow.

Upon the mergine it is noted, that James speaks of the authority of Paul.
1. Cor. 11. who uses the word (...) which ver^e signifies, not given, but
broken. I grant that they are to be taken in a signification here, but by this
it is easy to espy, how thou art vearsed in the Greik tongue: as may likewise
appear, by it that follows, when thou alledgest Erasmus. To James he
answers on this wife. Ze salbe assured that their words are spoken in the
present time, as testifeis the excellent Clerk Erasmus, according to the Greik
Text, quhilk is the natural Text of the new Testament the may pairt.

Ye shall be assured in deid of the whole, howsoever some does judge of the
Euangel of S. Matthew, who no dout, has written in the Greik, as may evidently
appear in the places recited out of the old Testament by him, in the which he
follows the Greik translation of the 70. interpretors, and not the very Text
of the Hebrew, yea, and whatsoever is judged by some in lykemaner of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, but in this, we have not to insist.

True it is, that these words. (...) are red in the present time, and yet they
are to be understand, as spoken in the future, as the vulgar Text bears, and
as Castalio, and some others does plainly translate them, and the sense
requires the same. Well let us procead, I will say with James

Giving that their words war spoken in the present time zit their is a
defference betuix their words this is my body quhilk is given for zow and
offered for zow To this ye answer partly, as ye had been auised with every man.

Their will no man (say ye) of judgment or learning, make difference betuix
their words, giving for zow, and offered for zow. As toward the effect albeit
the phrase and manner of speech differs.

I darre not take upon me judgment, nor learning, least I shall seem to
arrogate somewhat to me impudently, but the existimation, I will with all
sobriety refer unto the Reader: always I will travel to shaw, that there
is a great difference betuix, given, and offered: and that not only in the
signification of the words, but also in the persons that be the giuers, and
the offerers. I trust thou will not confound these two terms in Scriptures,
for many things we darre affirm to be given, that be not offered: oblation
and Sacrifice, be one, and yet we darre not affirm every gift to be an
oblation and Sacrifice.

We be teached plainly, It apperteaned to Christ only to offer him self to
God his father in sacrifice, for our sins, and that but ones for all.
that the Eternal God gave his Son unto us: yet we will not say that he
offered him up and Sacrificed him to us, for this only conueneth to the Son
him self, to make oblation of his body and blood, being appointed by God to
this office. Besides this, if oblation and gift should be thus confounded, as
thou would persuade, then should it follow, that as thou go about to prove,
that there be two oblations of our Savior, so shall I add the thride, that
when he was given to the world that then was he offered. I am not ignorant that
the whole course of his peregrination here, may apperteane and be referred to
his offering. But we do call that properly and specially his oblation, when he
enters in the Battle, and conflict with the adversary powers, the torments,
and panes of death, and the anguishe and thrist of man's Salvation, even till
his departing.

I will not deny, but the godly interpretors may in this place, take these two
manner of speakinges to an effect, referring them both to the Sacrifice of the
croice, as they oght to be, but seeing thou do it to abuse the Text, and
wreist the sense of it, to confirm thy wicked opinion: It is neidfull to shaw
thee, the absurdity that shall ensew. Doutles if thou should understand the
words, and refer them to that oblation that was a little after made upon the
croice, then should I grant thy sayings, and go with thee most willingly,
being assured of the approbation of the wholle Church, Of what ordorthe
papistical preistes be, to wit, of Epicurus and Sardanapalus
and consent of the Godly Fathers. But thou, that thou may seem to have
invented somewhat of thy owen head, confoundest these words, to the ignominy
of the Eternal Son of God, spoiling him of his preisthead, and intrusinge in
his room a pestilent harlote, a shaueling after the ordour of Epicurus and
Sardanapalus. This in deid can not be suffered, for being demanded of James,
what thou will infer of this, thou answerest and braggest, that thou have
gotten thine intent, which is. Our Lord maid ane oblation of his body and
blude in the latter Supper and gave his Apostles commandment to do the same.

Thou subioynest the cause, The false head of papists may heir be seen in their
forged communion and mass.
the gif our Savior in the latter Supper had only institute the communion and
not the Sacrifice of the mass then he had said tak ze, eat ze, this is my
body quhilk given to zow, and not for zow, because given to zow, includes
only the communion, and given for zow, includes not only the communion, but
als ane Sacrifice, as the phrase of the words plainly declares.

The horrible blasphemies that be here contained in these few words, nether
can mind think, nor tongue sufficiently express. For by these words, not
only shall we find that he spoileth the Son of God, the Eternal and only
priest, of his honor, trodding him underfoot: and als that he most craftily
and inuiusly takes from us, that great and infinite treasure of the latter
Supper of the Lord Jesus, which we are commanded to practice, Marcke well ye
papists what horrible sacrilege, ye commit
til his returning: and in the which he has so mercifully, and abundantly
disployed his benefits, gifts and mercies toward man. This I say, this
Author takes from man, for if, given to you, includes the communion (as this
Author says) and our Savior has pronounced no such thing, but given for
you, it follows well that here there is no such institution as the holy
communion, for by this Author given for you, is offered for you. Christ then
offered him self there: we be commanded to do the same: then follows that we
are commanded to offer him, and so to make Sacrifice of him, where is there any
place to the communion then? which is no Sacrifice: or else of necessity thou
shall grant that the communion and the Sacrifice, are both one, which
repugneth manifestly to thy doctrine, but aggreeth in deid with the Ancientes.

For some of them we observe, to have given this Name of Sacrifice to the
Lords Table, but that improperlie: Some of the Ancientes named the Lords
Table a sacrifice, but improperly
because it is instituted and practiced, in memory of that Sacrifice, which
only is worthy of that name, consider how thou art trapt in the same Snaire,
that thou prepared for others, and how craftily to establishe thy impius
Sacrifice of the mass, thou fraudest the whole Congregation of that great and
inestimable confort of the Lords Table.

This belyke thou would mean, howsoever thou say, that in these words
(given for you) is included not only the communion, but als the Sacrifice of
the mass, for with what Brow can thou deny, but I may collect of this thy
doctrine, that there is no communion at all, for as thou say, given to you,
includes the communion, so say I, that given for you, includes only the
mass: It follows well: for given for you, is as much, as offered for you, and
so imports a Sacrifice, then it follows well, that we have no communion,
but a Sacrifice only, for thou will not grant the communion and the Sacrifice
to be one, dividing and separating the one, from the other, and collecting two
diverse institutions in the latter Supper. And so always it is false that thou
assumest to prove that our Savior institute two things here, the holy Table,
and the Sacrifice of the mass. And likewise it follows evidently, that either
we shall lack the communion, or else the mass. This follows most necessarly
of thy interpretation: if thou will say, that the communion is contained in the
former part of the Table, he tuke bread, brake it, gave thanks, and gave it
to his Disciples: and in the latter part (for so ye of your faction
distinguishes the words) this is my body, which is given for you, here he
instituteth the Sacrifice: the commandment apperteaneth equalie to both, then
must it follow that there be two several actions, The papists setting up
their deuillishe Mass, make the communion no sacrament.
the former having, as it were, nothing to do with the latter, the communion,
to wit, and the mass.

Secondly hereby we shall collect, that there shall be a Sacrament without a
promise, every man I trust will grant the Lords Table to be a Sacrament, which
can not subsist without the promise. For if (given for you) apperteaneth to the
words preceading, this is my body, and shall altogether be referred to thy
mass, and now shall have nothing to do with the former action of distribution
of the bread, this Sacrament shall lack the promise: and so consequently shall be
no Sacrament: how vain and fond this is, let every man judge. For I darre
affirm, that there is no man of judgment, that will divide and disseuet this
action, being all one: and what Sacrilege do thou think it to dissociat,
distract, and put a shunder, that which is joined by God? And to answer you,
sire, in your owen manner, It is evident that Christ did never ordeine the mass
what was the cause, if the mind of our Savior was to institute here a
Sacrifice, and that such a Sacrifice as your mass, that he does not take a
piece or portion of bread, a certane quantity of wine, erect up an Altar, or
at the least, withdraw him self some space from the company, use the ceremonies
that ye do use, and so to make and offer up the Sacrifice?

We know that the wisdom of our God, has forget nothing uncommanded,
touching the offering up of Sacrifices in the Law, the garments and apperrell
of the Priest, the erecting of the Alter, the beast that was to be slain, and
likewise of the rest of the circumstances and ceremonies, then to be used, when
as the priest approached to the practice of the oblation.

Should this have been pretermitted in this Sacrifice, where the Son of God
is offered up, the verity and treuth of all Sacrifices preceading? We observe
with what solicitude, study, and cairfulnes, the Spirit of God painteth forth
the celebration of the Pasouer, and with what diligence our Savior and master
Christ Jesus celebrated it, according to the precept of the Law, not passing
by a ceremony. And requires he not the same of us in observation of his
ordinances? Will ye affirm that there is any oblivion, forgetfulness, sleuth,
or negligence in our God? Why does he not then say to his company, in this
manner? now have I celebrated the Pasouer, appointed by my heavenly Father to be
practiced, in memory and remembrance of your potent and mighty deliverance out
of Egypt, where your fathers was holden in servitude and bondage: this
ceremony is now to be taken away, in place of the which, shall ye have an other
sacrifice: wherein ye shall offer up my body, yea, my very real and natural
body and blood, under the forms of bread and wine, ye shall erect an Alter,
the Preistes shall be chosen with such qualities, anointed, shaven, they shall
have such apperrell. And in this manner shall they celebrate this Sacrifice.

It were werisome here to rehears all your murgeons, which ye think and judge
so necessary, that they can not be pretermitted, without an horrible
Sacrilege. Thus, we find in the figure all things prescribed by the mouth of
God, in the Sacrifices of the Law, and nothing passed by. But here, never a
word of any such thing, a simple action recyted, the commandment given to
practice the same, and the promise made, out of the which, this Scripturare will
fine out a Sacrifice, which he after trauelleth to prove by the exemple of the
Pasouer, which albeit it was a Sacrament, yet says he, it was offered up: to
this I will not answer presently, but will differ the full answer to the proper
room. Yet will I say, that if they should pretend the similytude of the
Pasouer, they should not thole them selves to be so driven and carried away,
from the institution of the Supper. For in the practice of the Pasouer,
howsoever they were commanded to celebrate it, they pretermitted not one jot
of the ceremonies appointed, they invented nor added none of their owen brain,
nether yet pared any thing: but being conuened together with staves in their
hands, their Loins gyrded, they did eat it, with the rest of the ceremonies.
The same should have been done of you, that it might appear, that ye bear
some reverence to the ordinances of God.

If ye should set you at a Table, and there reverently, take bread, give
thanks, break it, and so make distribution, according to the exemple lest to
you by Jesus Christ: albeit ye should brag somewhat of a Sacrifice, some
color might ye have, and it were somewhat tolerable. But where this is
wholly, The sacrifice that the papists have forged to themselves, distroyeth
wholly the Lords institution.
not only inuerted, but perverted, so that your deuillish proceadinges, are
als co^trarius to the action of our Savior, as the night and the day: and yet
will ye pretend a commandment so to do, and brag of a Sacrifice, invented by
your selves, utterly distroying the Lords action, as we have already prouen,
and shall yet travel to make more clear and sensible: what rests to us, to
say or do, but to declyne and eshew your companies, and pronounce you
possessed. For I am assured, the Devil him self, never invented things more
contrarius to God, more repugnant to his glory, nor ye have done, and
practisest daily (Helas) under the cloik of Religion. Now since I have
sensibly, in my judgment, oppened up the absurdities and inconuenients, that
does ensew of your interpretation, I will travel to declaire the very Germane
sense of the words of the action, and that with all simplicity and moderation.

First I trust no man will deny, but here our Savior does institute a
Sacrament, In the action of the Lorddestable we receive of Christ: but we
nether give nor offer any thing to him.
and Sacraments we know to be outward and external signs, having the
promises of God adjoined, in the which our God offers and gives unto us his
gifts, and not we give or offer any thing to God: as has been heretofore
shortly spoken and declared, by the exemple of Baptism, and will now in this
action, in the which our Savior, with the bread and wine, gives us his body,
and his blood, adding and adjoining the promise, whereby also he offers and
gives unto us, his gifts and benefits, and not we to him.

These benefits he communicates unto us, to this end that they shall remane to
our use, profit, and commodity, and not we (say I) to offer them unto God,
but only offer to him the Sacrifice of thanks giving, praising and extolling
him for his great and infinite goodness toward us. In which consideration,
this Sacrament is called of the Grecians (...) because it is a thanks giving
for a benefit received, now to give thanks, is to winnes that we have
received some benefit, and not to present or (...) out.

Now that the goodness of my God, shall be so great to^ardes me, that even this
small oblation of thanks, ^e ^^eth accept, as a very Sacrifice. This is
nothing to me to brag, that I de^erue or merit any thing thereby, either to
me, or to any others, but rather to be moved to preach and annunce the glory
of our God, who disdaneth not to receive Vitulos Labiorum Nostrorum as the
Prophet speaks that, is our prayer and thankfulness, yea, The difference
betuix a Sacrament, and a sacrifice
even in the place of a Sacrifice, and this is the cause that moved some of the
Ancients, to call this Sacrament (...) that is improperly a Sacrifice, for this
deffierence is betuix the natures of the Sacrament, and of the Sacrifice, that
in this we offer to God, in the other we receive from God.

This I am assured, the words of the action it self will testify, he tuke
bread, and having given thanks, The promise must be referred to the action,
and to none other thing.
brake and gave it unto his Disciples, saying, take ye, eat ye, this is my
body, and sofurth. And likewise of the cup, the promise is added, this is my
body, and this is the new Testament in my blood, which promise, if any man
shall go about to di^^euer from the action preceading, or refer it to any
other thing, then, is there expressed: we plainly perceive, that first he
distroyeth this holy Sacrament, and ^econdly, he diffeuereth those things that
be joined by God, which is altogether intolerable, according to that, that is
written, let no man put a shonder, that, Mat. 19.
that is joined by God.

Now the sense of the words is plain, that our Savior offers and gives to
the faithful and worthy receauers, his body to feed upon, The plain sense and
meaning of Christ's words i^ the last Supper
and his blood to be refreshed thereby, unto everlasting life. And to assure
them hereof, he subiuneth, yea, even this same body, that is given for you,
that is, which shall be given immediately after this, upon the croice. For no
dout, the present time, is taken for the future, as it is familiare to the
Spirit of God, to put one time for an other, for the assurance and certitude
of the matter, so that this (given) is altogether to be referred to the oblation
was made upon the croice, as all the Ancients do commonly understand it, and
can no otherwise (...). Now least any man should think that here in the Supper
we receive the verrie body natural and substa^ciall, and that body that was
borne of the Virgin, but only Sacramentaly, in this as the Ancientes do
altogether acknowledge a figure, that we call (...) that is when the name of
the thing signified, is given to the sign it self: so S. Paul does expone
this, given for you, to be as much, as, broken for you. No man will, or darre
say, that the natural body of our Savior was broken, for it was written ye
shall not break one bone of him. Exo. 12.
Herein there is an undoubted allusion, to the fraction of the bread, appointed
and used in the communion, and likewise a plain declaration, how the words of
the promise oght to be taken Sacramentally, and figuratively. This shortly for
the declaration of the words.

Now follows the latter words of the institution: do this in remembrance of
me, which nowayes can be understand of any Sacrifice, The exposition of these
words, do this in remembrance of me.
as ye do expone falsely, but of the receiving, and of the whole action recited
before. For these words our Savior does refer to the actio^ preceading,
take ye, eat ye, this is my body, drink of this ye all: and thus eating and
drinking, celebrate the remembrence of me, to wit, that I have given and
offerred up my body for you, and that I have shed my blood for you, to the
remission of your sins, for if these words (given for you) and (shed for you
to remission of sins) should not wholly be referred and appertane to the
Sacrifice of the croce, then should it follow that the Sacrifice of the croce,
was not necessary, seeing by your interpretation, we have remission of sins
by the virtew of this action, and so shall the virtew of the Sacrifice of the
croce euanesh. Paul exponeth these words (as I have) not of a Sacrifice, ^
Cor. 11.
but of the receiving, do this so often as ye shall drink (says he) in
commemoratio^ of me, for as often as ye shall eat of this bread, and drink of
this cup, ye shall forth show the Lords death, till he come: whereby we
observe, that he conioyneth the commemoration with the receiving, which ye that
affirms the mass, separateth and divides. For it is plain and manifest by
Paul, that in this public action, in the which, he commands one to tarry
upon an other, and in the which, the body of our Savior is eaten, and his
precius blood, drunkt: That he wills, that we conioyne the celebration of the
benefits procured unto us, by his death with the action it self. And that we
give thanks, for these gifts, and so in nowise wills he us to offer his
body and blood, but that we eat and drink them, and so to celebrate and
annunce his death: that is, the great and inestimable deliverance, purchased by
his death.

If any please to speak as the Ancients do, and call it a Sacrifice, I repugne
not: so he understand not, that Christ is here to be offered for the offenses
of the people, for the sins of the leuing, and the dead, for Salvation, and
sofurth. For he has by this one oblation, ones made, consu^mat and perfected
his faithful and Elect for ever.

For it is a haynus blasphemy, to think that any man may offer up the Son of
God unto the Father, as we have already heretofore declared, he being him self
(...) that is, the offerer, and the oblation it self, as I am able to prove by
the Greik Cannon, and the Ancients all in one voice. Christ is by the word of
God, and the ancients also called the offerer and oblation it self.
Now we offer not his body and his blood, the which we be commanded only to
receive, and were offerred of Christ him self, the virtew of the which
oblation, yet remaneth, and shall perpetually, yea, and here they be offerred,
and given unto us: but we again offer up prayers, laud, praise and action of
thanks: which we are commanded to join with this action, In these words, do
this in remembrance of me, which words are exponed by Paul, as we have
declared.

Now this to be the very Germane sense of the words of this action, I dout
not: yea, and all godly consciences will affirm and subscriue, that if an Angel
of heaven should setfurthe any thing against this it is one accurse: wherein I
have not traveled to satisfy the contentius, and obstinat persons, but
because the words of the text were wrei^ted, by this wrouglare of Scriptures,
I was driven to bring forth the godly meaning of the same words, with all
sobriety, to the releif of the simple, that by all appere^ce might else have
been troubled thereby.

Now let us return to our Author, who as he has begun blasphemusly, so he
contineueth impudently, and as I have already forewarned you, so now shall ye
find his principal study direct to this, that the whole communion may be
subverted and distroyed, and his deuillishe mass erected. For here he plainly
protests, that this his Sacrifice of the mass. Is a mair proper
commemoration and remembrance of the Sacrifice of the croice, nor is the
communion, quhairfore (says he) the Sacrifice of the mass is called a
Sacrifice of commemoration, and swa ze may perceive be the command quhilk our
Savior gave to his Apostles, saying, do this in remembrance of me, that he
rather appointed the Sacrifice of the latter Supper, to be ane commemoration of
his death and passion, nor the communion.

In deid master Abbote, I would glaidly ye should leave your magistrall and
Sorbonik manner of speaking, and prove your sayi^gs, but God be praised, it
appears that ye be rather a Scoller of Pythagoras, yea, Pythagoras him self,
nor a Scoller of Christ Jesus. We know that in Pythagoras Scoole, what
authority the papists take vpone them selves.
there was no more, but his authority, whereof proceaded this saying (...) he
said it, this authority ye take upon you, in preferring your pestilent
Sacrifice, to the holy institution of our Law maker Jesus Christ, yea, and
does, that is in you, to euert the holy communion, the which I have shown
heretofore to be called a Sacrifice of co^memoration, in consideration that we,
there give thanks to our God, of that blissed League and covenant, that it
has pleased his majesty to receive us in, and that in the blood of Jesus
Christ, although improperly in deid, yet in that sense, not altogether
intolerable, yea, and I will say further, that never ye shall find your mass so
called (being unknown in those days) as shall be after discussed, when we
shall atteane to the examination of the authorities of the Fathers.

Strange it is, to see a man so carried away with his owen fantasy, so given
over in the hands of Satan, that he shall repyne against God, that he shall
renunce and refuse the manifest verity of God, confessed in all aiges, to
establishe his owen imagination.

We know the communion, to be the ordinance of Jesus Christ, practiced in all
aiges, and as I have prouen by S. Paul, the most lively commemoration of
Christ's death, and yet will ye set before it, your stinkinge whore the mass,
which never had place, The mass is now justly trodde^ down i^ the dust as a
fylthy stinking harlote.
till these our latter days, and that never without controversy (to the great
and grievous grudge of all godly) and now finally fealeth the just pleague of
God, being trodden underfoot in the dust.

In your conclusion, howsoever ye will appear to give the communion some
place, yet seeing ye so earnestly establishe and decked up the mass, it is eue^
as much as ye should take the communion utterly away, being of that nature, that
it can not stand the mass standing, nether yet the mass, so long as it
stands. So if ye would prosper, or think to have victory in this cause, ye
must sharp your pen plainly against it, as it appears well your mind is.
These things in deid, for conclusion, since ye adduce nothing to prove them,
they are als easylie rejected of us, as ye obtruse them.

Here our new Sorbonist, being required by James, forms his argument and that
Syllogistice, in what figure or mude, I trust he learned not so far, for he
is but one of our Mule masters, howsoever he boldly takes to him this style.
The Lord (says he) gave commandment in the latter Supper to his Apostles,
to do as he did: the Lord maid oblation of his body and blood, in his latter
Supper, as is sufficiently prouen be the hail Text, Any man that is not utterly
blind, may here easylie se how foolish and falls be the arguments of the
Papists.
quhairfore it followis weill, that the Lord gave command to his Apostles to
do the same, saying: do this in remembrance of me, ergo cleik.

Now most reverend Doctor, for the part of James, I answer, the Lord gave
commandment in his latter Supper, to do as he did. True it is: The Lord made
oblation of his body and blood, in his latter Supper, that I deny, and will
affirm further, that it is false, blasphemus, intolerable, wicked, impius, and
deuillishe, and a thing that thou, yea, and all the papists in the earth
joined with thee, are not able to prove. For besides the absurdities, already
alleged it should follow, seeing thou cleauest extremly to the words and the
time, which is the present, that the blood of Jesus Christ was shed in the
Supper, for the word is (...) in the present, so that the whole glory,
strenth, and virtew of the croice, should be quenshed, buried up, and utterly
defaced, if these thy dreams might have place.

To the minor I have already answered at lenth, so now thy assumption being
denied, and most properly refelled, Infer what thou list, thou shall
conclude nothing but mere vanity, falshead and blasphemy. But now Doctor,
will I make to you a Syllogism, ye know it is a received maxim amongst them
of your faction: all the actions of Christ are our instruction, Read and
marcke well this Argument
Christ offerred him self up upon the croice, ergo, the Pope should do the
same. The mayor is clear of Gregorius your master, the minor I trust, needs
no probation, the conclusion must then follow, that the first news we shall
here, shall be that the Pope your master and capitane, has hengd him self. But
according to the matter, now will I reason with you thus, as the action of the
Supper will bear. Jesus Christ commanded his Disciples to do that he had done,
Christ tuke bread, gave thanks, brake and distributed it, saying: this is my
body, which is given for you: ergo, we should do the same, that is to say, take
bread, break bread, give thanks and communicate. etc. Which is not done in
your mass, ergo, she has nothing to do with the institution of the Lord
Jesus. The diuisers of the mass never put in these words, given for you, or
broken for you, in their mass.
For thou art not able, no not the very ports of Hell joined with thee, to
prove an new and several institution, included and contained in any one word of
the promise, it being but a part of the institution. In the mass We know those
words, out of the which, ye draw this your Sacrifice, yea, in the consecration
it self (For so ye term it) these words, given for you, or broken for you,
be not recyted, and I trust every man of any judgment, will think that if
there had been any thing making for them, that were diuisers of the mass in
these words, they should not have been omitted, yea, that the quin^^ verbians
ascribes the whole strenth and force of consecration, to the five words that
be rounded by the shaueling, to the du^me and insensible Elements (for this is
my body) Hoc est euim corpus meum. Where I pas by, that ye add ( enim) of your
owen. Always there is no mention of these words, given for you, or broken for
you. Cast over your mass (...), and read als diligently as ye can: ye shall not
find these words, I am assured. Whereby it may well appear in the very
murgeon and farce of the mass, that the words that be recyted, conuicteth you
of most manifest and haynus Idolatry. The words which the Papists rehears,
co^uicteh themselves of idolatry
For since of your owen doctrine we know, and it is evident, that all virtew is
attributed to the words pronounced, and in the words of execration, there is
no oblation: for these words (given for you) are not pronounced (upon the
which words ye ground your oblatio^) it follows then, that your mass (make
of i^ what ye list) is no oblatio^ nor Sacrifice. But least afterward we have
not so gauing occasion, as now is offerred, to speak of the term, it shall
not be altogether out of the way, to defyne and declaire what the euergie of
the word is, and what it is to offer, and Sacrifice to God. Offer, we
understand to be, to subject him self, to the will of the Father, to deriuate
the wraith, the ire, the indignation, yea, and the pain due to all our sins
upon him, and so to represent, stay and arreast him self, as the very
Sacrifice and oblation, to susteane and those the Ire of God for sins, to
transfer the whole offenses of the people upon his shulders, to be as it were
culpable, damned, and to be made an accurse, yea, and the very sin it self,
according to the Hebrew phrase, tearming the Sacrifice by the name of the sin
that it is offerred for. According likewise to the sayings of the Prophet
Esaye, and after him S. Paul. In this manner is to be understand, 2. Cor. 5.
the saying of the Baptist, behold the lamb of God that takes away the sins
of the world, that is, who susteaneth and is charged with the wraith of the
Father, in that he Sacrificed and offerred up him self, to appease the
indignation of the Father, conceived against sin.

The Lamb and oblation, and he that has offerred up this Sacrifice, we
acknowledge to be Jesus Christ, who being the only priest, that by the
offering up of him self, has entered in the most holy place, yea, and who
has Sacrified him self for us, because that none other was ever able to have
borne the indignation of the Father but he. Considder here then the blasphemy
of that Antichriste of Rome, who gives this power to his preistes in the
creation of them: we give thee power, says he, to offer the oblation to God,
to appease him. I fear I be to long in this matter most plain and evident in
the self. Now let us prosecute the rest. This Doctor (...) assure James of the
conclusion that it is true, proper, and aggreing with the words of the latter
Supper. I will make zow (says he) to understand the same be the conference of
Scriptures.

A manner of proceading, in deid substantius and formal, if he should do that he
does promise. To this place he has spoken all Pythagorice that is of his owen
invention, as he will seem, without any probation, and first alleged, the
Psalmest David, and S. Paul, to prove that which is confessed of every one.
Our Savior to be a preiste for ever, according to the ordoure of
Melchisedec, quha maid oblation of bread and wine unto God, as the Scripture
plainly teaches.

The place here alleged, I have already entreated at large, but now will I say
to this false glosare, that he is never able to prove, that never Melchisedec
made any oblation, and if he made any, he made it to Abraham. But that he made
no oblation, it is plain, by the Hebrew and Greik Text. For the word is
plain, he brought forth and not offerred up. And that he gave this bread and
wine to Abraham, There is no mention of any other, in that that Melchisedec
brought forth bread and wine, but only of Abraham, read the. 14. Chap. of Genesis
it is manifest likewise, by the praise that is given to Melchisedec, of his
liberalytie in refreshinge Abraham and his weary Host, according to that he
was King: and in blissing Abraham, conform to the duty of the priest.
Besides this, which is the very meaning of the Spirit of God, the Relative
(him) makes all that preceadeth to be understand of Abraham, in consideration
that there is no mention of any other, but of Abraham only. Now I resson
(says this Doctor) on this manner Read all the Euangell, quhare our Savior
used the Preisthede of Mechisedec, declaring him to be ane priest according to
the ordour of Melchisedec, but in ye latter supper: quhair he maid oblation of
his precious body and blude under the form of bread and wine, prefigurat be
the oblation of M^^^hisedec, than are we compelled that our Savior maid
oblation of his body and blude, in the latter Supper, or else he was not a
priest, according to the ordour of Melchisedec. Albeit that heretofore I have
declared sufficiently, all that belongs to the explication of this place, yet
shall I not werie to adduce somewhat for the more clear understanding of the
place, and co^uicting of the gros, malicius and blind ignorance of this Author.
What a madness and phrenesie, shall we think it in this Scripturer, that he can
not content him self with this that the Spirit of God has teached us? The
author to the Hebrews has declared the words of the Psalm, and has
pretermitted nothing, apperteaning to the similytude and comparison of our
Sacrificator Jesus Christ, and Melchisedec.

The Psalmist, The exposition and meaning of the Psalmest.
no dout, in the forenamed Psalm, vendicateth and attributes to our Savior,
the dignity of the kingdom, together with the progatiue of Eternal
preisthead: having spoken of his kingdom, in the fourt verse, he discendeth to
his preisthead, where he shows his preisthead, to be far different from the
preisthead of Aaron, being such an as should not now be after the ordoure of
Aaron, but after the ordor of Melchisedec. Secondly he shows it to be firm
and stable, planted by the authority of the Eternal, who shall never be
stricken with repentance, that is, the thing he has ones decreed, shall not
alterre nor change: then does he add the orackle, which does not consist in
oblation of bread and wine, nor yet is it added, thou art a priest, according
to the ordour of Melchisedec, to signify any such thing, as thou fondly
diuisest, but to declaire the perpetuity and the quality of his preisthead,
as the author to the Hebrews does plainly witness, declair and expone.

First then we have here the kingdom and the preisthead given by God unto our
Savior, so that he is both king and priest. By the kingdom we understand,
What is to be understand by the kingdom and preisthead of Christ.
that power that is given to him in heaven and in earth, to govern and defend
his subjects, to be avenged upon his enemies.

The office of the priest, is to instruct in the fear of God, to intercead for
remission of sins, to pray and offer, which offices, the Evangelist does
pla^nely witness, that Jesus Christ has fulfilled. The papists beshameles
liers always
And therefore ye do manifestly belie the spirit of God. And where ye affirm
that Jesus Christ did no part of the office of Melchisedec, unless we grant
that he did offer up him self, under the forms of bread and wine, that is a
manifest vntrenth. For that Christ is king and priest, was the office of
melchisedec, that his preisthead is eternal, and not temporal (as the
preisthead of Aaron was) is proper to Melchiesdec, that Christ does bless his
elect, and not curse them, was also the office of Melchisedec, and all these I
suppose ye will confess Jesus Christ, has done, and yet does. These two
offices in Moses and Aaron, being distinguished, are joined in Melchisedec,
the Type and figure of our Savior, in whom they be not only joined, but
perfected.

Secondly, as the kingdom and preisthead are not given to him by man, but by
God: as we may collect of this that the Lord swear. This observes the author
to the Hebrews, when he says: no man usurps any honor, but he that is
called as Aaron. An antithesis, betiuxt Christ and the pope
So the Son of God, being Lord of all, abides the appointment and vocation
of his Father: to the great shame and rebuke of the Popes, that no les
impiuslie nor impudently, takes and usurps the crown of the kingdom, and
the myter of the Bishopprie, and preisthead to them selves, without commission,
or laufull vocation. And therefore most justly shall it be said to them, they
reign, but not of the Lord, they are preistes, but not the Lords.

Thridly, this preisthead is assigned with a great ceremony, and by a certane
Religion established, and that with one Solemn oath, which peculiarly
co^ueneth to our Savior, and is diligently noted, in the Epistle to the Hebr.
others preistes (says he) are made without any oath, Hebr. 7.
but this priest is made by the oath of him that said to him, the Lord has
sworn, and shall not repent him, thou art the eternal priest: that by two
things that can not be moved, the promise, An sure comfort by the preisthed of
Christ
and the oath, by the which it is impossible, that God shall lie, we may reteane
the most firm confort of our faith, conceived of the preisthead of Christ,
that with a steadfast esperance we may enter in the inward parts of the
Sanctuary with our Savior.

Feardly, this preisthead, thus confirmed with an oath, can not be changed nor
transferred, but shall remain firm and immutable. For it is plainly said,
and he should not repent him. This steadfaste perpetuity of the preisthead of
our Savior, The perpetuity of Christ's preisthead.
is observed and declared by the Apostle: many preistes, says he, was made
under the Law, because they might not remane, being subject to death: but our
priest no ways being subject to mortalytie, has an eternal preisthead. The
word used by the Apostle, I have noted before, and the propriety of it.

And in this we may observe the difference of the preisthead of our Savior,
from all other outward and externe, which can not be governed by the dead, and
in this consideration requires multitude and succession, since no man can have
an Eternal preisthead, being subject to infirmity and corruption. So that the
necessity moves, that may were made preistes. The preisthead of Christ is
such that it can not be stayed by infirmity, The excellency of the preisthed
of Jesus Christ.
retarded by diseas, nor impeded by death. But in the death rather appears
cheiflie, he having thereby satisfied to the judgment of his Father, and
reconciled us again, so that yet still he is able to susteane the duty, and
perform the office of preisthead, even now sitting in heaven, at the right
hand of the Father, and interceading for mercy to us: whereby we are
admonished, that the preisthead of Jesus Christ, is of a spiritual nature, not
consisting in any outward, forrane, and beggarly ceremonies, which ca^ in
nowise appease the wraith of God. This our Priest never faints in the
execution of his office, ever leaving to call upon God for us. Now considder
what ignominy it is to this Priest and his office, that a certane shauelinges
shall intruse them selves in his office, and proudly take upon them, the office
of mediation betuix God and man, as that our Savior either were negligent, or
then unable to discharge him of his office.

Now in this that is said (after the ordour of Melchisedec) we shall observe
that there was never from the beginning, any sort of preisthead of that
nature, that it might be any wise alterred, changed, or innouate at the
appetite of any man, but ever restricted to a certane ordour, and that by God.
So that now as it is easy to vain, ambitius, and me^ of arrogant stomaches, to
divise and innent preistheades and ordoures, at their owen pleasure, it is even
als easy to reject them.

Last shall we observe, the diversity and dissagrement of this preisthead with
it of Aaron, which consists in vmbers, shadows, figures, rytes, and
ceremonies, altogether in them selves unprofitable and unable to obteane
remission of sins, Christ neadeth no succesor, because he lives for ever,
as the Apostle writes to the Heb.
and to pacify Gods wraith: yea, and the which now, in respect of the
infirmity of it, by the which it was astricted to a certane plurality,
multitude, and succession, is utterly abolished. And now a Sacrificer is
placed, all society, fellowship, and company being removed. For the cause
taken away, the effect must cease. The cause of plurality, was death, from
the which our priest is exempted. Confer this that we have here adduced, with
the sayings of the Apostle, Hebre. 7. And all shall be made manifest, that this
Author goes about to trouble. Where first the Apostle exponeth the name, which
is Melchisedec, meaning the King of Justice. Secondly, the place of his
kingdom, which is Salem, that is quietness and peace. For in his kingdom
only, is tranquillity, as is written, there is no peace to the wicked, and by
the Apostle, our Savior is called our peace. Thridly, is set forth his
generation, which can not be declared, he being without Father, mother, and
Genealogy. Feardly, the perpetuity of his kingdom and preisthead, The name,
kingdom, preisthed and Genealogy of Melchisedec.
nether having beginning nor yet ending, remaning the priest for ever, and made
like unto the Son of God. Fyftly, the dignity and prerogative of his
preisthead, in that, that he receaueth teindes of Abraham the Patriarck and the
appointed Father of all faithful. Last, the office of his preisthead, in
blessing Abraham, having already used him self liberally, as became a King, in
receiving him and his company to banked.

These things, how properly they conuene to our Savior, it is more easy to
considder, nor that I neid to apply them particularly. Now pas thy way, fond
and vane Papist, and add that which is impius, wicked, and deuillishe. I
regard not how many thou have to be companions in thy error. The Scollers of
Christ bears that reverence to their master, that where as the Spirit of
God keeps silence, they inquire not, as we may observe by the exemple of the
Author to the Hebrews, who suteth nothing of Father, mother, nor Genealogy of
Melchisedec: but seeing there was none expressed by Moses, he both willingly
misknoweth it, yea, and wills that we shall not inquire of it, having before
our eyes, that moderation and sobriety we oght to have in reading and exponi^g
of Scriptures, never to inquire further in the holy mysteries, the^ Gods holy
spirit does teach us. In the mysteries of god we oght not to inquire further
nor the Spirit of God hes reueiled.
Wherefore we neid not to declaire any cause why, nor to what e^d Melchisedec
brought forth bread and wine, since the spirit of God declares it not: always
that, that we have spoken of the refreshing of Abraham, we have followed the
judgment and conjecture of Josephus, and Crysostomus, like as in Hosting, we
know how thankful it is, how great plenty of wictualles, soever we have, to
be refreshed with fresh meats and drinks.

Now good Reader, how captiuslie this wranglare of Scripture trauelleth in this
matter, considder with thy self. I know well enough, what he braggeth of some of
the Ancients, that abuses this place of Melchisedec. But let no suffrage of
antiquity draw us from the commentary of the Spirit of God, who in a matter
of so great weight, would not have pretermitted the oblation of Melchisedec, if
it could have served anywise to the purpose.

Hereby, Sire, ye may understand sufficiently, that to be a priest, after the
ordour of Melchisedec, is not to offer up bread and wine, as ye falsely allege
Melchisedec to have done, but this to be referred to the stabilitie of Christ's
preisthead, and eternity of the same, as I have declared at large, so that we
may collect the dout of James, to be most reasonable, douting.

Gif he maid oblation of bread and wine, for other wayis (As he says) zour
argument can have na apperance.

We shall observe in like manner, the vanity of your answer to his dout,
assuring hi^ most untruly that the Scripture speikis it sa plain that it
leifes no place to dubitation.

And where as it is appointed to you to bring forth the words of the
Scriptures, ye, as altogether unmindful of the purpose that ye have in hand,
passes your way, and bring in a similytude, having nothing to do with the
matter.

First ye should have brought the words of the Text, and by them prouen, that
Melchisedec offered bread and wine to God, which is declared to be falls and
untrue, and then pereuenture your simylitude of the tree, in a shining and
bright Son, casting his vmbers according to the multitude of the brenches,
might have had some probability: by the which similitude, ye go about to prove
that every thing in the old Testament is a figure of some what in the new,
which I am assured thou can not justify universally, no not in the things
that be very figures in every point. For howsoever, every leaf of the tree
has the shadow, coresponde^t unto it, yet I am assured there be many ti^hgs
in the figures of the old Testament, Consider here, Sa^son, David, and Salomo^
which were figures of Christ.
which can not be attributed, nor in any condition conuene to the verity, the
treuth, and the body in the new, without a great Sacrilege. Samson is the
figure of our Savior, we read that he played the harlote: shall we werifie this
of our Savior: David likewise, being the figure of Christ, was an adulterare,
and to the crime of Adultery, joined slaughter. Shall we affirm this of the
body, which is Christ? Solomon was the most lively figure of all, and yet he
was carried away a whoring after falls Gods and Idols, at the appetite of his
wifes. 1. Kin. 11
Will ye find any thing correspondent to this in our master? God forbid, we
so think, or that any such thought enter into our hearts. So ye see manifestly,
that of all thing is found in the figure, we oght not to feak the like in the
verity, as we shall show in the Pashall Lamb shortly.

We read plainly in the Text, that Melchisedec brought forth bread and wine,
and that to conforte Abraham and his Army, as before we have said. In deid we
may find not unlike to this in Christ, Christ refreshed the people in the
wilderness.
that at sindrie times in the wilderness, he fed the people, that followed upon
him, they being destitute of sustentation, and wearied of the journey: yea, and
in the latter Supper, he gave bread and wine to his Disciples. And yet I will
go further with you, that in the Lords Table, we offer up bread and wine, to
be sanctified of the Lord, and that it may be made a Sacrament by him. These
things as I will not deny, so they may somewhat conuene. But that he made
oblation of bread and wine unto his Father, in any such condition as ye
pretend, as Melchisedec made none at all, so his doing can not serve you, to
prove your intent, yea, and when all should be granted to you, what strenth I
pray you, is in an allegory, to set up any doctrine, and make it of
authority? none at all. But seeing the Spirit of God passes by this with
silence, we may judge it altogether strainge from the purpose. If this
sobriety were in this doctor, he should not those him self to be thus carried
away God send you his holy Spirit, to lighten your heart, and oppe^ your eyes,
that ye may see, and purge your smelling that ye may smell out Gods treuth,
and embrace the same. Let us come to the exemple.

That is na dout (says he) but the Pascall Lamb was a figure of the
Sacrifice of the croce. Nottheles, that figure was coresponde^t in all parts,
to it, that was done in the latter Supper. For quhy we reid, that the Lamb was
offerred in Sacrifice of the Hebreains, in recordation of the benefit, the
quhilk the people of Israel was delivered fra the servitude of Pharo: and
bringing out of Egypt, bot the Sacrifice of the croce was not in recordation of
any benefit, bot it was the self benefit, the same self liberation fra sin,
the same self Redemption fra the captivity of the Devil. Quhairfore it was
necessare that be the immolation of the Pascall Lamb, ane other immolation
besides it done on the croice, sold be signified, the quhilk in the latter
supper was done, than man we conclude conform to the Scriptures, that like as
the Sacrifice of the Pascall Lamb was a co^memoration of benefit and gudenes
of Almichtie God, toward the people of Israel, quhair they delivered fra the
servitude and tyranny of Pharo, euin sa is the Sacrifice of the Lords body in
the latter Supper called the mass, a perpetual commemoration and remembrance
of the great gudnes of Almichty God, quhair he delivered the haill world fra the
tyranny and servitude of the Devil, be the Sacrifice of the croce, sa the
Sacrifice of the croce and the Sacrifice of the mass in all parts are
correspondent to the figure and Sacrifice, of the Pascall Lamb.

Now will I call upon the heaven and the earth, to bear record to it that
shall be now tossed betuix me and this Author, and how substancially he
proceadeth in the probatio^, to prove by the Pasouer two Sacrifices: one in the
latter Supper, an other of the croice. Your conclusion is plain, that by the
immolation of the Pashall Lamb, an other immolation besides it was done upon
the croice should be signified, the which (say ye) was done in the latter
Supper. And so will ye of a Sacrifice in figure, make two to start forth. Either
must ye say that, in that, the Pasouer Lamb was Sacrificed, it was a figure of
the immolation of our Savior upon the croice, or then it was a figure of that
oblation that was made (as ye pretend) in the Supper, take your chose, ye shall
never conclude of it, two immolations, as ye fondly travel to prove.

To it of the Supper, I can nowise aggre, for then the verity shall not
coresponde to the figure. In the Supper there was no shedding of blood, as was
in the immolatio^ of the Lamb, The pashal la^be and the Lords Supper do not
aggre in all points, for in the Lords Supper, was no blood shedding
which is the principal point belonging to the nature of a Sacrifice, but ye
will answer, that the La^be was offered in recordation of their deliverance. I
answer, that is very falls, for it was principally to serve to the figure of
that deliverance and Sacrifice, whereby all Sacrifices has their vigure, and
by the which we have, all deliverance, to wit, the Sacrifice of the croice. Ye
will object That the Sacrifice of the croice was not a recordation of the
deliverance of us, fra the tyrranny of Satan, bot the deliverance it self.

That, I answer, is likewise falls, speaking as ye do, strictly, For it is only
the instrument, by the which, of the part of our Savior, deliverance and
Salvation, are purchased unto us, that believes in Jesus Christ.

Bot it was the Pascal Lamb (will ye say) that was offered up in recordatio^ of
their deliverance.

In that I say it does aggre with the Supper of the Lord, that like as in it
we are commanded to celebrate the Lords death, till he come, so were they to
have remembrance of their deliverance, so that this is not in respect of the
offerring, which principally is to be referred to the Sacrifice of the croice,
whereof all Sacrifices were figures: but in consideration of the Lords Table,
The lords table came instead of the Pashcal lamb
which was to be placed, and succead in the room of it, and this to be the
very Bermane interpretation of that place, it is most plain, by the Apostle
Paul. 1. Cor. 5. where he affirms Christ to be offered up our Pasouer, and
so exhorts us to be mirrie and rejoice, without any mention of Sacrification,
and offerring up of him, under the forms of bread and wine.

True it is, that in every ceremony under the Law, we have to consider three
sindrie things, the first is, a co^memoration of some benefit received: as no
dout, the Pasouer, in consideration that it was a Sacrament, brought them in
mind of their deliverance out of Egypt. Secondly, we have to receive it as an
vmber or figure of Christ Jesus, as the offerring up of the Lamb, what we
have to consider in the sacrifices of the Law.
the spilling of the blood of him, was a figure of the Redemption of man, by
the blood and passion of our Savior. Thridly, it served for a document of good
life, holiness, and so forth.

As the Apostle concludes in the place before recyted, let us rejoice in all
purity, and verity. The same shall we observe in the first fructes, and the
rest of the Sacrifices under the Law: but to eshew all cauillatio^ of such
Sophisters, as go about to deceive, we have to observe every point, to examine
it that is proper to a Sacrament, and it that belongs to a Sacrifice, and so
to distinguishe them skilfully, as in the exemple of the Pashe Lamb, which in
consideration of the offerring and immolation, only apperteaneth to the
Sacrifice of the croice, as I have said.

Now will I travel to show the aggrement and similytude of the Pasouer, with
the Supper of the Lord, yea, and wherein they do dissagre, as in no figure can
be found the perfect image of the verity, aggreing in all points with it that
is corespondent, howsoever ye those your self to be deceived, and goes about
to deceive others. This is first to be observed, in the institution of the holy
Supper, that even as immediately, after the eating of the Pasouer, the holy
communion was instituted by our master and Savior Christ: so does he observe
the same ordour that Moses rehearses to be kept, and was appointed by the
eternal our God, in the eating of the Sacrament of the Pasouer: for that same
night that the Lord had decreed to slay the first borne of Egypt, and to
deliver his owen people, by the hand of the Angel, he ordained the Sacrament
of the Pasouer, to be a testimony and monument of that wonderful deliverance,
even immediately after to be perfected. The deliverance of the people ensewed a
little space after: the memory whereof every year, by this Sacrament was
renewed at the commandment of God.

In the same manner our Savior, that self same night that he was to be
betrayed, and in the which, he was to beat down that most cruel Pharoo, and
his whole power, together with his first borne Son, Death, Hell, to perfect
the things that were prefigurate by the Pash Lamb, he institute the holy
Supper, to be a perpetual monument of that unspeakable benefit, he was to
obteane unto us, and in place of a Lamb, and the blood of it, the Symboles of
the Pasouer, he appointed the signs of bread and wine, Why our Lord Ie^us,
insteade of the pasouer la^b ordained bread and wine.
elements, as most serving to the refection, nurishement, feading, and confort
of man's body, and likewise commonly most parable and easy to be obtained, so
most proper to bind up and confirm frenship and amity. Celius Rhodiginus
teaches this to have been most solemn and familiare to the Lacedaemonians, by
the breaking of bread, to receive in amity, such as they embraced in
confideracie and league. Aristotle in the. 8. book of his Morals, declares the
nature of amity, to be such, that as by mutual leuing together, resorting at
table together, it is reteaned, so by long silence and absence it is dissolved,
as the greik Proverb there recyted by Aristotle, and Atheneus in his fyft book,
does evidently prove. In these signs, our master and Savior instituteth his
holy Supper which was to remane, and practiced to his returning, to assure us
hereby of his presence, howsoever he is, touching his bodylie presence, absent,
and to ratify and establishe that amity, league, and society, the Eternal
God received us in, and that in the blood of his dear Son. Touching the
time, this we may observe, that as the wisdom of our God determines all
things, and appoints in the most due and convenient time: So this hour of
his Supper, to have served most properly to that holy action, by him then
practiced. We observe most diligently and keep in mind most faithfully, not
only the factes, but the words of them that we see in the travel and battall
of death, thereby as it were, calling to mind the memory of him who is
departed: these things as most notable, we judge most worthy of Register,
the treuth of them and majesty being sealed up by the very death.

The hour of his death then approaching, and at hand, and in the which, not
only the Lamb of the Pasouer, but all the rest of the Sacrifices appointed in
blood, were to receive their perfection and end, and so to have no further
place, the time can not be, but most proper, the ceremonies of the Law being
in no point by him neglected the figures fully performed, and the presence of
his body to be immediately after to them denied. Wherefore, not without cause he
changed the signs, whereby the things to come, were foresignified, in such
signs as should declaire those things to be performed already. So then
followed, the deliverance by the ^eath of Christ, the memory whereof, is
celebrated by the frequentation of the Lords Supper, to the which use it was
appointed. For he commanded, take ye, eat ye, this is my body, do this in
remembrance of me, the which commandment (as I have teached) can of no better
reason be separate from this Sacrament, and adjoined to any fond Sacrifice, nor
the promise, by the which, is plainly declared the cause of the institution,
when he says, this is my body, which is given to you: and this is my blood,
and sofurth. For how I pray you can these words, that be here interiected
(given for you, and shed for you) how can they (I say) be separate from the
action preceading and from the commandment, that is after given? Or how can
the commandment be drawn from the whole action preceading? That can be no
more, nor the members from the body. So they pervert the holy ordinance of our
Savior, that separateth the commandment from the promise, or yet the promise,
or any part of it from the action.

Now that the Pasouer was likewise a similytude and a figure of Christ's death,
may easylie be declared by sindrie things, which nowise can apperteane to the
communion. First in the Sacrifice of the pasouer, the Lamb was flaine, which
can nowise aggre with the Supper, in the which, there is no slaughter nor
boucherie, but ye will here insist and repyne, alledgeing by this, that it is a
Sacrifice. To this I have answered you, that there is no unbloody Sacrifice, by
the plain words of the Apostle. For ye teach plainly, that your mass is not
only a Sacrifice of thanks giving, but of expiation of sins which can not
stand, without spilling of blood. The Lamb was sla^^e, the blood of him spilt,
and that foresignified the death and cruel intreatment of Jesus Christ, who
was to be offered up in a bloody manner upon the croice, and this can nowise
aggre with the Supper, nor yet your fond oblation made in it, as ye imagine:
for as witnesses Paul, our Pasouer is offerred up, Christ. Like as the
Supper does lively testify and represent, so by the immolation of the Lamb,
as by the figure, was foreshewe^ to the fathers, the offerring up of the
Savior of the world: yea, and declared that he was the Lamb of God, that
takes away the sins of the world, of whom there was no bone broken: yea,
and of whose mactation Isay as fore prophecieth, Isay. 53.
under the image and figure of the Lamb and the sheep: and to the which
alludeth the history of the oblation of Isaac. Genesis 22.
By the which testimonies and figures, was plainly and evidently declared to
the Fathers that, which the Baptist declared in few words, calling him the
Lamb of God, and the taker away of the sins of the world. Hebr. 10
These things then, now fulfilled, even according as they were adumbrat in the
Law, and forespoken by the Prophets, there is no other oblatio^ nor emisio^ of
blood for sine, for since the way that he has prepared for us, Mat. 26
is fresh by his blood, which is the blood of the new testament, whereby he
testifies that we have not to esteem this reco^ciliation made by him, and in
the which we are received in his blood, to i^dure for a ^eason, but the strenth
of it, to be Eternal and permanent. What have we to do then, as it were, to
gaise for a new Christ, and to luke continually for others Sacrifices and
Laws, such as no godly heart can susteane?

The Sacrament of the pasouer contained a Sacrifice, and a banked, the one to
forewarne of that eternal Sacrifice of the Croce, which was ones perfyred and
never reiterated, the other to instruct of the Lords Table. The Sacrifice
being offered and perfected ref^eth to use the co^nsaill of the Apostle, 1. Cor.
5
and so to of^re us to the ban^ed of the Lords table, where we are made
participant of his body and blood. For the Apostle says not since our Pasouer
Christ is offered up, let us Sacrifice him a new, but let us make merry offering,
and representing us to his holy Table in all sincerity, and verity to be made
one with him.

Besides this the sprinkling of the Lambs blood, which was a manner of
Sacrifice declared planely the wraith of the Father to be appeased, and the
people reconciled, The conformity of the paschal La^be with the Sacrifice to
the croce and the holy communion.
which properly apperteaneth to the Sacrifice of the croce, be virtew whereof
we are restored to the favor of God.

The eating of the Lamb apper^aneth most properly to the Supper, for thereby
is witnessed, that we be al perticipant of that Sacrifice, by the which
reconciliation was made and salvation procured and purchassed, to so many (I
say) as worthelie eats of that Banked. The mystery of the time, which was
commanded to be after the going down of the Son, aggreith most properly
with the Sacrifice of the croce, representing and declaring in the latter days
the fulness and plenitude of time being come, then should the Son of God be
offered up. That how soever our Savior practeist and did institute this holy
action after down passing of the Sone being drewe^ so to do, by a certane
necessity as I have decleared, yet was it not to leif a perpetual reule and
bynd us straightly to that time: But by his owen words he has set us at
liberty, as well touching the frequent using as touching the time.

The pasouer was eaten but ones in the year, and at a statute day and time, but
our master says, do this as often as ye do it, in remembrance of me. Setting
us in fredome to use his supper, as often as we please. And at what time we Judge
most couenient.

Be the aggreance and dissimilitude of the pasouer with the Supper of Jesus
Christ, it may now evidently appear what apperteaneth to the supper properly
and what is to be referred to the Sacrifice of the Croce, yea, and how fondly
ye are abused in applycation hereof to your fond Sacrifice, let us return to
our master Doctor, where he plays the Sophistre in deed and hyngeth I
warrant now by a small grip.

Attoure it is sure (says he) that Jesus Christ our savior come to fulfill
the law, and not break it, it was commanded be the law, to make obla^tion of y^
Pascale Lamb before it was eat^n, so was it necessare, that our Savior hade
first maid oblation of his body before he gave the same to be eatin, to the
effect that the verity sold corresponde to the figure. Quharefore we at
compelled to affirm that our Savior maid oblation of his body in the latter
Supper before he gave the same to be eatin, or else the verity was not
correspondent to the figure. Quhilk is against all verity, and this may ze
clearlye perceive that the Pascal Lamb, was not only a figure of the sacrifice
of the Croice, but a mere express figure of the sacrifice of the mass as is
sufficiently prouen.

Trewly Brother since, thou have no other refuge, but to clean to a certane
circumstance of time, Discovered craft is a henderance to the cause and fame of
the politic practiser.
I even piety the and repent me vetray fore vndoutedlie that thou should mell
with the defense of so desperate and wicked cause. And here as ever thou did in
all thy life, thou playest the sophister most craftily, if thou could have
covered thy craft but thou know craft, when it is oppenned up and perceived
whate a hindrence it is to the faime and opinion of a man.

True it is that thou proponest our Savior to have come to perform and not to
break the Law, but that thou affirmest the Lamb to have been offered before it
was eaten, that thou prouest not, nether yet art thou able to prove by the
institution of God, or by the plain words of the Text, that any commandment
was given to the people to offer the Lamb to God before it was slain* or
before it was eaten, commandment was given that they should take it, keip it,
slay it, sprinkle the blood of it, No commandment to offer the Lamb.
roast it, eat it, and so forth. But of offering of it, shall thou and no
commandment I will not deny, but that the pasouer ryghtlie done with all
circumstances according to Gods commandment may be called a Sacrifice, but I
absolutely deny that it was commanded to be offered before it was commanded to
be eaten, The Abbot is an unfaithful patro^ to the miserable mass
so that the offering signified a Sacrifice as thou alledgest and the eaten out
other, and so seeing thou leauest that vnprouen, whereupon thy vnsa^erie
Sacrifice depends, considdre with thy self how unfaithful a Patron art thou
to the miserable Mass.

But if I should grant that which thou art never able to prove, to wit, that
the Lamb was offered before it was eaten* what will thou conclude that there
was two Sacrifices; or the figures of two Sacrifices? that I deny, Note.
for what soever was done with the Lamb, or to the Lamb, before the eating,
was done in respect of the eating and to the end, it should be eaten of the
people, so that if the eating had been omitted all that preceded had been
unprofitable, and so the whole action of the pasouer, was but a sacrifice, (if
thou so will have it termed and the figure of a sacrifice, to wit; of Christ's
body ones offered upon the Croce, whose flesh and blood by his death, Ihon. 6.
are become the verrie nurishment of our Souls, according to his owen promise,
saying and the bread that I shall give you, it is my flesh, which I shall give
for the life of the world.

Play thou thy self, with thy mearie conceait, dreaming that he first offered
his body, and then he gave it to be eaten. We are assured, he did offer it
upon the Croce, by which only oblatio^ we have obtained life, Sear^h then what
thou lest in thy Sacrific^ of thy mass, life shall thou not find in it, for
that flows from Christ's death only, Life flows to man of the croce of
Christ
but master Doctor if a man should dema^de by which words is this your
Sacrifice of the mass instituted, if ye answer by these, this is my body. and.
Then ye grant that there was no thing offered before they words were
pronounced.

Then if some man should dema^d were the Apostles obedient to Christ's
commandiment or not. It well be hard to you to say that they repined in that
caise, but plain it is, that the bread being broken, Christ said take ye, eat
ye, and after subiuned the other words then it appears, that some of the
Apostles were busye with the bread, before the whole words were pronunced. And
so would some captius man, and that not without some just cause, seeing ye
deal with the matter so captivity, say, that if his body was not eaten, yet it
was in eating before it was offered, thus ye may espy, that we can trouble you
if we list, for our conjecture hes more probability, nor hes your bold
affirmation, Christ's body was offered before it was eaten, because the pasouer
was offered before it was eaten.

But such anxius and to curious observation of every moment of time, will not
serve to establishe and for up a new doctrine, wicked and impius, it that is
worthy observation of the time, What is worthy^ of observation in the
circumstance of time in one and the other
is this in the o^e and the other, that the Lord our God, being of mind to
deliver his people out of Egypt, and to see them at liberty, he instituted the
Pasouer, which should be unto them as a figure and a monument of there fredome
and (...) to all ginerations in the ages to come and that they should be the
more diligent in observation of his ordinance at that same time there was no
little dainger appearing to Egypt, and they not as yet delivered, he commanded
them to do this, for we be more moved and affected with those things that we
be teached in the myddest of a great trouble, and calamity, nor with those
that be repdited unto us in all quietness and security, for as solicitude and
fear makes a man more attentive, war, and able to conceive, so do they make a
man more thankful and myndful of the benefit received.

Likewise we observe that our master and savior Christ that same night he was
betrayed, the displeasour and melancholy having occupied the hertes of his
Apostles then did he institute his holy supper, whereby they should be
admonished of there insta^te delyuerance that was to follow at hand.

Yet since ye urge the figure, and preisseth so earnestly at the time, I pray
you answer to me if any Preiste we disquieted, called upon, appointed for the
Immolation of the Easter Lamb, The Easter La^be was only a sacrifice of
gratulation.
ye know I trust the contrary, it was commanded to be eaten, in every housse
slain be the master of the housse, without any Ceremonye, or circumstance
commanded in otheres Sacrifices, as of preiste altar; and sofurth, whereby it
appears evidently that it was only rekned to be a Gratulatorie Sacrifice,
and of the kind of such as were called meat offringes, and no such as ye
mean, and this we will not deny to conueine most properly to the Communion
as has been clearlie declared.

Now then a little with you. where of proceadeth this your Papisticall
Preisthead, by the which ye claim Authority to offer up the Lamb of God,
since ye see no priest called upon here in the figure, but the master of the
housse in this to have the charge. answer to to this Papist.
Now apply the figure to the verity, and ye shall perceive how great a vanity
it is to seik the congruence, aggrement, and similitude of the one with the
other in all points, for if that should have place, never shall I seik one
other argument, but the figure to euert thy whole purpose, as thou alledgest,
the Son of God should be first offered and sacrificed according to the figure,
then shall it follow, that he was first slain, syne eaten, yea, and after he
was eaten, slain again, as we know Christ Jesus to have dead upon the
Crioce, after his holy Supper. These are the great absurditeis following upon
the figures.

Forther to inquire of the time, it is vain and ^ur^u^, yea, and foulishe to
lead any probation thereby, Of circumstances can be led no solid probatio^
an establishe any thing any ways doutsum, let be it that is manifestly
wicked. Here James is moved seeing this dimne bring all his probations out of
the figures of the old Testament, to utter his Judgment, and think that the
figures of the auld Testament ar noche sufficient confirmatioun of the matters
of faith, concerning the new Testament. As in verrie deid allegoreis, how
soever the Ancients delyted in them, are but weak probatio^s and not mekle to
be leaued unto: In some places being used modestly, they may be received in
doctrine of admonition.

But to this, this Doctor boldly pronunceth. ze think (sayis he) all wra^g
because zour heart is against the Scripture, dois not our Savior confirm his
burying till endure three dayis, and three nychtis, be the figure of Jonas? Dois
nocht Peter prove Baptism necessary be the figure of the Arc of Noie,
affirminge all thaim till have perissed that were without it, Likewise Paul
callis to remembrance the two Sons of Abraham, to have signified the two
Testamentis, thus may we perceive the special matters of our faith, conteaned
in the new Testament to be confirmed be the figures of the auld Testament.

To prove his intent, this glorious divine adduces three exemples out of sindre
places of the new Testament, even as these places were cyted out of the old
Testament, as solid probations. When as they are adduced only to Illustrate
the matter, which is already decleared to be luke for, or then that which is
already prouen by strong arguments: Last to shaw that they have some figure, or
similitude in the old Testament. We know that our Savior, to whom, and to
his holy spirit, it apperteneth to expone, and declare the conformity of the
figure^, with the matter represented by them, and not to, every one to take upon
him to devise and ymagine al thing according to us fond fai^talie: our Savior
(I say again) being in oportuned be the Iowes, continually calling for signs
tokenes, The similitude of Jonas to what e^d it serves
wounderous works, according to there ingyne, he thus disdanefully tr^etteth
them, and pronunceth them unworthy of the things they called for most
earnestly, and ^o ^urte^h them of sch^rcie, and says they shall have no
other sign, but the sign of Jonas, who was three days, ad three nyghtes in the
whales belly, not hereby laboring or intending to prove his Burial anywise,
but rather to mock and wrape them up in a great obstinacy and blyndnes.

It that is adduced by Peter of the Arc of Noie, is not to serve for one
probation of his purpose, but to declare that he is not altogether destitute of
some thing i^ the old Testament secu^ng and aggreing to his matter. The Ark
served not for aprobation of Baptism but only shows su^thing to be in
testament aggrei^g with it in some consideration.
And to prosecute the conformity of the figurat things wi^h the figures, what
have we correspondent in Baptism, to maste sailles and other things most
properly apperteyninge to the Arc, if this should be urged, as show most
instantly requirest, then in Baptism, we pull up sailles, and have all other
things aggreing with the Ark: perceive your owen vanity. God forbid, We shall
so entreat the Scripturs of God, that the German treuth and verity of the
matters rejected, we shall cleave unto incertane Allegories, having no pith nor
strenth to convince, but rather with variety of matter delight, as may most
euedentlie appear be the exemple of Paul, who having prouen his intent by
strong arguments and interiected certane exhortations to move the Galathians,
When allegories has place.
for decoring and erornyng the matter adds this allegory or figure, which in
it self, is no solid probation, but now is not to be rejected the matter being
sufficiently prouen.

Origenes in deid, and a great noumbre with him are moved, yea, carried away
after Allegories, by this exemple of the Apostle: thrawing and wreisting the
Scripture from the owen proper sense and understanding: curious and vain men
delyting more in subtle speculations and diuises of there owen hertes, nor in
solid doctrine and treuth, and the natural interpretation of the Scripture:
And of this no dout has proceeded the great ignorance and contempt of the
Scriptures, the profanation whereof God has most Justly avenged, in this
that we see the verrie proper intelligence of them ouerset and oppressed with
bastard glosses, and fond allegories. God auengeth the profanation of his
scripture by bastard gloses and fond Allegories.
If we will proof it in the intelligence of the scriptures, Let us clean to
the Germane sense of the Text, embrace it, and stik by it. As to divised
expositions aliene fra the matter, what culour or cloik so est they shall have,
let us not only reject them boldly, but judge them unworthy to be hard. And
this is the mind of Chrysostomus upon the forenamed place of Paul.

Now pass thy way with thy vain Allegories and deceive James or such others
that knows not the pith of them: In figures and parables the substantial
points being observed co^formitie in all things is not to be su^ed.

The Abbot vrgi^g the figure at al will appear to favor the heresy of such
as denied Christ to have been crucified but Simon Cyreneus supponed for him.


for we are (God be praised) other ways instructed, nor to receive them to
establishe any doctrine, otherwise doutsome, either yet to seik the conformity
of the figure, with the thing figurat in all points. For figures we have to
Judge to be as Parables, in the which the scope, and the fine being observed
with the subst^ntiall points serving to the purpose, we have not curiuslie and
anxiuslie to insist in all others things that be rehearsed: a^ is plain to any
man, that is but indifferently versed in the Scripturs. And to end this long
disputatione in one word, Isaac was the figure of our Savior: his immolation,
the type of the Croce of our Savior, and this is the most lyuelie figure, I
darre say, that we can find through out all the Scripturs. Yet do they not in
all aggre, for we know that Isaac, was not offered, but a Ram was taken and
offered for him. If your argument should have place sire their should we say,
that our Savior was not offered up, but as some have said Simon Cyreneus taken
and Crucified for him: tak head, that ye be not suspected of the same deuilishe
and impius opinion.

Now have we perused the parts of your book, in the which ye go about to
prove and establishe your purpose by testimony of Scripture. Your arguments
has been recyted faithfully and so pithilie refelled, that I trust any man of
sobriety should be satisfied, yea, and what so ever thou braggest, either of
thy Judgment in the natural interpretation of the places adduced by the:
either yet of dexterity, in the proper applycation of them (and how vanelie
thou this take upon the) to the purpose and matter: how aptly and
conveniently thou so do I take it to be manifest.

The Abbotes arguments drawn forth of the Scriptures refelled.
But here allace, James yealdeth and casts all from him so struken down by one
allegory, that he grants him utterly vainquest, and almost cries Gods
mercy. Ye lacked I trust (brother James) a faithful armoure bearer to have
served you of wappinnes, but what aualeth it to put good wappinnes of defense,
or yet of invasion in the hands of him that can not handle nor use them in
time, and place. Damd was more expedite, able, and ready with his fling staf,
to go feght against Goliath, nor he was inar^ed on all parts with the fynest
harnes, It is easy to vainques him that makes no defense.
the King had* on the one part, being encuraged be the ryghtuousnes and equity
of the cause, and on the other, feat of his personn and well acquent with his
wappinnes.

Now James grants himself sufficie^tlie persuaded with the conference of
Scriptures, and thinks them seat and proper to the purpose, and only is
desyrus by what other ways and means this divine is able to persuade that our
Savior i^stituted the sacrifice of the mass in the latter Supper, the Doctor
answers. That he will persuad the same by the universal Doctrine
interpretation and consent of the auld Ancient father is Interpretouris of the
Scriptures of almythtie God, both the Greikes and the Latinistes, together
with the deliberatio^ of the may Ancient and notable Counsales. Quhilk ever
hes been sen the faith began.

This is fairlie and largely promeist, and how rashelie interprised shall be
after known, but here I pray thee indifferent reader considder the craft of
this sportar in exornyng and decking up them, quhose authorities he is after to
abuse, not but I will grant a great part of the fathers, and some of the
conciles to be worthy of praise, and admiration. But I pray thee note the
ambition of the man, who will seem to have al for him. I trust to obtene the
same in this part, that I have already in the matters preceading, that is to
pull fra him the authority of the Fathers, and the determinations of
Counciles, such as be of most estimation and faith: And then will he know the
strenth of the reid of Egypt, The Abbote leans to the reid of Egypt
he leans unto.

But here is casten in be James a question, if he thinks that the
interpretation and doctrine of the old writers concerning the mysterijs of the
Supper of the Lord, is sufficient to persuade the Sacrifice of the mass: to
this it is answered, treuly (says he) I am persuaded be i^uincible ressons,
quhilks ar aggreable with ye scripturs of almychtie God, that ye auld writtars
specially they quha was disciples to the Apostles had the true mind and
understanding of ye mysteries of ye scripture, specially of the word is of the
latter Supper. Quhareby they understand the Sacrifice of the Mass.

These things glorious Doctor be persuasiuelie spoken but they be not
arguments of such strenth, as be invincible, but shall be over thrown. Well
James is desyrus to here the reasons. Then (says he) ze sall considder that
after the ascension of our Savior, the Spirit of verity, entered in the hearts
of the Apostles, giving thaim full instructione of all places of Scripture,
quhare our Savior hes spoken in Parables, and all other mysteriis of the
Scriptures, concerning our faith, and true understanding of the sam. Now man ze
understand yt like as the Spirit of verity gave instructione to the Apostles
of all the mysteriis of the Scriptures, swa did the Apostles give instruction
to their Disciples of all mysteriis of the Scriptures necessar to be knawin for
a Christian ma^nis saluatio^e quha were the Primitive Kirk (as I wald say)
beginnares of the faithful Congregation immediately nixt to the Apostles.
Quharefor quhe^ soever question is for the understanding of the mysteriis of
the Scriptures, and specially the Sacramentis and rycht use of thaim, quhilks
but dout ar the may profound mysteriis in all yt Scriptures, it is ane assured
way till have recourse to the auld Ancien wryttares specially they quha was
Disciples to the Apostles and Martyrs, for the faith of Jesus Christ, to have
true instructione both of the Sacraments, and of the rycth use of thaim as
the Kirk of God hes ever teached ws be the perpetual succession of time sen
the time of the Apostles to their our dayis, conform to the doctrine and
interpretation of the Scripture maid be thaim. Quha were Disciples to the
Apostles and als conform to the doctrine and deliberatioun of the general
Counsels duly conuenit to quho^e it appertenis to tak ordour in all matters
doutsu^ concerning faith conform to the Scripture.

We be teached by the Scripturs in deed that the Apostles were endued soddenly
with the gifts of the Spirit from above, which gifts, I believe assuredly were
not Idle in them, so that it is out of all questione, The godly excuse of the
Apostles and Ancien fatheres.
that the Apostles were continually occupied in Predication of the word, in
ministratio^ of the Sacraments, in planting of Churches every where, yea, and
I will go with you in that, that they had certane Familiars awaiting upon them,
whom they instructed, as we read of Lucas the familiar of Paul Marcus of
Peter, and such others, yea, and I will proceade forther yet with you, that
even in doutsum and ambiguus matters that falls in question, I walde gladly
luke upon the works of them, that has faithfully traveled in the action of
godlynes, yea, and receive the determinations of general Counciles, but that
with the reule and restriction given by you, conform to the Striptures. But
that ye will hereby insinuat obliquelie, and quietly mean that all corruption
and vanity Whereby the Church of God, has been heretofore oppressed these
many hundredth years, the Sacraments perverted and right use of them
adulterated, the word being buried in all ignorante and proud contempt, and
man erected, and set up in the place of God, that ye will mean all this to
have proceaded of the Apostles, and consequently of the spirit of God and
hereby defend and restore the abominations over thrawen by the blood, and
labors of many godly men in this our aige, In this I will answer you, feling
your mind reach and tend to this, lest that some simple man shall chop here.
Some things kept bak from the Apostles for a reason, yea, and some
imperfection and i^firmitie in them.


True it is, that the Apostles had given unto them the intelligence of the
Scriptures and the mysteries thereof, to the admiration of all men that so
suddenly ignorant and Idiot men, simple and abject persons should start up
and not only speak the praises of God in every language disertlie, but bouldly
withstand the fury and rage of preistes Magistrates, and the whole people,
where soever they passed: Yet do we observe this discretion in the Spirit of
our God, that some mysteries are kept from them secreit and hid for a
certain time, as the vocation, and calling of the Gentiles, hid from Peter
till the Revelation was made, and the vision came: some did esteem the
Ceremonies of the Law neidful, which question troubled them so that they were
even divided. Thridlye, some imperfectio^s find we in them, as when Paul
withsta^deth Peter in his face being worthy of reprehension. Act. 10. Act. 15.
Gala. 2.
Whereby we are admonished, and may observe the wisdom of our God, in
handling his owen, that howsoever he shall extolle, and set them up, yet does
he bridle them so, that they continually keip in mind and remembrence them
selves, to be men, to receive all of God, and a man left to him self, what he
is, and how ready to declyne from God.

From the like ignorance, the Ancient Fathers Abraham, Jacob, Moses, David can
not be excused: Moses the beloved of god, how cairful he is i^ the government
of the people, in i^structing them, in laying before them continually the law,
the ordinances, and constitutions of God, reducing to there remembrance there
wounderfull delyuerance, there preservation in Egypt, the great cair of God
over them in the wilderness, the mercyful co^uenant made with there Fathers
and renewed with them selves, so that these people were the very familiar
scolers to the Prophet. Exo. 32.
Yet what became? Scarslie has the Prophet turned his bak, and up with God in
the montayne, when they fall to a horrible defection, and haynus apostasy from
God, erecteth Idolatry, yea, and carries the hie preiste Aaron, brother to
Moses, with them to the same impiety.

What an instrument do we think S. Paul, in the church of God? What travel
takes he in execution of the charge laid upon him? how diligently teaches he
the Corinthianes, remaning amongst them the space of a year, and one half: But
immediately after his departinge, what corruption enters in that church, he
co^cealeth it not but plane lie testifies in his Epistles to them and cheiflie
in the formare, where he compleneth of the deprauation of the Lords Supper,
and of the resurrection besides many other things he scharplie lays to there
charge with other such exemples occurreth in Scriptures, Which were to long,
tedious and not necessary to prosecute. Whereby we may first observe and note,
yea, even a gross ignorance to be sumtymes in the chosen and elect of God that
be appointed to the ministry. Secondly how easalie men are carried away from
the obedience of god, and ryghtuousse and lawful observation of his
ordinances. What necessity judge ye to be in your a^gume^ts alledgeing there
Fathers, to have been the Disciples of the Apostles, and instructed by them?
When we see oftentimes Scollers declyne from the doctrine of there masters, as
we read planelie of Ioas, 2. Chro. 34.
who during the time of Ichoiada, did it that was ryghtuousse and just in the
eyes of the Lord. But as ever the hie Preiste was taken away, how horribly he
declyned and returned to the trace of his wicked fathers, the history does
planelie testify: and ye your-self some times I have hard to have casten forth
the fylthie and pestilent dung of papistrie to the great confort of many: now
how miserably, ye are declyned and returned to your vomit, the trouble that
ye do move, does likewise witness. So then we have to receive lawful and
constant scollers, who being instructed in the treuth remaneth constantly
therein: This scoleris worthy of praise whoo constantly remaneth in the treuth
received.
Ambitious, proud and arrogante, and such as can not content them with the
simple treuth of Gods word, and the purity of his constitutions and
Sacraments, we have not to acknowledge for Disciples to the Apostles, nether
yet to give unto them such authority, whereby the gifts of Gods spirit may
be foreclosed, or yet any thing received prejudicial otherwise to the
ordinances of God.

I am sure the godly Fathers craves no forther of the reader, but that he
allow, and follow it, that is setfurth by authority of Scriptures: where they
excede the bounds and speaks of there own head, they give us liberty to
reject als frelie as they have taken rashelie upon them to wryt it.

This is the judgment of all the old and godly fathers, and namely Cypriane,
who in his 3. Epistle of his secounde book. Epist. 3. Lib. 2.
If in the Sacrifice, which is Christ says he, only Christ is to be
followed, then is it force to us to here and practeis that, that Christ did,
and that he commanded to be done, since he says in his own Euangel, If ye do
the things, that I command you, Mat. 17. Esa. 7.
now call I you not seruandes, but freindes: and in deed, we are commanded to
here him only by the father, who has given him to be the Angel of great
counsel, and the only teacher to his church.

The same reule, In Proeamio de trinitate.
and moderation is prescribed by Augustine, to all readers of his works: Give
not thy self to my wryttinges, as to the Canonical Scriptures: But in them
without all tarry believe, when thou shall find that thou beleuest not, but in
these (meaning of his owen) it that thou was not assured of, retene it not
certanelie until thou have understand it assuredly.

And in one other place, I will not thou follow my authority, Ad Panlina^
Ep^ste. 117
that because I have said it, thou shall think thy self astricted to believe it.
But either believe the Cononicall scriptures, if thou see not, as yet, the
thing that is true or else to the verity, teaching inwardly, and schawi^g that
thou may see it planelie.

And likewise in one other place, we ought not to esteem or receive the
disputations of every man, be they never so Catholic, Ad Fortunat Epist. 198.
and laudable as the Canonical Scripturs, that it shall not be leiful to us (the
reverence saned, that is due to them) to improve and reject some things in
there writtinges if pereuenture we shall find that they have other ways
iudgeid nor the verity, either with the help of God understand by us, or
searched out by others, conteyneth, I am this man in other men's wryttinges
and wylleth every man to understand mine in the same manner.

This reule laid by the fatheres ever to hold fast and retain the verity of
the scripturs and not to follow the judgment of any man.
I might adduce out of this same author, and otheres of the ancie^ts, if the
necessity should require it, where they lay this reule and moderation, nowyse
astricting the reader to follow that, which they have Judged to be most
co^sonant to the treuth, but sending them to the scripturs.

This moderation and reule being laid, I will travel with you through the
feildes of the Doctors, and Counciles, which as ye say well, ought, and should
attempt no thing above the counsel of God, reveled in his Scripturs but ought
to determine all by the precise reule thereof.

The Apostles takes no forther upon them, I have received of the Lord, says
Paul, that which I have delivered to you: our Savior in the reformation of
Marriage goes to the Original institution: being demanded of the chief
commandment, he has recurse to the law: being tempted by the Sadducces, in
the matter of resurrection, he ryteth not the books of the Thalmude, 1. Cor.
11. Mat. 19. Mat. 22. Mat. 6.
nether yet the conciles and the Commentaries of the Hebrews, but brings
forth the plane Scripture: and correcting the wicked and pernicious
interpretations of such, as had place to his coming without any repugna^cie or
co^tradiction, of the scriptures, says, ye know it was said to the Ancients
and Immediately he adds, but I say to you: teaching us hereby that bidding
fair well, to the doctrine of men, we ought to clean to the sure true and
undoubted sense and mind of Scripture. The Ancie^ts, in that they say well we
should praise and allow them: How much is to to given be the fatheres and
Cou^ciles
But we should not be there followers, but as they were the followers and
Imitators of Jesus Christ, nor yet allow them in that which is wicked: and this
is lykewayes our Judgment of Counciles.

We will grant that it apperteyneth to godly and excercised men in the
Scriptures of God, to determine according to the scriptures upon al things,
that he called in doubt, wherein we can admit no tyrannical power of any
man, which being received above all authority of Scripture, and of the
conueyned brothren, the experience teaches ws, how prejudicial it hes been to
the Church of God, where we have seen no thing, but the stinki^g traditions of
a tyrane not in equale degree and rank with the ordinances of God, but placed
and authorished above them, the purity of the word utterly quenched, the
Sacraments profaned and adulterat, yea, and the godly constitutions of
ancient conciles by the iniquity and ambition of a man, affecting and exerting
the Impyre above all others, abrogated i^ the latter Counciles.

Attoure we be sufficiently teached by the Councile holden at Carthage, in the
time of Cypriane, Where he was present, what authority is to be given to them,
if they shall tak upon them to defyne any thing of there owen heads, Was not
there the Anabaptisme established, and erected by a plane Decree, Besides
others things that Augustine dissimuleth not, but they did displease him.

Shall we be accused to oppone us, having the authority of God, to a councile,
where al thing is determined according to the affection of man. Paphnutius a
singular man withstude and opponed him to the whole Councile holden at Nice,
the most godly Councile, I dar say that has been sen the time of the
Apostles. To conclude then we will gladly and willingly admit either private
man or general Councile, that defynes upon the matters of controversy, by the
Scriptures: if they do not, we will take the liberty that is purcheshed to us
by Jesus Christ, and say planelie that we will not be made seruandes to men
according to the commandment of S. Paul. 1. Cor. 7.


Here allace James as happinneth commonly that a man ones fangged in, will
grant more nor ye would desire, condescendeth to more nor is affirmed, or was
required, and that the matter shall have the more weight and authority
affirms it, of his conscience, To be of verity, yt the Disciples of the
Apostles had the true understanding of all the mysteries of the Scripture,
necessare to be knawin, for ane Christian ma^nis salvation, specially of the
profound mystery of the Supper of the Lord: Quhareof is gathered the
Sacrifice of the Mass. Quharefor I am desyrus to know the sayingis of ye auld
wryttars, specially of thaim ye war Disciples to the Apostles of the Mass,
and give they make mention of it in their works.

Heretofore some releif had I of you brother: But now being becumin no les
Inimie to this cause, nor the Abbot himself, here ye must not be offended
(brother James) if I shall renu^ce forder amity to your, I trust ye speak not
this of your owen head, but as your Tutoure has instructed you. Here I must
schew to you where ye chope, to wit, in this that ye do think the true
understanding of the mysteries of the scripture, to consiste in proximitie of
time, or in familiarity with the Apostles, The true vndesta^ding of the
scripturs consesteh not in proximitie of time nor famelearitie with the apposles
foreclosing the graces of God, and bynding them to a certane age and time, and
meaning that the familiarity of the Apostles might make stedfastnes and
constancy.

I would not any man should think, that I speak this in prejudice of the
ancients Which I with all my heart reverence But I would not that the
foreconceaued opinion of there authority, should preinge the action of
verity, and that no man should think this to be sufficient to establishe any
doctrine to say, the man, who was the familiare of Paul and this of Ihon the
Disciple, says, and so to conclude, it to be allowed as godly.

I am assured, there be none of there Disciples of that they were reached by
them, will establishe any other thing nor the Spirit of God approved in his
Scriptures.

But we know there complaints, and the forewarnyng of the Apostles. Ihon in
his Canonick, they have passed forth of us, but they were not of us, Act. 20.
and S. Paul exhorts the ouersears of Ephesus, to tak head, and be vigilant
for of them selves (says he) shall rise up men, speaking wicked things
immediately after my departing, yea, rauenus Wolffes, having no pity on the
floke, and so forth. Whereby we may gather that it is not yneugh to have been
familiare, and familiarlie instructede by the Apostles, no not by Jesus Christ
him self, unless we considdre if they be of there Disciples in deed, which is
known by conference of there writtinges with the doctrine of the Apostles, if
they aggre not, we may well affirm with Ihon they passed forth from them, but
they were not of them.

This matter is so plain, that it needs no forther probation in my judgment.
Now cumeth our author, and dif^endeth to the sayings of the Fathers. Which he
has gathered out of there works, as he thought they might serve to his matter,
and first he recyteth Testimony of Ignatius in his Epistle Ad smirninses. It is
not leiful to offer nor to make Sacrifice nor say mass, without the Byschops
authority and consent.

These words of this Ancient doctor, ye understand and expone of your
unsavory Sacrifice altogether profane, Which I am sure if he were a live, he
should say, he never kn^w, nor yet meant of any such impiety. The sentence and
the mind of this author may be easalie gathered for there his chief and
principal study is, that discord may be avoided in the assemblies, and
conuentions of the people: The which crime, the Apostle Paul lays scharply
to the charge of the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 11.
Herefore says he, it shall not be leiful without any kind of difference and
ordour to all and every one to conueyne the people, to have public
assemblies, and there to offer up Sacrifice, that is to preach the doctrine of
Salvation, to offer up prayer and action of thanks in name of the whole
Conuention: for these exercises, according to the custom of the old testament,
yea and the new ar called sacrifices by the fathers the Apostles and there
disciples and such others, that it should not be leifull to every man to
conueyne the people, without a charge to the practeis of the Lords Supper
called there planelie (...) that is the Conuention of them that shall practeis
the Lords Table.

I have compleyned before of the ignorance of Greik, and Latin tounges, the
Ignoration whereof, no doubt, hes moved us a great part of this business,
specialie having to do with men that understands not the propriety of them.
It is plain, that Epiphanius understands by this miss ^ the public
Conuentioun of the people to the service of God, to here the Preaching, the
Prayers made, thanks given, Trip. hist. Lib. 58.
and the Lords Table, and such other godly exercises, in which the primitive
Church did exercise them selves, The practice and ordor of the primitue Church
as we may be teached by Socrates in the Tripartite History, recyting the
ordour of the Church of Alexandria Where the Scripture was read, exponed,
Prayers made, the Communion distributed, and oblatio^ made, that is, a certane
gathering for the poor, and Justinius in his Apology for the Christians. For
as in the old Testament the people conuened at certane times to offer up the
Sacrifices of Kiddes, The sam ordoure that is now used in reformed Churches, is
recyted i^ Insti. 2. Apolo. to Anto.
Lambs, and such others, conform to the commandment made in the law: So now
in the new Testament by the Superintendents, Elders, Ministers, the people is
conueyned for a certane ordoures cause, and offreth up, vituios labiorum the
Sacrifice of praise, thanks and Prayers.

Now follows Clemens, whom this author affirms to have been S. Peter's
Disciple, if he was, I know not. I have recyted the Judgment of Clemens
Alexandrinus of him, damning him planelie, and that out of Eusebius, But I find
not that the words of Clemens can any ways hurt, which are, Nane of the
Preistis sal say Mass in his Paroche, nor Baptize, nor do any other thing,
without permission of the Byschope, their sayingis the Apostles resauit of the
Lord, and gave till us, and we teach y^ sam and commandis zow to hade and
teach to al men without reprehensioun.

These words may be even so understand, as the sentence of Ignatius, for all
tends to a scope: but this writter in deed, because I find him full of
superstitions, either is he, by wicked men adulterate, (as we know the Papists
to have interiected many wicked sentences in the writtings of godly and
Catholic men) or if he writes of his owen head, I dar bouldly affirm, that
he was no Scoler of Peter, but as Ihon speaks, 1. Ihon. 2
he passed furthe from him, but was not of his, and this is the opinion of
Clemens Alexandrinus, Who planely condamned this your Clemens Epistles.

Follows Alexander, quha was martyred for the faith of Christ fourtene
houndreth 30. nine zeris bypast wryttis on this manner, our Lordis Passion is to
be rehears it in all Solemnities of the Mass with sick Sacrifice the Lord is
delyted and pacifeit and will forgive great Sins, for amang the Saccrifice
their can be na thing greater than our Lordis body and blude, their is na
sacrifice better nor this, this excellis all vthers, quhilk man be offered to
the Lord, with a pure conscience, and resauit with a clean mind worschypped
with all men.

In this, thou obseruest two things, to wit, the Mass to be called a
Sacrifice for sin, and likewise to be worschypped. True it is, that this
author can not be excused but he has spoken (...) that is to say, somewhat
heyghlie to extolle the matter. Yet can I not find here, wherein thou can have
great matter to rejoice: For the custom appointed heir, is most laudable, that
in the Solemnities of Masses (for so commonly the Anciens speaks in plural
noumber) that is, of the peoples Conuention, the Passion of the Lord, The
proper and natural meaning of Alexander.
be recyted with a loud and intelligible voice: for that Sacrifice is the only
sacrifice whereby the Lord is satisfied, appeased and our sines forgeuen: where
we may and shall observe the name, either take in the proper signification,
apperteyni^g to the sacrifice of the croce or else if thou can not be contented
with this, it is, (...) that is by a certane manner of speaking abused and
applied to the commemoration of the Lords body broken upon the Croce, made in
the holy Table, in what manner we have observed this word to be taken
oftentimes by the ancient Fathers.

But before I proceade, first I require the reader, that when soever he hears
this word mass, or masses in the ancie^ts, that he understand it of no such
Mass as we have seen, and this author most impiuslie defends, but as I have
expound it out of Eusebius, and Epiphanius, of the Conuentions of the people,
which is easalie gathered of this author Alexander.

Mark thou that there can be no thing so contrarious to thy Mass, in the
which there is no recytation of the Passion of our Savior at all, nor yet of
no other action of his, confortable any ways to the audience: so that how
soever the words shall be taken, they can no ways serve to thy purpose. Now
that Alexander speaks (if he be the author hereof, as many does not without
cause dout) of pacification and delyting, the author to the Hebrews, Hebr. 13.
may serve for a Co^mentarie to it, where he exhorts to remember of
liberality, and well doing, for with such Sacrifices God is appleased, and this
no dout is the mind of Alexander how soever he speaks excessiuelie of
forgiveness of Sins, to stir up the hertes of the people to devotion: or
referring it to the Sacrifice of the Croce, (whereby we have remission of
sins only) that he speaks of the excellency of the Sacrifice of the
Lords body and blood.

This should be applied to the Passion, that he comma^deth to be recyted, or if
ye list to the practeis of the Lords Table, which no dout is the most
excellent Sacrifice of all the Sacrifices, we are commanded to offer, not that
it is a Sacrifice properly, but as I have declared a Sacrifice of recordation,
and co^memoration of the Lords death: for this is the most heyght, and
excellent mystery, in the which the body and blood of the Lord Jesus are
proponed and given so unto us, to feed upon, that we are made one with him, and
he one with us: and as he is one with the Father, so are we one with him: which
mystery is to be wyrschepped, that is, with such reverence and humiliation of
heart, we ought to offer us to it, deeply and profoundly mediting with our
selves the goodness of our God. Who so familiarlie presents his Son unto
us, and with him communion and participation of his benefits, that we can not
be but carried away in admiration of the mystery and the wyrschepping of so
beneficial a God, and so to offer up our selves, and all to him.

Take head that thou believe not, good reader, as this false teacher would
persuade, that this Alexander wylleth us to stand and gaise upon the bread and
wine, to fall down before them, worschipe them, and sofurth. For thou see
planelie that he requires first a diligent trial and examination of
conscience, nixt a sincerity of mind in receaui^g, to the which he subiuneth
the worschipping which is not else but a deipe and profound meditation of the
goodness of our God, the league and covenant made in the blood of his eternal
Son, and the which he has confirmed and sealed up in the heart of the true
receauer, in that he here offreth and gives to him bread and wine, the body
and blood of Jesus Christ now, by the receaui^g of the simboles of the same.
Thus I trust any reasonable man ought to be satisfied with the words of
Alexander, now let us cu^ to Ireneus, Policarpus Disciple, Quha was Disciple to
S. Ihon the Evangelist and martyred for the faith of Jesus Christ, threttene
hundredth, fourscore five zearis bypast, wryttis on this manner, Christ tuke
bread, and gave thankis saying this is my body and tuke the Chalice of wine,
and confessed it to be his blude and teched the new sacrifice of the new
testament, quhilk the kirk resauit of the Apostles offered unto God in all the
haill world.

Here our new master wylleth James to mark how this godly author affirms
that our Savior in the latter Supper, teached a new Sacrifice of the new
Testame^^ the which the Church received of the Apostles. Because of set
purpose and fraudfullie a great part of the sentence of this author is
suppressed and omitted, I am drewen to rehearse the proper words of Ireneus,
that the Lector may then Judge clearlie what is the meaning of this author, The
meaning o^ Iereneus.
to the which effect it shall be verrie necessary that he read the 32. and 33.
Chap. of the same fourt book, this place is drawn forth of, that he may the
more resolutlie Judge of what oblation is there spoken.

Here shall I not weary to declare the su^me of his disputation i^ the two
Cheptres, which is to teach be many places and exemples of Scripturs, that the
verrie true sacrifices be not the externe and outward commanded in the law,
but unfeigned faith, obedience, knowledge, patience, the love of our nyghtbour,
and such others inward and spiritual Sacrifices, without the which the
outward a^e but mere abominations in Gods presence, as is easy to prove by
the testimonies of the Prophets. Whereby he concludes in deed, that the Lord
required no sacrifice, no solid offering, but faith, obedience, and Justice, to
the salvation of man, What kind of ^acrifice plesed God.
as we be teached in the Prophet Osea, and our Savior repeateth i^ the
Euangell. To this place Ireneus goes about to prove all oblations made unto
God, in a foreconceaued opinion of ryghtuusnes, justice, and remission of
sins, without these inward sacrifices of mercy, peace, and sofurth, to be
execrable before God, since God has not institute these outward things, as
he anywise delyteth in them, but to admonies us of the inward as we be teached
by Ihon, 4. that the true worschippers adoreth in spirit and verity, and
Peter, offering up spiritual offringes acceptable for Christ's saike, for unless
all our Sacrifices and works be derected to God by faith in the mediator, they
are altogether vnplesing, because there is no access to the Father, but by
him, and by grace we are saved even as the Fathers under the law.

This oblation then, that Ireneus speaks of, is not the oblation of the body
and blood of our Savior, which falls lie to establish thy mass thou pretendest
to be offered up by a shaueling, for here there is no thing of any mass (God be
praised) spoken, but it is the whole outward, and inward externe and spiritual
worshipping. First the spiritual, as A true and unfeigned repentence, a
contryte and a sobbing heart stricken with the conscience of sin and so
directing it self by a steadfast faith in the mediator, to God, receiving
remission of sins for his saike, giving thanks to the Eternal Father for the
great treasour of his goodness disployed and powered down upon man, in giving his
only Son to the death, for the redemption of the world: which faith is
testefied, confirmed and sealed up by the receiving of the holy mystery of his
body and blood. To these inward works, we may Join the earnist and vehement
desire and thrust, we have to the propagation of his kingdom, the predication
of his word, and such others of this kind.

Thus having proceaded, he does prosecute and teach v^ how we ought to Join
to these inward and spiritual, the outward and externe, which consists in
such outward virtues as extends them selves to others, as liberality,
Justice, fortitude, prudence: but cheiflie in deed of liberality and mercy
toward the nedy and indigent: The liberality of the Primitive Church toward
the poor
For in they times, it was received that certane almous was brought to the place
of Conuention, where the Lords Table was to be ministrate, and this
distributed to the use of them that were in necessity, that not only they
should be teached by the preachers of that Fraternall and brotherly love,
league and society that they were all b^und together in Jesus Christ, But that
the lyuelie practies of the same should more vinelie represent, set up, and
imprent it in there hertes. These oblations were called by the word of the old
Testament, the first fructes: for as by the commandment they were oblist in the
old to offer them so says Ireneus our Savior commanded in the new testament
oblations to be for the supporte of the poor, which was in the Primitive
Church done, when they co^ueyned to the Celebration of the Lords Table, and
this beninguitie used to the releif of the poor, is called by the Apostle
Hostia bone fragrantie one oblation of sweit savor to the Philip. Philip. 4.


This thought I neidfull to premitte, for the oppinning up of the mind of this
author. Now shall we recyte the words that the calu^nius fraud of this our
start up, may appear: the words are: but and he giving counsel to his owen
Disciples to offer up to God, the first fructes of his creatures, not as he were
nedy, but that they should not be found vnfructful and ingrate, he tuke it,
that by creation is bread and gave thanks, saying, this is my body, and it
that is the cup likewise by creation after us, he confessed his blood and of
the new testament he teached a new oblation the which the Church receiving
from the Apostles vniuersalie offreth to God, that gives to us our Alimentes
and sustenence of the which Malachias one of the twelf Prophets, did
forewarne, and so recyteth the words of the Prophet, which be declared
already. It is easy the matters being considdered, I have said before, what of
the explication of the place of Malachias, and what of the mind of Ireneus to
understand how miserably this author and all the Papists be deceived and
schamefullie they stumble.

First it is evident that all they that do affirm the ma^^ says after there
mu^milled inca^tation, consecration they call it, the bread is no creature,
nor yet is bread, but is turned and changed in the verrie natural body of
Jesus Christ, and that they offer the Son unto the Father, yea, and sets
him even there before the Father. Now the son is no creature being the
creator, and Ireneus says that the Lord gave counsel to his Disciples to
o^fre to God the first fructes of his creatures, so that it is evident Ireneus
to have spoken no thing of the offering up of the Son of God, but the
oblatio^s and gifts that were brogh^ to the Table at the celebration of the
Lords Supper, together with the prayers, action of thanks, and predication of
the Euangell through out all, even amongst the Nations which preaching of the
Euangell, the Apostle terms by the name of Sacrifice. The preaching of the
Eua^gell is a most acceptable Sacrifice to God,
I am the Minister of Jesus Christ (saeth he) among the Nations Sacrifiing the
Euangell of God, that the oblation of the Gentiles, may be acceptable and
sanctified in the holy Spirit. Roma. 18


Thus Ireneus exponeth Malachias, declaring him to speak of the whole new and
spiritual worshipping of the new Testament, and to speak no thing of thy
mass, his words are: For my name is great amongst the Nations says the
Lord omnipotent, most manifestly hereby declaring that because the first
people had desisted to offer to God, and in all places sacrifice is offered to
him, and that clean, so his name is glorified in the nations. Whereby Ireneus
clearly declared the Prophet to have foresignified the Sacrifice of the
Euangell and the preaching of the croce, whereof the sueit odore the delitious
and confortable savor is disparsed and spread throghout all, which is the most
acceptable oblatio^ to God as the apostle witnesses, praise to God, ^. Cor. 2
says he, that has made manifest by us in all places, the ordour of his
knowledge. Ireneus exponeth him self in the 34. Chap. as he is plane yneugh in
the 33. schewing that prayers and thanks giving of the Sanctes is the same
oblation that Malachie foreprophecied to be offered up in all places, Revel. 5.
where he calls the incenses that be spoken of, by Ihon, in the Revelation,
the prayres of the sanc^^^ and after him schortlie (...) against the (...),
(...) in the 4. against Marcion, fo^^^^eth the same exposi^^^n, no dout, says
Tertuliane (...) is forespoken by the ^^ophete, because the predicatio^ (...)
the Apostles was to ^^sse throghout all countries: and (...) after speaking of
^^^ritual ^acrifices, he rehearses these (...) of the Pro^^ete and in all place
clean Sacrifices shall be offered to me.

Now lest some should think that this oblation, which the Church receaueth
from the Apostles, and offreth up every where may always be applied to this
Authors wicked purpose, Ireneus in the words of the Text, reryted by me, but
fraudfullie omitted by this author; declares him self, calling the oblations
of bread and wine, and others things that were brought to the releif of the
nedy, the first fructes, the words are plain, to him (says he) who gives
aliments to us, the first fructes of there gifts in the new Testam^nt, as he
should say, in that that our Savior tuke bread and wine, and offered to his
Disciples, he teaches us a new oblation of the new Testament, how we ought
with the oblation of our prayers, action of thanks, the predication of the
mercies of our God, and the holy Supper, ioyn^ ^^^tly and (...), that is, to
acknowledge us to receive all at the and (...) o^ God, to be as it were stewarts
and despe^s^tours of his gifts, and thus to offer up the first fructes to God,
that is, to sanctify them to thereleif of the poor: and so he declares him
self in the Chap. following, by the gift, says or, the honor and the
affection is schowen toward the King, the which the Lord wylling to be
offered in all simplicity and innocence preached saying, when thou bring
the gift to the altar, and sofurth, then should thou offer says Ireneus, and
concludes the first fructes of his creature, to be offered to God, as Moses
says, thou shall not appear empty in the presence of the Lord thy God.

Now as I have decleared alreaddy his principale study is that with these
outward actions, the inward worshipping be joined, we must make our oblatio^,
What is the oblation of the new testament
says he, to God, and be found thankful in all to our maker God, in simple
mind and faith, without Hypocrisy, a steadfast hope, a seruent dilection
offering up the first fructes of them that be his creaturs, and this oblation
clean and undefiled the only church and Congregation offreth up to the maker
Sacrifiing to him of his owen workmaschipe with action of thanks: in the which
words he planely declares, what he will we understand by the oblation of the
new Testament, which no ways may apperteyne to your mass, where one goes
aside and pretends a certane oblation, not, of no creature, but of the verrie
Son of God where we be teached here of one oblation made by the holy Churhe,
and that of the creaturs to the maker joining to the inward Sacrifice of
faith, a clean conscience, a steadfast hope, together with prayers, and the
furthschewing of Gods mercies, exhibited in Jesus Christ.

Syndrie other places may I adduce of the same two Cheptres, wherein he
decleareth plainly, that he means of almous given to the nedy in the Lords
Supper, and of the table it self, prayer, and thanks giving, and others such
laudable and Godly customs as were then used, which altogether are called
the oblatio^ of the new testament by this author.

Followis Cypriane, quha was martyred for the faith of Christ 1296. zearis
bypaste, and wryttis in this manner, gif our Jesus Christ and God himself be the
hie priest of God the father and be him self, did first offer a Sacrifice to
God the father and hes commandid the sam to be done in remembrance of him, that
priest verrelie goddis Vicar, quha dois follow the thing that Christ hes done.
Hither to Cypriane and als he affirmis that God is author and teacher of the
Sacrifice of the Mass.

Now ye add to the words of Cypriane (by him self) and omitteth a part of his
sentence, which is this (and verrie and full Sacrifice then he offers in the
Congregation to God the Father, if he shall so begin to offer as he has seen
Christ alreddy to have offered) and pass by and will go to the matter.

What do ye find here that will serve any ways to your mass? and in verrie
deed because ye perceived no thing to be here making for you, ye add that God
is author and teacher of the mass? Why do ye not allege the place? if any
thing might be found in Cypriane, ye should, no dout, have brought it forth, for
it should have served more to your purpose. Shall ye thus be suffered to raill
against God, and inure such insufferable blasphemies to the Eternal, and his
sanctes, making him author of the most detestable impiety, that ever was
divised? Shall ye thus be permitted to deceive the simple ones of Christ's
flock, redeemed by his blood? Be you assured, that the Eternal will not suffer
the profanation of his mysterijs, the decept of his people, and the wrangling
of the wryttinges of his sanctes, unpunished.

Let us return to the words of Cypriane in the which it is most certane that
he speaks no thing of private masses unknown in his days, nether yet ever
had place til that all being distroyed and waisted by the Gotthes and Vandelles
and others, When it was received that one should co^municat for all.
fearslie could any multitude be conueyned to the Celebration of the Lords
Table, but belyke all good sciences falling in decay, the ignorance and
contempt of Gods word entered in, and received, that one should eat, for all
the multitude, one should take upon him to do that which ought to have been
done of all. Now the ancients did abhor these private massts, we may know by
the Epistle of Leo Pope, who was many years after Cypriane, to Diofcurus,
where he declares planelie that there was but a mass, and that the whole
people being co^ueyned together at festuall days and times, yea, and even in
these our days, the Greik Church has no private masses, and in the Popes
owen Chapel, there is but one altar and a mass, and that seldom at certane
appointed times in the year.

The words of Cypriane are to be understand of the distribution of the
Sacrament, and Communion of the people. For like as Christ upon the Croce,
offered him self to God the Father, and that the memory of this his oblation
might be kept ever fresche and recent in his Congregation, he instituted the
Supper, and commanded the practeis thereof, breaks bread, calls it his
body, and distributeth to his Disciples, and sanctifies the cup, calling it
the blood of the new Testament: So the minister making distribution of the body
and blood of our Savior, according to his exemple and institution, and giving
thanks to the Eternal, for the Sacrifice and oblation ones made upon the
Crote, the virtue whareof ever remaneth, no don't he is the stedholder of
Christ, in the imitatio^ and doing that which Christ did and comanded to be
done.

Now lest that the words that I have added of Cypriane, may appear to be
hurtsum and prejudicial to satisfy all readers and take all enasion from you.
Let no man think that Cypriane wylleth a priest to stand up by one altar
allone and there to make one oblation by him self. But that he shall divide and
distribute to the assistars the body and blood of our Savior, and offer unto
God prayers and action of thanks for the Sacrifice of the Croce, the memory
where of, is there solemnedlie celebrated, for that is to offer as Christ
offered in the Supper, to wit, to give thanks, pray to God, and so make
distribution of the simboles of his body and blood.

It is well noted by Chrysostomus, there be some things wherein the Minister
differs from the Commoun and layick people, Wherein the preferment of the
minister consisteh at the lords Table.
which stands not in that, that the Priest should make oblation and Sacrifice
of Christ for them, and eat the Lords Supper for him self allone, and so to
distribute, and apply it to whom, and in what measure pleases him. But the
preferment of the priest in this matter, is only in the ministration, as
Cypriane here plainly teaches that the priest as a commoun minister and
debtor to the Church, does preach the word and distribute the Lords supper
unto the people, who does receive it at his hands.

Here it shall not be altogether out of the way to schawe the causes that moved
the ancients, Why the holy communion is called a Sacrifice by the Anci^es.
to call this action a sacrifice or one oblation, which appearinglie be syndrie
and diverse. The first cause is drewen from the observation of the cons^etude
in there days cheiflie of Ireneus and Cypriane: the custom was this, that the
people brought with them a great quantity of bread and wine, and offered at the
table, whereof a certane portion was taken and used to the holy Communion, the
residue, was sanctified to the use and supporte of the poor. And this no dout
is the oblation, that Ireneus Cypriane and Tertuliane, makes so often mention
of, yea, the verrie collectes of your mass (as ye be verrie Aippes, and will
seem to had and reteyne some figure and Image of antiquity.) In this
consideration were called collettes, being received from the people, and
oblations, because they were offered to a holy use in which respect Paul to the
Philipp. calls the almonsan Sacrifice and a host of sweit savor, as I have
alreddy touched.

Secundlye, there is one action of thanks an publyck attestation of our
gratitude, and thankfulness, which in the scripturs is called one Immolation of
praise, and laud. Thridlye, all communicantes does offer them to be reuled
and guyded by God, yea, and mortified, whereof speaks Paul to the Romans,
Romans 12.
give your bodies (says he) to God, a living and a holy Sacrifice pleasing to
God, and after he witnesses, that he bears the ministry, Romans 15.
and Sacrifices the Euangell that the oblatio^s of the Gentiles may be
acceptable and sanctified by the holy spirit, as we have cyted here tofore.

The fourt is, that there is celebrated the memory of the Lords death and
passion, which because it was the verrie and full sacrifice, the name of
sacrifice is applied to that action whereby it is represented, and thus
speaks Augustine, when he says by memory and recordation our Savior is
every day offered up.

These are the four considerations, whereby the fathers are moved to give the
name of Sacrifice and oblation to the Lords table, albeit that I dar not
altogether allow this in them, for since the Scripture gives no such name unto
it, and rashelie, we ought not introduce any new speaking nor yet leif the
acquent manner and phrase of the spirit of God: yet somewhat is it tolerable in
the fathers who carried away in admiration of the dignity and worthynes of the
mystery could not wit certanelie what praise to give to it and with what title
decore, set up, and exorne it.

Let this ones declared serve to the understanding of the wryttings of the
fathers, when soever either we shall read any thing in them, or there authority
shall be laid against us.

Chrysostomus ane Greik, and ancien writter and doctor 1157. zearis past,
writtis on this manner. Christhes preparit a mekle mair wonderful and
magnificent Sacrifice, both quhe^ he changit this Sacrifice it self, and als
quhen he commandit him selfto be offered instead of brutale beastis Quhilks we
offered in the aid law. Hitherto Chrysostom, he writtis i^ a other place
saying, O great good will of God towardis us, O mirakle he that sittis on y^
rycht hand of the Father in heauin above, is contained in ma^nis handis in time
of the Sacrifice. Also he sayis in aue other place, do we not offer sacrifice
daily? we do offer bot doing it in remembrance of Christis death, and this
host is in with money and that oblation was anis offered in to heauin, bot this
Sacrifice, is ane exemple of that, we do offer the same selfthing: we offer
nocht the day ane Lamb to Christ and the morn ane other bot ever the sam
self thing Quharefor this sacrifice is ane or ellis be that reassone zit is it
offered in money places, ar they money Christis? na thing les bot their is ane
Christ over all, quha being heir all haill and their all haill, ane body, for
as that quhilk is offered in every place, is a body, euin sa it is a Sacrifice,
bot he is our Byschope, quhilk offered ane Sacrifice making us clean. We do
offer the same, and that, that quhilk was then offered can not be confoundit.
Hitherto Chrysostomus out of quhais wordis money notable leasone may be
collected in contrare the realing reassoning and myscheant mokrie of vain men
in their dayis.

It appears that ye were well bote in the conclusion, what has moved you so
suddenly? In this, it is se^e, that it is most true that is reported of you,
that as ever ye get any match, or any withstand you, ye then kindle and may
not away with any contradiction. But I wounder of you, a man that will seem to
be verrie diligent in reading the ancients and in collecting all may serve to
your purpose, being no ways occupied, but in the defense of this desperate
cause, that ye gather not out these notable leasons. But this is your craft,
sire, to cast a jealousy in the heart of the reader that ye may appear that,
that ye are not in deed. But let us go to the examination of the matter. In deed
I can not find the formare words in 2. Homi. upon the Epistles to Timothy,
nether upon the first, nor yet the secounde, but giving they be written, I can
find no thing in them any ways helplie to you.

For that the preparation of this Sacrifice is more magnifique and wounderfull,
nor the sacrifices under the law this is but spoken to extolle this holy Table
above all the oblations of the law: In what respect and consideration it is
declared at large. Of the offering up of him self that is Sacramentalie spoken,
and apperteyneth no thing to his reale presence.

In the latter part, even in the conclusion of the. 2. Sermo^e upon the secunde
Epistle to Timothy, he wrytteth these words, I will schewe you something that
is wounderfull, meruell not, be not troubled, what is this? the holy oblation
whidder it be offered by Peter or Paul, or any priest of what sumeuer merit,
is the self same with it that Christ gave to his Disciples, and that the
ministers now does make, why so? because men do not sanctify this, but
Christ that hallowed that before, that as the words are one, that Christ
then pronunced and they that be now pronunced by the ministers, so is the
oblation one: and the same reason is of Baptism: so all does consiste and
stand in faith.

These be the words of Chrysostomus in the place before rehearsed. Of the
office of the ministry and sanctification I have spoken in the beginning of
this treaty, of the oblatio^ Likewise, how it should be understand and that it
is one with that, which our Savior practeist with his Disciples: since the
action is one, sanctification one, a sanctifiar, the same ceremonies recyted
and the commandment given to do the same, there is no dout. But here ye must
observe more that he makes no difference toward the presence of our Savior
in this action, and his presence in Baptism and this is most true, Gal. 3.
for in consideration that they that be Baptized in Christ are endued and sled
with him: we have to luke for no other presence of Christ in this action
toward the realitie of his body and blood, But all is to be referred to
faith, as this author concludes, nor we have in Baptism. In the secunde place
adduced by you, where the author is drewen to burste forth in admiration of
this mystery, and call it a miracle, in deid it is excessiuelie spoken to the
praise of the action. Which manner of speaking is verrie familiare to this
writter, for who soever is well acquent with him, shall observe him much given
and to delight wounderfullie, in allusions, tropes and figurs, and as he has
his name from great eloquence, so hyperbollie and heygtly set up and extolle
the matter that he entreats, that he shall even appear to forget him self:
notwithstanding the sense is good being rygtlie considdered and discreitlie,
according to the mind of the author in other places weyed and exponed: for can
there be any thing more miraculus, nor the conjunction of God and man? of the
son of God and the sinful and wrached man: man to possess Jesus Christ
with all his benefits? and that he who sets at the right hand of God the
Father, shall be given to the Saul of man? no thing at all. This is the
operation of the spirit of God, the strenth and virtew of faith, which makes
the things that be absent, present, yea, and makes us to inioye and possess
the things we hope for, as Peter teaches us and this author, ^. Pet. 1.
as has been laitlie said. Be were prudent reader, that thou think not that
this author here speaks any thing of Christ's real, substancial and natural
presence as the Papists do fondly ymagine for that he has affirmed to be no
other nor i^ Baptism: and it is not to be supposed that here he means any
thing other nor he teaches plainly in his Sermon, De Eucharistia in
En^oenus. Do not (says he) think that you receive by the hand of any man, the
body of God, meaning of Christ.

Ad Populum Anticehenum Homi. 61. in Io^. nuem. 45.
And in many other places says, that we ascend up unto heaven, and eats
Christ sitting at the right hand of the Father: and that he speaks, yea, and
some others of the wounderfull operation of God, in his Sacraments passing all
man's wit, sense, and reasoun, not meani^g of the working of God in watter,
bread and wine, which be figurs sanctified in deed to one holy use, but of
the merue lus working of God, in the hertes of them that receive his Sacraments
secreitlie, inwardly, and spirituallie transforming, renewing, feiding,
conforting, and nurissing them with his body and blood in heaven, so that all
this is to (...) referred to the receauers who be thus wonderfully changed and
not to the signs, which notwithstanding the sanctification proceading of the
commandment of Jesus Christ, and that they be removed and taken from the
vulgar, commoun, and prop^^^ne use, and dedicate to this holy action, and so
to be the simboles and Sacraments of Christ's presence, and remunition with
us, yet receive they no alteration in there owen natures: but remane still in
there proper and natural kinds, so that it is most true, that this author
says of Christ sitting above with his Father, in his natural body
tryumphant in glory, and yet is the same here in our hands Sacrame^tallie, and
figuratiuelie, yea, and present, and remaning in our hertes by grace and
nurishment. In the third authority alleged by this Scripturare. First observe
with me, reader, that which I have admonished before, to wit, in what sense the
ancients does call this action of the Lords table a Sacrifice, because, says
Chrysostom, it is celebrated in memory of Christ's death and passion, the
rest tends altogether and only to declare this action, wheresoever it is
practeist or how often repeated, it is no thing different, but all one with the
action of our Savior.

And lest that any man should be moved or trubled with his free speaking, he
exponeth him self in the conclusion, this that we do (says he) is done in
commemoration of that, that was done, In what sense Chrysostom will have his
words taken
do this (says he) in remembrance of me, not one other as the byschope, but
the self same we do, Magi^ autem recordationem operamur: rather we work the
co^memoration of the Sacrifice. By the which words he notes him to have
spoken excessiuelie and corrects him self, exponing and restricting his
former disputation, to the remembrance and recordation of the great and only
Sacrifice, lest that any man should think and judge by his words, this action
to be a Sacrifice in deed. What have ye now to brag of your Sacrifice of the
mass, when ye are thus refelled of Chrysostom him self, whom ye and all
papists pretends to stand most for you?

Now in verrie deed, I petie you, and exhort you, in the bowels of the
mercies of Jesus Christ, to zeald to the treuth and eschame not to recant and
confess your impius wicked, and ungodly error, eschame not to give it over to
Jesus Christ, whose eternal verity will obtain victory. This we seik at
you, not on a realing manner; or yet of mockery, but (as God is witness to our
conscience) from the bottom of our hearts, for there is no other thing that
pusheth us to this ba^tell, (,God is witness) but the defense of the treuth,
which by tyranny, ambition, Avarice, and ignorance these many ages (allace)
has been oppressed and almost buried, to the which we will postpone all thing
that is here most tender, deir, and precius. Now cumeth this author to
"Ambrosius ane ancien doctor approuit be ye kirkof god in his approbation I will
not stand, but will say, that he is best worthy of approbation, who stands by
the treuth, and further, that many be approved by the Ro^ane church (which
church I trust ye mean) that be worthy to be cast in the fire, or to serve to
the butter wyffes, that I say no wers. 1176. zeris bypast wryttis on this manner
we have seen ye Prince of Princes cum unto us, we saw him and hard him offer
for us his blude, let us prestes follow as we may offer Sacrifice for the
people, although we be weaik be our desseruing, zit we at honorable throuth the
Sacrifice, for albeit Christ is not seen to be offered zit never theles he is
offered upon the earth, quhen his body is offered, Zea, he is declarit planely to
be offered intyll us quhais wordis makis haly the Sacrifice quhilk is offered.
The Abbot as a man vnmyndful of his matter draweniual places which der they make
for him or (...).


Your purpose is (to call the matter to mind again) to prove the mass to be a
Sacrifice, wherein Christ is offered to the father by the priest. Now I pray
you what stre^th of probation lies in these words of Anthrosius, serving to
this matter: there is no mention of mass, the Sacrifice and oblatio^, that is
here spoken perteyneth derectly to the practeis and celebration of the holy
communion, where the faithful menisters executing there office and charge,
conform to the exemple of our Savior are not only followers of Christ as
Ambrose does testify, but Vicarres and stedeholders as we have alreaddy said
in Cypriane: but as we observed in Chrysostom, so we have in this author, that
he in the ^clitsio^ uses a certane correction of his form are sayings:
Whereby he explaneth his meaning in the word preceding that, not so much have
we to understand his body and blood to be offered up (speaking properly) as it
is to be understand that, that it is declared plainly him to be offered up in
ws. that is, as he would say, this oblation and Sacrifice, which I beat thus
co^tinuallie i^ your ears, is not to be taken so as I should mean properly,
us to offer up to the Father, his Son Jesus Christ, which he him self only
was worthy and able to do and did. But I mean that now we being received in
couenante with our God by the mediation of Jesus Christ, which league is
confirmed, and sealed up in our hearts by the symboles of his body and blood,
whereby we are assured, that we are one with him feiding upon his body and
blood, that we now possess him and hes him duelling in us, what rests on our
part, says Ambrose, The natural meaning of Ambrosius.
but in recordation of this so great a benefeit, and in declaration of our
thankfulness, to offer us up to God, together with all that we possess: we have
received by the communion of thy Son, Justice, ryghtuusnes, sanctification,
holiness, with all benefits: these graces, as we grant our selves to have
received of thy free mercy, so we now do dedicat sanctify and offer them to
thee. This Immolation then is none other, nor it that Paul speaks of as we
have heretofore declared. Romans 12,
All our worthynes does proceade and flow of that Sacrifice, in recordation of
the which we celebrat this Sacrifice, reiocing in no thing, but in Jesus
Christ, and him crucified, by whose agnominy, we are made honorable, by whose
poverty we are made rich, by whose death, we are quickened, and by whose
obedience, we are made bold to enter in the presence of our God, thought we be
never so unable and unworthy of our selves, so that now we are not to be Judged
and reputed the offrers, but rather he whose spirit reuleth our hearts, and
moves us to this thankfullnes, yea he him self offreth all we have by the
Communion unto the eternal Father.

Now followis Augustine, ane excellent doctor approved be the Kirik of God,
1156. zeris, bypast, reproved Atrius as ane Heretic, because he said as money
sayis now of little knawledge that me^ fulde nocht pray for the deed, nor offer
Sacrifice for thaim, he wryttis thus concerning that matter, it is nocht to be
denied y^ the saules of me^ departed ar releued throuch the godlynes of their
freindis on live, quhe^ the Sacrifice of our Mediator Christ is offered for
thaim, hidderto Augustine. He writtis in ane other place say and, quhen the
Sacrifice of the altar or almous is offered for the deed Quhilk war Baptized,
their at thanks geuin for thaim that be verray good people and for thaim that are not very evil they ar propiciatio^ns or purchessinges of mercy and favor
of God. He wryttis in ane other place, it is not to be douted, but the saules
departed ar helped be the haly kirkis prayers and the Sacrifice of salvation
and almous, quhe^ they ar geuin for thaim that god sudle deal mair mercy
fully, tha^ their synnis had deserved, hidderto Augustine, mark how this
godly Doctor and Byschope affirms the Sacrifice of the mass to be
propiciatorie and helplie for thaim that be departed.

I can not answer Augustine better then by him self, but before I cum to the
answer, it shall not be all out of purpose (good reader) if I shall show the
reule which Augustine p^scribeth to al readers of his works, and will not
attribute to others, nor yet vendicat to him self more then becumeth

Of this matter, I have spoken sumwhat heretofore, out of Augustine, yet to
refreshe the memory of the reader and to show and teach that many mo places,
may be gathered out of his works, then they that be recyted, I will not weary
here, in the proper place of the interpretation of his owen words, to show his
opinion, and in what place he wylleth all readers to put his works. And first
these be his plane words, I can not deny, nether yet oght I, that even as in
them, that has passed before, Libro. 4. de Anim ^ et eius Origin. ad victorem.
so verrie many things to be in my so many treattes that by a Just judgment,
and without temeritie may be damned.

And again he wrytteh to Ieronimus, for I will grant (says he) unto thee, to
these only books of the Scripturs, which be called Canonical have I learned
to defer that fear, and give that reverence, Ad heronimum Episti. 19.
that I believe most firmly none of the authors of them, in wrytting any
thing, to have erred, or if I shall find any thing in their wryttinges that
shall appear to be contrarius and repugnant to the treuth, then do I not dout,
but either the exemplar is false, or the interpretor has not atteyned to the
understanding of it, that is said: or that I do not understand it my self. But
others I read so that with whatsoever holiness and doctrine they have excelled,
yet do I not judge it to be true, because they so judged, But because they have
been able to persuade, either by these Canonical authors, or by a probable
reason, that abhors nor from the treuth: I will content me, gentle reader,
with these testimonies not but there be many mo, but that I judge it superfluus
to adduce any mo and think these sufficient to oppin up the mind of
Augustine. What is the reverence that is due to the Scripturs of God, and with
what judgment and discretion we oght to read other men's wryttings, and what
he craves him self of others. Now shall it then in anywise seem arrogant if it
should be required of Augustine that, that he craves of others? that has
passed before without any respect to there holiness, or doctrine and craves
earnistlie authority of Scripture, or a probable reasone, not abhorring from
the verity, and pereuenture in sober and matters of no great importance. The
disputation now being here in the matter, we have in hand of, the chief and
principale poyuctes of our faith, in the which all authority of man set a
part, the only scole master Jesus Christ is to be hard according to the
commandment given (here him) what ever Augustine did judge of purgatory, and
prayer for the dead, Contra Pelag. hypog. nosti. Libro. 5.
I am assured these be his words. First the faith of the Catholicques by the
authority of God, has believes that there is a kingdom of heaven: the secunde
that there is a Hell, in the which all that declyneth to Apostasy, or divides
him self from the faith of Christ, shall feile torments. We know no third, yea
and we find no^e in the holy Scripturs. And in one other place best it were in
one incertane matter; of the which the scripturs makes no mention, mi^tacken
affirms the contrary, that they should say no thing, conform to the
sentence of the wise Seneca, in th^^^ (...) douesum, thou should affirm
nothing, but hald (...) judgment incertane: In others places, he planely
doute^ even In Luchiridio ad Laureunum. 68. Cap. and writes the same in the
conclusion of 68. some thing like this (says he) to happin after this life,
it is not incredible, but he says, if it be so, it may be demanded and either
to be funde, or to be ignored, and these same words, ye shall find Ad dulcinum
questione prima. and in the book of faith and works, Cap. 1^. whidder then men
shall suffer these things in this life or yet after this life? some such
judgments shall ensue, it abhors not as I believe from reasoun: and again
in 21. of the City of God. Cap. 26. having spoken of Purgatory, subioyneth,
this I red argue not, for pereuenture it is true. In all these ye may perceive
euide^tlie Augusti. to dout of it, but against Pelagius, to affirm planely,
that after the deperting out of this life, there is Heaven and Hell, and no
third place. But thou will say, that he affirms it in other places. I answer,
that those places, in the which he appears to affirm it, should be exponed by
these, that either he was certantlie persuaded that there was no such thing, or
then he douted of it.

But now would I ask of thee, why would thou this godly man, Nether was
Purgatory known to the fathers under the Law nor yet reueiled to the Apostles
should certanely affirm that, which he can not proueether by authority or by
exemple of attentique scripture. If it be a thing so comfortable and
necessary, do we think that boith the ancien Fathers under the law should have
been frauded, nether yet any revelation made to the Apostles of it. I will not
feght with stronger arguments because it is but incident and accessorie to our
matter.

The argument of praying for the dead is euerted by the same reason, true it
is, and can not be denied, but of long antiquity, it heth been received to
pray for the dead, and again it is not to be douted, but they were me^, and
builded not ever upon the fundation, Gold, Silver, and precious stones. And we
know that there is no antiquity of opinion, nor error, that oght to
prescribe or preiudge to the verity, for it is most certane, that even in the
time of the Apostles errors were, and Paul him self makes mention of evil
builders, yea* 1. Cor. 3.
and a little after there age, we read that some was (...) opinion that Baptism
should be received for the de^^^.

How esalie men are moue^ ^y a natural affections and inclination to wysse
there fr^^des at there deperting to be well, and so to burste forth (...) some
prayer, we have al experience, but we oght to tak head that our affection be
not fund repugnant to the reule of faith, and godlynes, and so to be brydled.

This co^suetude of prayi^g for the dead, how this consuetude of praying for
the dead crappe in
no dout, appears well to have proceaded of the opinion of Purgatory, yet
some other cause may be assigned, as that it was judged one i^humane thing to
those the memory and renome of the depted to be utterly extinguished and
perish: so that these prayers at the beginning before the opinion of
purgatory tuke so deep rute appears to have been sumwhat tolerable for they
tended to this end, to give God thanks, The praying for the dead in the
primitive Church was either a certane gratulation for the felicity obtained or
a certane thanks giving to God.
that has called them from the miserable condition of this life to his mercy:
and so Ambrosius in his oration at the departing of Theodosius and
Valentinianus makes a certane gratulation to them that are delivered out of
the miseriis of this life, and was with Christ in the Eternal ^lysse. He
adiuneth some prayers which repugneth to this but by this he would teach and
admoneshe the Church of a certane duty toward the departed, even as they were
yet a life, not douting, but they had received that which he wyssed to them.
Christ prayed for the resurrection of Lazarus, being certane that he had
obtained that he hade called for, so he says, he did for there saik, that
assisted: and it appears by Dionisius that the Byshope prayed to teach the
people principalie, what the felicity was, that the departed enjoyed, and that
he hade received all that the Church wyssed to him. Epiphanius gives one
other cause against Arrius, to show our imperfection conferred with Christ:
this cause it has no probability, for we know the ancients, to have prayed
for Martyrs, Sermon. 11. de San^^.
Apostles and others. But these are not to be called prayers properly, but
actiones of thanks, like as Augustine witnesses him self, in the words
recyted by you.

And als we are able to prove by the Greik Ca^non where it is planely said,
that offringes be made for Prophets, Patriarchs, and others that be received
already to mercy, Which I am sure neideth hone of our prayer, by the
confessio^n of all, and so ^a^ no^ stand if it shall not be thus understand for
a certane thanks given to God, and g^atulation to them, that be ^^ceaued in
that eternal felicity.

These causes I have ^^duced that ye may understand that there be ^o ^or ^
^ause that moved the ancients to pray for the dead, and that ye may perceive
that there was some certane color of simplicity, at the beginning, til
purgatory that gredy, deuowring, insaciable, and pestilent fire was erected,
when all religion was overthrown, as we seen by experience, for of it has
flowed all the abomination that regneth to this day.

Let no man think that in this I will excuse the ancients in this there
attemptate without any commandment or allow^nce of God. But that ye may
understand them to have been moved to this, The custom of offering for the
dead when it was induced and how it still continued.
by many causes probable in there judgment before there was any mention of
Purgatory.

Now rests to oppin up the beginning of the oblatio^s that were made at the
burying of the dead, it was a received custom, and co^suetude among the
nations, that in the days of there nativity, and solemnity of there burial
they made a certane Banked to the people, which custom after there conversion
to the Euangell, they still retained in many places, and specially in the
burial, albeit some part corrected, that they in the burying brought meat and
drynk, unto the grave of hi^ that was deceassed, and placed upon the grave,
which ryte Augustine rebukes, calling them that so did, Sermon. 15. de Sanc^.
Infideles. And it is not to be wondered that they who were instructed in the
scole of Pythagoras, and Plato, retained and sauored something of their old
dregge. This use dured a sufficient time amongst them that were converted,
therefore says Augustine: cease brethren from this heathen error of
infidelytie, for the holy Souls says he, either be innocence of life, are
clean, or are purged by satisfaction of repentance, and so are received by our
Savior, and are to be judged, to be with him, according to the saying of
Paul, I wisse to be dissolved, and be with Christ this far Augustine,
making no mention of Purgatory nether yet sending the Souls of the dead, to
any such place.

This consuetude thus flowing from the gentilytie, could not be altogether
removed, yet was it corrected in this manner, that at the practeis of the Lords
Table, and in the burial, The ordor and form of burial, in the premitiue
Church.
oblations were made of bread and wine, and such others things to (...)
^eleif, and use of the poor, yea, and in the funeral this was ^e^^er
adjoined, that not only almous was geuin to the supporte of the nedy, by the
freindes of the dead: but there was added prayer, thanks giving, and funeral
orations made in the public assembly. The form is setfurth by Dionisius, In
Hierarchia Ecclesiastica.
that the minister after he had set up the monument of him that was to be
buried, then he gave thanks to the eternal God, who by Jesus Christ had
distroyed death, and the author of it, and by him had given eternal life to
them that believed in him then was there certane Psalms recyted, sung by the
assistence, after this a certane place of Scripture confortable of the
resurrection of the dead was red and exponed immediately, they that were under
instruction and unbaptized, were put forth of the temple. This done, a
cathologue was recyted of them, that had been called upon, to Gods mercy
before, and the name of him that was to be buried, put in, his virtues
rehearsed as constancy in religion, faith, Innocence of life, mercy and
liberality to the nedy and to this was joined one exhortation to them that
assisted to follow there exemple and fotesteppes, then and last came the
Minister unto the corpse, and there recyted certane prayers, commending the dead
to God.

Of this ordour used in the burial proceeded that even in the holy communion,
mentioun was made of the dead, Libro. 9. Confessio number. 12, 19 Cap.
as Augustine planely witnesses, speaking that his Mother, earnistlie craved,
that mention should be made of her at the table, and as we may gather of his
book, that he wrytteth de Te cura pro mortuis. Yet was not this memory and
commemoration so superstitious, as in this aige, when our mass mounging
schauelinges braggeth that they offer up the body and blood of Jesus Christ,
for the dead and the quick, for redemyng of them that be in Purgatory, the
Supper of the Lord, being institute, nether for dead, nor for quick, others
nor does use it, according to the institution and practies of our Savior.
Whereby we may clearlie perceive in the time of Augustine, as I have already
declared, and may prove by the Greike Canon, there was no oblation, such as ye
pretend for the dead, but only ane ^ction of thanks to God for his mercy
showed upon them in receiving them to his cumpanye.

The oblations we read in the ancien wrytters, are to be understand of bread
and wine, What the oblatio^s were that the ancie^ts make so often mention of in
there wryttinges.
and such others things given and serving to the use of the poor, and not
for redemption of any Souls out of Purgatory. It can not be denied, but they
speak as I have oftentimes warned) excessiuelie, yet all is to this end, that
the releif of the poor may be the more depely imprented in our hearts, and
that we may have the greater care over them, and thus brusteth forth to promise
remission of sins, increase of goods multiplication of the benefits of God,
yea, and some times to encurage them the more, affirms it to auale even to
the dead, not that any fructe redoundeth to the dead, but only that they may
move them to greater pity, and liberality toward the indigent they
amplyfie, and deck up the matter. For this ye bring out of Augustine is not to
be understand of any other oblatio^, nor of almus given to the poor, to the
which was joined certane orations, or rather commemorations, and actions of
thanks for the dead. And that these be called propiciations, and means,
whereby grace and mercy is purcheshed to the dead, this we have to take
excessiuelie spoken to the praise of almons, Almons and prayer in what sense
are called propitiatory.
and to kendle the charity of me^ toward there indigent brethren, which
charity and mercy, they complene to be waxed cold: thus by fair persuasions
and promises they walken, allure and encurage the dull hearts of me^: and so
the words are not to be taken rigoruslie and strictly: For if ye shall so do,
we must have recurse to the reule of Augustine, already declared, that is, to
the eternal verity of God, reveled in his Scriptures, where there is no such
commandment given to pray, or offer for the dead, nor yet allowed by any
exemple of attenticque Scripture, nor word spoken of Purgatory, but planely
teached that all faithful are saved, and unfaithful condemned. Where unto
aggreth the doctors them selves, as Ambrose, De bono mortis. Ambro^^ De bono
mortis. 1^.
He that receaueth not remission of sins here, there shall be none there, to
wit, after the departing of this life, there shall be no^e, Co^tra Demetrianu^:
t^ac. 1.
because they could not atteyne to eternal life, which is remission of sins.
And Cypriane, after the departing of this life, there is no place to
repentance, nor effect of satisfaction. Here is life, either lost, or holden,
here is provided for eternal life, by the worshipping of God, and the fructe
of faith. And Ieronimus, in this world, we know that we may help every one
others either by oratioun, or then by Counsel, when we shall cum before the
Trybunal of Christ, nether Job, Daniel, Noah, 13. questi. ^. Cap. in presenti.
may pray for us, but every man shall bear his owen burthene. And Augustine him
self, besides the places alleged, says he not? all has at there departing
out of this world, there owen diverse receptacles, the godly has joy, In
Euangelium. Ioanuis. ^r^ct. 49.
the wicked torments, but at the resurrection, the joy of the godly, shall be
amplyfied, and the panes of the ungodly, shall be made more grievous, when they
shall be troubled with there bodies: the holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Martyrs,
Apostles, and all good faithful are received in peace, yet they shall all
receive in the end, that God has promised, for there is promished ^esurrection
of the flesh, consumption of death, eternal life with the Angels, this we
are to receive at ones, for the rest, which immediately is given after the
death, every man receaueth (if he be worthy of it) when he dies. This far
Augustine.

If a rest be prepared for all faithful, where is thy Purgatory, and since
thou feast, they receive this rest immediately after the dissolution and
uanishnig of these bodies, what now can serve thy oblation and prayer to them,
more then to pray for the elect vashell of God Paul? Shall we think that the
oblation, whereof mention has been made, was offered for the Patriarchs?
according to the words of the Greik Canon, we offer to thee this our spiritual
service for them who rests in Christ Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and
sofurth. I trust thou dar not say it, how little schame soever thou hest. It is
plane then, that the oblation that was made in the holy Communion was a certane
action of thanks for that, that God had gathered to him a Church from time to
time by there ministry, he had geuin his word to be dilated throughout all,
by the Scepter whereof he governed all. These things be plane and manifest,
and can not be denied of the learned adversaries, that be versed in the
antiquity, how soever they impiust it wrangle and wreiste all to there fond
wicked and abominable mass, which Augustine never knew, nether was there any
such prophanatio^ amongst christians many years, and ages after. If you can
not be satisfied by this, that I have adduced for the understanding of the
words of Augustine, Many works ascribed to Augusti. that be not his and in
those that be his words added some taken away whole sentence is interlaced
corrupting the mind of the author.
assure your self that how so ever my answer is directed principally to refute
the treatty of the mass, yet my labors are dedicat to the comfort of the
simple and godly, that might be troubled with his calumnius arguments.

True it is, and is not to be douted, but as Tritemius, witnesses many works
are ascribed to Augustine, which he never made, nor were his: so we lack not a
probable argument of conjecture, and suspicioun, that even his wryttinges be,
i^ some places deprauat, sentences infarred, in some places words added, in
others taken away, peruerti^g the whole, yea, and the same is to be judged of
the rest of the godly Fathers.

And if care the reader shall find this strange, it is the querimonie of
Dionisius Byschope of Corinthus, who compleneth even in his owen time, his
Epistles to have been corrupted, many things added, many taken away, as we may
reid in Eusebius. Whereby we may be most certanelie persuaded, this to have
been the continual practies, and travel of Satan, to saw in some fitches
amongst the good sayings of godly me^, and so to pervert there works, and
deceive the people of God. Which may be easalie tried, when the authors are
found contrarius, and repugnant to them selves, In Ecclesiastica ^rsto. lib. 4.
Cap. 23
affirming a thing here, and doutting of it there, as ye may observe Augustine
in this matter affirming, douting and planelie denying one thing, as we have
shawen, alwayis we have the reule and line of the Scripturs: The reule and line
of scriptu^s ever to be followed.
which as they can not deceive us, and are most certane, so oght we to examine
all true doctrine by them, and then can we not be abused by authority of one
or estimation of one other.

Now followis Tertuliane, 1386. zeris bypast, we make oblatioun for these that
are departed zearlie, the day of their departing.

Would to God, whatsoever ye note, upon the margin of one Obite mass, that ye
would, and your papists, in all matters, which ye pestilentlie, maliciously, and
mischeuouslie call in deuteronomy, being more bright and evident, nor the Son at
none days, that ye, I say, and all your pestilent faction, could stand to the
determination of this godly man, for God be praised, he a^peareth to have been
send of God. to avenge the cause of his treuth, and confound other errors,
that appears to have been then creping in, as of your monstrus
transubsta^tiation, and others, which I have not to truble me with at this
present being aside from the purpose.

The oblation that he makes mention of, in the day of departing, is not that,
that we read in Virgile, of the a^niuersarie (out of the peruerst, and wicked
Imitation whereof, has flowed this your Obite Mass, Dirigie, Placebo, and so
forth) made by Eneas, for his father Anchises, but as I have already declared
of almous, according to the custom, to the releif of the nedy, as I have said.

Here after follows in this author, Gregorius, whose age in deed, I darre not
absolve from superstition, for then trouble rising, and specially, the great
and haynus contention for the supremacy betuix Constantinople, and Rome, the
Scripturs began to be handled by every man's fantasy, at the affection of
parties, where greatest aua^tage appeared, without all reverence, as may be
clearlie known, by the works of them of those days, and of this sa^^ author
that is now alleged. His words are. Ine g^dlie doctor approved, be the Kirk
of God, 960. zeris bypast, wryttis on this manner. Let us send brethren unto God
our messingers, be weiping giving almous and offering the haly hosts for the
Sacrifice of the haly altar offered up with weiping, and deuotioun of mind is
singular help unto our absolution fra sin, for als oftentimes as we offer
unto him the Sacrifice of his pass^ ou^^, ^a often do we repare and apply to us
his passion, for our absolutioun.

I content with the translation ye have adduced, albeit this word (applying)
be not in the text of Gregorius, and ye have translated it, as it might best
serve to you, albeit it serves no thing at all, for in such exhortations,
what shall any godly man do, or moss the people to do; (...) it exhort them to
murne, to weip, to be ^aile there (...) ^oul^ offenses, warn them to take head
that they be not oppressed, nor suddenly taken, and so to send such
Ambassadors, as it were, declari^g there good mind and prompt obedience ready
to serve, to pay tribute, that is, give almous to the poor, and offer up such
hosts, as proceading of a clean conscience, and one intiere mind, may
testify and witness there simplicity, in respect whereof the former rebellion
is forgiven, since we clean not to our owen merits and desernings, but to the
mercy of our great king, disployed in Jesus Christ, and purchessed by his
Passion, to the which only all remission, and absolution from sin is to be
referred. This to be the mind of Gregorius, it is easy to perceive by any that
pleases to read the place: the Homily is written upon the words that be
recyted in the 14. of Luke, the beginning is, if a man haite not Father and
sofurth. It follows of the King that passed to war, and considers with
what power he may witstand his Inimie stronger nor he: upon the explanation of
these words the author, as might serve to his exhortation, passes from the
sense of the text to the allegory, and shows what is meant by the exemple, we
are unable to withstand the potent King God, to enter in Judgment with him:
herefore ought we clean to his mercy disployed upon the croce of Jesus Christ
his eternal Son, and so to weip, and bewail our Sins by repentance. The
only way and mean to be received in favors again, and to have our former
rebellion forgiven and remitted.

There is no mention of mu^dled masses: but our author is so addicted to his
wicked opinion, and so blinded, that wheresoever any word is made of a
Sacrifice, one altar, one oblatio^, one host, incontine^tlie thinks he with
him self: ha this author makes for me, let me put this in protocolle, never
having respect to the custom of the time, nor sense of the author, and so
abuses all to the wrapping up of him self in obstinacy, and blynding, and
deceauing of the people.

The oblation, and Sacrifice what it was, I have declared, one host likewise,
what the altar is the author to the Hebrews, Hebr. 13.
and Ihon in the Revelation declared, to wit, Jesus Christ, who vndoutedlie is
the altar, upon the which we have to offer up our Sacrifices, hosts, and
oblations of prayer, thanks, and liberality, whom by all our actions,
Sacrifices, and oblations are sanctified, and he is the verrie Host, of the
which Sacramentallie and spirituallie do eat, all that offers them to the
holy practies of the Lords Table, and do believe in him, as your owen Parisien
doctor G^gneus does well say.

We know none other altar, nor the Scripturs of God allow, unless ye will set
up a new Iudaisme, as ye fetched in a gentilisine out of Virgile, in your obite
mass, and the most part of all your proceadinges, as I am able to declaire
particularly, if time and leaser should serve.

Now says this author, give I wald call to rememberance all the sayingis of
the godly Fatheris, quhilks treattis according to this purpose, our Colloquie
sulde extend the boundis and grow till ane great work, quharefore we will
rehearse the sayingis of the may notable Counsallis.

I trust ye have adduced all might serve anywayes in your Judgment to this
deuilishe purpose of the defense of the miserable mass, but if the matter had
been good and allowed of God, I dout not, but albeit ye should pereuenture not
have needs so many, yet we could have contented with a few number, but my
believe is that these authors being ryghtlie co^siddred, the time weyed, and
there minds graipped out (where in we have taken some pain, not vnfructfullie
God be praised) the lector shall perceive clearly that they make no thing for
your party. Follows the concile Nicene.

Toward this purpose (says this author. "The counsall Necene, quhilk was the
first general consal ester y^ time of Apostles approuin in all ages, 1226.
zearis bypast, writtis and sayis on this manner disponing our selves to the
godly table, let us not luke selenderlie upon the bread and the cup set
before us, but let us lift up our mind be faith understanding in that holy
table, to be the Lamb of God, takin away the Sins of the world, offered up be
the preistis without blude, and we receiving verily his pretius body and
blude, aucht to believe thaim to be the plage of our resurrectioun.

The Sacrifice that is here spoken of, in the determination of the concile, is
a Sacrifice of praise; laud, and thanks giving, which albeit it be made by
the minister, yet since it is made in the name of the whole Church, and the
people does consent in there hearts to it, that is oppinlie spoken by him, yea,
and does approve it to by the saying, Amen, It is reputed no les to be the
Sacrifice of the assisters nor of the minister. This then is the Sacrifice, the
councile speaks of making no mention of a Sacrifice propiciatorie to be made
for remission of sins of the dead and quick. This propiciatorie, and
expiatorius Sacrifice was offered up by Christ, Hebr. 10.
and that ones never to be repeated and reiterat, for the way is ever ready
prepared, and his blude ever fresehe, as the Apostle speaks, The Church in
deed, in memory of that Sacrifice, offers up co^tinuallie oblation
oforation, prayers, and thanks giving.

The words of the Concile calling Christ, the Lamb of God, that takes away
the sins of the world, are not to be referred to the symboles of bread and
wine, which the concile disertlie pronunceth to be there, but to the Son of
God, Christ him self, who was made the verrie propiciation of our sins, and
the correction of our Peace. But here I will hear with your falt, in the
translation knowing you to be ignorant of the Greik tongue, and should pass by
it, if it should not serve to the declaration of the mind of the concile: for
lest that any man should think that this action, be a verrie Sacrifice, this is
added (...) that is (not like a Sacrifice) or (not after the manner of a
Sacrifice) so the sentence (Sacrificed of the preistes) (not as ye turn it)
without blood (but) Sacrificed by the preistes, Note diligently and take head.
not after the manner of a sacrifice or not like a Sacrifice, declares plainly
that there is no such Sacrifice propiciatorie meant of here as ye falsely
pretend: whereby ye may perceive evidently a great difference betuix the
Sacrifice that is offered by the priest, and the Sacrifice of Christ, who in
verrie deed, did offer him self, after the manner of a Sacrifice, that is to the
death, for the absolution and expiation of the sins of the world.

The priest wi^^ ^he (...), and offer up (not after the manner of a Sacrifice,
as the councile says) the action of thanks, laud, and praise for that
sacrifice cause, Where by the wraith of God is anoyded, The bleding of Christ
and not the eating wippeth away sins.
sanc^ification purchased for his (...) wypeth away our sins, and not the
eating of his body, nor drynkinh of his blood.

And forber we shall observe in this that this councile, wylleth us to lift up
our minds, and not to fix them upon the ^ume Elements, that be set before us,
we be here I say, admonished Christ's body naturally, to be in the heauennes,
and to be no ways here, in this action, but as he is in Baptism, as this
councile planely does declare and we have alread^y shown in Chrysostomus.
Others things I pass by, that be here to be observed, and are most lyue^ie
setfurth, as the form of the action, the mention of the Table, according to
the form practeist, and observed by o^r Savior, the ^yfting up of (...)
^artes by faith* the (...) made indifferently to all of boith the part^s ^a^e
of all in the words ^^^^ted by you, that we oght to take, but a little and
sober quantity* known, that we do not offer us thither, for the satur^^e and
filling of the flesche, but for sanctification, as the councile does most
godly conclude.

Now let us cum to the consale of Ephesus, ha^^^ 1128. zeris by^ast, ^uhareby
was condemned the (...) of Nestorius, wryttis on this manner, we do offer ane
vnbludie Sacrifice, and also we cum to the haly Sacrament, and ar maid haly,
being maid partakers of the haly body and bind of Jesus Christ, quhilk was
maid redemer of us all, not receiving it as commou^ ^lesche (God forbide) nor
as the slesche of man maid haly and joined to the Son of God, be any unity
of worthynes, or ellis as being ane Mansioun of God, but as that quhilk verelie
geuis life to men's saules, and was maid proper to Gods awin sone him self.
Hitherto the counsal Mark how their two ancient counsel is dois approve the
Sacrifice of the mass, and als the real presence of the Lordis body, in the
Sacrament of the Altar.

To the one councile I have answered, and schewen the true meaning of the
fathers in there determination, where there is no thing, that any ways
apperteyne, or properly can be applied to the mass, like as in the decreit of
this concile, Mark how the one concile aggreth with the athher and exponeth it.
there is no thing making for your part and for th^s cause, the Sacrifice that
they acknawledgeit to be here, they pronunce it to be one unbloody Sacrifice,
that is no sacrifice in deed, if we should speak strietlie, and according to
the proper nature of a Sacrifice, but only to bear the name of sacrifice,
because it is a monument, and memorial, and as it were one anniuersarie of the
propiciatorie Sacrifice offered up by the Son of God, so that the meaning of
this councile is one with it of the councile of Nicea, for it that is went by
the Aduerb, (...) is here called unbloody.

Considder with your self, how far ye offend against this councile, that
says, and defends the verrie contrary, for ye affirm that ye have a blody
sacrifice going about to infer a real presence of Christ's body, The
papists calling the mass o^e vnblody sacrifice, directly repugneth to the
co^stitution of the concile.
and blood, for if his verrie and real body (...) there, in your mass, and
his verrie and real blood, and oblation made of them, it follows
necessarelie, that it is a bloody Sacrifice, and so your conclusion directly
is contrarius to the constitution of the concile, that calls it one unbloody
Sacrifice in the manner, as I have declared.

Now have we, God be praised, atteyned to the end of this authors arguments,
there be no other thing in his book, worthy of answer, not the les, le^t that
he should brag (as I know the (...)) if (...) thing should be pretermitted,
we shall go throught all the rest. Here then is James brought in praising his
reasons, and arguments gra^ting them to be most properly alleged and exponed.

In this, I will truble the render no fo^der with many words, but refer the
judgment to him, if i^ de^ot evidently declared, that ^e her has be any
fundation of (...) mass in the old Testamen^, nor in the now, exemple, nor
practies of the Apostles, authority nor suffrage of antiquity, either the
fathers, either yet the conciles, which he all most vntreulie pretended to ma^e
for him: his wrangling and wraisting of the pl^ces of Scripture, ineptlye and
impertinentlie cyted by him, together with there tre^ and germane sense, is
expo^ed this ignorance of the Greik tongue and antiquity (without the
knawledge of the which it is not able to any man to travel happily in the
matters of Scripturs) is oppinned up, and the verrie and natural mind of the
fathers, and counciles vtterred to the co^tentment, (I trust) and satisfaction
of the modest and gentle reader.

I have schewen, besides this the things that wrappeth up this author, in
obstinacy and di^nours. First his owen affection and his folishe and
inconsiderat zeal being addicted to the defense of that, that seems good unto
him, and as we see, a Febricitant man, having his stomach corrupt, and his
taiste inf^rted, all thing, be it never so good, synketh to him, even so it is
in the mind, The corrupt affection of the mind is most properly copared to
the stomach and taist of the febricitant man ^o^hing all good meats.
when a man is addicted, and fixed upon any purpose, be it never so wicked. it
shall seem good, be it never so impius, it shall appear godly, be it never so
haynus and detestable, yet shall it be to him pleasing and delectable.

True it is, that the spur of ambition pricketh a man wounderfullie
forewarde, when a man will seem, and appear, will set up, and extolle him self,
and so will be singular in opinion, and of these, allace, we have a great
number, who in time of papistrie, and darkness regarded not mass, caired not
for no ^ond ceremonies, whispered in every corner, yea, and some times
plainly spoke al to be wicked (as it was in deed) that was then used, cried
for reformation, which now of the great mercy of our God offered they Loath, and
abhor, would be again at there vomit, the stynking dung of papistrie, we
luked not (say they) for a speaking God, that so scharplie rebukes vice, and
extremely punisieth, let us return to our dum God, that never said evil to
us, but was ever for the price ready to forgive, what so ever we had committed:
to the purpose, one inconsidderat zeal, joined with ambition, it can not be
expressed, how pithy and strong it is to carry a man away headlinges to
induration: then if ignorance shall be added the mother of will, and arrogance,
the seiknes begins to be incurable, pa^sing and exceeding al remedy.

The ignorance of antiquity, and of the Greik tongue* has helped much to
pe^uert your judgment, Sire, in preposterus, and inept citing of the sayings
of the ancien doctors, and I fear, that ye have rather given credit and faith
to others that has traueled in this wicked cause before you, nor has red them
your self.

When a man is affectioned, then O Lord how ^asalie is he transported, what so
ever he reads making it to serve to his purpose this, thinks he is to be
s^ked, here is mention of the mass, here is word of a Sacrifice, here one
oblation, what so ever it be, it must serve to the purpose with out all
consideration and trial.

This has been a part of my (...), to opp^n up your seik^es, and the cause
thereof, beseiking the eternal God, to put remedy to it, if his godly
pleasour be: take not this to be said in realing manner, how soever ye deserve
to be entreaitted, realing without all mesour, moderation, and modesty against
the true and holy seruandes of God, yea, and verrie Prophets sent of his great
uter^y, to reform the face of the earth, which had so hor^idly ^^dyne^ from
God, and his obedience, but rather, Si^r, think and judge it to be said of a
zealus har^, desyring and thristing most earnistlie your conversion, and
unfeigned repentance. James after that he has thus praised him and as it is
written in the old Proverbs, Mules claweth ever one other, then requires he
for his memories cause a rehearsal be made of the whole disputation, to the
which reasonable desire as he is verrie gentle in such cares, how soever he
appear to be otherwise, he grants willingly and first brings him bak to
it that was principal of the whole disputation: If the mass be a sacrifice
instituted by Jesus Christ, in his latter Supper, which he takes to be
clearly prouen, but upon this matter, I will sp^a^ no thing, but require the
reader to call to remembrence, what has been spoken against his defi^ition,
the gr^^^^ and fundation of it drawn out of the words of the la^^er Supper,
in the which words, there is no commandment given of oblation, nor Sacrifice,
but only to do that which he had done, to take bread, give thanks, break, and
distribute it, and all in remembrence of his death, the which being thus
practeist, they might be assured of his very body and blood, to be thereby
nurished and refresh^d unto eternal felicity.

The inconveniences, and absurdities, that does ensue of your oblatioun, has
been declared, how ineptlie and improperlie ye adduce Malachie, the true
meaning and sense of the Prophet has been shawen by the universal consent and
exposition of the most godly, some do think the mind of the Prophet there, to
signify, and forewarne the vocation of the Gentiles, and nations, by a manner
of speech familiare to the Prophets, to wit, by the inward and spiritual
manner and form of worshipping, set forth according to the worshipping of the
law, to Prophecy the vocation of the nations together with the reiection of
the Jews. In whose place they war to be received and adopted

As in there whole works, The things that were to be planted be Jesus christ
at his cu^myng forewarnned and setfurth* by the prophets under the rytes and
figures then used.
we have the gifts exhibited unto us, in Jesus Christ, painted forth, by the
figures, aggreing to there age, as the conversion to God, by the passing up to
Jerusalem, his adoration by the offering of al kind of gifts, and Sacrifices,
and by the visions and dreams, we have the foresignification of that great
knowledge, that was to be given to the elect, and chosen at the ^^yumphant
Revelation of the eternal Son of God, Jesus so that this place of Malachie,
is even all like to that, that is spoken of the three Altares, to be erected in
Assiria, Egypt, and Judea, for if ye be of that opinion, that this Prophecy of
Isaie is fulfilled, and accompleshed ye must schaw to me, where, and when these
alteres were erected, and further, if every kingdom has a certain temple
appointed or one altar for the self, and if ye will make answer to these, I
trust ye will be drowen to confess^, that the Prophets under the forms, types,
and figures aggreing and consonant to there aiges, forwarneth the dila^ation of
the kingdom of God, at the exhibition of his son Jesus Christ.

Besyddes this, I have showen how miserably ye are deceived, thinking that
there is no other Sacrifice, but your mass. Notwithstanding that the faithful
now still offers to God, a clean and undefiled oblation, as we have already
spoken. The similitude and comparison of our Savior, with Melchisedec out of
the author to the Hebreues, is explaned, and to it adjoined, the interpretation
of the words of David, In the 110. Psalm, which words no ways apperteyneth
to any oblation of bread and wine, but to the perpetuity of his kingdom,
without any fallow or successor, for it is plane that Melchisedec made no
oblation of bread and wine to God, whereof there is no mention, but only
brought them forth to Abraham, and his wearryed Army, as Chrysostomus, and
Josephus does note, and there shall be any place to conjecture and
probability, but we oght not trouble our selves with the cause, wherefore
Abraham so did, but rather to keip silence with the spirit of God. And if any
oblation shall be granted in the Lords table, it is of bread and wine, to be
sanctified, and converted to one Sacramental use, from a profane and
natural, and not to be transubstanciated in the body and blood of our Savior,
for then the similitude shall peryshe, so that no thing can make more against
the real presence, nor this, as haethbene shown.

How ye are abused in the Pasouer Lamb, thinking all the points, parts, and
ceremonies of it, to be performed in the latter Supper, as no part of it,
should foresignifie, or apperteyne to the Sacrifice of the Croce, I trust ye
be alreaddy convicted, within your self, by it that is spoken, for we have not
to judge, nor esteame (how ever we have spoken of this matter before) the
Sacraments of the ancien Fathers to be figures of the Sacraments of the new
Testament, Contra. Fast. 2. Lib. cap 2.
what soever similitude or aggreme^t be betuix them, but they be all together
figures of our redemption in Christ, conform to the saying of Augustine, the
Sacraments of the old Law, says he, are Figures paynting forth the things
that were to be accompleshed, and performed in the Croce of Jesus Christ, in
whom we have the whole perfection of all, and in our Sacraments we celebrat
the memory of the benefits purchassed unto us, by his passion, and death.

True it is, that in that, that it was eaten, a sufficient nombre called
theirto, and appointed to be practeist in reme^berence of there myghtie, and
wonderful delyuerence, it has a certane aggrement and conformity with the
Lords table, but how it is a lyuelie figure of the passion of our Savior,
representing it most properly haeth been declared.

How fondly, and ignorantly ye bring in the figures, and allegories out of
the old Tastament, to confirm your doctrine, has also been sufficiently
expressed, but in this part as y^ mo^te rejoice, so ye expone your self, even
to be iested and la^the^ at be the verrie Ba^es, and Infantes, seiking a
corespondence, and conformity, betuix the figure and it that is represe^ted by
the figure, for, as I have said, this was the color and clo^^ ^tended by
them, that affirmed Simon Cyreneus to have suffered the death, and not our
Savior, he being supposed in our Saviors rowme like as we read of the Ram,
that was offered up for Isaac: be werre that ye be not perceived to be of this
sort of men and opinion, which in deed, we must conclude of you, if you persew
obstinatlie the co^gruence of the figure, with the thing figurat by it. Upon
this was declared that such allegories, be no probations, nether yet are
adduced to serve for any arguments to confirm any point of doctrine in the
new Testament otherwise doutsum, but sumtymes to show the conformity of our
doctrine, with the doctrine of the old Fathers: sumtymes to exorne, and dilate
the matter alreaddy prouen: and sum times are produced in contempt of them that
can not content them with the simplicity of the doctrine of Christ, but
cries and gaippeth after signs, tokennes, and wondres: as to them that now
desires the verity of the Euangel to be confirmed by miracles* we may most
iustlye give the answer, that they shall have no other nor the laying up of
Iesabell in her bed, or any such other serving to that purpose.

Now that ye have showe^ your ignorance of a^tiquitie, and of the Greik tongue,
in cyting the fathers, what ever ye brag hereof, I trust it be manifest:
where likewise was declared, what oght to be concedet to the Fathers and
general conciles, to wit, that they are to be received so far as they keip
them by the precyse reule of the text of God, where they shall excead this
bounds and lean to them selves, then have we to judge of them, as they did of
others before there aige.

What apperteyneth to general counciles duly conueyned without tyranny, has
been exponed, to wit, that they ever err, when as they take any thing upon
them more nor they are able to manteyne by the Scripture. When soever they
exeade, or takes upon them to bynd the conscience of man to that, which is
left fre by the spirit of God, or to determine any thing against the Scripture
then not only the whole multitude, but any private man ought and should oppone
them, oght and should intercede, oght and should resist, and withstand as
Paphuntius to the whole concile of Nice, and sindry others at other times. It
has been se^blably declared that the conciles ^y^ed by you, serves you no
thing, but rather makes against you, and thus I as one appointed by the rest
of the brenthren, and of the smallest shows and declares al godly to be
offended with you all places of Scripture cyted by you, to be impertinentlie
applied to your wicked purpose, and trusts to have prouen manifestly by the
Scriptures, the mass to be the most wicked abominable and deuyllishe
invention, that ever proceeded of the forge of Satan, yea, and all defenders
and may n^teinars of i^, to be members of the Antichrist; since it is prouen,
to be a thing of such nature, that it utterly spoylleth the Son of God, of
the dignity of his eternal preisthead, defaceth the glory of the Croce of
Jesus Christ and feyghteth directly against the heavenly benefit an^
threasour of the holy Communion.

And in this action, I regard not who be in my contrare, what soever James is
brought in he^, speaking (at the plesoure of th^s Author against his
conscience) of the Disciples of the Apostles and the ancien fathers, who makes
no thing against me nether yet meant any thing of the mass, but albeit so were,
we have to say with Aristotle, that it is a thing most holy to prefer the
verity to freindes, and with Paul, that if one Angel of heaven should (...)
any other thing, nor we are teached by Jesus Christ ^ee must prenunce it,
Anathema accurse.

Now will I leap over a question casten in by James, of the cause of variety
or opinions in these days, which is no matter to be astonished with all, since
this is the continual battle, and exercise of the Church of God, from the
beginning, yea, and is not without a great proffite to the holy Church, and a
singular comfort to every mem^re thereof, albeit that God most justly
auengeth, and (...) hereby the contempt of his word, the prophanatio^ of his
ordinances, and the polluting of his Sanctuary, in deed we be hereby teached
and admonished of our horrible apostasy, and declyning from God, we are led
as it were to the hie way; and brought again to the original, which is the
first Institution, and ordinance of Jesus Christ, whose voice only should be
herd and against the which no man oght to repyne.

This being done, that is the inventions of men, separated and eiected, the
ordinances of our Scoole Master erected and set up every where, in their owen
natural cleanes and simplicity, t^^n shall we have concord and aggrement,
and til that be Let no man think that it is able to a treane or have any
quietness, how so ever we shall procead sufficient witness of This is the
aggrement of all reformed Churches.

Now let us with this Author, return to our purpose, and examine the three
heads of his persuasion, out of the old and new Testaments, and the doctrine
of Vincentius Lyrmenses, which seameth so notable, so weighty, and of such
consequence to this Author, that it can not be refelled. The argument is drawn
out of Tomstallus, Bishop of Durame, howsoever this glorius divine decketh it
up in an other and new apperell.

The first head of your persuasion is. That we sall never read the people of
Israel, quha leuid under the servitude and boundage of circumcision, in
expectation of Christ's cuming till have been abused with Idolatry, the space
of. 40. zeires, or at the may, the space of a ma^is liftime, but anes in y^
time thai war brought to the knawledge of their Lord god and it is they war
never universally geuin to Idolatry, how than is it possible, that all
Christian men beand Baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, beleuang surely,
that he is already cumin, Savior and Redemer of the warlde, hes leuid
universally, in perpetual Idolatry, their. 1550* zeires and mair, without
repugnance or gainstanding, be the provision of God, and sa forth.

Ye conclude, that either the Lord has more s^lenderly entreated us, nor the
Iowes, or then the mass is not Idolatry, this Author does very wisely, to
term this argument, and call it a persuation, for albeit it may appear to
have some colloure to persuade, yet has it no pith nor strenth to convince,
giving, it were true, which shall be declared and prouen most ^als and untrue.

Consider how aplty this is inferred, the Iowes was never by the space of a
man's lyfetyme, suffered to be in Idolatry, how can it then be, that all
Christianes has continewed in Idolatry, these. 1550. years, the conclusion
is gathered hereof, ergo, the mass is not Idolatry, for this howsoever ye
procead by a disjunctive, ye would conclude and affirm.

Consider and examine the argument your self, and pronounce; if ye find any
weight with it, but I pray you, sin^e ye thus take upon you the knowledge of
Scriptures, how take ye this upon you to affirm, that the Iowes was never in
Idolatry, by the space of a man's lifetyme, the text and history being so
plain, that the children of Israel perseuered and remaned still Idolaters,
from the time of Ieroboa^, who set up the golded Calves, and made Israel to
sin, til the time of their eiection and utter exterminion.

True it is, that from time to time, God starred up Prophets, to admonish and
rebuke the people, of their defection from him, yet do we never read, no
universal reformation, nor hearty repentance, where do ye read, that ever the
statutes of Amrie, Mich. 6. Chap.
as the prophet does speak, and before him, the Acts of Jeroboam, yea, even
of parliament erecting and serting up Idolatry, which did still multiply and
increase, during the days and reign of. 19. Kings in Israel, beginning at
Jeroboam, and ending at Hoseas, under whom come their destruction: the cause
being assigned in these words: the Sons of Israel, imagyned wicked things
against the Lord their God, to buyld themselves heigh places in their times.
2. Regu. 17.
etc.

The Prophets rebukes, even the very Trybe of Iudath, for the same crime,
notwithstanding the Temple, the Religion, and preisthead placed and remaning
still with them and the promise of God, made to David and Solomon, yet did they
continually decline and follow their sister Israel, going aw^oring after
strange and uncouth Gods.

It can not be denied, but some faithful Kings they had, yet was never the
people reduced to the full and persite obedience of God, from Idolatry, till
the time of Josias, who taken away, without any further delay, they return to
their falls Gods, and still follow them, till they were likewise extermin^^^^.
Let us ripe the matter heigher Consider how easylie Adame created in all
perfection and innocence is drawn from God, consider the staite of the world
from Adame to Noie, where is the number of the godly, when we read, the Sons
of God carried away by the daughters of men, and the whole number of the godly
redacted to a certane family, and concluded in eight persons, yea and of the
which persons, some were wicked. What do ye judge here, of the permission of
God? stryking as it were, the whole earth with blindness, and ignorance of his
word, yea, and haynus Idolatry, which ye shall find to have dured. 1556.
years, what find ye after the restitution, find ye not the posterity of
Noie, to return to the impiety of their Fathers, and continue therein ill the
calling of Abraham? who out of the fire of Idolatry was called, to the
knowledge of God: and so the whole to have continewed in impiety, from the
time of the Flood, till Abrahames calling, the space of. 363. years.

Now will I pas by Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the time of the Patriarchs, and
of their being in Egypt, and live you to consider, how Moses and Aaron are
troubled with the people in the Vildernes, and after them, Iosuah, and will
enter into the history of the Judges. What defection read ye there from God,
that albeit he raised up men, from time to time to their defense, yet they do
rinne headlinges after falls Gods.

But here ye will object and reply. True it is, that they declined horribly,
but they were ever admonished of their defection and Idolatry: if thou meanest
universally that God admonished the whole world, the Apostle does manifestly
convict thee, saying, God sufferred in the aiges before passed, all the
Gentiles, to walk in their owe^ ways, that is, to be headlinges led in
Idolatry. If thou say, he admonished his owen, so, say I, has God done for
(...) time to time, he has stirred up some to admo^ish^ and rebuke the world
of impiety, or at least his owen, being wrapped amongst Idolaters.

True it is, that ever from the time of the Apostles iniquity and corruption,
has been creaping and entering in, as we may observe by the works of all the
Ancients, whose chief study and travel was against heresies: so that the
primitive Church lacked not men that did admonish all of defection and
declining from the former and original purity of the word and Religion, in
whose aiges, as we have already declared at large, was no mass, nor this your
mass never had place, till the time of the vastation of Gotthes and Wandalles,
as we have somewhat touched before, when the people might or durst not conuene
for fear, and so did they choose to them selves, every one a Sacrificer, at
the exemple of Michah. And thus was the beginning of your masses, always the
preistes findinge the Roste sappy, large luces, gains, auantage, they begin
to deck up the whore, not unlike to Hesiodus Pandora, sets her forth a
whoring with the Princes, and no dout, some godly men in these aiges has
espied and tried forth her impiety, albeit there names be suppressed, that the
fore signification of Ioanne the divine made in his Revelation, might have
place of the great silence should ensew the laying up of Iesabell in bed, which
silence contineweth from the latter part of the Second Chapter, til the.17.
where the damnation of that whore is foreshewe^, Iudi. 17.
and the cause of the same to have been her fornication, and the shedding of
the blood of the Saints, with the which, she has been drunken. But wonder it
is, that ye can find none that has been offended with the face, regiment,
opinion, doctrine, rytes, and manners of your Church, before the days of
Vickleafe, and Ihon Hus. If ye be so well seen in the antiquities as ye brag,
ye can not be ignorant that Anachdrite, who separated them selves from the
common society of men, are of long aige. If there had been nothing that
offended them, even in the face and regiment of the Church, it had not only
been folly, but also impiety to have separate them from the company of the
faithful, I do not allow their fact in all things, but the separating of
their selves is an evident argument, that they were moved by some prick of
conscience, to avoid the public corruption, that then began to grow in the
Church.

The diverse mutations and changes that we read in Monachatu, or in your monkish
Religion declares the same, for if they had been fully content with the
public ordour, they should never have invented an other. It chansed to them, I
grant as did to sects before the manifestation of Jesus Christ, that is, the
forther they declyned from the common soci^^ie of the people, and of the
accustomed Religion, the deipper they fell in damnable errors. But yet their
first motion proceaded, I say, from offense conceived in the public error, so
that all their defections and particulare Religions were complantes, and as we
may call them accusations of that Religion which was commonly received.

If I should bring forth the complaints and accusatio^s of the most learned,
amongst the Ancients, of the confusion and insolency of there aiges, and
specially of these that sharply reprehended your mother Rome, her pride, inuy,
judgment and doctrine, I should spend no small time.

Your owen Hierome feared not to term her ofter then ones, Babylon, and
Pupurata mereitr^x, and affirm that the inuy of the clergy of that sait, was
so intolerable, that i^compelled Tertuliane to fall to the error of Montanus
Augustine co^pleaned, that the Church was burdined with superfluity of
ceremonies in his time, how vehemently Gregory, Ambrose, Bernard, and others,
inuey against the insolent lives of the Clergy, ye can not (except ye
wilfully will) be ignorant: and if ye object that these compleane of manners,
but impugn no doctrine publicly received, we shall find y^ on some* we read
of Bertraillus, who in the time of Charlemagne, and at his desire confuteth the
impius opinion of transubstantiation, and after him Berengarins: Vickleafe in
de^d, goes neirer the quick, and oppenneth up the whole poison and uncovers
the whores head, plainly pronouncing the mass to be Idolatry, to him
succeadeth Ihon Hus; and Hieronimus Pragensis, and others in that aige, ^o from
time to time the matter has been conducted so by the Spirit of God, that there
be none so deaf, but they have (...) her fornication, none so blind, but they
have seen it, to the great confusion and shame of all her pertakers. Thus ye
are co^uicted of two manifest lies, one of the Isralites, and the people of
God, them I have showen to have been given over in Idolatry, during the time
of many Kings, and if we shall have recurse to the beginning, we shall find
thousand years, and long aiges, and so forth* There is no fault with God, who
has given us his Law, laid it before us, has kept nothing back of his will,
and holy mysteries, but has in all points sufficiently reueiled them.

Thus we be convicted most worthy of induration, being the Authors of this
defection from him, and contempt of his reule and Laws. The Second vntreuth is
this, that ye affirm your mass to have continued this. 1500. years, since it
is prouen, no such impiety to have been known in the time of the Fathers, and
all their meaninges to be referred to the holy and blissed communion.

Now follows the Second head of the new Testament, where this Author writteth
thus.

It is writtin in the Euangel, the promise quhilk our Savior maid to his
Apostles, and to all other faithful Ministers in the Kirk of God, to the end
of the world, on this manner, I sall pray the Father, and he sall give you ane
other conforter, that may bide with zow for ever the Spirit of verity, quhen
was this promise fulfillit of our Lord Jesus Christ, toward the Spirit of
verity to his Kirk and faithful Ministers? Gif all the ministers of the same,
and all vthers of Christ's Kirk hes beleuit universally in perpetual Idolatry
sen the time of Christ, to their our days.

And thus concludes this Author, that he is compelled by this argument, to
affirm that the mass is no Idolatry, or then the Lords promise has not been
fulfilled, according to the Scriptures, for we are assured (says this Author)
by all writers that the mass has been universally approuen in all aiges,
years and times, ever since the time of Jesus Christ our Lord, to these our
miserable days.

Of the promise of God we dout not, of the performance of it we be likewise
assured, but your mass to have been thus universally received and approuen,
since the time of Christ, till this aige, this is a manifest vntreuth, for the
Ancients never knew it, nether yet did ever the Greik Church receive or
authories it, yea, even in this our aige, The mass never erected til the
Bishope of Rome invaded the supremacy
yet still has no private mass, ye faill then in this, and is miserably
abused, taking it to have been universally received, since the time of Christ:
till these days, which is a greatly, and thereupon I will join this Issue
with you that ye are not able to prove your mass, ever to have been erected in
the occidentall Church, till the time of the supremacy of Rome, till the time
that the Bishops of Rome invaded and usurped the impyre and tira^ny above
their brethren.

What assistance they have had of the Spirit of God, promest to his Church,
their doctrine and works testifies, the just plague, vengeance, and damnation
of that great whore; that sat upon many watters; which now hes ensewed, does
witness. I will send you to the Revelation of John, where ye shall find your
mother the whore of Rome, so painted forth with her colors and properties,
Reave. 17
as if he had even luked upon her, and all her filthy and horrible fornication,
the cup declared, whereof she had impoysoned the Princes about her. Shall we
think that albeit God gave over this stinking, vile, and common harlote, in her
owen vanity, and suffered her to go a whoing as he threatens the daughter of
Judah by the Prophet, till the measure of her iniquities be fulfilled: Shall we
think, I say again, that Gods holy Spirit is not with his Church: with the
Greikes it is manifest, who ever did see the impiety of Rome, and never did
receive their constitutions, yea, and here in these parts of the occident no
dout, In lib. de ementits donatione constanti.
but in all aiges has been men that has withstand such impiety, as we have
Larentius Valla, arguing that saite of a manifest, vntreuth and rapine, where
he proves all to be lies, that is vainted and blawen by the Romanistes, of the
donation of Constantine Emperor, and so consequently may be easylie gathered,
that they invaded tirrannycally and rauenuslie other men's possessions, be like
the Emperor being occupied in the orient: and others has been, that has
noted the wickedness and impiety of that saite, as their owen Histories: like
as we shall never seik, nor lay against them any sharper probation, nor shall be
drawn out of their writers, and especially of them that has been most quick
and sharp against their impius doctrine. The Names of many we have not, that
place might be to the great silence, forewarned by Ihon, and it is not to be
douted, Reave. 2.
but God had his owen in all times, albeit unknown to man, according to his
answer to Eliah. I have left to me Seven thousand, that has not bowed their
knie before Baall. This shall suffice for answer to the Second head of your
persuasion. 1. Reg. 19


Now let us come to Vincentius Lirinensis, an Author in very deid unknown to
me at the time when I did first read your treaty, and so was driven to
inquire of others, if they had at any time either read this Vincentius, or herd
of him, they could show me nothing, but appeared to be glaid, never to have had
any thing to do with him. Last of all within a short space, I require of him at
one of our brethren, who show me the very way to come by him: the way was
this, to ask of him at some freir or monk, which was hard to find in this
great ra^itie and scantues of that byke, I thought well with my self, he had
been a Dortor man, howsoever he has been a throt cutter. This way at last, did
I atteane to my man, and pull him out of the Dortor to the battle again, and
shuke the Coul from him, to make him for his first profession, the war: for
in the beginning of his laudable (so speaks of it this Author, as he had been
his Armor bearer) he dissimleth not that he had received wages, and I dout not
but he was worthy of them, wearied always with the travel, and his hands
litted with blood spilling, he gives him to be a Monk in some Eremerage belyke
(for there was no other Monks in that aige, if he be so old as this Author
pretends) where he might appease God, Sacrific^^ Christian humilitatis, by
the Sacrifice, yet always of no mass, but of a Christian humility. Well, he
proceadeth and gives the three notes, whereby a godly doctrine shall be discerned
and tried from ungodly and superstitious, antiquity, vniuersalytie, and
consent, which being joined with the fundation of true doctrine, proceading
from the Spirit of God, no dout, may move much to cause the doctrine to be
embraced, as we se the people of Sichar first moved by the words of the
Samaritane woman, Ihon. 4.
to believe Christ, but after they had herd them selves, then pronounce they
plainly, that not for her ^ermone they believed, but we have herd him speak,
and we know him to be Christ the Savior of the world. If the words and notes
of your Dortor man, shall be thus taken, I will go with you. But if ye will
hereby think that these three concurring, are sufficient to establish any
doctrine, otherwise doutsome and fond, that I will utterly deny, and prove to
be a manifest blasphemy and vntreuth, for the Church of God has no way nor
reule to judge and discern betuix godly doctrine and wicked, but the
Scripture, The only mean and way to try treu doctrine is the scripture of God.
whatsoever we find here commanded, that have we to receive with all reverence
and expedition, it that is not here, or is repugnant to this, to judge it
wicked and impius.

Shall we think that antiquity shall preiudge the holy ordinances of God,
either yet universality or consent? Shall we think that the'boke of the Law
Deuteronomium should not be received, because it had been suppressed and tynt
alo^g time? To the ordinances of God, howsoever they have been contemned by the
space of one aige, two, three, four, five, yea, a thousand aiges, yet are they
ever to be received with all humilytie, trimbling and fear. But let us
consider, what is to be given to every head of these three notes, and first of
antiquity, whereof ye brag most, for that ye have continually in mouth, the
mass is so old has continued this long, and so forth. Shall this be now
casten away, that has been so long retained?

First I have answered, it to be falls, that ye affirm to be true, for there
was no mass in the Apostles days and time, nor yet in the primitive Church,
so that it is clear to any that is well versed and seen in antiquity, that
there was no such abuse, a five hundredth years or longer, yea, and albeit this
your mass had been as ye falsely pretend in the days of the Apostles, Shall we
think that sufficient to prove, and declare it to be good, which is a manifest
impiety? God forbid.

How old I pray you is the Devil, Author of all iniquity and impiet^e? How
long is it since the fall of Adame? In this ye may consider the nature of the
world, that even since the creation, has abused and inverted wicked ways, to
draw the people from the obedience of God, yea, and even then when it appeared
that the restitution promest by the Prophets, was so accomplished in Jesus
Christ, that all lies and errors were utterly rooted out and remoned, yet do
we see and read, wickedness to have been set up, lies to have abounded, to have
oppressed and obscured the verity, and the Religion of God profaned and
brought in contempt.

Consider I pray you, what Cipryane writes contra Aquarios, who even in his
aige did allege and lay for them antiquity. Pas, pas thy way (says he) with
thy antiquity, for in so far as it is prejudicial to the institution of our
Savior Jesus Christ, and to the right use that he gave unto us, it must be
condamned and the more Ancient that a custom be, it is the more pestilent and
pernicius, because that thereby men be wrapped up in a more deipe induration of
hearts, and all cloike and couerture of excusation is taken from them: and
this same Author speaking to this same purpose. Our master Christ (says he)
says not, Ergo sum consuetudo: but he says, Ergo sum veritas that is, This
is to be esteemed laitly invented that is diuysed by man how old soeu^ it be.
Christ says not I am consuetude but I am verity. I might adduce out of
Augustine, Chrysostom, and others of the Ancientes places to this purpose, but
iudgeing it to be plain and sufficiently prouen, I supersead further
probation. Since the Ancients refelleth abuses, what cloik of antiquity soever
be pretended, let never our selves be so carried away after wickedness, that ever
we give place to it for any pretense: but let us in deid consider if it has
the fundation of the treuth of God, and not laitly divised, invented, and set
forth by man, for that is to be judged laitly invented, whatsoever man has
divised in the worshipping of God, like as your mass is, whatsoever antiquity
ye brag of.

Your Second note is vniuersalytie, to the which what weight of probation oght
to be given, it is easy likewise to consider, we know the Alcorane to be of
greater antiquity, and received universally in mo Regions and countries, nor
ever your mass has been. The Turks religion is more older and more
vnniuersalie recaued nor the mass
Shall we then by this note, authories and allow it to be good. But ye
restrain this note of vniuersalytie to Christendom, to this I answer, that
the Grecians, who ever has been more witty and godly men, nor the Latins did
never receive your mass, and amongst the Latins them selves, we have not to
think, The miserable end of the Popes ki^gdom.
but some men did espy the great vanity and superstition of it, albeit their
Names be suppressed, that the great silence foresignified by Ioanne might have
place but now darre I bouldly affirm in the Name of God, the horn of their
kingdom to be down thrung, and never to be erected again. Remember the
golden Calf erected by Jeroboam, universally received throughout all Israel
and continued till their utter extermination and after. The mass compared to
Ieroboams golden Calves.
This is the confort and exemple I had to say before your eyes, that be
papists, and ga^peth thus busylie, and anxiuslie for the mass.

Thy thride note of consent, which ye defyne to be a certane aggreablenes, in a
doctrine without any faction or division, is not much differrent from
vniuersalyt^e, and I will to that point answer you in one word, that it all
the Nations of the world should consent and aggre together, in any thing that
is vnlofull, dishonest, and ungodly, Every one oght to oppone him self to
vntreuth.
it is no more to be regarded, nor if any private man should affirm it, and I
say further, that a private man oght, may and should withstand and oppone him
self thereto. We know the craft of the Devil, ever to have been since the
beginning, to stir up Realms, nations, and countries, against the treuth,
yea, and even in the places that be especially called by God, The craft of the
devil ever to deface the treuth.
sainctified and consecrated to the praise and glory of his holy Name, that
there he makes his greatest effort, to supplant, distroy, pervert, and deface
the whole. How his interpryses prospered amongst the Children of Israel, the
peculiare, chosen, and adopted people of God, it is plain by the History, and
what victory he has had amongst the Christianes, the experience yet still
teaches us. How he troubles, stormeth, and rages now, when as by the
merciful visitation of our God, his shifts and craft are oppened up, his
members and ministers known, and the horn of his kingdom overthrown, yea,
and the mass the principal instrument of his forge utterly broken (which ye in
the conclusion of this treaty say, Luther was forbidden by the Devil, to the
great contempt and ignominy of that godly man, even as it were, a great
absurdity, that the Devil shall speak any thing that is true: otherwise we
be instructed by the Spirit of God, to wit, the treuth plainly confessed by
the Devil, the Son of God acknowledged in Evangelists, and in the Acts of
the Apostles, read the.19. Chap. and thus take home your change again) every
man may judge. I am assured that the Devil has these three notes, antiquity,
vniuersalytie, and consent* that ye require in a godly doctrine, so of your
doctrine may conclude, the Devil to be God, and his doctrine to be godly, yea,
and a great injury is done to him, in that, that he is eiected, since he may
enter in judgment and plead his cause, laying for him antiquity, Tak head to
your notes Papists.
vniuersalytie, and consent, four thousand years ringing ^mongest the
Gentiles: but have ye never red that the way is strait, that leads to
Salvation, and few enters by it, but the way that leads to perdition, is
ample and spacius, and many shall enter in it.

Math. 7.
Now having particularly refitted your notes, in the which ye earnistlie
rejoice, and apply to the mass, most vntreulie, An falls doctrine and a
bastard and wicked wyrshipping of God, are very plagues albeit they be
comfortable and necessary for the exercise of the Church.
I will conclude, that albeit the mass had all antiquity, ye can pretend,
universality joined, and consent all this is no thing, we have not to do, but
to weip and beuaile our Sins, and iniquities, in punition whereof the
eternal of his great Justice, powers forth his wraith, stryketh his people
with blyndnes, permits them to rynne headlynges to perdition, and a
whooringe after Idolatry, and I believe to have prouen sufficiently there was
never a greater nor the mass, all kind of impiety being contained in it and
it not unlike to Hydra Lernea, spoutting forth her poison to the infection of
all.

Secundlie, we have to Judge it wicked and abominable, since it has not the
fundation in Scripture. For all thing schorlie that is invented by man, to the
worshhipping of God, is Idolatry, and abomminable, according to our first
proposition. The Virgins, Martyrs, and Confessores, nether did approve the
mass, nor yet suffer for it, but for the testimony of the name of Jesus
Christ, And the profession of his faith, with all constancy: and now in this
aige, when it has pleased our God to discloise the horrible wickedness of it,
never o^e did i^ any age suffer for the defense of of mass.
how many have we seen offer there little finger to the fire for it. And thou
thy self, glorious Doctor, if thou were not at thine ease in all security and
quietness, thou should not thus blaw of it: and the trial of fire were set up
to thee I fear thou should schrink and desire some time to adwyse,

In the confutation of thy mass, nether clean we to antiquity nor
universality, nor yet consent, but affirm constantly that it is the duty
of every man to refelle reject and condamne it by the Scripture of God, like as
we have in that the constant and universal consent, without any varia^ce,
schism or division of the most part of all Christindome, and so may boldly
pronunce it one accurse, and utterly to be exterminated out of al realms:
which work, Amos 9. Act. 11*
as God has begun of his infinite mercy, so will he conduct it potently, to
the praise of his holy Name, the confort of all godly, the erecting of the
Tabernacle of David, and reparation of the ruins thereof. Amen. Haste Lord
and tarry not.

FINIS.
TO this treaty of the mass, this Author subiuneth a certane addition, which
he terms appendix, and that of the ceremonies and orations that be used in
the mass, going about to prove them institute, made and appointed by the
Ancient godly Fathers, which as partly manifestly falls, partly wicked, impius,
unlearned, and blasphemus, I have judged unworthy of any answer, and will send
him to these common sanges, that be sung every where at Tables, paynting
forth, declaring and giving to every man his owen part and portion, in this
dissaguised masque, in such sort that not without most just cause it is
compared to a beggars cloik, being thus patched and clamped, of so many peaces,
so many variant, diverse and sindrie colors. Vain it were, and superfluus to
me, having already confuted the whole, having refelled his eight confirmations,
whereof he braggeth so much, to travel herein. In consideration, that plainly
he grants all these ceremonies, prayers, and orations, to be invented by men,
set to and added by men, to this monster, and finally, nowayes to leave to Gods
commandment and word: and so shall we shortly conclude, the mass to have
nothing to do with the institution of our Master and Savior, nether in the
substance, as I have plainly prouen by the Scriptures, Counciles, and godly
Fathers, nor yet in ceremonies and prayers, as is her confessed by you, Sire,
and so most justly we have rejected it, and judges it to be the greatest
abomination that ever was invented by Satan, and the most haynus Idolatry,
that ever entered in the Sainctuarie and Church of God.

Lord oppen his eyes that he may see. So be it.
Imprinted at Edinburgh, by Robert Lekpreuik, and are to be sold at his house
at the nether Bow. Anno. 1563. Cum priuilegio.

Ite, Missa est.
Ire licet: missa hinc quo debit ire remissa est.
Nempe ad tartareum trans phlegetonta Patrem.

