The Second part of the Domestical or household Sermons, for a godly
householder, to his children and family: Compyled by the godly learned man
Christopher Hegendorffine / doctor, most necessary for all faythefull
householders: now first translated out of laten in to English by Henry
Reiginalde.

Anuo. M. D. xlix.

Deuteronomy.vi.
These words, which I command the this day, shall be in thy heart, and thou
shall show them unto thy children: and shalt talk of them, when thou art
at home in thy house, and as thou walkeste by the way etc. The first and
second sermon of the belief, be prynted in the first part.

The third Sermon domestical unto their children, of the conception of Christ.
TO the first sentence of our belief, well beloved childr^ this clause is wont
to bean nexed (I believe in Jesus Christ our lord) Anbic can not be declared,
what strength is in this word, our lord, for here we witness yt we do believe
that Jesus Christ, has brought and delivered us from the captivity of
sin, death, hell, and the devil underneath his domynion. And now does rule
all these enemies, and that we through Christ, be higher then these enemies:
for Christ has gotten unto us. and not unto him self, a tryumphaunte
victory, of such tyranycall enemies. By what means Christ has brought us
underneath his power: the sequel and following sentences of our belief, do
more plainly testifye. And first, it follows, which was conceived by ye holy
ghost, that is, I believe Jesus Christ our lord to be conceived in the womb of
the holy Virgyn Mary, but not conceived by the mean of the seed of man, but
of the holy ghost, which in ye womb of the Vyrgyn Mary did make the ve ry body
of Christ. And that is it, that Damel says, the second Chapter, that Christ
is the stone cut out with out hands, that is (as some men think) without
the seed of man to be conceived in the womb of the Vyrgin Marye.

And the Angel Gabriel, luke the first chapter, the Vyrgyn demaundyng how she
should conceive a son, seeing that she never knew man, he answered The holy
ghost shall come upon the, and the power of the highest shall over shadow
the. For this cause, Christ would be conceived by the holy ghost, that our
vnpure conception gylty of dampnatio^ (for in sin we are conceived the.I.
psalm) should be purged by him, lest for the syn of our conception, we should
be cast into eternal death: he therefore which does believe that Christ was
conceived by the holy ghost, in the womb of the virgyn his mother for his
cause, may trewly get and vendicate unto him self purely, the conception of
Christ: eue^ in like case as al other things which Christ did: for Christ
is all ours: and all things which Christ did, they be to be accounted in the
self same place as if we had done them our selves, the which things when we
have certifyed our selves in, we can never be trow beled in any other thing
any more. Christ Jesus which is our lord, has always rule in us, and even
the same which was conceived by the holy ghost, cleanse thoroughly our vnpure
conceptyon, and give us his grace to believe, that undoubtedly it is all made
clean bye him. So be it.

The fourth sermon domestical to their children, of Christ's birth.
A Few days a go, well-beloved children, ye have heard that the church of
Christ does believe yt he is ye son of god, yt everlasting god, with the eternal
god the father in like power as the father. Row, when Christ the son of god
also is very man, it follows in the belief (I believe in Jesus Christ, which
was borne of Mary the Virgyn) And here is great occasion given unto me, to
speak largely of the birth of Christ. But when yt he is dyligentely written
of by one of the Euangelystes and first of Saint luke.ij. Chapter: Thither
will I send you. And at this time we will first entreat, what it is to
believe. Christ to be borne of Mary the Virgin. It is to declare brieflye,
nothing else then to believe that Christ is the son of God, taking very
human flesh, of the Virgin, he was borne true man and yt even of the holy
Virgin, whose flower of chastity was not taken away, no: changed, neither
before the birth, neither in the birth, neither after ye birth. And for this
cause, I do believe that this thing was done, that he should clean pourge as
well my vnpure nativity, as al other men's, and that he shouldbe that promised
seed unto Abraham our father in the which as well I, as all other men be
blessed, that is, that we should follow the remyssion of our sins, and an
eternal life, and that we should be delivered from the power of the denyll.

And first we must here mark, yt every man must ve^dycate and challenge unto
him, the nativity of Christ, and yt Christ was borne of the Virgyn Mary for
his cause, and he must make his soul to believe that his natiuytie is truly
pourged and made clean by Christ's natyuitte, and for to follow the eternal
salvation.

And that this was no hyndrance unto him, for this syngeth daily the church,
onles our little son Christ had byne born unto us, we should have perysued
for evermore, for this cause, for that we were conceived in sin, and bor^^ i^
sin. And as Paul to the Ephesians y^ ij. chap. says. We are borne ye
children of wrath, that is, we of our own strength do perform this one
thing for the which thing, god is angry with us and does condemn us. Christ
therefore is borne, that we being the children of wrath, should be made well
beloved children of god, by his holy natyuytie and that he should wasshe away
the fylthynes of our sins, of our vnpure natiuytie, through his holy
natiuytie. Paul to the Galathyaus ye iiij. Cha. de clareth briefly wherefore
crist was borne, when he sayethe, But when the fulness of time was come, God
sent his son made of a woman that those which were gyltie under the law, he
should redeem that we should be taken for his sons by adoption: Saint Paul
means here in his saying, when the time was fulfill led, that Christ should
be sent here in to this world, god the father not being requested, nor
provoked through our de seruynges, but through his unspeakable mercy, toward
man kind, sent not aunge^ nor Prophet, but his son, not that the son
should here look after his own commodities and profits, but yt he should
vendycate and challenge us from condemnation of the law, which could not make
amends for our own selves by our own deservings, for ye which he did
abundantly make am^nds for us, and he being the true lamb of God, should take
away our sins Ihon the first Chapter: yt so by Christ the only natural
son of god, we the which should believe in him, should be made the sons
of adoption of the heavenly father, and the heirs of god and the coinherytours
of Jesus Christ, too the Romans ye.viij. Chapter, which is so great a well
spring of eloquence that as it is evermore worth and worthy, it can not be
expownded: god the father showing to us and toward us his mercy in Christ
Jesus, what tongue is able to declare or expres ye commodites which Christ Jesus
the son of god and of Mary the vyrgyn, has brought unto us by his
holynatiuite? But what should we do? When god for y^ his unspeakable goodness
does desire nothingels but that we should be thankful unto him, and give
daily thanks, both unto god the father, and unto our Christ, even unto him,
for that, that for our saakes, he did vouchesafe his only Son, the cause
of our health, to be borne of the virgin Mary, to this end, that he obeying the
will of his father, did not refuse to take our flesh on him, and to make us
free from the curse of the law, from sin, from the tyrany of the devil. Let
us therefore give thanks unto god the holy ghost, for that he did make by his
holy power, both the body and soul of Christ, in the womb of the holy
Vyrgyn, that CHRIST being very man, should get us our salvation, and should
bring us to everlasting life, praise be unto god the father and his son
Jesus Christ, and to the holy ghost, now and evermore so be it.

The fyfte Sermon domestical unto their Children, of the passion of Christ.
IT follows as ve know, well-beloved children, in our belief which suffered
under pontius Pylate, yt is, I believe in Jesus Christ, both the son of god
and of the Virgin, which suffered under Pontius Pylat, for as there may be no
doubt of the nativity of christ therefore is it added into the belief, borne of
mary the Vyrgyn, where the name of the Virgyn is plainelye expressed, even also
(as I might use the words of saint Cypriane) least the passione of Christ
should waver as a vain and pha^tasticall thing, the time where in christ did
suffer, verily when Poncius Pylate was lieutenante of the Romain Impire, it is
expressed very well. What is it to believe, that christ suffered under pontius
pilate, this thing is meante in it, that he should make a mendes for my
sins, and therefore, to go unto so vile a death, for Peter in his first
Epistle the second chapter, says, Christ did bear in his body our sins,
upon the cross, where by we being dead to sin, should live unto justice,
with whose strypes we are made hole, and adds unto this thing ye saying of
Esaye. In the.liij. Chapter. Truly he did bear our infirmities, and he did
suffer our pains. It is truly by cause I would expound ye thing more at large.
The passion of Christ after ye mind of saint Augustine, is two ways to be
taken, first, as an holy sacrament, and the^ as an example, as a sacrament
trewly, for that it signifies and kylleth sin in us. As an example that we
should freely and ^lilyngely hear all manner of euyls with a good heart, which be
sent to us by Christ, perswadynge with our selves, yt all thoose afflyctions
in the passion of Christ, are made acceptable in the sight of god, and that
also, if need shall require, we offer our selves to Christ, eue^ as a sacrifice
willyngly for our neighbors even as Christ did offer him self a sacrifyce
for us to god the father, as a smelle of a good and sweet sauer. Ephesyans the
v. chapter. For whi Christ did suffer for us, leaving to us an example, that
we should follow his foot steps, and here Christ says, Matthew the.x,
Chapter. Who so ever doch not take his cross and follow me, is not worthy of me.
Jesus Christ grant that we may take his passion with a true faith, and we
being once entered into his footsteps, may come thither where he is come,
sitting on the right hand of god almighty. To whom be praise and glory,
world with out end. So be it.

The sixte domesty call Sec mon to their children of the cross of Christ*
WE have not as yet expounded, well beloved Children, all those thyn ges by ye
which Christ was made our lord, for now we must entreat of this thing which
we do profess in our belief. I believe in Jesus Christ which was crucified,
which without doubt I do protesse that I do believe, that Christ the son both
of god, and the Virgyn was my priest in the very cross, and y^ he has offered
a lively sacrifice to god, ^uen him self for my sins. And y^ there is none
other satisfaction for my sins, which god the father does receive, but only
this one oblation of Christ upon the cross, which offering was once of fered
in the cross. But even so that all which believe truly in Christ, he does
help the^ always, and make the^ clean from al their sins, y^ remembrance of
which oblation and Christ has left in his supper unto us for Cristes words be
these. ^u.xxij. This is my body which shall be betrayed for you, do this in my
remembrance. And Paul y^ ^ieste Epistle to the Corinthia^s the xi. Chap.
sets fourth, y^ Christ after the same manner did take the eup, and said,
this eup is the new testamet in my blood, do ye this so often as ye shall
drink of it in the remembrance of me. Saint Chrysostom in his commentaries
upon the Epistles of Saint Paul to y^ Hebrews, says. That thing that we do,
it is done in his remembrance, the which is done etc.

Furthermore, for the oblation made and done, upon the cross for our syns,
Paul does testifye in many places, for to the Ephesy ans the.v. Chapter he
says. Christ delivered him self for us an offering and sacrifice to god, in
a sweet savor of a sweet smell. Where Paul (welbe loved children) with few
words, does declare y^ the sacrifices of y^ old testament were figurs of y^
sacrifice of Christ made on the cross, to the Hebrews the.ix. Chapter. Christ
was once offered for us for to take away the sins of many men. And unto y^
Hebrews the.x. Chapter. Here truly Christ once being offered a sacrifice for
our sins, does sy^ at the right hand of god, for with one oblation / he made
perfect for ever all those which be sainctified. To the Collossians the ij.
Chapter. He forgyuyng us al our sins, has put out the hand writing that was
against us, contained in the law written, and that has he taken out of the
way. and has fastined it to his cross, and has spoiled rule and power, and
has made a show of them openly, and has tryumphed over them in his own
person, with which words Paul writes y^ christ did triumph on ye cross. For
even in like case, as those which make a triumph, bear about with the^, the
thing which betokens the victory and do show unto the people, y^
rememberaunce of their victory: so Paul says yt Christ, as a triumph on the
cross, did show unto his cruel enemies y^ wear overcome, that is to say, he
has driven away the devil, death, and sin, and has set fourth openly a
token of his victory where by it may be open to all natyons by the only
victory, gotten by Christ in the Cross, of sin, death, and the devil: not
only unto him self, but unto al us which shall put our hole confidence to be
saved, ye do understand, I trust, now well-beloved children, what it is to believe
that Christ was crucyfyed, since then y^ Christ has declared unto us by his
cross such great benefits, and that only of his free goodness and mercy, let
us therefore be thankful unto him, and let us crucyfie our flesh, that we
may say ^^ Paul, with our affectes and our concupiscences, y^ is let us bridle
the wanto^nes of our flesh, and our evil affections which the spirit of god.
And let us not do rudely those things which ye flesh procures us to do, the
which al mighty Christ grant us, to whom with god the father and the holy
ghost be praise honor and glory world with out end so be it.

The seventh Sermon Domestical to their children, of the death and the buriyng
of Christ.
IT is not unknown unto you (as I think.) well-beloved children, that we shall
dye al once. Hebrews 9. chapter. For when even unto one, all we were guilty
with sin, death began to rule all men, after these sayings. 1. Corint. 13.
Chap. The prick of death is sin: and lest death might swalow you up. Christ
makes for your purpose: for why, he dyed for this cause, yt he might satisfy
for our s^nnes, and break the strength of death, for the which we should dye,
and death would swalowe us up. Seeing that therefore there is made
satisfaccion for our sins by Christ, death can no more devour men: for why,
the death of Christ is our death, the satisfaccion of Christ for our sins, is
our satisfaccion. Therefore we say in our belefe. I believe in Jesus Christ,
son both of god and of the virgin, dead and buried. (...) I confess, that I
believe christ (...) died for me, and I also with him and (...)

The tenth sermon domestical, unto their children, of the Ascension of Christ.
THis day, as ye know, well beloved children, we shall entreat of thascention
of Jesus Christ, unto the heavens, in ye which there remain goodlye
testimonies, ^oth out of the Prophets, the Euaungelistes and the wrytyngs of
the Apostles. For Daiud says, Psalm xv. He does ascend on high, he has led
captivity captive, he has given gifts to men, which place of the Psalm,
Paul does open. Ephesians the.iiij. Chapter. and in the fortye and syxte
Psalm. David says. Godde has ascended in gladness and the Lord in the
voice of the trompet. The fourtenth Psalm, which has ascended upon
Cherubyn, and has taken his flight upon the feathers of the wynd. The hundredth
and nynth Psalm. The lord said to my Lord, sit on my right hand.
Furthermore, Mark, xvi. and Lukei. Chap. in thactes does make mention plainly
in every place of the story of the ascension of Christ. and Peter in his first
Epistle ye.iij. Chap. Says of Christ, which is on the right hand of god,
sitting in heaven. And Paul to the Ephe.v. Chap. After the efficacye and
strength of his power, which he did exercise in Christ, when he should be
raised up from the dead, and to cause him to sit on his right hand in heaven,
ye do here how goodly the testimonies of holy scripture be brought in of the
ascencion of Christ. But every man may easily say. I believe in Jesus Christ
the son both of God, and of the Virgyn, which has ascended up to the
heavens, and sits on the right hand of god the father almighty. So does not
every man know the meaning of these words, or understand them, or believe
them. It is nothing else to believe that christ has ascended up to the
heavens, and to sytte on the right hand of God the father almighty, then that
therefore Christ did lift up himself from our syghte, that he might have to
do with all men, to rule in all men, to be preached of al men, and that he
might be in all men, and that he might hear the prayers of all men, and help
our cause, and defend us against al evils, and to pray for us, and to take the
office of an intercessour for us, and an advocate. Romans the eight chapter,
and the first epistle of S. John the.ij. Chap. Furthermore, we must not think
that Christ is far from us, but we must think clean otherwise. When that he
did walk here in earth, he was far from us: now truly after that he has
ascended up into the heavens, and there shall sit on the right hand of god the
father almighty, that is to say, that he should have like power, glory, and
honor, like kingdom with god the father, he is nere us, although our reason
cannot compass it, it makes no matter, for it is an article of our faith we
must have a faith of those things which our reason can have no understanding
of, wherefore we must make our reason captine in the obedience of our faith. Who
will not now, well-beloved children, rejoice and be glad? when he hears that
Christ for our sakes has ascended up into the heavens, that it should
prospere us in all our thyuges both body and soul? Who will fear now any of
his enemies: when he does hear y^ christ sits i^ heaven at ye right hand of
god the father, and governs every man's heart, that men cannot do any thing,
but as he will, and shall permyt. Furthermore if at any time, we are suddenly
taken with any of our enemies, or when we do come in peryls, we ought
constantly to believe y^ is done by the will of our savior Christ: Jesus Christ
rule us always, and give us that grace y^ we may suffer our selves to be ruled
of him. So be yt.

The eleventh domestical sermon to their Children of the latter judgment.
Hitherto, well-beloved Children ye have heard how Christ was made our lord and
savior, that is to say, made satis^action for our sins, has vendicated and
worm us freely from death, the devil / and hell: and has deserved for us,
remyssion of our sins, and life everlasting. Now the^ does remain (as ye
may hear) how christ now at the last, shall show him self openly in his
latter judgment unto al y^ world, and verily to be a merciful lord of y^
godly, that is, a delyuerer of them and lord of al thing, and to the wicked, a
sharp judge. Therefore, it folow^th in y^ belief, I believe in Jesus christ y^ son
both of god, and of y^ vyrgin, which from thence y^ is to say, from the right
hand of god y^ father, shall come to judge both ye quick and the dead: With
the which words I p^ofesse this thing, y^ I believe y^ Christ at length when he
shall see his time, will come in his glory, and all his holy Anngels with him, and
shall litte on the seat of his glory* Matthew xxij. Chapter. And he shall come
also, not as in his first coming, for to preach unto men the gospel of
grace, or to save the world, but to judge both the quick and the dead. And
how that shall be, both Christ and his apostles declare. Matthew.xxvi. chapter.
Christ says, when the son of man shall come (where now he speaks of his
second coming) in his glory, and al his angels with him, the^ shall he sit
upon the seat of his glory, and there shall be gathered together before him al
nasions, and he shall separate the^. etc. Ye know this place. Mark.xiij. chap.
Christ says, then they shall see the son of man come in the clouds with
great power and glory. Luke.xxi. cha.i. These.iiij. chapter. We that shall be
leafte in the coming of the lord, shall not preuente those which have slept,
for the same lord with that exhortacion, and in the voice of the Arch angel /
and the trump of God shall descend from heaven, and first those that be dead
in Christ shall rise, then we which shall live, which shall be left, shall be
taken with them in the clouds in the metyng of the lord in the air, and so
shall we be with the Lord always.ij. epistle of Peter.iij. chapter. The days of
y^ Lord shall come as a thief in the night, with the which the heavens shall
vanishe away as a storm, the elements being hot shall be dissolved, and the
earth also and al those things that are therein shall be burnt up. etc.

Behold, ye here (well-beloved children) how Christ shall use his last judgment.
Furthermore, of signs, which shall be as tokens of the coming of Christ, read
unto your self the Evangelists, and the second epistle to the Thessalonyans,
the second chapter, the seventh book of Lactantius of the institution of holy
things. For it is to long to rehearse here all, nor there is no small number
of testimonies which do appear in every place in the prophets, of this second
coming of Christ. David says.xcvi. psalm. The shall the tongue of woods
rejoice from the face of the Lord, for because he shall come to judge the
earth. Esaias the second chapter, And he shall judge the nations, and he shall
reprove many people.

Esai.lxvi. Psalm Behold the lord shall come in fire, and his chariot shall be
as a boysterouse wind These few testimonies of the Prophets, well-beloved
children, I have recited here, that ye might know the second coming of christ,
even before: or as well as the first coming of Christ, by the holy ghost: which
was spoken by y^ Prophets, and also pre^aticy^ated or prophesied. Now, seeing
y^ it is most true well-beloved children, that christ shall come at length to
judgment, it does belong unto us, first both with our life and behaueour to have
in remembrance christ which shall come to judge: for this is a goodly saying of
S. Augst. the xlix. Psalm. which says. When euer^ man does way in his heart
and sees what place faith takes here, if we do believe y^ judgment for to
come, brethren we shall l^ue well, now is y^ time of mercy, y^ time of
judgment shall be. And Paul.ij. Cor.v. Chap. says. Wherefore let us stryne with
our selves, if we be present at home, or with out making our journey, that we
may please him, for all we must show our self before y^ judgment seat of god
and christ, that every man may bear those things which have been done by his
body. Furthermore, if we truly believe y^ last judgment of Christ, we shall make
our hertes glad, that in that time, all we the which have cast our confidence
surely in him both shall receive the crown of our justice.ij. Tim.iiij. Chap.
And we shall live also with our head Christ for evermore.i. Tessa.iiij. Chap.
What ought to be more desired of us, then wherebye we may look upon the face
of Christ, which is the immaculate Image of God, the first begotten of all
creatures, by whom all thing was made, which is in heaven, and which is in
earth? Colloss.i. Chap. Our lord Jesus Christ grant, that in like case as
here in earth we be one, so y^ we may so lead our life with him, even together
for evermore. Let ever this latter judgment, well-beloved Children be always
before your eyes, I shall marvel if ye shall not have a great account or good
eye to your living. So be it

The twelfth Domestical sermon to their children, of God the holy ghost.
Seeing that I have taken upon me (well-beloved children) to expound the belief,
I have told to you christians, without any controversy or doubt, that we
should believe with a ^yngle eye, that there is but one god, and yet three
persons, which have the self same divine substance: and as I shall use the
words of the old auncyente d^uynes, or consubstanciall, which is god the
father, god the son, and god the holy ghost. We have spoken hitherto very
much of god the father, and god the son. And now the course of our talk
does require, that we should entreat now of god the holy ghost. The holy ghost
also to be god, the holy scripture does plainly prove. But lest I should be
tedious unto you with the multitude of Scryptures I will bring forth only some
places of scripture, by the which ye shall know the deity of the holy
ghost, and that ye may both defend your conscience from the assaults of the
devil. Matthew the last chap. Christ says unto his discyples, whom he
wylled to god through all the world: Go, and teach all nations, and baptize
them in the name of the father, the son, and the holy ghost. ^o^, here Christ
does attribute the godhead unto the holy ghost: for when I must believe in the
holy ghost, then I make him a god, for I must believe and put my trust in no
man, but in God. This argument does Razianzene the fifth ^oke of his holy
writing use, whose words be these. But if the holy ghost be a creature, how do
we believe in him, or be confirmed in him? and it is not al one thing, to believe
in any thing, and to believe of any thing for that thing is attributed to the
godhead, the other thing to every creature. And this argument S. Cyprian does
touch in his exposition of the belefe. David.xxxij. psalm, says. The
heavens were made with y^ word of god, and with the spiryt of his mouth all
their powers, and here is also opened a testimony, that the holy ghost is god,
as heaven, and all thing which is in heaven was made by him. Psalm. Cxxxviii.
Whyther shall I god from the spirit. And whyther shall I fly from thy face? It
is in no creatures power for to be in all places, or to fulfill all the world:
but that pertayneth only to God the creator. Furthermore, that the holy ghost
is very god, these places may satisfy you for this time, of the Godhed of y^
holy ghost. Now I come to the belief, in y^ which we say. I believe in the holy
ghost with the which words I say, that I profess to believe not only, that
the holy ghost is god, with true god y^ father, and very god the son, and
for to come forth of them both: but also, makes in me that thing, that his
name does sygnifye, truly that he does sanctifye me: with what means that is
done, y^ next sentences of the belefe do declare. But truly, to believe in the
holy ghost, is to believe, that our hearts are led by him, are styrred by him,
are moved to believe the gospel of Jesus Christ, and that by him we are
brought to the knowledge of the father and Christ: and by him, ^e follow Christ
our lord / and our defender from all kind of bondage. For no man ^^^ believe at
any time either the gospel or can by any means believe christ to be his lord,
onles it be given him by y^ holy ghost. Therefore, y^ congregation s^^geth in a
song. Now we beseech the holy ghost, y^ first he will give us a true faith, and
that he will keep us before we come to an end and when we co^ehome out of this
life full of misery, Lordhaue mercy on us, where y^ here dear children, y^
right faith both in y^ gospel to be asked of the holy ghost and Christ.
Corint.xij. No man can say Lord Jesus, but by the holy ghost. To be short the
holy ghost is the same spirit, by who^ our heavenly father both woorketh all
thing in us, and does quicken the^ in us. And here the congregation does
syngagayne of the holy ghost Without the holy ghost, there is nothing in
manne, and nothing is without sin. Wherefore (well-beloved children) when
either ye will hear the word of god, or do any thing, pray ye to Christ, y^ he
would send unto you y^ holy ghost, y^ whatsoever ye shall here or do, y^ ye may
both hear it ^ do it luckely and happily. And first, we must desire christ y^
the holy ghost may not leave us so long as ^e be in this world* but at all
times he may be chiefly present with us, that he may defend us from the
manyfold snares of the deuell / and preserve our hertes, that they being always
intent and beeholdyng only Jesus Christ our savior, may not be troubled
with any thing contrary to his commandment. So be it.

The thirtenth domestical sermon to their children, of Christ's Church.
IN the last sermon (well-beloved children) ye have herd that to believe in the
holy ghost, is nothing else then to believe that the holy ghost is very god with
very God the father, and very god the son, and that he does make us verily
holy, even as his holy name does signify: and now ye shall hear, how by
the holy ghost we are made holy, and what things appertayn unto him from the
first beginning of y^ world, and what appertains to him even to the end of
the world. This follows in the belefe. I believe the holy church, the
communion of samtes. Here ye ought to be admony shed (wherefore we say
here.) I believe the holy church, and not in the holy church. Saint Cyprian
does make answer here, for this cause it is done, that the creator ought to
be separated from the creatures, and holy things may be separated from humayne
things. Furthermore, when we profess that we do believe holy church, we show
and set forth the holiness of the church, which can not be set forth before our
corporal eyes, for those things which we believe, are not seen with our eyes,
and so is the holiness of the church hydden, for god has wrapped his church
with many kinds of infirmities, with sin, with errors, and with a thousand
manner of crosses he does oppress it, that it seems to be nothing less then
holy. Therefore whosoever does not observe and mark the manner of god
bilig^tly, and sees or beholds y^ errors, sins, and daily falls in those
me^, which be born again with the water of regeneration, and have both y^ word of
god, and do keep it in faith, cannot but greatly be offended, and think, that
those are not to be taken of the holy church. But here perchance thou will
say. But what is the Church? Hear well-beloved children, this word, Ecelesia,
is Greek word, and in ^aten, it signifies, Societatem, or, Concionem, or,
Coetuns populi, in English, it signifies a fellowship, an asse^^ble, or a
congregatyon of people. And this is this holy church, called a certain
feloweshyppe of holy ^^enne upon yearthe, warrynge under Christ by the holy
ghost. (^o, behold the office of the holy ghost) congregat^d in one faith,
mind, and understanding, and mdewed with many gifts. Briefly, the holy
church is al those which believe in Christ: and this thing signifies these
words. I believe the communion of samtes. Which words (as the holy fathers
testify with one voice) the holy church is expounded to be a communion. or a
fellowship or congregation of saints. And this is the th^g y^ ^. August.
writes, in a sermon of al saints. Our holy mother y^ faithful church being
sured in all the world, taught chafflictions of Christ in the head Jesus Christ.
etc. But here perchance also, you think with your selves Behold how is it, y^
holy church of christ which (as I have said a little before) so^time falls
hedlong into sin? I make answer. The holy church is by faith ^^ Jesus Christ,
whilst truly it does believe, that by Christ's blood it is washed clean from
all sin.i. John n. chap. And y^ holy church of Christ is, those that do
abstain from the sins of the flesh, and do exercise the^selfs with spiritual
exercises. Furthermore, it is not so holy, that utterly it lacks al evil
desires, may be oppressed with no wicked opinions. For y^ church of god must
confess her sin: therefore, she prays, y^ her sins may be forgiven.
Wherefore she beeleueth to have remission of her sins. So that now we
perceive, that saints do sin, do ^alle, and are disceiued, but unawares, for
they will not willyngely forswear Jesus Christ* and renounce his gospel,
wherefore they do obtain the remission of their sins: and if they do at any
time err from the doctrine of Christ, so that neglygentely they be out of the
way, there is made ready for them forgiveness: for why, sometime, and
specially about y^ end of their life, they be brought somewhat to remembrance
of their sins, and repent of their sins, and give the victory only to the
truth, and unto the mercy of Jesus Christ But peradventure here, well-beloved
children, again you would know of me, whether the holiness of y^ church, may by
any means be hid from Christ: Or whether the church of Christ may be known
by any exterior signs, as I have said a little before: wherein I wylsygnify
unto you, the church of Christ to be* wheresoever the pure word of God is
taught, and the sacraments administered, as Christ has instituted them, the
people be styrred to live godly, and where they do pray unto god for kings,
princes, and al ordinary governors and rulers. Behold, these be the signs of
christ's church, when therefore I do profess and say. I believe the holy
church. I confess this chyng: I believe that there is upon the earth a
company of holy saints, which do believe in Jesus christ of the which
company I am one: yea and a membre of the same, and profess that I am a
partener of all good things which they do: In the which company I am
associate unto the^ by the holy Ghost, for that that I have hard the word of
God: and now hear it. Jesus Christ grant that we may be in his holy Church,
and that we may continuallye there remain. So be it.

The.xiiii. domestical or how^holde sermon to their children, of the remission
of sins.
Last of al ye have heard, well beloved children, that we by the holy ghost, and
by y^ word of god, are associat to the holy church. And hear now what thing is
done in the church, the holy ghost being our guide. There follows in our
belief: I believe y^ remission of sins. Here I do confess that I do believe
the holy church to have the remission of sins: The remission of sins is,
when our sins are forgeuen us freely by Christ. Which forgeuenes is made by
the preaching of the word of god, and the administration of the sacraments
among the church of Christ, and given to us by only Jesus Christ, both through
his merits and promise. For thus says S. Paul. Romansiii. cha. Verily ^e are
justified freely by his grace, that is the grace of god by the redemption, which
is in christ Jesus. Ephe.i. chap. By who^, that is to say, by christ we have
forgeuenes, and remission of our sins by his blud. The same words Paul
writes, Colloss.i. chap. And Christ him self says in the last chapter of
Luke. This ought Christ to suffer, and rise the third day from death and
underneath his name, repentance and remission of sins to be preached among
all nations. And Paul says, Acts.xiij. chap. Be it known to you (O ye men)
that by this, that is Christ, remissyon of sins is declared unto us. But
wherefore do I tarry, in bringing forth so many testimonies of Scripture? as
who should say, that all holy scripture were not full of testimonies, that by
only Jesus Christ, the remission of our sins is granted and promised to us*:
and it is not only fortified by y^ open places of scripture, but also confirmed
by the se^tences of many holy men. For what other thing does baptism represe^t
(and what does y^ supper of the lord also? then y^ by only Jesus christ y^
forgeuenes of our sins is both gotten and promised. For the which thing (I
trust) we shall have leisure at an other time to speak more of. Furthermore,
for that, that we are made partakers of y^ remission of sines by crist both
gotten and promised unto us, only our faith in Jesus Christ causes it, for
who that does believe and that with all his heart, that Christ came into this
world for this cause, was borne, suffered death, was crucified, and rose from
death, y^ he might attain the forgeuenes of sins, he truly has optayned the
forgeuenes of his sins, for the which thing, well-beloved children / let not
your conscience doubt, and behold. I will set forth here before you, a few
places of scripture, which ye shall have always in remembrance. Christ says,
John. in. chap. As Moses has exalted the serpent in desert, so must y^ son
of man be exalted, that all which believe in him shall not perish. Balat.ij.
chap. We do believe in Jesus crist, that we shall be justified by faith, and not
by the works of the law. Furthermore, to be justified, as ye have heard often,
is to obtain the forgeuenes of sins, or else of an unjust man to be made
just. Ephe.ij. chap. With grace are ye made safe by faith. Act.xiii. chap. By
him (that is by christ) remission of sins is declared unto us, in that thing
that he which believes is justified: And this S* Ambro ^n his commentaries
upon ye.iii^. chap. to the ^o* which place I will declare by the way They be
manifestly blessed, whose (...) be forgiven them without any labor or any
work, and that offenses be covered, so that (to their iustifica^ion) (...)
required no works of the^, but only that they should believe. As I (...), (...)
of these places, well-beloved (...) easily understand, that only (...) in christ
does remitte us of our sins. But here perchance you would say. And how is
this faith gotten in Christ? Hear with a few words, faith is gotten in
Christ* partly of heryng the word of god, or the gospel, partly of the holy
ghost, which makes us believe the promises of christ. Paul To.x. chap. says.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of god Peter says,
Acts.xi. chap. That when he did preach unto the Gentiles, the holy ghost did
fall among the^. Which place, as many other mo, does prove plainly in the
acts of the Apostles, that the holy ghost did stir up the hertes of men by
the word, that they might believe (...) y^ now (...) belief* (...)nnes is*
(...)yng (...)g as (...) church^, ^^ w^^ch (...)ly ^h^ ^org^^^enes o^ (...)e
is, both for that that god y^ fa^^^^ for Jesus Christ's sake has forgeuen us
our sins (...), ^ also for that that we offending ou^ an other, do forgive
one an other. Wherefore well-beloved children, pray unto Christ y^ he would
vouchsafe to admit us always as of his church, for those that be not of his
churthe, they never obtain the forgeuenes of their sins, and those be not of
his church, which will deserve y^ forgeuenes of their sins by their own
merits and not by y^ gospel, and faith in Jesus christ (...) we have declared
and said of this (...)e^t^y for this time.

The fiftenth domestical or household sermon to their children, of the
resurrection of the dead.
Few men, well-beloved children, do willingly dye: and y^ cause is (as I think)
partli for that we are more desirous by our nature of life the^ death, partly
for that in few of us there is true faith, that there shall be a resurrection of
y^ dead: for if this faith were strong in us, truly it could not be, but y^ we
should willingly dye: but that this sentence of y^ resurrection which shall be of
the dead, may be made to you more familyer, and y^ it once well understand,
might make you the willynglyer to depart this present life: we shall speak a
few words at this present time of it. We say therefore in our belief, I
believe the resurrection o^ the flesh: where, by this flesh understand you this
our body, as you might say, I believe that this my very body shall at length
rise again, or I beeleue the resurrection of this body. Wherefore exercise
your mind to believe this, that our body, which now here we see, shall be raised
again, but the condition and quality ^hanged (as I may use the words of S.
Cyprian) For why, this our bydy y^ shall rise, shall be incorruptible and
immortal, not only the just (as S. Cyprian says) but the sinners also. The
just truly, for because they shall ever tarry with christ, and y^ sinners
without any remedy, shall ever tarry in everlasting pain.i. Corint.xv. chap. For
this corruptible body must put on incorruption, and this mortal body, must
put on immortality. Job xix. chapter. I know that my redemer lives, and in
the latter day, I shall rise from the earth: and again I shall be covered with
my skin, and in my flesh I shall see God, whom even I my self shall see,
and mine eyes shall look upon. Furthermore, of the resurrection y^ shall be of
the dead, there be many goodly testimonies in holy scripture. Ezech.xxxv. chap.
says. Behold, I shall open your sepulchers, and shall bring you out of your
sepulchers. Daniel.xii. cha. And many of those which sleep, shall come out of
the dust of the earth, some to everlasting life some to their rebuke: that they
may always see, Christ says. John.i. The hour shall come, in the which all
that be in y^ graves shall hear his voice, and those which have done good,
shall go to the resurrection of life, and those that have done cuyll, to the
resurrection of comdemnation. Matt.xxii. Christ says also, of the resurrection
of the dead, have ye not red, that it has been said unto you of god, which
says? I am the god of Abraham, the god of Isaac, and the god of Jacob. God is
not the god of the dead, but of y^ living, And unto those apply y^ saying of
Paul.i. Corint.xv.i. Thessa.iiii. and Philip.iij. Chapter. In the which places
there be goodlye testimonies of the resurrection y^ shall be of the dead. But
here perchance ye would say: and how, and after what sort, shall the
resurrection of the dead be. To these words does Paul make us answer and
say.i. Corint.xv. chap.i. These.iiii. chap. We tell you verily this thing, as
the word of the Lord, that we which live, and shall be least to the coming of
the lord, shall not preuente and come before those which do sleep: For y^
same lord with a commandment and the voice of the Archaungell, and the
trumpette of god should descend from heaven, and those that be dead in Christ
shall rise first, then we which do live, which shall be left, shall be taken
together with them in y^ clouds in the air to the meatyng of y^ lord, and so
shall we be always with the Lord, these be the words of S. Paul, and when he
adds at the latter end, and so shall we be alwai with the lord* he declares
how much joy remains to those which die in Christ, that at length they shall
rise to everlasting life. Furthermore, he declares what we shall do, after
that we are relieved, we shall come out of y^ earth to immortality and
everlasting life: or we being yet alive shall be changed to immortality: with y^
which thoughts if our heart shall so^times be occupied, we shall easily etolerate
and bear this death, which may be a mean unto us to an immortality and
everlasting life. The cause y^ we do rise christ through his holy resurrection
has beserued for us, y^ no man should think y^ it comes of his own works.
Of y^ which Paul does speak.i. Cor.xv. Chap. and in other places of his
epistles, of y^ which I have made me^tio^ a little before: and now (...) shall
(...) in a (...)y^e. ^or (...) gloriouse (...) chap. Whi^^ (...) scarce half
holy and (...)y ^^^y ^ost does daily (...) his protection, and does (...) stes
church, the ^org(...)s, until such time as we (...)o an other life, in the
which (...) made (...)an^ and holy / and ^h^^ we shal^^ delivered from sin,
death, and from a^ evils in our body, which shall be immortal and
incorrupryble. God that is our merciful father, gra^^^e that we may see one
another ^oyfully and gladly in that day, and that w^ may perpetually remayn
with our head Christ, to who^ be praise (...) the holy (...)

The sixtenth Sermon Domestical to their children, of the life everlasting.
THere both remayn now the last article of our belief, as ye know well beloved
children, of y^ which although we did sum what sprake in the last sermon, yet
for all that, we will common which a few words of it at this present time. I
therefore in the belief say, I befour the life everlasting, with y^ which
words. I confess that I believe, that after that I shall rise from death to
life, that I shall never dye: but that I shall have everlasting life with
Christ our head, which is declared openly in the holy scriptures.
Daniel.xii. chap. says, And many of those which sleep, shall amake from out
of the doust of the earth, some to life everlasting, some to their rebuke or
punishment, that they might always see. Oseas.xiii. chap. I shall deliver them
out of the hands of death, and shall redeem them from death. Ezechiel xxxiii.
Chapter, I live (says the Lord) I will not the death of a sinner, but that he
should be converted and line.i. These, iiii. chap, says, that we shall be
always with the lord, from the resurrection and death: therefore we shall live
perpetually with him. But here some men would say. But what shall this
eternal life be? Esai.lxvi. chapter, says. In this place where he makes
mention of the last resurrection of the dead, then shall be a Saboth day, of a
saboth day: and a month of a month etc: That is to say / then shall it
perpetually be holy day, and saynctes shall perpetually worship the lord, that
is they shall know the Lord, and shall live without any spot of sin, and
shall dye no more. And the same thing does Job be are witness of, and says
in the sixte^ch cha. I know that my redemer lives. etc Which place I brought
out in the last chap, and here refer Christ's sayings John.xvii. chap. This
is the life everlasting, that they may know the to be the only very god, and
him which thou have sent Jesus Christ. Behold, he says, that the life
everlasting, is the knowledge of the father and Christ's. And this eternal life
shall apperrayne to sa(...) and tho^^ that be godly the wicked sinners truly
shall live always, but to this purpose that they shall always continue and remain
in everlasting pains. Wherefore David says. Psalm.xxxi. The death of sinners
is cursed, as he might say, although in this life god does not punish always
sinners yet for all that, aster this life they shall be punished of god
grievously. And therefore look here upon the saying of Christ. Matt.xxv. chap.
And these shall go, that ^o to say, the ungodly / into everlasting punishment,
but those that be godly, to everlasting life: for this everlasting life and
eternal joy, as Esai says in y^.xxxv. chap. is divided and given to us of
god for Jesus Christ's sake. Roma. 5. So that grace should reign by righteousness
to everlasting life by Jesus Christ. To.vi. chapter The life everlasting is the
gift of god by Christ Jesus our lord. And truly this life everlasting is not
divided to all me^ by Christ, but only to those which believe in Christ, that
is, which do believe that Christ by his death, his resurrection, by his
as(...) to the h(...), has deserved for (...) ^ife everlasting. John iii,
(...) believes (...) son, (...) life everlasting, and he that believes not in
the son, shall not see life, but y^ wrath of god does remain upon him.
John.vi. chapter This is his will which sent me, that every one which sees the
son, and believes in him, has everlasting life, and I shall raise him in the
latter day: and in the same chap. Verily verily I say unto you: he that
believes in me, has everlasting life: mark this word, has. This everlasting
life gotten for us by Christ, shall cause, that as I trust, weibeloued
children, when Christ shall call us from hence, we shall willyngly depart,
seeing that ye perfitely know, James.iiii. chap That ye shall vanishe away out
of this transitory world, not much unlike unto a smoke, which does appear for
a little time, and so both vanish away, and so for to go to everlasting life.
In the which we shall see Christ face to face, whom here we do perceive as a
figure in a glass: as I might use the words of S. Paul, that is to say only
even with faith and in words.i. Cor.xiii. chapter. The grace of our lord Jesus
Christ, and the love of god, and the partaking of the holy ghost be with all you.
So be it.

The seuententh domestical or household sermon unto their children of Baptism.
OF late in a certain sermon well-beloved children, I have said that in the
Church of Christ, there is remission of sins, which is communicated to you
by the sacraments: and that ye may the more liuelye understand it, I will
speak a few words of the sacraments, and chiefly of those which Christ
has instituted, that is to say, of Baptism, and the supper of the Lord, and
in this present sermon we will begin to speak of baptism, and an other time
(if god will send unto me his grace) I shall speak of the supper of the lord:
and least this word, sacrament, should troble you, mark that this word
sacrament, is for the most part diffined of divines, that it is a vysible
form, of the inuysyble grace of Christ, as for an exaumple, Baptism, of the
which we speak, is a Sacrament, for in that is a visible form, for as I
shall use the words of S. Augustine, which he writes to Marcellin^^* in his
first epistle. In baptism the eyes ^^ see the puttynges into the wa^^r, or the
touchynges of the water: but the ea^es hear the promise of grace. Whosoever
shall believe, and shall be baptized, shall be saved. With these sensyble things /
God gives us his inuisyble grace and redemption, which is in christ Jesus. And
these few words be spoken of the definition of a sacrament: and now I come to
baptism, of the which every christen man ought to know three things. First,
what is baptism? afterward wherefore babtism is instituted? the^ who be made
partakers of baptism. That I may god unto the first, baptism is nothing else,
but water put unto the word and commandment of God, and by that word
sanctified, or that I will brieflyer define it. Baptism is the water of god,
not that this water of the own nature is better then other water, but that
unto this water, both the word of God, and the commandment also is put unto
it. But here some man might say, what manner of word is that? And what manner of
commandment of god is that, where with baptism is made. Hea^^^^ the word of
god is that, that Christ says Mark the last chap. Whosoe^er shall be leave, and
shall be baptized, he shall be saved whosoever shall not believe, shall be da^^ed This
is the commandment of god, that Christ says, Matt.xxviii. chapter. Go ye
therefore, baptisyng them in the name of the father, and of the son, and of
the holy ghost. Wherefore be these Anabaptists men of our time so fra^^^e,
which ^ehemently ^^ye* how can the water help our souls? Here* well-beloved
children, baptism is not only the water, which we wash our hands with: but
it is the water mix with the word, the commandment* and the institution of
Christ: which if thou do take away from baptism tho^ ^ast left it naked
without any god^^ apparel. But at this present, I purpose not with my self to
concend with y^ Anabaptist, ye know, what baptism is: therefore hear now,
wherefore it was instituted of Christ, that is, how y^ it does profit us:
wherefore it was ordained, y^ words of Christ teach playnelye. Who^oeuer
shall believe, and shall be baptized* shall be saved. Of the which word you
may ^^iden^^^e percey^e the m^^nyng. And the fr(...) and end of baptism is,
that we should be saved. To be sa^ed, is to be taken away from sin, the
devil, and (...)h, and ^o be brought into the kingdom of Christ, and to have
everlasting life with Christ. And here ye hear again, well-beloved children,
how much we ought to set by baptism, as a thing that brings unto us an
^nspekeable treasure. Of the which chyng i^ may be plainly perceived of us,
that baptism is not ^leane water, as the babbling Anabaptists ^la^ber* for by
pure water (as I the ^^^) we can not bring the devil or ^de^h ^nd^e the yoke,
nor obtain remission of sins, nor get the grace of God, and wh^^ Christ,
and the holy ghost* with all his gifts*

Furthermore, who be those that ^^^ made partakers of this so g(...) a
treasure? Hear now* Christ shows this thing with fe^e words, in the
(...) Chapter of S. (...) the ^^ange(...) when he says, who so ever shall
beele^^ and shall be baptized, shall be saue^, where ye hear that we are made
apt by faith, that we should use that divine water for our own necessity, that
is, that we may follow a^ length that thing, which is by that ^olso^e water,
which is mixed with the word and commandment of God, promised to us: and let
not this be scrupulous with your conscience, that the priest, or mynister of
the congregation does give into us baptism, by y^ which we get such
unspeakable gifts: for the pastor is the mynister of God, and it is so with
the when thou art baptized of a minister, as if thou should be baptized of
god himself. And this is the thing y^ Christ speaks of* Matt. the last Chap*
Baptisyng them in the name of y^ father the son, and the holy ghost, as he
might say, those that are baptized, be not baptized in the name of the
minyster of the church, which does minyster the baptism, but in the name of
go^ the father, ^he son* and the holy ghost, that is to (...) ^hen men be
baptized of you, they ^^ persuaded in th^^^ minds to believe ^^^^ ^e so, as
though god should baptyse them, and say with his own mouth. Behold, I baptize
thee in my name, and I forgive the all thy sins, and I receive the into my
favor: and I will be thy defender always, but in the stead of an a^gmenter, I
will add always this thing Baptism in his own signification and figure is
taken for repentance, which is the third sacrament as some me^ affirm, for
repentance, is to mortify the old man and to lead a new life. Wherefore who
soever is penitent and sorry for those evil acts that he does in his life time,
is always occupied in baptysme, which does not only set forth a new life, but
also does work, and begins always to work yea, and also is always styrred to
work. Therefore baptism does endure even so long as we have any breath in our
body For why, although any man does styde from it by sin: yet for all that,
we may come to it again, and mortifye the old^ man: that is to say, wrath,
lechery, co^e^ousnes, pride, ungodliness, and other vices, which we have
taken of the nati^itie of Adam. Christ Jesus the author of baptysme, give unto
us all, that we may ^e made partakers of the fruits of baptism, and that we
may continue in him so long as we here live. So be it.

The.xviii. Domestical or ho^sholde sermon to their children, of the supper of
the Lord.
GOd accustometh for y^ most part, welbe loved children, to add unto his holy
promises certain signs, y^ the^ should always be the more ready in our
remembrance, and should admonish us of his holy promise, for in like case,
wha^ god had promised Noe. Gene.ix. chapter That he would no more after this
subvert and drown the universal world with water. He adds unto his promise an
heavenly sign, namely, a rain bow. In like case. Gene.xvi. When God had
promised Abraham his blessyng, which should remain to al nations by his sede:
he did add unto it the sign of circu^cisio^ the sign of the righteousness of
faith, as Paul says. Romansiiii. chap. In the new^ testament, Christ the son
of God dy^ add unto his promise of remission of sins / and life everlasting,
signs, baptism and the supper of the lord. Of the which supper, we purpose at
this time by gods grace to speak a few words. And first mark the sacrament
of the body and the blood of our Lord, is called by many names. For Paul.i.
Corint.xi. chap. calls it the supper of the Lord, which supper we do
represent, when we have taken that sacrament which Christ even at y^ present
time, going to his death for us, did begin with his disciples in the evening.
It is called the sacrament of thanks geuyng, because it is instituted by this
name, to be a sacrament, as Chriso* says. Let us give thanks unto Christ,
for his ineffable benefits which he has bestowed upon us, by his most
bitter passion: It is called a communion, for that the supper of the Lord, was
woonte ^o be solemnysed, in and among the congregation of Christen people,
they being once gathered together.

Therefore, learn what is the supper of the lord, and then wherefore it was
instituted of Christ, and what profits we do receive by it: and last, who
ought to be admitted unto this supper. The supper of the lord is, when Christ
said unto his disciples, take and eat, this is my body, which is given for
you, this is my blud which is shed for you in the remyssion of sins. To the
which words Christ adds bread and wine, with the which the faithful
receive his very body, and his very blood spiritually: which.ii. signs, be as
seals, that the words of christ be agreeable unto the truth. Wherefore was this
sacrament instituted? for two causes (well-beloved children) first that we
should not doubt that there is given to us truly, which the gospel does
promise us, that is the remission of sins, and life enerlastynge, for Jesus
Christ's sake, then, that we should declare our faith before the world, for
before god it is sufficient for us to believe the ghospel* but for because God
suffers us here to live for this cause, that we should be profitable to all
men, and the faith that is hydden in our hearts, we should show outwardly
before men: He has instituted to us baptisine, and the supper of the lord, by
the which figurs* y^ world does know that we are Christians. But here ye might
say perchance. Is not Baptism sufficient for us? Wherefore should we receive
the supper of the lord* seeing that we might by baptism be admonished of the
remission of our sins, and the life everlasting by Christ, and thus declare
our profession. But here ye, well-beloved children, by baptism truly we are
revived, and regenerated first, as ye have heard in the sermon before. Sense
we can not here put of the old skin, and for the moast part are thrown into
diverse storms of temptations, Christ has left here unto us in spirit and
faith to receive his body and his blood, with the which we may make strong
our faith against so many assaults of temptations, and so by the^ to be
strengthened more and more. I think ye look for now that I should show to
you, what commodities or fruits we do receive by y^ sacrament of the body and
blude of Christ, and for because I will be short, this sacrament ledeth us to
two commodities, one is, for that it makes us brethren, ^^^ ^oheyrs of Jesus
Christ, so that of him ^ us together, there is one house: an other commodity
is, that we are roupled among our sehies with mutual love and charytie, by this
sacrament, and we are compelled one to love an other: which.ii. fruits of
this sacrament, Paul with one band (as they say) does knit together.i. Cor.xv.
chap. saying. The ^uppe of blessinge whom we do bless, is it not the communion
of the blood of Christ? The breats which we break: is it not the communion
of the body of Christ? Behold, here Paul has placed it underneth one fruit and
commodity, because we should be one bread and one body, for all we be
partakers of the same bread: and lo, here is an other commodity: And these be
the words of S. Paul. Ciprian in his.vi. epistle y^.i. book, does interpret
these words this: saying. Furthermore, the lords sacrifice does declare the
christian unity to be annexed unto him, with a strong and inseparable love:
for when the lord calls (as it were) his body / bread, made of the puttyng
together of many cornels, he does declare our people (whom he did bear) to be
vniced and knit together: and when he calls his blood wine / pressed out of
many chisters and beries, and brought into one form: he signifies also unto
us that we are coupled together with y^ co^mi^tion of the multitude vniced, and
these be the words of S. Ciprian. There remains that I should ^eache you,
well-beloved children, who be those that should ^^ admitted to receive the
sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. I would that ye should not be
ignorant in this thing: they ought to be admitted to this sacrament, which
know perfitely what this Sacrament is, and which can tell wherefore they will
receive it, ye have heard a little before the words of Christ^ the sacrament to
be the signs of the body and the blood of Christ. The cause truly, wherefore
any may will receive this sacrament, should be this, that they wylreceiue this
sacrament, for y^ they would co^firm their faith, to the comfort of their
^onscyence. And this ways we shall use this sacrament rightly, orels if this
cause which I have spoken of, do not co^pel us it is not so good that we should
come to the receiuyng of this sacrament. Other things, which might be spoken
of the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, I will speak of an other
^y^^. And these things which I have spoken of, rep^^e them diligently with
your selfs, y^ ye may rightly ^se the supper of the Lord.

Praise be un ^o Christ, our god and Savior.
The householders prayer.
O God merciful father, to whose high prudence (imediately after the creation
of man) it seemed not necessary, for man to be alone: but dyddeste make him a
helper, like unto him self, a wooman to be his wife / and did conioyne
them two in one flesh: Grant, we beseech the, that we two may be of one
true faith, hope and trust in the, and that we may so bring up the fruits of
our bodies, our children, with all our servants and famylye in thy fear and
love / that they being well instruct and governed in their tender age and
youth, may always observe and keep thy holy law and commandments: and that
all we, living in thy peace unity and concord, may always depend on the
fatherly providence, unfeignedly repenting our sins, and undoubtedly beleuyng
to have the fre forgeuenes of al our offenses / only at thy mercy / and that
for Christ's deaths sake. Bless, we humbly beseech the, O father, y^ labors
of our hands, that we may have suffyciente for our necessaryes, and alsoo to
relyene and com*forte thy members, our poor neighbors. Make us ever content
with that thy lyberalytye sendethe us, and never (...)*

Imprinted* the last (...)* (...)* At Wor^eter by Ihon (...) (...)*


