Domestycal or household Sermons, for a godly householder, to his children and
famyly, compiled by the godly learned man Christopher Hegendorffyne, doctor,
most necessary for all faithful householders: now first translated out of
laten into English:

by Henry Reiginalde.

Anno M.D.XLVIII.

Deuteronomi. 6. These words, which I command the this day, shall be in thy
heart, and thou shall show them unto thy children: and shalt talk of them,
when thou art at home in thy house, and as thou walk by the way etc.
Christophorus Hegendorffyne, Doctor of ye law, to the right wise and excellent
man lord Thomas Reiben senator of Francoforte* by side Oderam, his synguler
good patron, wissheth health.
AMong all other benefytes which we christians have received of our only
savior Christ (my especyall good friend) these be even the chieffest, that by
him we are al made both kings and priests. Kings true lie, not that we have
any kingdom earthly to rule, but that by christ we subdue all vices, both
death, sin, the devil, and hell. For we Christians be as well kings, as
Christ is our head and king: and that because we believe in him. Now, Christ
is no worldely king, for the scripture says. Io. 18 (The kingdom of Christ
is not of this world) for he is king of kings: for because he has power over
all thing. And all things are subdued underneath his seat. So therefore as
Christ is a king, so are we Christian kings, for all that apperteyneth to
Christ are ours. And also, al we christyans, be Christ's, for christ and by
Christ, For by him we all do offer spiritual sacrifyces daily unto God, and
one prays for an other: and we have power to preach gods word, which
things S. Peter in his first Epistle. 2. Chap. does comprehend in a few
words, wha^ he says, ye are the chosen generation ye kyngly priesthode that
holy nation etc. This place is known to every man. And so we christians in
Christ, be al Pristes. But least any tumulte or scisme might rise among the
Christyan congregation, the Church or those to the which the Church does
commyt such authority: do chose certain minysters which do both mynyster
the Sacraments and openly preach the word of God, according to the doctrine
of S. Paul. 1. Corin. 14. when he says, let all things be done honestly and
in order, amongst you. Every Christen man being father of a household has
aucthorytie in his own house, to enstructe and teach his children and
household with the word of God, and of right he is, or ought to be a very
Bisshoppe over his own household. And that that we say unto fathers of
housholdes, we will to be spoken unto every Christian woman which is mother
over her household, for the which thing, lest that any might doubt in this
matter, I will proceade a little further in it. First of all, Josephus in the
first book of his Antiquites does write, that Adam and his son Seth did make
two tables, one of slate, ye other of stone, in the which they wryt the word
of god and his Prophecyes, the which they did, without any doubt, that they
might both bring up their household in the word of god, and leave it to their
posterytie, and to to exercise ye office of a Bisshoppe in teaching the word
of God. Gene. Chap. 35. Moses does show how* Jacob calling together all his
household, vydde make a short and a vertuoule scrmonde, when he said. Cast
ye away strange Gods which be in the myddest of you etc. this place is known
to every one that reads scripture.

But what need I to bring this or that example, as though the old Tastament
were not full of the^, wherewith it might be easily proved, that a good and a
virtuous father of a household ought to inform all his hole honsholde, both
in godly doctrine and in good manners Furthermore, Deute. 11. God commau^ding
after this manner fathers of house holds, says these words even at the
first (where he speaks of the x. commandments) put thesemy words in your
heart, and in your soul. Deute. 6. and bind them for a sign upon your
hand, that they may be as a warning between your eyes, Proverb. 3. And ye
shall teach them your Children, that they may talk of them, when thou
sytteste in thy house: and when thou walk by the way, when thou lie down
and when thou rysest up, yea, and thou shall write them upon thy door posts
of thy house, and upon thy gaates that your days may be multiplied etc. Do we
not hear in this place, that god will that every good father of a household
shall teach his Children and his famyly the commandments of god, and yt he
shall take the office of a private Bishop and preacher. Even likewise, even a
little before. Deute. 6. God does command when he says. Thou shall love thy
lord God with all thy heart etc.

And these words which I command the this day, shall be in thy heart and thou
shalt show them unto thy Children, and shalt talk of them, when thou art
at whom in thy house, and as thou walk by the way etc. But here some men
would say. God did command them unto the Jews, that they might teach their
famyly the precepts of ye x. commandments, what have Christian men that be
fathers of households, to do with those precepts? He not Christen me^ delivered
from all Moses law by Crist therefore hear thou (o Christian) of the
Christian liberty. At this time I do no thing speak of the abrogation of the
law, for that every father of a household should institute and teach his
Children and famyly, as well ye x. commandments, as any other Christian
doctrine. S. Paul teaches us plainly and manyfestly in his Epistle to the
Ephesy. 6 Chap. when he says. Ye Fathers move not your Children to wrath. But
bring them up through the doctrine and enformation of the lord.

What means it to bring them up in the doctrine or discyplyne of the lord?
truly nothing else, but their Children always from their tender infancy to be
Christianly brought up, in those things which our lord god will require at
their hands. What things be those? The x. commandments do suffycyentlye
declare. Furthermore, lest that youth should forgette or contempne the
commandments of god (as even in deed ye sort is most neglygent) therefore
Paul says, that they ought to be admonysshed and warned of their gouernoures,
with the admonirion of the lord: and yt thing to be grafted in their minds,
which God does specially require in them. And as we may easily perceive by
the words of Paul, that it is ye true part of a father of a household, to
bring up dyly gentlye his Children and household in the ten commandments.
And let no householde keeper against this thing wynce or kycke: but let
them bring them up, in faith, hope and charytie, and in other wholesome
precepts and doctrynes of Christ: that the law may be as a scolemaister (As
S. Paul says unto Christ) that is, that they being brought to the knowledge
of their sin by the law, may prepare and ordeyne their selves to seek unto
Christ, and to his right heritage: for why, the law (as Paul to the Romans
and Galathyans does argue) does make us to prepare our selves to receive ye
grace of god, so yt it sets before our eyes our sins, and puts down
the stubbernes of our mind. and makes us very gree die of Christ's doctrine.
Furthermore when Christ (as it is showed in the 5. of Mark) had delivered a
certain man of a devil, and he did pray Christ, that he would tarry still
with him. Christ made answer unto him. Go thy ways into thine own house,
unto thy famyly and show them how much the Lord has done for the, and what
compassyon he had over the.

Now, we have herd Christ our only savior command also, that he which
was delivered by him from a Devil, should take the office of a Bishop and
preacher of his word in his house among his Children and famyly, and that he
should set forth the great benefyciall goodness, which he had received of god:
and so to bring his famyly by the love of god, to the very knoweledge of God.

Furthermore, we may gather out of diverse Epistles of Paul: that in his
time, there was both fathers of householdes, and mothers of housholdes, which
did bring up very earnestlye their famyly, both in the faith of Jesus Christ and
also in other pryncypall matters of Christ's religion, for whi, in the Epistle
unto the Romans the last Chapter, he does salute the household and faithful
church of Prisca and Aquyia (or as I may use his terms) the Christen family
which was in the house of Prysca and Aquila: for without doubt, theye were
informed priuyly in the faith of Christ. And in the first Epistle to the
Corynthyans the last Chapter he says. Aquyla and Priscilla, with those which
be of ye faythefull congregation in their house does salute you hertely in the
lord. And where again, he calls the household faythefull Church, the
Congregation of faithful Children, men servants and women servants, which
were in the house of the woman Priscilla (who^ he calls to the Romans
Prisca) and Aquyla her housbande.

The self same thing Paul to the Collossians the last Chapter says. Salute
the Brethren which are at Laodicia, and salute Nymphas, and the congregation
which is in his house, where S. Ambrose thinks that this Nimpha was a woman
diligeut in the commandments of God, this article in greake, Aphtae, does
reprove it, that he was no woman but a man, which did noryssh and bring up his
Christian famyly at home in his house in Christian love and godliness. The
self same thing does S. Paul exhort Tytus. Tit. 2. That old women should
be soberlye aparelled, no slaunderers, and that they should teach honest
things, that they might cause young women to be sobre etc. And here Paul
wylleth also, yt old women should instruct their young women at home in their
house, to godliness and good manners. And also Paul unto Tymothie the first
Epistle the fourth Chapter commands wydowes to learn godliness at home in
their houses, and to have a godly famyly. And how can they have a godly
family, except theye teach their household dylygently and privately in ye
learning and erudition of Gods word?

To conclude, that holy man Sayncte Chrysostom in his first homely in Genesis
says. When ye shall depart from hence from this sensyble table, let there be
put before you a spiritual table, and let the good man of the house say some of
these words, which be here said. Let the woman here. Let the servants lecne
Let their aquayntaunce learn, and let ye house be the Chuche of God, that the
Devil may be driven away, and that our daily adversary may be put to flight
with all the enemies of our health and let the grace of the holy ghost here
adyde in this place, that all peace and concord may defend all inhabytauntes
herein. etc. These be the words of Chrysostom. Of the which words what man
can not understand, that it perteynethe to godly fathers of housholdes, to
make their house the church of God, and the congregation of Christian people:
and to take the office of a Bishop upon them Also Chrysostom sets fourth
the fruits which rise of sermonnes made at home in houses: for because of them
the devil is driven away. As S. Peter says which goes about as a rorynge
Lion fekyng whom he may devour. And ye holy ghost does rest upon the
inhabytauntes and dwellers in the housewhere the word of god is taught: and
the inhabytauntes and dwellers do line in concord and unity, and they do
agree peaceably, one with an other. Which fruits verelye do easily bring to
this point all fathers of housholdes, that they should dylygently instruct
their famyly, with the word of God in their houses.

For we may see by daily experyence, yt the devil goes about with all his
power, to make debate and strife in howses and breaks amity and peace and
soueth discord. And it is no doubt (yt as Chrisostom truly says) the devil ye
enemy of man's salvation, and of our hole famylye, sekethe our life: and often
times would bring both the father of the household, the wife the Children,
and ye whole family to perels, unless he be driven away of godly fathers of
households by the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God. With these
examples of holy fathers, with the precepts of god in time paste given and
commanded in the old Testamente, with the commandment of Christ, which he
gave unto him whom he delivered from a devil, and by these examples of
fathers of housholdes and mothers of housholdes, which I have rehearsed out of
S. Paul's Epistles.

And where as Saint Paul, does require of old women and widows, we may
gather esely by the words of Crisostome, every father of a household has
liberty to teach his famyly at his own house the word of God, and yt of right
he is, and ought to be, the very Bishop of his famyly. And there is no less
to be thought of mothers of housholdes. If there be any brother of a household
which is illyterate or unlearned, and can not teach pryuately his household,
let him hyer one, which in his stead may learn his famyly, or if he can not,
let him aduygysantly mark the sayenges of Publycke and open sermons, and let
him repete those saiengs at home in his house before his famyly, as soon as
supper or dynete is done. Therefore I being persuaded with those arguementes of
S. Paul, which I have made relation of, is I ever thought dylygently with my
self, that it were very necessary to write for my children and for my hole
householde, certain household sermons. In the which those things which were
requisite to a very true and Christian relygion, might be expounded with few
words propise and corespondent for the matter, which sermons often times I use
to read in my house, to mye Children in laten, to my famyly, in ye mother
tongue. And do earnestly require at their hands after my reading, whether they
do understand these things which are read or no, and least they should forget
very quycly those things which I have red, I do require oftentimes of them
all things, which in these sermons be entreated of, even as of their distafe
and spyndell, which sermons I being earnestly requested of my especial friends
have suffered to come abroad, yt by them even other fathers of housholdes may
be styrred toward their famyly, to teach them well and godly. For I know that
fathers of housholdes be slack in this thing: and do not dylygently excecute
their office committed to them of God.

First I will leave out some of my sermons in laten, if my fryndes shall think
it best, and set out those that be necessary in ye mother tongue. But unto the
(mi well-beloved Thomas) do I dedycate these my pryuate sermonnes, for that I
know the to be given studiously to a perfect godliness. And although I know
thou haste no need of these sermons to enstructe thy famyly with, for that thou
haste attempted many godly things with the study of godly wisdom: yet for
all that seyeng I know that every thing which may be conducyble and
profitable to obtain and get some godly wisdom is most acceptable unto the, I
doubt not but yt thou will take these my sermons well at worth. For because
I have written them to the furtheraunce of Christ's true relygion. Some
perchance will laughe me too scorn, for that I would be taken for an earnest
lawer, and have taken upon me to interlace my self with holy scripture, whose
laughinge to scorn I will utterly despise, Although that I am among the
company and the fellowship of lawers: yet I will not be forgetful of those
things which perteyneth to a christian father of an household, for this is a
blessed saiynge of S. Paul: he that has no care of his, and espeacially for
his household, denyethe his faith, and is worse then an infideele. This bid
the well to fare, my especial good friend.

A communication of the lords prayer, Between Christopher and Jerome.
Jerome.
My well-beloved brother Chrystostopher, from whence come thou? Christopher. I
come from ye temple, my brother Jerome. Jerome. Out of ye temple? What have
thou done there? Christopher. What should I there do? I have prayed. Jerome.
Have thou prayed? If it pleased the, but for thy pains: my gentle brother,
teach me homely and briefly what is prayer, and to what end, and how, and
what we should pray: for although our well-beloved father, did frutefully teach
us at home, many godly things as concerning prayer (as it seemed unto me) yet
for all that I can not tell how I should well understand them, nor to have
the^ in remembrance. Christo. O brother, thou putteste unto me an hard
matter, for thoose things which thou wyllest to know of me, they ought not to
be asked of such a rude Child: but of some doctor of dyuynitie, and he that
is learned. But for as much as thou prayest me so soberlye, I will show my self
unto the as a brother, And so much as I bare away in remembrance, from our
father and the preather of these things, which thou will know of me, I will
tell it the, but thou doste pray me in vain, that I should do it homely and
briefly: and how should I being a child do otherwise in such grave matters,
Iero. Brother I thank the for thy gentle and brotherly heart, but do as well
as thou canste, and Christ shall be thine assistaunce. C. Except I be disceaued:
there be four things to be noted in this our disputation. The first is, that
I will show the, what it is too pray, the second is, wherefore we should
pray, the third is, how we should pray the fourth is, what we should
pray. Iero. Surely brother, you art of a good renembraunce: for by cause thou
doste remember chiefly ye pryncypall things yt I covet in espeacyall to be
learned in: and therefore show thy mind, even only upon those things.
Christo. Well beloved brother, both my father and the preacher did say, to
pray, is to ask some what of god. Iero. Of god? What is god? Christo. God, as
our father said if thou doste well remember, is all that thing, to the which
we have a confydence with all our heart, so that, if we have a confidence to
ye god with all our heart which did create and make both heaven and earth,
and all thing that therem is, and governs al thing, we have a confydence to
the true god if we put any trust in any other god, we are both wicked and far
from the true God Iero. I understand well yt thou sayste, my brother. Christ.
Brother our father and the preacher, among all other things, had in
remembrance, First, wherefore we should pray, the first cause was yt god did
command us to pray, for why, when god did graciously threten in his second
commandment yt we should not take his name in vain, our father said, god
without doubt wills yt we should ask of him in all kinds of necessity, we
should pray also yt he would be ready at all times both to rule us and govern
us, for why, when god forbad yt we should take his name in vain, our father
said that we might easily coniecter yt god would require ye use of his name of
us, and what use should we have of his name, but to call upon it in all kinds of
necessity and eiul things. Ie. Surely this is a great cause wherefore we should
pray, but doste thou remember brother, what other causes there be. Chapter The
second cause wherefore we should pray, our father said it was this, for
that yt we have neade of many things, and we are cast every momente into ye
peryls of many euyls And seeing all things should be given of God and yt we
are defended of god only, against all manner of parels of evil, very necessyty
(which is a mortal darth) does compel us to pray. Ie. nor this is no small
matter my brother, wherefore we should pray, but yet ye therd cause remains,
except I am disceued. C. it is true, and yt after ye mind of our father there
remains yt God did constantly promise to all the^ yt did pray unto him, he
would most mercifully hear the^: and it is ungodly either to be forgetful of
yt promise or to ^i lipend it, wherefore for yt he has promeysed therefore we are
compelled every one of us, to pray unto him. I. and where has godly petitions
of his faythfulll. But peradventure thou lokest brother, yt fynaly I should
show the what things we should pray for, that is, what things we should
ask of god, although I think that it is no need, seeing that daily thou doste
pray with me before the table. Ie. Truly those things I do look for all though
chiefly I pray daily with the: but I know not how to understand those things
which I pray. Christo. Those things which we ought to pray for, there is no
man does show better the^ Christ him self, for you know, so did our father
affirm. I. Trewly he did affirm it, but I pray ye repete it again, and
compendiously, as you can right well. C. I will do at thy commandment and
that with a good will my brother. C. The syxte Chap. of Matt. says. Ye shall pray
after this manner. Our father which art in heaven: hallowed be thy name. Thy
kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day
our daily bread. And forgive us our trespaces: as we forgive them that trespace
against us. And suffer us not to be led into temptation. But deliver us from
evil. Amen. Jerome. I have this prayer upon my fyngers ends: if thou will
know it, I will say it without the book. Chapter O brother, it is not enough to
say this godly and holy prayer without the book, except thou may understand
it, for our father did say, that this prayer shall never come from ye bottom
of the heart, unless we do well understand it, and there is no prayer
thankfully taken of god, unless it be drawn out of the inward bosom of our
heart. Ie. Therefore make me that I may understand this prayer by some means,
all though I learn it not without the book. Chapter I will go about to do it god
wyllyng. And as thou art wont to do give thy dilygence unto me with an
attentyne ear. Jerome. I shall do that thing. Christo. In the first
beginning of this prayer, our father did affirm benevolence almost to be
taken of those things which shall be asked afterward for since that god, not
only God, that is to say, our defender succuorore and helper, but also is a
father, nor fathere of this man, or that man, but our father, that is, of us
all, which puttethe their trust in Jesus Christ his only begotten son.
And how can he deny us yt thing, the which we ask of him? Ierom. Surely even
in like case, seeing that our yearthely fathers (bye whose mean we were brought
into this world) can not deny us that thing, which we ask of him: much less
even that our father celestial, which is father of us all can deny us of any
thing that we ask which does excel all other yearthely fathers both in
goodness and mercy. Christo. Surely, thou doste give a godly Judgment of our
god, my brother Jerome: ever talk thou on these things, and let this be thy
Godly exercise. Therefore thou know, how with these words our father should
be a preparation, with a certain benevolence, toward those things which we
shall be about to ask. Iero, I know it very well, but how understand thou
this thing, which is added unto, which art in heaven. Christo, God truly, as
thou haste heard of our father, is in every place, but peculyarly he is in
heaven: and he is in celestial and high things. And with these words we are
called from the care of worldely things, for to be always in contemplation, of
heavenly things. Wherefore, Christ when he should pray, did lift up his
eyes unto heaven. Iero. Surely this first beginning does excellently well,
and therefore say on. Christo. The beginning of this prayer, does gather seven
petitions / in the which thou haste heard all those things as knitte up even
to gither with one band, even what so ever should be either asked of God, or
necessary for us. Iero. I have heard those things which thou haste said,
but cause that I may more plainly understand them. Christo. First we pray
let thy name be hallowed, this thing our father did say that it did smell some
what of the Hebrew phrase, and therefore it could not be understood so well of
men. Jerome. Whatte does it mean then? Christo. This it means, that ye name
of god, that ever both was, and is, holy, shall be sainctified in us, that is (as
our (...) ked kings and Princes, even as it might be with a sudden thunder,
which at the denylles instigation would go about to forbid and extyuguysshe
the Gospel, with all those which were earnest professors of the Gospel, yea,
and also that this petition did often times withstand, that the wicked and
cruel will (shall I say) their carnal desire, shall in no wise be fulfilled.
Iero. How wyllest thou that these words shall be understand, even in earth as
it is in heaven? Christo. Haste thou forgotten those things that our father
did say, that these words, ought this way to be taken, that in like case as
the holy Angels in heaven do obey his holy will, so in like case here in earth
his holy will to be obeyed of all men, yea, and that in all manner of things.
Iero. But gentle brother, what do we then ask to be given unto us of God
whylest we say, give us this day our daily bread? Christo. To be short,
gentle brother, we do not only ask of god for bread, but we ask for those
which labor dilygently, that he might preserve us with a sufficiencye, yea and
alsoo fortillers of the earth, that god would send a prosperous success unto
their labors, to send temperatenesse of weather, to make their ground fruit
full, that the corn may grow to our sustenance, we also do ask here, that
god may take away all euyls which be wont either to destroy corns, or choke
up corns, as hayle, thunder, boisterous wyndes, or else such proper chances
as does apperteyne, or come by their own nature, as worms, or rottynge, when
it does lie on the ground, where upon our father did show, that the Heathens
had certain holidays that were instituted to pray unto their Gods, for such
chances. In the stead of such feasts, as I thynk we have come into their
place certain (superstitious) supplications and prayers made unto Amburbya, or
the prayers of Amburbia. Ierom, Forsooth those things which thou haste showed,
I remember that they were declared of our father. Christo. We pray for in the
same petition that god may drive away battle: for that in time of war all
corn and fyldes be destroyed, trod underneath the foot and thoose that be
tyllers, be slain, so that there must needs follow dearth of corn: to be
short, we do ask of god for all necessary things perteynyng to our living:
with these few words. Iero. I understand very well how many things we do ask
of god with these few words: but I pray the, wherefore is this word (to day)
addyd. Chris. (To day) our father said that it was added for this purpose /
after the mind of S. Cypryan, that whosoever will be ye Discyple of Christ,
after the voice of his master, he must forsake all things, and ask his
daily meat, and not be long in asking of his petition, the self same lord
showing the same, which said in the, 6. Chapter of Matthe. Be not thoughtfull
for to morrow, saying, what shall we eat, and what shall we drink, and with
what shall we be clothed, after these things do the gentyls inquire alsoo,
your heavenly father does know, that ye have need of al these things. Ierom.
Gentle brother, how doste thou understand these words, and forgive us our
trespaces, as we forgive the that trespace against us. Does not god therefore
forgive us our trespaces for that we do forgive them that trespase against us?
Christo. My well-beloved Jerome, this did our father say, as perchance thou
doste remember, these words ought to be plainly taken, if our faults should
trouble our conscience, that we in this thing ought to know as by a sure
sign and token that our trespaces be forgyuen us of God, if we shall forgive
to our neighbor his trespaces, in the which he has offended us, for why, so
says Christ in ye 6. Chapt. of Matthew. If you forgive un to men their faults,
your heavenly father shall forgive you. And if you do not forgive unto me^
their faults, your heavenly father will not forgive unto you your faults,
Iero. Alas, what a greuouse thing is it, to forgive our neighbor his
faults, which has hurt us by many kind of ways. Chapter Surely it is a
greuouse thing as thou say (brother) but they be greater faults which god
does forgive us. Ierom. There follows, except I am disceiued, and bring us
not into temptation. Do we in this place desire to be delivered from all kind
of temptation? Christop We do notte pray here, that we should not be
tempted, but that we should not be led into temptation: that is to say, that
we should not be overcome with temptation. Iero. Of what enemies be we
chiefly-tempted? Christ. Of three enemies, the world, the flesh and the
devil. Iero. How be we tempted of the world? Christ. When we see that other
men do excel us, either in riches, learning, or else in other things: and do
dispyte or envy their good fortune, or learning, or other things that happily
chance unto them. Iero. And how be we tempted of the devil? Chr. When the
great abundaunce of our sins be set before our eyes, and be enticed to
desperation, and we are compelled to cast away the hope of gods mercy.
Furthermore, when we are stirred too murder, to be a parricide or kyller of our
kindred / or to commit any such abominable crimes. Jerome. And how be we
tempted of our flesh? Christ. When we be tysed unto lust, aduoutry,
deflourynge of Oyrgyns, with such other like sins, the devil being our good
guide and pryncypall master. Iero. Doste thou believe that by this prayinge we
shall be delivered from all these euylles and temptations? Christo. Yea
surely, we shall be delivered, so often as these words be brought fourth with
a lively faith from the inward bottom of our herre. Ierom. Now, remains the
last petition, but deliver us from evil. Chapter It remeyneth even in deed: and
our father thought that this petition was chiefly against the devil, which
both far and nere goth about to devour us, so that he confyrmed it with
these arguments, for that it does partly signyfye in the greake word (apo
tou ponyrou) that is to say, from evil, partly for yt yt devil is called
by S. Paul to ye Ephesians the last Chapter (evil) our father said that in
this prayer there was many things to be asked after this fation that god would
deliver us from al euyls, that is to say, from all perils and myschaunces,
which should either hinder body or soul, and so this word (evil) must be
referred to the thing, and not to the person. Ie. Wherefore do we put unto
(Amen) and what manner of language is it Christo Even as I shall make unto the
an answer, unto the very effect: this word amen, is an hebrew word, and in
english it signyfieth so be it. And our father said, that it was expounded
of one Aquila, for faithfully And of Saynct Jerome, it is called the seal of
the lords prayer. Therefore, this word truly was addid unto this prayer, that
we should not doubt, but that our prayers were herd of God, and so to
depart, having that which we asked of him. And for this cause, we say so be
it, as though we should say. Truly o lord, O heavenly father, we are sure
you haste heard us, we are sure thou will grant and give those things, which
we have desired of the: behold now thou have (my well-beloved Ierom) those
things, which partly I have in remembrance, and partly I have written, by
the redynge of our father, and also by ye preachinges of our congregation, of
the lords prayer, prayinge the, that these things, which I have said, that
thou would dilygently call them often to remembrance, and pray with me to
god daily, then the which thing, we can do nothing more acceptable unto
Christ, yea, and also we can not deuyse with al our studyes, a thing that is
so profitable unto all congregations, Ierom. my well-beloved Christopher, I give
the her tie thanks, for this thy great labor and I will not be neglygent in
remembrynge my deutye toward the, God sendynge me his aid and help: I shall
vehemently endeavor my self, that among my often prayers unto my only savior,
aucthor and leader Christ, I will not be neglygente in the rest, praises be
unto our lord Jesus Christ and savior, so be it.

The first household sermon unto their children and famylie
Well-beloved children, Saint Paul, yea God the holy ghost, which speaks by
Paul, in his Epistle to ye Ephesians the 6. Chapter Teaches fathers, how they
should both entreat their children, and instruct the^: for thus he says.
Fathers be not wyllinge to provoke your children to anger but bring them up in
the doctrine and cortection of the lord. Wherefore, for that I must obey god
the holy ghost which speaks by Paul / I have decreed (although it shall be
but rudely and of a gross wit) to open and declare unto you the ten
commandments. In ye which both all those things which god does require of
us, yea, and also those which belong unto our neighbor, be comprehended in
a co^pendious some Wherefore, I earnestlye beseech you, yt you will give me a
dylygente ear. Ye shall not hear of me any thing invented of man: but those
things which the deuyne majesty by his unspeakable goodness toward us did
draw forth out of the holy bosom of his breast. But here perchance some
would thynk these things, what apperteyne to us Christians, the ten
commandments of god? seeing that they were delivered to the Jews by Moses,
as it does apere in the 20. Chapter of Exodus. First of all here (my well-beloved
Children) learn that those ten commandments were promulgated and declared
unto us, which have taken upon us to be called Christians, do no less the
obedyence, and observing of the^, apperteyne then to the Iues. For why, seeing
that those precepts dyuinely (as I might say) be engraven in our minds, as
S. Paul teaches in the 2. Chapter to the Romans. And seeing that all we do
assente to those commandments, even nature leads us unto them: he shall be
no man nor yet christian which will nut go about to express them in his works
and doing. And although there be many things in those precepts and
commandments contained, which be impossible to be done by our carnal
nature (for who can either fear god or have a confydence in him, by the power
of his carnal nature) yet for all that god wylleth his precepts and
commandments to be observed and kept of us, that our vntained lusts
should be brydeled, not as in like case, and in time passed, some have
thought, yea, and also at this present many do think, that by them, we are
justified: that is to say, we are compted before god as just: but yt we
should escape temporal punysshemente, for this says Moses. Who so ever
shall do these things, shall live in them. For he that kylleth no man,
semblabely shall not be killed. He that takes not away his neighbors good,
shall not be hanged on the galow tree. What need I to have many words? You
hear (well-beloved children) your mother commaundyng your systers to labor in
spynnyng at the rock, not yt your mother is brought bye those labors, to
believe that her daughters do beserue their living, and shall be iustyfyed
thereby: but that they should be in structed to lead an honest life, and use
them to labor, and that they should know often times the imbecilitie and
wekenes of their strength and nature, seeing yt they can not perform those
labors which are put unto them. Even in like case, god unto the Jews, yea,
even unto us all has put certain precepts and commandments not that by
those we should obtain everlasting life: but that by those we should learn to
do our duty, and then we shall plainly perceive, what god does require of us:
and what we owe unto our neighbor, and that we can not, no not the best
perform and keep no not the lest and so we should flee unto Christ our
savior, which only did observe and keep all his fathers commandments even
to the uttermost jot for our sakes, that we should challenge unto us, his
dilygent study in obseruyng the commandments of god. I have minded my
well-beloved children, to speak these few words before, for that I would
declare unto you, the judgment of my council, in expoundynge the
commandments of God, and yt I would some what stir you to the observing
and keeping the commandments of god But now will I begin with yt first
commandment.

Thou shall have no strange Gods. First of all here is to be declared, what
it is to have a god, to have a God is nothing else then to give confydence
with all my heart to the very god and fear him which did make heaven and
earth, and all thing that therein is Wherefore the prophets therefore do
speak these words. Malachyas says thus in his first Chapter. If I am the
lord where is my fere, says the Lord of hosts. Esaias says in the 7.
Chapter If ye will not believe, ye shall not live, Dauyd says in the second
psalm. Blessed be those which put their trust in him and the C. and xxvij.
psalm. Blessed are all those which fearethe the Lord, and in the 4. psalm,
do ye sacryfyce with the sacryfice of justice and hope in the lord. Osias in
his 12. Chapter says. Hope always in god. Out of these sentences which I
have rehearsed (well-beloved children) ye may easily conjecture, what it is to
have strange gods for if there be any thing, where unto we have more
confydence, then the true god, that is, in the stead of our god. So there is
many at this present day (it pityeth me to remember) have more trust to tbeir
goods, then unto the true god There are many which worship their will, in the
stead of their God. There are many to whom works, are in stead of their god.
For why, they fyxe their confidence more in them, then in the mercy of God,
for Jesus Christ's sake.

And I can not sufficiently declare, how much goodness, both to rule yea, and
also to lead an honest life, is mynestred unto us out of this commandment
For even out of this commandment al magestrates do learn that they should
always fear God, and therefore they neither do nothing, nor judge nothing
which may either oppugn god or disdisplease him. More over, by this
commandment, all Magistrates be moved, that they should neither trust to
their wisdom, neither to their worldely polysie, but that they should put
their especial confydence only in the help of god in all their doyngs, for
why, thus says Solomon in his proverbs the 3. Chapter. Have thy trust in god
with all thine heart, and do not lean unto thine own wisdom, and a little
after have thou no trust unto thy wisdom fear god and depart from evil.
This first commandment does this profit us, to lead an honest and a perfect
life which does appointe unto all man kind how he should be have him self,
yea, and also this precepte does require, that the servant should execute in
the masters absence his busynes and works dilygently, and with a good will,
for why although the master is absente, yet god is present, and does see how
dylygentely the servant does apply his labors, so in like case, although I am
not always with you (well-beloved children) yet god is present, with whose fear
you being smytten ye shall eschew always, that ye shall not commyt any thing
out of ye way, yea, and also ye shall not suffer your goodly and preatious
time to be spent in idleness.

God only will not require of us account for every idle word, as it
appears in Matthew the 12. Chap. But also of every deed that we do,
wherefore my well-beloved children, take heed that ye have always in remembrance
this commandment, yea and al way both to put your trust in god and also to
fear god, and so shall I trust, yt ye shall have no confydence to your own
wit, or to any of your works, and this shall ye govern your life as becomes
Christian men, and now pray ye unto Christ our god and savior, with all your
heart that ye may rule your hertes by his holy spirit: and that he would as well
increase the faith and confydence of god in you, as his fear: and that he will
never suffer it to be baren and without fruicte.

So be it.
The second household sermon unto their children and famylie.
IN the first commandment of god (well-beloved children and servants) ye
have heard what sted fast heart ye ought to have toward god, trewly that we
should have confydence in him, with all our heart and to fear him.

And now I think ye are desyrouse to learn, how we should trewly worship god
both with our mouth, and tongue. And that thing does this second
commandment teach, thus does god command. Thou shalt not take the name
of thy lord god in vain. God will account him gyltye, which takes ye name of
god in vayn. And this commandment does prohybit and forbid, that we should
abuse the name of god, or use it in vain, that thing is, when that we shall
either swear by the name of god, or when we shall put the name of god to
inchauntmentes or cungeringes, or when we shall for every light cause use the
name of God, for a great sort (I know not but that it comes upon some ill
use) theye shall scarce speak one word: but they shall place it with an oath.
And therefore that god might fray men from the use, of rasshe and vain
swerynge by his name, he threateneth that they shall be gyltie, that is, he
shall be punysshed which does abuse his name, which threats, well beloved
children, should put you in remembrance that you should very earnestly take heed, that ye take not the name of God in vain, for it is God that gives the
threate: therefore, he will not suffer his name to be blasphemousely spoken of.
Seeing that god has forbidden that his name should be abused, we can no less
think truly, but that he has commanded us to have the right use of his
name: we use the name of god, rightly, if when the honor and glory of god
requires, we swear by his name: as if we swear by ye name of god to confyrm
the verytie of the gospel, so does Paul swear to the Galathians ye first Chap.
When he is about to prove, that he has received of only Christ, the
Gospel, he says, those things that I write un to you, behold before god that
I lie not as Paul might say. I take wytnes of god, that all things be true,
the which I have showed you. And in the first Epistle to the Corinthyans, the
15. Chap Paul says. I dye daily by our reioysinges. Where Saint Augustine
also does testify that Paul did use with certain holiness to swear, in his 89,
Epistle. And in this sermon of the words of thapostle 28. Furthermore, we do
use well the name of God, when the time shall so chance that we swear by the
name of god in judgment, either before a maiestrate, or for the love of our
neighbor, that is when we call god to witness, that the matter is none
otherwise the^ we do affirm, for why, we do make this oath partly by the
commandment of the magistrate, to whom god commands that we should obey,
and partly that the truth should not be trodden underneath the foot, and that
our neighbor should have neither loss or hynderance of his life or gods.
Further more, we use the name of god well, wha^ we do desire lamentablye the
name of god, either in all ye begynnynges of our works, or in any peryls.
Furthermore well-beloved children, if when ye will go to your study: or else do
any thing, sayye always, god prosper all things well or god send me good
fortune, for know this of a suertie, that all your works at like fortunately
to go forward, if they be begoue first with the name of god, yea, and also
when so ever you are going to sleep at night, or when in the morning ye do
rise from your bed (making asigne of the holy cross on your forehead) say ye.
In the name of the father, the son, and of the holy ghost, for so both
through all the day and al ye night, ye shall be the safer against all the
assaults of the devil.

Furthermore, in perryll no man is of so great strength and efficaci as the
name of Christ, for why, I my self have not a little experyensed the thing,
that there has avoided from me many perrels and dangers, yea there has been
many perrels which has suddenly chanced unto me / so that I have cried out O
lord Jesus Christ help me, drive away this evil o lord Jesus. For the
devil which goes about to cast us hedlynges into many perrels, he can not
hear of the name of god, or the name of Jesus Christ. Therefore, the name of
god being called on, by and by, he flies (in conclusion) the true use of the
name of god is, wyllyngly to apply our self in our prayers, that we may also
wyllyngly give our mind to praiyng: and this thing does this commandment
require of us, we use also the name of god well, if as so as any good thing
does chance unto us. Therefore, I pray you hertely well-beloved children,
remember and mark, that ye may use the name of god well, for, as God will
punysshe greuousely the abuse of his name, so with out doubt he will garnysshe
yt right vsyng of his name with very excellent promyses. And when the devil as
Peter says, shall go about as aroryng lion sekyng who^ he should denoure, by
none other means, ye can make your self safe against his disceites, onles ye
have the name of god always in your mouth.

The third howshold sermon unto their Children and famylye.
THe third commandment well-beloved children is, thou shalt halow the sabbath
day, which commandment although it does belong properly unto the Iues, to
whom the sabbath day was samctified, yet for all that, it does as well perteine
unto us Christians, For although as soon as Christ our savior did appear unto
us, the Sabbath was made, the Sabaothe: Esaie the last Chapter, and therefore
one day is as holy as an other to every Chrystiane, yet for all that, that
order is hyghly to be praised that every weke the seventh day should be
consecrated both to god and to exercise holy things. And this is the
understanding of this commandment, halow thy sabbath day, that is to say,
the other syxte day thou may spend in labors both public and private: but
as soon as the sabbath day, and so thy seventh day is come, be dilygente that
thou may saynctyfy that day, that is, thou being vacant from all cares and
labors spend the^ in holy exercise. And which be those holy exercises? truly
to exercise thy self with prayer* to here the word of god, and so to endeuer
thy self to holy works. And if thou do dilygently search out the meaning
of this precept, thou shall perceive none other things commanded unto us,
the^ the other does command us, verelie pertelie, that we should put all our
trust and confidence in god, that is to say, that we should love his word and
the teacher of his word, and as I shall use the words of Sayncte Paul, those
that labor in the word and doctrine. ye 1. Thy. 5. be worthy of double
honor, partly also, yt we might chiefly teach our children in this day the
commandments of god, and that we ceasynge from all labors, for why this
saboth day did thus signyfie to the Hebrews, the word of god might bring forth
frutefully some fruit as well in us as in all our famylye or household. And
partly this commandment does command us, that we should be chastened with
the fear of god, that is to say, yt we should not have his word in derysion
for it is impossyble that he which fears god with all his heart, should not
regard his holy word. And that thing that I have said of the sabbath day, or
else of this our seventh day. I will that it shall be mente as well of other
days, which be ordained by the congregation for to read the stories of the
gospel Behold well beloved children, ye have herd how our sabbath day shall be
used, but (alas) it greueth me, how specially this present time, and now a
days we use the sabbath, truly when we have slept almost mydde day, at the
last we awake, and come to the temple, in the which as soon as ye sermon,
which we have heard earnestlye preached unto us, is done, then we flee
straight way whom to dinner, and as soon as dinner is done, we go and gase a
broad, or else to bank tynge, or to dance. I am ashamed here to tell before
you, certain things that be done in the sabbath day, seeing that many be ashamed
to do the^. But you well-beloved children, halowe your sabbath day, that is to
say, ocupie your selves with godly exercyses. In numery the fourth book of Moses
the 15. Chapter. We read, yt a certain man was commanded of god to be stoned
to death, for that he had gathered wood on the sabaothe day, therefore take heed that and if you my suse your sabbath day, god will punysshe at length the
breakyng of the sabbath day. It is a fearful thing, as the aucthor of the
pistle to the Hebrnes the 15. Chap. says. To fall in to the hands of ye
lyuinge God.

The fourth household Sermon unto their Children and famylye.
Very often ye have heard of me (well beloved children) that the hole life of a
christian, does stand in two things, first, that we might know what does
perteyne unto God and then what is our duty toward men. Those things which
we must exhybit toward god, ye may easily perceive them out of the first
commandment, which I would wysshe, yt you would bear about with you in
your mind, and that you would keep them more better then the nails on your
fyngers, for why, they shall teach you in all things how you shall use your
self. And ye shall not lightly goo out of the right way, if thou will
follow them even as guydes that lead you in the right wave of your life, for
he cannot by no manner of means err, which has god before his eyes, and if
he does understand that his love ought to be preferred before the love of all
creatures. Furthermore, that duty which we ought to do toward men, the
commandments that follow declare, seeing that our duty done once unto god,
there are no men whom it becomethe to imbrase with a more greater love and to
do more greates honor unto, then to our parents: which this fourth
commandment does show of our parents, honor thy father and mother, that
it may be well unto the, and that thou may be long living upon the earth,
ye have heard (well beloved children) that god does command, that we should
honor our parents. To honor our parents, not only honorably, gentely and
mekely, to salute their parents, to speak unto them, and to handle them
gentlye, and to put of their cappes unto them, and to give them the way, and
give them the highest place, but with all their heart not only to love them:
but also to have a fervent heart toward them, and they being oppressed with
poverty, to help them, and they having their health to handle them gentlye:
and being very aged (if need shall require) to bear them on their shoulders,
where so ever theye would go, Furthermore, what so ever they shall command,
so that it be not wicked, none otherwise, then if it were sent from heaven, we
ought to receive it with all love and fear, and once received, dilygently to
execute it, and not to mock them, if either with age, or with any other kind
of fault, they do dote, not cruelly to make answer unto them, what time they
do earnestlye rebuke you. Behold how far and how large the honor of
parents does extend, neither here we be not only commanded to honor our
parents / by ye which ye are brought fourth here in this world, and by them
be brought up, but we are also commanded to honor the parents of our soul,
the teachers of gods word and your masters. And also subjects be
commanded, that they should honor their magistrates, both men servants and
women servants be commanded to honor both their masters, and mystresses.

To be short, in this commandment both polityque laws and household laues,
be ordained and al obedyence is commanded toward those who^ by god we ought
to honor, for because that we should be the redyer, to give honor unto our
pare^tes, god did annex to this commandment a serteyne pleasant promys. And
what is this promys, I pray the here, that it may be well with the, for it is
well with us, when all things chance according unto our mind undoubtedly, if
we be in health or if there be mynystred unto us aboundauntly our daily
necessaryes, or what so ever we do, it does luckelye chance when our mind is
void of all troubles, we are well spoken of, we are taken reverently of all
men. And truly these things be excedyng good, which god impertyth unto those,
which honor their parents. But this is a gift not commonly seen, that those
shall be partakers of a long life, which have not given honor unto their
parents, and what is more pleasant then life? Is not life, and yt a long
life that all we covet? Let those good things, well beloved children, styre
you up, that you may remember your dewtie, as well toward your father and
mother, as also to the teachers of his holy word, Masters. all magistrates,
yea, even all our life time, for why, you do hear, who reqyireth it of you,
yt you should give honor unto your parents. It is neither angel, nor
prophet, but the almighty god, lord both of Angel and prophet, which can
not so easily forget this precepte, not only in cholde Testament, but also in
ye new Testament did study furthermore to renew it: for Salamon in his
proverbs ye 30. Chapter says. The eye which disdeyneth the father, and
dispiseth the commandment of the mother, Crows shall pick it out, beside
the river, and Egles shall devour it.

Behold ye do hear here, well-beloved Children, what the holy ghost does require
of you, trewlye that you should give honor unto your parents, if ye do not,
ye here what kind of punishment he does admonish us with, Ecclesiast. the 3.
Chapter. says. Who that does honor his father, he shall have delight in his
children, and he shall obtain his request in that day that he does pray, he
that honors his father shall have long life, and he that is obedient unto
his sather, shall make his mother glad. Honor thy father, that thou may be
blessed of god etc. Furthermore, Christ the son of god, and our savior, the
xv. Chapter of Matthew. Chiding ye Pharisees, says. Wherefore do you break the
commandment of God for your own traditions? For god commanded, saying,
honor thy father and mother, and who so ever curses father or mother, shall
dye the death. Also Saint Paul to the Ephesians the 5. Chapter, says.
Children obey your parents in the lord, for that is right, honor your
father and mother in the lord, which is the first commandment that has
any promise, that it may be well unto the, and that thou may live long upon
the earth, yea, hear well beloved children how this fourth precepte both in
the old Testamente, and also in the new is very often times repeted with out
doubt, even only for this cause, yt god should show that this commandment
should not escape the remembrance of children, and that it should be always
unto them, as the most necessaryest thing perteynyng to them in the house, yea
and also, even that thing which almyghtie god has declared bye many examples,
for why, in like case as god did curse Cham the son of Noe, for that he had
no honor unto his father. Eue^ in like case did he bless Sem the son of
Noe, for that he did reverently honor his father, as it does appear in the
ix. Chapter of Gene. And it is not unknown, what did chance to Absalon, the
second book of ye kings the xviij. Chapter. For that he gave not dew honor
unto his father David, as he ought to do. But what neade I too set fourth any
more examples, as whoo should say, that the holy scripture were not full of
examples, with the which god does now show, that he favors those which honor
their parents, and so to hate those, which do not their duty in honourynge
their parents.

These things, I think well beloved children, shall kyndle you, that ye
should have dew honor unto your patentes, it is the first commandment of
god having promise, that is not once much spoken of, abroad, but we find it
very often repeted in holy scripture, yea and also by examples, with the which
God shows inobediente children, toward their parents, yt he will be avenged
of the^. And in examples to the which he does declare how just he is of his
promise, toward those children / which love their pare^tes, honor the^, and
obei the^.

For that which I here say of parents, yt self same I will you to understand
of masters, professors of thy divine word and of all Maiestrates, for as I
have said a little before, in this commandment, all obedyence is commanded
toowardes every man, our duty once done to god the which be called to the
hygheste honor: Jesus Christ the sone of God, grant that that thing, the
which is required of you in this commandment, that you earnestly may perform
it with the help of his spyryte: and that you may both mind it, and follow it,
for god is he, which works in you, both for to will it, and to perform it,
after as it shall please him. to ye Philippi. 2.

The fyfte household Sermon unto their Children and famylye.
YE have heard, well beloved children, what god has required of you now
therefore hear, wherein our duty does apperteyn toward other men, god says
thus. Thou shall not kyl, which commandment truly in his kind (as the Jews
do understand it) does seem only to forbid that we should not neither kill our
neighbor with hand nor with sword.

But Christ being the chief interpreter of the law, Matthew the v. Chapter It
is not enough says he, if thou kylleste no man with thy hand unless also our
heart is void of all anger and hatred, for why, thus says Christ our
savior. Who so ever is angry with his brother, is guilty of judgment, that
is to say, he is worthy to have that punishmente which he should have, that
with his hand has killed any man, that is to dye, and semblabely, to be
killed.

Ihon in his first Epistle the 3. Chapter says. Every one that hatyth his
brother is a manqueller, why so? For although he kylleth not his brother with a
sword, yet being inflamed with hatred, in his heart, wyssheth his neighbor to
be utterly killed. Nor truly those only of the which we have spoken bye man
quellers, but Ehrist says further* Who so ever shall say to his brother,
Racha, shall be gyltye of counsel, for Racha, does signyfie here, all manner of
tokens, with the which we declare our selves to be angry with our neighbor, as
when we will neither see a man, nor hear him, or when we will rejoice privily,
when any mysfortune is chanced toward our neighbor, or else when we do show
our selves toward our neighbor, that it shall easily apeare, that there can
be nothing more thankful, nor nothing more welcomer, then if our neighbor
come to utter destruction.

Christ says more over, who so ever shall say fool, shall be gyltye of hell
fire: in this word fool is comprehended, not only externe signs, but al
naughty words, which come from yt heart, that does hurt our neighbor. And
if I do call any man fool upon agood intent. I sin not. So paul calls
the Galathyans fools in yt 3. Chapter. And Christ in the last Chapter of
Luke, says unto his Discyples. O fools, and slow herted to believe, and truly
we ought not only here to use the name of fools, but also greuousely to be
angry, and to show al manner of sharpness, and as it were, vnmercyfulnes, for
such anger is a godly zeal, which is angry with the evil, and not with the
person, to whom he wyssheth with all his heart good, for this cause the men of
law, if they would take it as they should take it. They say well, that they be
the enemies of the cause, and the friend of the person. Ye have heard well
beloved children, how Christ has more truly and better interpretated this
commandment against killing thy brother, then either the Jews in old time
did interpretate it, or then some Christians at this present day do
interpretate it after ye text. Ye do hear also, that although all the world is
full of manquellers, yet for all that, no man will know in him self, yt he is
a manqueller, what? What manquellers be those, which do abound in riches, and
do suffer their neighbor to perysshe with famyne, thyrste, and cold. Trewly
what is it else, but to give no meat to these that be hungrye, too give no
drink to those that be thyrsty, to give no clothes to those that be naked,
then (to that is in his power) to kyl his neighbor, there is no difference as
the civil laws do affirm, whether any man kill, or whether he be the cause
of death, what need I many words? This commandment does require of us yt we
should not hurt our neighbor ney there with word nor dead, but help him by
all means possible, with council, and with the help both of body and
goods, and that we should take no less care in his cawse, then in our own,
yea, and also that no man should look for his own, but eueri man for his
neighbors, to the Philyppians the 2. Chapter. Furthermore, how wylleth God yt
this commandment should be vyolated of no man: for he does not let escape
the manqueller unpunished, seeing that as well profane histories do show as
divine, but that we will here over pass profane histories. Did not god punish
greauousely Cain, for because he did kill his brother Abell. Geneses. the 4.
Chapter? And did not god strayghtlye punysshe Achab and Iesabell, for yt they
did kill myserably, Naboth, the third book of the kings, the 21. Chap. There
be examples enough in scripture, well beloved Children, pray ye unto God, yt
ye may cast out of your heart at all times, both anger and hatred, and
disceitefulnes toward your neighbor and that he would suffer your hands not
to be defiled with the blood of your neighbor, by our Lord Jesus Christ.
So be it.

The syxte household Sermon unto their Children and famylye.
I Think, that ye are not forgetful well beloved Children, that the syxt
commandment of almighty god, ought to be expounded to you, which is. Thou
shalt not commit adultry, which commandment, although it seems to be
spoken to those which be knit to gyther with the band of matrymony, yet for
all that it does also per teyne unto those which be not married, and first it
requires of him, whom g^d shall call to have a wife (for god was ye first
aucthor, that we should have wy ues, after the saying of Christ, Matthew the
19. Chapter. Let not man separate those, whom god does join. And after the
saying of Solomon in his proucrbes the 19. Chapter. God does give us a wise
wife, we must love her with all our heart, and to be content only with her,
and to desire none other. Which commandment Christ in Matthew the 5.
Chapter does interpretate, both a gainste the perswations of the Jews, and
also of them which count theymselues christians, ye have heard that it was
said unto the elders, thou shalt not commyt adultrye. But I tell you, who so
ever looks upon an other man's wife, to lust after her, has committed in his
heart adultry with her, behold ye have heard (well beloved Children) that it
is not Enough / if any manne do not commyt adultry with an other man's wife,
but and if he burn in his heart with desirynge of his neighbors wife, this
precepte does admony she us that we should take heed as well of ye heart, as
of all other things. For out of the heart comes all evil thoughts,
adultry, fornycation, Matthew, the 15. Chapter. Furthermore, this
commatindemente does require in his kind, that you should leab a chaste life,
and flee whore dome, and that thou should be clean as well in soul, as
body. And if thou fealest that thou caust not live contenente or chaste, for
this word ought chieflye to be noted, that Christ spoke, few has this gift,
that then he should marry, in the which thou ought so to order thy life,
for to be contented with thye wife, and to leave other men's wines untouched.
To be short, there is contained in this precepte and prohibited all manner of
kinds of lusts, which either may be done, or expressed with fylthy
communication, or desired with evil thoughts of the heart. And this
commandment is furthermore called to remembrance in the holy scriptures.
Solomon says in his proverbs. A wife shall make the merry, how young so ever
she be even as a pleasant Do, or as a lustye fawen, and therefore content
thy self always in the love of her, and continually study to love her, and by
and by he adds, o my son, wherefore will thou be seduced by an harlotte,
and wylt embrace a strange woman (Paul in his first Epistle to the
Corinthians the 6. Chapter, says) flee whoredom. And in his first Epistle to
the Thessalonians the 4. Chapter says. This is the will of god, your
sainctificatio^, that ye should absteyne from whordom, and that every one of
you should know how to possess your vessel in sanctifycation, and honor. And
here Paul does often times exhort men, that they should love their wynes, and
that they should love them so, as Christ has loved his church, to the
Ephesians the 5. Chapter. And to the Collossi, the 3. Chapter. Ye men (says
Saint Paul) love your wynes, and be not sharp toward them, furthermore,
for that that god will punisshe greuousely as well formcation, as adultry, it
may be confirmed as well with the open testymonies of holy scripture, as with
examples of the same, over and besides, I will here hold my peace of the
madness, with ye which god does make blind both whoremongers and adulterers.
After the saying of Oseas. Fornication and wine, does make blind a man's heart.
And after the saying of S. Paul the first Epistle to the Corinthyans the 6.
Chapter. Ye can not be both the members of an harlot, and the members of
christ, both here and in ye world to come, except they do repent, they will
be punnisshed, as well whormongers, as adulterers. Solomon in his proverbs ye
6. chapter says. Foles, when they commyte fornication they forsake their life,
and bring upon them as well de fourmytie as a plage, and they can never a void
the sclaunder, paul in his first Epistle to the Corinthyans the 6. chapter
says. Be not disceyued, neither whoremongers nor adulteters shall receive the
inheritance of the kyngedome of heaven. To the gala, the 5. chapter, the
works of the flesh be manifest adultry, whordome uncleanness, wanton nesse
etc. Who so ever do those things, they shall not be the in heritours of the
kyngedome of Heaven, to the Hebrews the 13. Chapter. God shall judge
whoremongers and adulterers. Furthermore for that that god will punnish them
with grievous pains, the first epistle of sayntte Paul to the Corin. the 10.
chapter. Declares neither let us be defiled with adultrye, like as some of
them were defiled, and there fell in on day 3 and twentye thousand. The xxv.
Chapter of ye 4 book of Moses. Gene. the 20. and 6. Chapter. God did purpose
to kill Abbimeleche, for that that he would have had to do with Isaackes
wife. And for that I would omyt many other examples, god has declared, that he
will not suffer unpunished aduitrye even in only dauyd, for that he did
constuprate or defyle bethsabeam the wife of Dry, the first book of the kings
the 11. Chapter. Ye have heard well-beloved children, both what God does require
of us in this commandment, and also that he wylleth no man to use fraud in
this precepte, seeing that the thought of man is prone all way to evil at al
times. Gene, the 6. Chapter. Therefore, we ought to pray unto god, yt he would
create in us a clean heart, and that he would sainctifie us, that our hole
spirit soul and body, may be kept irrepre hensible in the coming of our
lord Jesus Christ, the first Epistle to the Thessalonyans the last Chapter.
So be it.

The seventh household Sermon unto their Children and famylye.
HEre follows the seventh commandment of god all myghtie, well beloved
Children, which is, thou shalt not steal, which precepte is understood
many ways, first as the words be spoken, it does prohibit, that we should
not steal away other men's goods. Furthermore it does command that in all
manner of bargainynges, we should mean trewly, and that we should disceyue no
man, for to disceyue any man in bargaininge or making any promise, we do even
as well steal even as we should take any thing privily out of our neighbors
cheste. And this precept for those things does admonish all manner of men, of
all kind of occupations, that they should not sell their marchaundice dearer
then theye need to be soulde, or be worthy. Finally this precepte does perteyne
to an unfaithful household or familye, that the maistet and mystres being both
absent that utterly lives in Idleness, or else is very neglygent in their
office, and suffers many things to be lost, often times undone by their
negligence, and so to perish, which often times bringethe more hurt in one
year to some house, then other thieves do to some me^ which do steal either
money or goods For that I would touch many things in a few words, the
meaning of this commandment is, that in any case we should not in any
manner of matter hinder our neighbor, and although we could dysceyue our
neighbor with out any punyshmente, yet for the fear that we bear chiefly
unto God, which the law of God does first require of us, we must absteyne
from false dealing, for god, although theft is neither perceived nor taken
of the Magistrates, yet for all that he will not suffer theft to be
unpunished. That thing both of other examples, as of this may be perceived,
that god did command one to be burned, which had stolen from one that was
cursed. Iosue 7. And god is not only wont to take a temporal punishment of
thieves, but also and everlasting punishment unless they do repent, and thus
does he threaten them, for thenes and murderers shall not possess the
kyngedome of heaven, says S. Paul to the Corinthyans the first Epistle the
6. Chapter. And to the Ephesians the 4. Chapter, S. Paul says he that has
stolen, let him steal no more, let him rather labor working with his hands,
which is a good thing that he may have where with he might be liberal to the
paciente that has neade Jesus Christ grant that we may bountefully
fulfill this same precepte of almyghtie god, that and if we can not perform
this our duty in this thing, we have an advocate with the father: Jesus
Christ / there is just / and he is our satisfaction, for our sins, notte for
our sins only / but for the sins of all the world. The first Epistle of
Ihon the second Chapter. So be it.

The eight household sermon unto their children and famylie
I think that ye are not forgetful, of this, well beloved Children, that ye
should have expounded to you this day the eight commandment of god
almyghtie. And this it is, Thou shall bare no false witness against thy
neighbor, which commandment as we may conjecture easily of these words it
does forbid us lest when we should be called into judgment, that we ought to
bear no witness, either led with hatred, or blinded with coueteousnesse of
monye, and that we should not ouerpresse our neighbor with false witness, for
often times our neghbour is both brought in danger of his life and beraued of
his goods by false witnesses. And that god will have this his prece^te
straightly kept of all men it is expedyente both with many other examples, and
with this one also that Danyell the 13 chapter does make mention of Susan. And
this precepte only does not perteine unto ye courts of the law, but also
does prohibyte that we should not feign no lies by any kind of means upon
our neighbor, but as Saint Paul to the Ephesyans the 4. Chapter, says,
putting a part all manner of lyenge. Let every man speak the truth to his
neighbor for because we are the members of our mystical bodies. Furthermore,
this commandment does forbyde that we should not hurt the honistie or
estimation of our neighbor, and that we should not give ear unto those
which go about to put out of credet the estimation of our neighbor, for both
does offend, both he that goes about to destaine the honesty of his
neighbor, and he that gives ear to him yt sclau^dereth his neighbor. For
and if ye shall hear any sclau^derers, well-beloved children, enquire freely of
them, whether those things which with a sclau^derous tongue they do backebyte
him that is absente, they will speak before any magistrate, or not? And if those
sclaunderers deny that they will speak before a judge, then tell them freely
to their face, and command the^ that they may leave to speak so rasshely
such things of their neighbor, and if you will not tell those sclaunderers
after this manner, I will show you an other way, which ye Lord and our savior
Christ the son of god does teach us. Matthew the 18. chapter, wheare he
wills that our brother which does offend first, once or twice we should
brotherlye admonish him, then if he will not hear our admonitions, he should
be taken as an Ethenicke or a Publicane. And if by chance ye shall fall into the
company of sclaunderers, ye shall say it does not pertein unto you to
sclaunder your brother that is absente, give him warning of his fault first
and then if he shall contempne your admonitions tell the congregation, yt is to
say, those, the which the people have given power to preach the word of
god. God does forbid sclaunderinge. Leuiticus. 19. Thou shalt not sclaunder
thy neighbor. But I shall come to the eight precepte: and it is to be
understand briefly, partly, that we should not oppress in judgment our
neighbor with false witness, partly, that we should not belie our neighbor,
and lest that we should not defame or rob our neighbor of his good name
or fame. The almighty god give us that grace that we may observe this
commandment well, through our Lord Jesus Christ. So be it.

The nynthe-housholde Sermon unto their Children and famylye.
WE are come now to the last two commandments of God, well beloved
children, which do entreat both of concupiscence, or unlawful desiring, thus
does god command, Exo 20. Thou shall not desire thy neighbors house, nor
thou shall not desire his wife, his servant, his hand maiden, his ox, his
afse, or any thing that pertains unto him.

Behold, and mark these two last commandments of almyghtie God and both
of them, as I have said a little before, do speak of unlawful desiring, and
brieflys / this they do command us, it is not enough, not to take away other
men's goods (which thing was forbidden in the seventh commandment) but also
we should not covet the goods of our neighbor, as for an example, my
neighbor has an house pleasauntely builded, and trewly God wylleth that we
should not covet the self same house, but that we should favor our
neighbor with all our heart although we have but a little house scarce to
thruste our head in. And often times my neighbor has a wife, which is of a
godly beutie, and indewed with good manners, and rich: I ought to suffer or
let my neighbor aloue with her, although I have a wife, which is nothing to
be compared to any neighbors wife.

Although this commandment does seem properly to apperteyne unto the Jews,
to the which for the hardenesse of their hertes, they were suffered to have
license to give unto their wives a testimony of deuorcemente, yfany man would
not keep them with him, which license they did greatelye abuse, for if any man
had a wife, which had a good dowrye, and fair, an other man that could by
any means, would bring her into the hatred of her housebande, and then a
deuorcement made with the first husband, did take her to wife and it do not
syldome chance among Christians, yt one does take an others wife away. And so
many in these days do take away unto them either their true labourynge
seruaunce or maiden, increasynge their yearly wages. There perteyneth also to
these things that ye beasts which be fruitful and strong we do hate that
our neighbor should have them, and therefore, bye all the chraftye means
that we can, we will obtain and get them for our selves, to be short, these
commandments will us that thou shuldeste not once wisshe thy self well, if
thy neighbor should fare the worse. And these two commandments seem to be
compared against couetuousenes, for conetuouse me^ gape for, and covet all
things, and they cannot suffer their pore neighbor to have any good thing,
with a good will, both these commandments of almyghtye god, ye, and also the
voice of Christ the son of god, Luke, the 12. Chapter shall call you away
from coneteousenesse, when he says. Take head of couetuousnesse, for because
the life of every man is not in the abundaunce of those things which he does
possess, the saying of S. Paul does fray you from couetuousnes both to the
Ephesians the 5. Chapter, and to the Collos. the 3. Chapter. Calling it
ydolatry, let this pluck you from couetuousenes, for that that God does
abhorte it, which we may perceive in Laban, Gene, the 30. Chapter. And in
Rabal the first book of the kings the 16. Chapter. Wherefore flee you from
this enyll, well beloved children, and embrace you godliness, and those
things which the mercy of god shall give you, take them thankefully
Godliness is a great gain say the Samcte Paul in the first Epistle too
Tymothe the last Chapter, too those that can be content in their vocation,
with a good will. For we have brought nothing into the world, and we can carye
nothing away. Wherefore if we have necessary lie meat and drink and where
with all for to cover us, let us so be contented.

Behold now hitherto I have declared in order the ten commandments of
God unto you, although it be but meanly, which seeing that they be beyond
man's strength or any man's power to observe them, and keep them
accordingly: yet let us pray unto the holy ghost, that he would both renew
and puryfie our heart that we may not only keep them with our extery our
doings, but also with our inward affection and will. So be it.

The Declaration of our belief, called in laten, simbolum apostolicum.
The first household Sermon of god the father, and the creation of all things.
YE have heard, even of late well beloved Chyldrenne, those things which god
does require of you in his x. commandments, yea even of us all, and seeing
that those things which he requyrethe of us can not be performed of us, for
because of the fragilytie and weakness of our strength for Christ says, Ihon
the 7. Chapter. None of you do perform the law with your deades, he is only
to be known of us, which gives power, that we may do those things, which of
our selves can not be done, he is trewlye God of whom what so ever is
necessary for us to be known, that same is in our belief comprehended, which
belief, that it may be understand some what of you I will dilygently declare
it. And for yt I would open to you some way, unto those things which we now
take in hand. I give you knowledge that there is one god, as it does appear in
ye first Epistle to the Corinthians, the 8. Chapter, that is to say, one
essence, or spiritual substance, for god is a spirit. Ihon the 4. Chapter.
And truly that same deuyne essence or spiritual substance is atributed to
their persons, God the father. God the son, and God the holy ghost. Matthew
the last Chapter.

So that those three persons be equallye everlasting, of an infynite power, of
an infynite wisdom, of an infinyte goodness etc. Now trewly what god is, is
showed in the first beginning of ye belief, when a Christian man says. I
believe in God the father almyghtie maker of heaven and earth. Let us begin,
and examyne every word: a Christian man says. I do believe, we do believe
trewly those things which be not present before our eyes, for faith is an
argument of things hoped for, and a declaration of those things that do not
appear, to the Hebrews the 11. Chapter we do believe in god, and what is god?
God is a spiritual substance, for god is a spiryt, Ihon the 4. our god is all
yt thing to the which we have a confydence with all our heart, for if we
have a confidence to the true god / we are in a good case: if we have a
confydence to a false god, or to mammon, or to any other god, we do procure
the everlasting pain of our ungodliness. Wherefore says a Christian man, I
believe in god, and not simplye, I believe god, behold hear Gregory
Nazyanzene, which in his first book of the word of god writes, to believe in
any thing / does properly perteyn unto the godhead.

To believe therefore in god, is to believe / and to have asure confidence in his
divine substance, and everlasting substance which has neither begynyng nor
ending. And god is the name of ye divine majesty. And for that that we do say
more over in our belief, that we do believe not only in god, but in god the
father, it is the beclaration of a great faith, for he that does believe god to
be the father, to him, is promised al thing of god, and looks for all thing
of god, for if the son has a confydence that he shall obtain all thing of
his yearthly father, how mothe more ought we to have a confydence that we shall
obtain all things, of god the father, for why? as Christ says him self, if
you which be evil, can give your Children good gifts, how much more, royll
the father of heaven give, if ye shall ask of him? Matthew, the 6. Chapter What
means this, that a christyan man says. I believe in god, the father
almighty? Truly nothing else, then I believe in God, and also in god the
father, which can do all thing that he will, to whom there is nothing
impossible. And it folweth, the maker of heaven and earth, that is to say, I
believe in god, which has create heaven and yearthe, and all thing, which
either is seen in heaven, or in earth which be the son, the Moon, the
sterres innumerable, the Clouds / the fowls, the fysshes, and all kind of
beasts. And god ye father has not brought fourth the yearthe naked, but
garnysshed it with great varyetie of all things, corn, flowers, grass, and
with diverse kinds of beasts. And we ought not to think, that god has only
once created all these things, with the word (for he said, and they were
made) which we see as well in heaven, as in earth and so leave in creatyng of
things, but we ought to prynte this in our remembrance, that yet God does
create all things, in every momente, of the which we have neade of, in this
present life, for Christ says Ihon the 5. Chapter, my father does work even
at this time, and I also. And the C. lxiiij. Psalm. Thou opening thy hand,
all be fulfilled with plentyfulnes.

And god does not create as yet soomoche, but yet for all that all those
things, which have been create from the beginning, he does daily encreace
with his power, yea, and also keep with his word, and is present with all
things that be created, for so god makethe the pearthe fruitful: sendynge
rain from heaven, and keeps the frutefulnes thereof, least those which it
brings forth, should perysshe with any tempests, but that it should
return to our use, for that thing that I say of the earth I will to be
spoken also of other things.

Wherefore, Saint Paul says to the Collossians. the 3. Chapter. All things
stand by him, and in the 2. Chapter Also, to the Ephesians, the first chap. he
does after the counsels of his will. Mat. the 10. Two sparowes be soulde for a
farthynge, and one of them falls not upon the earth, witout the heavenly
father. But this article in his kind, does require this thing, that we should
believe in god the father, now if every man will examine him self, he shall
perceive in him self also many good things that be private, for he shall
perceive that he is a man indewed with reason, and healthful in his body, to
have the power to give, and to receive, and to florisshe in the quickenes of
his me^bres, and can go hither and thither, and has a perfect sight and can
hear very well, and to get his living But who can rehearse those benefits
which florissheth often times in one manner, I pray the, from whence do they
come? forsooth even from God, which has created by his almyghtifulnesse al
these things, and daily does create, and keeps those that be created, and
gives al things. Therefore to believe in God the father is to persuade with
his heart that al which thou haste, thou have them of god. The first Epistle
to the Corinthians the 5. Chapt. And that god has for thy cause created al
things, which either be in heaven or earth, and dailye does create. And thou
can not content thy self with these things, but he also gentely delivers
the from al evils. And does adioine unto the his holy Angels that they may
fight for the against the assaults of the devil. And he does all these
things, for because he is thy father by his only goodness and mercy, and of
none of thy deseruinges. And thoumaist think to thy self that thou shall have
of him all things, seeing yt he is almighty. And thou causte wisshe nothing,
or think any thing, but straight way if it pleases him, he may grant it the.

Let us be thankful, well-beloved chylbren, unto god the father, for his great
goodness and mercy toward us miserable sinners. And let us never more
dispayer, but when we have so heavenly a father, both gentell, merciful, and
allmyghtye, which will grant to all those that do ask of him aboundauntlye
all things which they shall have need of, for ye know yt words of Christ
which I rehearsed a little before Matthew the 6. chapter, if you therefore seeing
that ye be evil, do know to give to your children good gifts: how much more
your father which is in heaven, shall give, if you ask of him So be it.

The Second household sermon of the belief.
YE have hard now well-beloved children, what god the father is, and what we
ought to believe of him, the voice that he sent from heaven do declare. Now
seeing that Ihon in his first epistle the 2. chapter says, who so ever denies
the son, he has not the father. And in ye last chapter, who so ever has ye
son, has life, who so ever has not the son of god, has not life,
furtheremore ye ought to know, what is ye son of god and what we should
believe of him, there fore it follows, I believe in Jesus Christ the only son
of god, when I say I believe. I do not sygnifye only, that I believe, that
Christ is the son of god. Matthew the 8. chapter, for that the denyls of hell
do believe, saint James, ye 2. Chapter. But this I will it to signify that I
have the son of god, and that those things which be spoken of the son of
god, be turned into ye commodity and vtilite of my doing, and every private
man's, for why. This is my very faith in Jesus Christ, which justifies a man.
Those things which truly be spoken of Christ, yt he is Jesus, for why he
makes safe his people from their sins. Matthew. ye 1. Chater. And that he is
Christ, yt is the anointed of god, yt is the King and Prist, king truly for yt
unto him is given al power, both in heaven and in earth, Mat. the last chapter,
and yt he is the Pryst for ye he offered him self for our sins. He brues the
6. chapter. And for yt he does make intersession for us unto ye father Romans
ye 7. Chap. And besides those do I believe, yt the same Jesus Christ is ye son
of god, and truly, ye only son. For why, one Christ is the only and
natural son of god: with out beginning gotten of the father, as well
everlasting, almighty / as god the father, furthermore, that Christ is ye
very and everlasting Son of god, and very god with very god the father as many
other places of holy scripture as this which is in the first Epistle of S. Paul
to ye corinthians yt 10. Chap. do well declare. And these be ye words of S.
Paul. Let us not tempte Criste as in like case some of the^ did tempt him: and
they were killed of Serpents. Now Moises ye 4. book ye 14. Chap. says. The
lord says. Al those which have tempted me now ten times, and have not obeyed
unto my voice: they shall not see ye land etc. Where ye voice of the lord, or
ye Lord of al creatures is put; which voice does agree and is attributed to ye
only everlasting on^* and very god. Where also Moses says. The lord of al
creatures, that is to sey, he calls him very God, the people have tempted me
x. times, bye and by, Paul declares who was yt god, which ye people did te^pt,
and he declares yt it was christ which verylie was not yet at yt time borne
of ye virgin Mary. Wherefore, it was truly spoken yt Christ was that man of
who^ Moses spoke, yt he was truly God: become both Christ ye Son of god, with
out beginning, borne of ye father, and yet so^e what destinct from ye father /
but of this thing we have sufficiently declared to you.

Prynted at Ippiswich by Ihon Osive^

Cum priuilegio ad Imprimendum solum.

The rest of the sermons shall be printed shortly.


