TEN SERMONS PREACHED UPON SEVERAL SVNDAYES AND SAINTS DAYS: 1 Upon the
Passion of our Blessed Savior. 2 Upon his Resurrection. 3 Upon S. Peter's Day.
4 Upon S. John the Baptists Day. 5 Upon the Day of the blessed Innocents. 6
Upon Palm Sunday. 7 and 8 Upon the two first Sundays in Advent. 9 and 10 Upon
the Parable of the Pharisee and Publicane, Luke 18.


TOGETHER WITH A Sermon Preached at the Assizes at Huntington.

BY P. HAVSTED Mr. in Arts, and Curate at Vppingham in Rutland.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN CLARK, and are to be sold at his shop under S. Peter's
Church in Cornhill. MDCXXXVI.

TO THE WORTHY AND VIRTUOUS Knight, Sir CHRISTOPHER HATTON, Knight of the
honorable Order of the BATH.
NOBLE SIR,
I Have made bold to borrow your fair name, to grace the Front of my Book; It
will pass for current (I hope) now it has your Superscription stamped upon it.
Nay, do not sweat for the matter. I will not put the sweetness of your
modesty to the torture of a blush. I protest (were I necessitated to one of
the^) I would rather choose to be rough with you, then to flatter you. The
first (I acknowledge) is an incivility; but yet the second (though Courtly)
carries with it the greater danger, and the juster anger. I know the roads of
Dedications well enough; It is expected there should be fucus and cerusse in
them: but (if a man could find it) there is a nearer and a cleaner way. I will
be plain with you. I stuck a while at the very word Dedication, because they
do male audire, are something out of credit, by reason of the daubing that is
in many of them: Nor had I adventured upon any, (especially to you, who I know
would receive an Inventory of your own good parts in line with a challenge)
but that I was confident to my self that I had purchased already in the world,
the opinion of a blunt man, and therefore shot-free from the imputation of a
flatterer. I beseech you, suppose me not so weak to think that I believe any
thing here (which is mine) worthy of the noise of a Dedication and that to you.
They who know you, know you deserve greater Presents, my hope in this is, they
who know you not but in Landscape, (a far off and mixed with other fair pieces
of variety which make up a beautiful prospect) will certainly divine that
there is something more in you then in ordinary men, and that you deserve well
of the Church and Clergy, when they shall see one of the surliest of our Tribe,
leave the pursuit of Lions, Wolves, and Tigers (a game he takes delight in) to
stand still only to observe you, and glory to style himself who otherwise
under his gracious God and King, is free as the air, which circumscribes him)

Your servant, PETER HAVSTED.

To the Christian Reader.
Something must be said to you (Christian Reader) although it be but for Forms
sake; and it shall not be much, I have put forth some Sermons here (you see)
rude, and just according to the first draught: I could have proceeded (I
confess) to the second and third sittings, have added the lights and the
shadows, the graces and the rellishes, which make pieces beautiful; but the
same reasons which made me expose them to the world, would not allow me time to
pollish them. I am not yet so meanly conceited of my self, but that I will
think there is something in them; nor yet so in love with what is mine own,
that I dare affirm that something to be any great matter, -- Qui se mirantur,
in illos
virus habe. --
The Age we live in is full of Knowledge, so that should the spirits of our
dead Ancestors return to view their old habitations, they would find by a
strange Metempsychosis, the soul of learning wandered even into places where
they left nothing but Barbarism, behold great Clarks in russet coats, and an
University even at the Plow. Books are daily multiplied, and with those, the
desperate Censurers, and therefore I cannot be ignorant of the danger I have
put my self in, by this open way. It is very likely that I may repent the
publishing of them, when I see the entertainment they shall have in the world:
but it is also as probable that I may make some good uses of that repentance. I
have already tasted of the success of the Press in some of my younger
studies, and therefore desire thee to be so fair, as not to interpret it vain
glory, or an itch of being read in Print. No, my intent and end is good and
honest, neither of which Titles can belong to thee, unless thou provest so
charitable to believe me. Whether it be necessity in me, being in a low
Fortune, (the common calamity of us Scholars) whether it be a persuasion of
the good which may accrue to the Reader, or whether it be to feel the Pulse of
the Times, that knowing the temper of their acceptance, I may hereafter or
expose or suppress some other things, or what other aim soever I have, does
not much concern thee to know, and I shall make it a suit that I may still
keep it private to my self. I am naturally an enemy to Apologies, otherwise I
might tell you, that most of these were sudden births borne in a private
Auditory, without any intent of ever showing their heads abroad; but it is my
fault to force them into a crowd, who would have been far better pleased
still to have enjoyed a quiet and chaste solitude. The years I have past (I
acknowledge) are not many; but my desires to benefit Gods people, and to
communicate those few good things the Lord has been pleased to bestow upon
me, are far above the number of my years, or abilities. There is good to be
learnt from these Sermons, if thou read them with candor: but come with
prejudice, and the best food is turned into poison. If thou will needs be
finding fault with me, (as there be a generation who sucked that humor from
their Mothers) be so kind (I entreat thee) to let the censure thou layest
upon me be mild. If thou apprehendest that I am something too bold in
adventuring things of this nature to the public eye, not having hair enough
to plead a fullness in me, while other men of profounder learning and larger
reading, like deep streams, pass silently on; be advised, and that for thine
own sake, (for fear there be other men who will censure thee, even for that
very act, and call thy judgment into question) let the Title thou fastenest
upon my offense, reach no farther at the most, then to the term forwardness;
and then it is likely we shall not quarrel for that: for two or three good
words, it may be, will make me confess as much, and withal grieve that I have
occasions offered me to prick me on to that forwardnes; which for ought thou
know, is contrary to my nature, how ever my outside may appear to those
who are not well versed in my disposition.

It is not impossible but there may be something found in this book which may
relish harsh to many of our preciser people, and open their mouths both
against it and me: but I should show my self an ungrateful Son of the Church,
a bad Subject to my Sovereign, and an unequal spirited man in my self, if I
should much esteem of the suffrages of those, who esteem not at all of the
sacred laws and authority of their Prince and State, nor of the blessed
discipline and unity of the Church; whose comely and harmonious order, the
Nations (our neighbors round about us) do look upon with envy and admiration.
-- But I fear I have already tired thee with a Preface; so that I shall
deter thee from going any farther. -- rest, -- and so will I, till I have
some other occasion to tell thee that I am

Thy friend PETER HAUSTED.

Summa Approbationis.
PErlegi has undecem Conciones, quas habuit Mr. Petrus Hausted super varia
argumenta, in Dominicis, and aliis diebus festis, una cum Epistola Nuncupatoria
ad D. Christoph. Hatton, militem de Balneo, and Praefatione ad Lectorem; in
quibus omnibus nihil reperio sanae doctrinae, aut bonis moribus contrarium, quo
minus cum utilitate publica Imprimantur, ita tamen ut si non intra novem menses
proxime sequentes typis mandentur, haec licentia sit omnino irrita.

Ex aedibus Lambethanis November. 10. 1635. GUIL. BRAY R.P.D. Arch. Cant. Capel.
Domesticus.

Faults escaped.
Page. Read Page. Read 5 crucified him with 231 Synonoma^s 6 did crucify him
really 233 fault 14 found out another Ibid. Divino. 42 Elongare. 237 Sepulchies
61 (...) 249 (...) 72 (...) 252 (...) 74 Praecursores. 261 Ambodexter. 79 this
is spoken. 263 Judicabor. 88 wandered. 264 fact. 95 translated. 266 Legis. 101
hear Ibid. (...) 206 entertained 267 (...) 208 as it is with the 269 Advocate
209 then. 277 It is not the knowledge, etc. 211 in the reason or Ibid.
principal 217 exclusive.

THE FIRST SERMON, UPON The PASSION of our Blessed SAVIOVR.
St LVKE 23. VER. 44, 45. 44 And it was about the sixth hour, and there was a
darkness over all the Land until the ninth hour.

45 And the Sun was darkened, and the Vetle of the Temple rent through the
midst.


WHen Great Ones wear Blacks, and the Peers of a Kingdom are seen in
mourning, we may (I hope) without the help of Divination, conclude, that the
funeral of their King, or of some great Prince amongst them is near: And
finding the Earth (here) apparelled in a mourning garment, and the Sun
himself (who uses at other times, to appear like a fresh Masker) now wearing
a Suit of Blacks; and to these the Temple, which was was once the holiest
Place, the glory and joy of the whole Earth, (like a loving Mother robbed of all
her children at once, those dear pieces of her self) sitting alone
disconsolate, wringing her hands, and for grief rending her precious garments
in sunder; we cannot choose but suppose presently, that these great and
unusual signs of grief (which the senseless creatures, yet eminent in their
kind do express) must needs point out the death of more then of an ordinary
man. We see that mighty Kings and Emperors die, and yet the Sun looks upon
them (even when they give up the ghost) without any alteration of countenance:
Like a Heralds Coat, or the face of a Widow, who has buried three or four
Husbands, he beholds diverse Funerals without any change of color. The Earth
she endures the slaughter of whole Armies, thousands and ten thousands fall
together, the blood of great Commanders mixes with the blood of the common
Soldier, so that the streams which issue from them following the course of
all rivers which make have to the ocean, do seem to threaten that with the
name of the red Sea. And she beholds all this without any changing of her
livery: she does peradventure sometimes at the sight of a slaughtered Army in
a kind of jollity and pride, die some of her green into a scarlet: but that
she ever wore black at the death of any was never heard of before.

Xerxes the Persian indeed, who carried that numerous Army into Europe against
the Grecians (consisting as some report, of a million of men) who drunk up
whole rivers as they past, and made mountains plain before him; having at a
certain time got the advantage of a Hill, and by that means taking a survey
of his great Host, is reported by Historians to have sighed and wept, to think
that all those multitudes of men which were then in his eye, should within
less then an Age be laid in the dust, not so much as their very names
remembered: Yet afterward when this mighty Prince joined battle with the small
Navy of the Grecians, and was discomfited, and the greatest part of his men
slain, we do not read that the Sun sighed or grieved at all, but went on
his ordinary course, undisturbed and unmoved with the spectacle: nor do we
hear that the Earth was at all troubled with the matter. Great Alexander dies,
he who conquered every thing, but his own desire of still conquering more.
Julius Caesar dies, that learned and valiant Roman, that spirit of the world,
whose Sword and Tongue, were alike victorious: and this man dies treacherously,
betrayed in the Senate, amongst his gowned friends. And to come to sacred
History: Abraham the Father of the faithful, dies: Moses that great Lawgiver,
he dies too, he who had the honor to see God face to face, and yet lived:
All the Prophets die, who were the Penmen and Temples of the holy Ghost:
David, a man after Gods own heart, he dies too; Solomon, who was the wisest
and the happiest King that ever lived, dies; and yet we do not find in any
Story, either holy or profane, that either the Sun or the Earth did put
themselves to the expense of blacks for any of these: or else that any Church
or Temple did rend her garments, in sorrow for their deaths. What shall we say
then? surely we must be constrained to take up our Saviors words in the 12. of
St. Matthews Gospel, Mat. 12 42
ver. 42. Behold a greater then Solomon is here. For we see here in my Text,
both Sun, Earth, and Temple are mourners at his death.

I shall not need (I hope) with Pilate, to set up a Title upon the Cross, and
tell ye that he whom they mourn for is Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews,
because I suppose that this Title is written in Capital letters in the heart
of every true Christian.

Here be in this Text (which does contain the solemnity or pomp which was at
the death of Christ) these two parts.

1 Paratus fanebris Naturae, and 2 Paratus Dei. 1 The funeral solemnity of
Nature; Then was darkness over all the Land, and the Sun was darkened. 2 The
funeral solemnity of God; And the veyle of the Temple was rent in the midst.

And it was about the sixth hour (says our Evangelist.) The first thing I do
shall be to make St. Luke, and St. Mark friends, who at the first sight may
seem to be at variance a little. Mark 15.25.
For St. Mark tells us in the 15. Chapter that it was at the third hour of the
day.

We are to understand therefore, that the artificial day amongst the Jews,
began at six a clock in the morning, and ended at six in the Evening, so that
the compass of their artificial day was twelve hours. (Are there not twelve
hours in the day? says our Savior) So that calling our sixth in the morning,
the first hour of the day, the sixth hour (according to their computation)
must needs be our Noone; and about or a little before this time was our
Savior crucified. But why does St. Mark call it the third hour?

I will not give ye Cajetanes answer, who says, that there may be an error
in the Scribe, mistaking and writing the Greek Character of one number for
another, because there is some affinity betwixt them in the figure. ( exemp.
gr. (...)) St. Augustines is something better, who to excuse the matter has
these words. Linguis Iudaeorum, crucifixus est hora tertia, manibus hora sexta:
The Jews (says he) crucified with their tongues at the third hour (when
they cried out so unanimously; Crucify him, crucify him, his blood be upon us
and upon our children) but they did not crucify him with their hands until
the sixth. But if we observe St. Marks words well, we shall find that this
interpretation cannot stand, for after he had said, that he was crucified at
the third hour, he presently adds, and at the sixth hour there was
darkness over the face of the earth; which last words imply, that they
crucified him not at the sixth hour, but at another hour. Wherefore I do
rather subscribe to the opinion of St. Jerome in his Epistle to Cyprian. As the
Night (says he) was divided into four watches, so their Day into four parts,
or hours. Into the first hour, beginning at six in the morning, and lasting
till nine, containing in it three of our ordinary hours. Secondly, into the
third hour, beginning at nine, and ending at twelve; and into the sixth, and
ninth, containing the other six Pomeridian hours. Erat quasi, or fere hora
sexta (says our Text) it was about the sixth hour; he does not say it was
perfectly the sixth hour, but it was about the sixth hour, meaning a little
before Noone, and so the two Evangelists are reconciled. For it is true that
St. Mark says they did crucify really at or in the third hour; and it is
also true which St. Luke says here, and it was about the sixth hour. About
the sixth hour, that is, a little before midday, our twelve of the clock;
and it was in the third hour too, (i.) in the latter part of the third hour,
a little before Noone. And so although he was fastened to the Cross a little
before noone, yet he did not give up the ghost until the ninth hour, which
is our three of the clock after midday, that he might directly answer to the
Paschall Lamb, which by the Lords command was to be killed at the Evening,
Exodus 12.6
Exodus 12 6. Or as the Original reads it, betwixt the two Evenings. And here
there may a question be raised, what part of the day should be meant, by these
words.

The opinions I find are two.

1 The first is Aben Ezras, and he says, That there is vespera Solis, and
vespera luminis. An Evening of the Sun, when the body of the Sun is removed
from our eyes, when that sets: and an Evening of the light, when the beams or
shining of the Sun do also forsake us. And betwixt these two Evenings (says
he) was the Paschall Lamb slain; which time by us is called the twilight,
which by the opinion of Astronomers, does ordinarily endure an hour and one
third part.

2 The second from Rabbi David, and he is larger in his interpretation, and
understands a greater latitude of Time. There is (says he) vespera
declinationis, and vespera occasus: An Evening of the Sun declining, and an
Evening of the Sun setting. The Evening of the Sun declining begins at
twelve of the clock, when the Sun is in his Altitude, in the Meridian, and so
declines by degrees toward his fall. The Evening of the Sun setting what that
is, we all know: And betwixt these two Evenings, (i.) betwixt Noone and the
Sun setting, the Paschall Lamb (says he) was to be killed. And certainly
this second opinion is that which will endure the Touchstone the best, for
without question by this phrase, Betwixt the two Evenings, we are to understand
such a parcel of time, wherein the daily Evening Sacrifice might be slain
too as well as the Paschall Lamb, for even that was commanded to be done,
inter duas vesperas, betwixt the two Evenings as well as the other, Number. 28.4
Number 28.4. And as the Talmud reports (if we reckon the hours according to our
ordinary computation) the daily Sacrifice of the Evening Lamb was usually
slain betwixt two and three, and betwixt three and four it was offered: but
upon the Passover Eve it was slain betwixt one and two, and offered betwixt
two and three; and the reason was, because they might have time afterward for
the slaying and offering of the Passover: But if their Passover Eve fell upon
the Eve before their Sabbath, then their daily Evening Sacrifice was slain and
offered an hour sooner then ordinary, that there might be time enough both
for the Passover, and also for the preparation of their Sabbath after that.
And Christ that he might show us that his death did comprehend all Sacrifices
(which indeed were nothing else but shadows and types of that one and perfect
Sacrifice, which he at this time made upon the Cross, for the sins of the
whole world) he began to be crucified in the third hour of the day, with the
daily Morning Sacrifice, and finished it at the ninth hour with the daily
Evening Sacrifice and the Paschall Lamb. He was both the Sacrifice of the
Morning, and of the Evening: He was sacrificed as well for those who lived in
the Morning of the world, before the Incarnation, as for all us who have lived
since in the Evening, in its declining Age. He was the Sacrifice of the
Morning and Evening, both for Young and old. Of the Morning and Evening; for
the East, and for the West, for the whole world. The Morning and the Evening
Sacrifice he was, and therefore observe how the Morning and Evening here do
meet together (as if it had been on purpose) to mourn for him: and perceiving
(it seems) that their own Apparel was a great deal too light and glorious
to appear in so sad a business, they borrow mourning garments out of the
wardrobe of the Night, to wait upon the Hearse. For at that very point of Time,
wherein the Morning and the Evening meet together (which is Noone) did the
darkness begin, which continued for three hours following: The Noone, the
height and glory of the day, wears black at his Funeral.

Concerning this darkness, we are to enquire here;

1 Of the extent of this darkness in regard of Place, it was over all the
Land, (...). And there was a darkness over all the Earth.

2 The extent of this darkness in regard of Time, from the sixth until the
ninth hour, from our twelve to three.

3 We are to enquire d^asa tenebrarum, what was the reason or cause of this
darkness: and the physical or nearest Cause of all will appear to be the
darkning of the Sun. For certainly this (...) which joins the two verses
together, (...) and the Sun was darkened, must of necessity be a conjunction
causall, (...) pro (...) So among the Latin Poets, Virgill, who very frequently
did use Graecismes (to give ye but one example) Audier as and fama fuit, --
for quia fama fuit. As if St. Luke had said here, There was darkness over all
the Earth, for the Sun was darkened.

Of the first;

(...) There is a little difference a^i^ here concerning the extent of place,
for there want not some who would have this darkness not to be universal, and
therefore they under^d these words, overall the earth, thus, overall the (...)
of Judea: but I do rather incline to the opinion of universality, and indeed
me thinks the very letter of the Text is plain enough for it, over all the
Earth. And very fitly does all the Earth wear black, when the Lord of all the
Earth dies. Christ suffered for the whole Earth, and great reason that the
whole Earth should suffer with him. When great men die, commonly (if they leave
noble heirs or executors behind them, who will bury them like themselves) the
whole Family, the whole Train of servants mourn, and not only three or four
who are nearest unto them. And can we suppose that our Savior CHRIST would be
so sparing and nigardly at his death, to give his Cloth to one Nation on^? To
cloth none but the Land of Israel in mourning? We see that the Lord is
infinite liberal even of his very light and grace, his best garments: (He
makes his Sun to shine upon the bad as well as upon the good) Surely then he
might have afforded his darkness, his blacks, which is a Cloth of a cou^r
price, at an easier rate.

I do acknowledge that the J^wes after a more especial manner then any other
Nation had deserved this darkness, for they had the light of Gods word, (which
the Heathen wanted) the light of the Law and the Prophets; nay they indeed of
all other Nations might be truly called, the people of the East, for the Sun
of righteousness rose in their Land, the Dayspring from on high visited them
in the first place; but yet for all this (as if too much light had made them
blind) they could never be at rest until they had put out the light of
Israel, and drawn a thick darkness upon themselves, not only this
darkness in the letter, but also a darkness in the Allegory, in the moral
sense; they brought a night upon their hearts, consciences, and understandings,
of which that outward darkness was but an Emblem.

But if we take darkness here in the last sense, in the figure, for the
blinding of the eyes of the understanding, then both the opinions may very well
stand together. This darkness was over all the whole face of the Earth, and
this darkness was only over the Land of Israel. There is not altogether such
a flat opposition betwixt these two Propositions, as ye may suppose there is.
I will show ye that it is possible to reconcile them. This darkness was only
over the land of Judea (i.) it ^anne at that time only to be over that Land,
but it was then and long before too over the whole earth. For of all the
multitudes of Kingdoms and Nations, there was light only in the Land of
Israel till now. They had the light of the true knowledge of God, whilst all
the rest of the world lay mufled in darkness, and therefore they having put
out this light, the darkness may be said to be only over them, (the Text
passing by the darkness of other places as a thing granted, and needing no
mention) that is, the darkness which was general over all the eyes of the
Heathen, does now begin only to be over them too; erant tenebrae, for
incip^ebant. Alas! the Heathen (from all Ages) were only guided by the weak
glimmering twilight of natural knowledge, and therefore could never find out
the right way to the worship of the true God; but every one (according to his
Fancy) or worshipped the Gods framed by the Poets, or framed a God of his
own. They had their cheating Oracles at Delphos, Delos, and other places,
where the Devil entering into the Priests, and appearing in strange ecstasies
and furious expressions, did deliver ambiguous and deceitful Answers to the
people. They peeped many times into the entrayles of an Ox, to see if they
could find their God there: An old weatherbeaten Oak, nor a River, nor a
Spring, nor a Mountain, nor a Wood, could escape their blind devotions; but
every one of these they believed had his Deity, a God belonging to it. Nay, the
Egyptians had an easier and a quainter way then all these for the making of
their Gods, they sow their Gods of seeds. The Onyons and the Leeks were
worshipped amongst them: but then did the time begin when the light was taken
from the Jews them selves too, and they were left in darkness as well as the
Heathen; Or rather, (as when the Sun sets to the lower Hemispheare, to our
Antipodes, it rises to us) the darkning of the Jews was the enlightening of the
Gentiles. So that this darkness which was over all the earth for this 13
hours space, may seem to be to the Gentiles nothing else but a forerunner of
the approaching Morning. As we observe many times how it grows darker upon a
sudden for a little space, when the morning draws near, as if the Night
seeing no remedy but she must depart, before she yields up her dominion,
should in indignation call all her strengths together, and give a Bravo to the
day her enemy) which darkness ushers in the twy-light, and that the Sun. For
now began the Heathen to have their eyes opened, the Paynim Religion began to
lose of her repute and credit, their lying Oracles ceased, and the name of
Christ (like the glorious light) began to spread abroad amongst the Gentiles.

The learned Plutarch (who lived in the reign of the Emperor Trajane)
observing that there were no Oracles delivered in his time, nor for a good
while before (as was accustomed in former Ages) was much troubled to find out
the reason of their Cessation. Amongst much other discourse, he falls into a
disputation of the Nature of the Gods, and finding that there was a kind of
Gods which the Ancients called Demi gods, or halfe-gods, begotten of the Gods
upon mortal women, which was a received opinion amongst them, that the Gods
many times fell in love with women upon earth, and accompanied with them, I
shall not need to name any particulars, the writings of the Poets are full of
such scapes, and a fine device it was to preserve the honor of some of their
great Ladies, who were not altogether so true to their Husbands, or their vow
of Virginity as they ought to have been,) and finding moreover that these
Dem^gods, although they lived long; yet at the last dyed, was brought to
conjecture, that these Gods might be they who did inform the Oracles, and at
their death, the Oracles ceased: but had Plutarch been truly enlightened, he
might easily have found out in an other cause of the defect of Oracles.

The same Philosopher in his book of the defect of Oracles, inserts a
memorable History of one Epitherses a Grecian, in the time of Tiberius Caesar,
who making for Italy, being embarked in a Merchants Ship, and sailing smoothly
by the Islands called E^h^les, the Sea upon a sudden was becalmed, so that
they by little and little working themselves nigh unto Paxo, there was an high
and intelligible voice heard amongst them, calling Thamus, Thamus; they all
heard the voice, but knew not from whence it came, and therefore a sudden
affrightment invaded them; this Thamus (whose name was not known to the
greater part of the passengers) was the Captain of the Shipp, who hearing the
voice calling to him the third time, assumed so much courage as to answer it.
Unto whom the voice replied (far louder then before) charging him, that as
soon as he came against the Palodes, he should publish to the inhabitants,
that the great Pan was dead. The whole company in the Ship being amazed at the
strangeness of the voice and message, consulted amongst themselves what was
best to be done; and at the last agreed, that if the wind were fair and
prosperous for their Voyage when they came against the place, they would then
go on without any stop: but if the Sea were smooth and calm, then they
determined that Thamus should fulfill the command or the voice. Which he did,
for finding it a very quiet Sea when they came thither, getting into the Stern
of the Ship (against the Palodes) with his face toward land, he cried with a
loud voice, The great Pan is dead. Which message was no sooner delivered, but
all the company in the Ship heard upon the sudden a strange and confused
noise, sounding like the outcries and lamentations of a distressed multitude.
And this Ship afterward arriving in Italy, the report of this strange matter
was soon heard of at Rome, so that e're long it came to the ear of Tiberius
the Emperor, who sending for the Master of the Ship, was certified of the Truth
of the rumor, and calling his wise men together, demanding of them who that
great god Pan should be, was answered by them, that he was the son of god
Mercury and Penelope.

Ye see what an account Plutarch gives of the death of great Pan. But if we
weigh the circumstances of the story well, we shall find that this voice did
signify the death of Christ, which caused the Oracles to cease, and destroyed
the power of the devil. And it is not unlike but those cries which were heard
in the Palodes, were the lamentations of evil spirits, bewayling the downfall
and destruction of their Kingdom. For first, this is reported to be done in
Tiberius time, in whose reign Christ was crucified, and why might it not be at
the very time of his death, or immediately after? besides this, certain it was
that Tiberius had inquired and heard of Christ, and of many of his miracles,
for if the Senate would have agreed to it, he would have canonized him, and put
him into the roll of their gods. And it is very credible, that by reason of our
Saviors calling himself by the name of the good and the great Shepherd, the
Heathens understanding it, might conclude, that it must needs be the god Pan,
who was said to be the god of the Shepherds. And the great god Pan it was
indeed who was dead (taken in Christian sense) the great Shepherd of our
souls, who left those 99 above who had not erred, and came down to seek and
to save that One which had strayed, poor mankind. And from hence the silence
of the Oracles, and the lamentations of evil spirits. But the strangeness of
this History related by a Heathen Writer, has carried me a little too far.
To return to the Text, the opinion of the best Writers is, that this darkness
was not only over the land of Judea, but general, overall the earth.

The second thing we are to enquire of, is of the extent of this darkness in
respect of time: and that was from the sixth to the ninth hour, from our 12.
to 3.

It began at Noone, at that point which is the most opposite to darkness, and
lasted till our three of the clock, which time does include the chief glory,
strength, and manhood (as I may call it) of the day: For the day after three,
(like a man parting with 50.) begins to wax ancient, and from thence declines
into a weakness.

The darkness began at Noone, (as we may suppose) a little after Christ was
nayl'd upon the Cross; so that if the Spouse in the Canticles should not yet
be satisfied concerning her earnest request, when she cried out in the first
Chapter of that Song, Show me (O thou whom my soul loves, Cant. 1.
) where thou feedest, where thou lie at Noone; we were able to instruct her
here from my Text, to tell her where her beloved lay at Noone; Not only at the
Noone of the world, at the fullness of time, but also in the literal and
nearer sense, at the Noone of the day. Nor is there any harshnesse in the
phrase, to say, that Christ lay upon the Cross at Noone, For Iacere situs est
miserorum; To lie is accounted the posture of those who are miserable, and
therefore we use to say that Pauper ubique jacet; The poor man lies every
where. And let all who beheld that spectacle of Christ's hanging upon the
Cross, or all who have but any fancies to apprehend the manner of it, judge
whether the earth was able to produce a man more poor and more miserable then
he was at that time. He lay at Noone, the Cross was his bed of sorrow he lay
upon, the darkness was the Curtains drawn about him. As David says, Psalm 18.
Psalm. 18. (though in an other sense) He made darkness his secret place, and
his Pavilion round about him.

Christ was borne in the night, as we understand by the Gospel, Luke 2. And
there were Shepherds watching their Flocks by night. Yet when the Angel
delivers the tidings of his birth to the Shepherds, he does not say this
night, but, this day is borne to you a Savior. It was naturally a night, but
the birth of Christ miraculously made it a day: (and the glory of the Lord
shone about them, says the Text.) Christ dies we see here in the day, in the
mid day, but even that is turned into a Night: It was a day naturally, but the
death of our Savior made it a night miraculously. And the reason for it is
good; for it was not altogether so fitting, that the earth should have worn
one and the same Garment, both at the Birth and Funeral of her Lord. He was
borne in the night, and that becomes day, he dyed in the day, and that becomes
night: See how Christ both in his Nativity and Passion, manifests himself to
be the God of Nature, who to show her allegiance to her Lord and Master, quite
inverts her ordinary course, and does not wait upon him in that livery which
pleases her best; but in that which he commands, and is the most agreeable to
his fortunes. So that as the Disciples cried out in an admiration, when he
quieted the Storms and Tempests, Who is this whom the wind and the Sea
obeys? So may we say here, Who is this whom the Night and the Day obeys?

It began at the sixth, and lasted till the ninth: so that the whole compass
or time of the darkness was three of our ordinary hours. I might here observe
a mystery in the number of 3, being the first perfect number, that number
which (as Geometricians say) does make the first figure, the number which
Aquinas calls Numerus omnis rei, the number of every thing, and certainly he
had that hinte from Aristotle, in his first book de Caelo. Omne totum (says
he) in tribus ponimus. To every whole and perfect thing is required the number
of 3. And why may not we say, that as there went three days over his death,
like three witnesses to bear record of the truth of his death; so there went
three hours of darkness over his Passion; to bear witness of the Truth of
his Passion. The complete number of 3 went over his sufferings, to manifest to
the world that now his sufferings were whole, perfect, and complete; and
therefore no sooner are the three hours of darkness over, but presently he
cries Consummatum est, it is finished, and gave up the ghost. But we have been
too long in searching out the cause of this darkness, which was the third
thing I propounded to be inquired for. The nearest cause (I told ye) was the
darkning of the Sun. But alas, this will not satisfy us. For as the Prophet
David in the 114. Psalm (which is appointed by the Church to be read upon
Easter day) does not content himself with saying, The Sea saw it and fled,
Jordan was driven back: But he adds also the question, and says, What aylest
thou O Sea that thou fieddest? and thou Jordan that thou was driven back? So
neither must we think it enough to say the Sun was darkened, and go no
further; but we must Causam causae investigare, Find out the supreme cause
of that subordinate cause, and say, What aylest thou (O Sun) that thou wast
darkened, and thou, Light, that thou wast driven back? The Sun was darkened we
confess, but what was it that darkened the Sun? This certainly will trouble
us.

There are but three things (supposing that we are Sub dio et in sterili
prospectu, Under the open Heaven, and withal have our eyes perfect) which can
any ways take from us the sight of the Sun.

First, The interposition of Vapors or Clouds.

Secondly, The interposition of the Earth.

Thirdly, The interposition of the Moon.

As for Clouds, it is not likely that they should cause this darkness; For
Saint Luke (here) after he has made mention of the darkness which was in the
air (the place of Clouds and Vapors) he presently adds, and the Sun was
darkened, making this the reason of the other darkness below, so that we may
very safely believe, that the Sun was not darkened only to us, but even in it
self too. He who says unto the proud billows of the Sea, Be ye still, and
thus far ye shall go and no farther; He is also able to say unto the
Sun, Thou shall not shine. He who at the beginning was able to say, Let
there be light, and there was light, says now, Let there be darkness, and it
was so.

It could not be the interposition of the Earth, for whenever that is
interposed, it makes it night, (being nothing else but the shadow of the
Earth, which is betwixt our eyes and the Sun) but this was at noonday, when
the Sun was in his height, over the heads of the people of Jerusalem.

Nor yet was it possible it should be the interposing of the Moon, for the
Sun never suffers an Eclipse by the dark body of the Moon, but only when
the Sun and Moon are in a conjunction: but now they were in opposition, the
Moon was at the full, or but newly past it, 180. degrees distant from the
Sun. Which is easily proved, for the Paschall Lamb was not (by Gods command)
to be slain nisi Luna quatuordecima, but upon the foureteenth day of the
Moon, Exodus 12. and Levit. 23. and just the night before he was crucified did
Christ eat the Passover with his Disciples, so that this must needs be the
fifteenth day of the Moon wherein he suffered; quando solennitai erat
Azimorum, the first day of unleavened bread, which was the great and chief day
of the Passover, howsoever the Evangelist St. Matthew. 26.17. may seem to make
the foureteenth day the first day of unleavened bread: Mat. 26.17
Now the first day of the Feast of unleavened bread the Disciples came to
Jesus, saying unto him, Where will thou that we prepare for thee to eat the
Passover? which must be understood according to their Civil Account, their
natural day (according to that computation) beginning at Sunrising, and
ending with the rising of the next Sun, and in this regard the foureteenth
day might be called the first of unleavened bread, because it comprehended in
it part of the first day of unleavened bread, which day (in their religious
account) began at the Sunne-setting, and ended at the setting of the next.

We have not yet found out the Cause of this darkness. What should the Night
make here, usurping the dominion of the Day? It is not such a hard question to
answer. I will give it ye in three words. Christ, the scond Person in the
sacred Trinity, united to our humane nature, the wisdom of the Father, by
whom the worlds were made; the Lamb without spot, who was free from all sin,
He hangs upon the Tree in torments, to satisfy for the sins of the world, a
spectacle to men and Angels; All his friends and kinsfolks stand a far off,
and they who pass by, in derision wagge their heads at him. And can we suppose
that the Sun can look upon such a sight as this, and not pluck back his
head again, as confounded with the spectacle? Or is it possible that the
Light, which was Gods first Creature, his eldest son in the Creation, should
endure that pitiful object and not fly? Alas! it stood and gazed upon him in
that misery as long as it could, but being able no longer to look upon his
tortured Lord, it resigned his Empire to the Night, and fled into the lower
world. Or else, as at his Birth, the Day (whose proper place was then the lower
Hemispheare, for he was borne in the night) did come round from below to view
him as he lay in the Cradle, so does the Night now steal about from the
Antipodes to have a sight of him, as he hangs upon the Cross: Peradventure
the sons of darkness, (wicked Spirits and men, who were the instruments to
procure his death) had by this time with great triumph proclaimed the news of
his crucify^ng in the gloomy Court of their mother Night, and she not easily
crediting that which she much desired, lifts up her drowsy head to see if the
report were true: and true she finds it; and therefore as delighted and
pleased with the sight, she forgets her self it seems, and stands full three
hours together to look upon him. Or else is the Night employed here upon an
Embassage by the Moon, (who is ordinarily called the Queen of the Night) and
by her train of Attendants, the Stars, to see what the matter was above, that
the Sun denied them that tribute of influence and light which he was
accustomed to pay them? For we must needs suppose that the Sun was not the
only sufferer here; but also the Moon and the Stars below (where it was
naturally a night) did partake of the darkness too. As when some great Peer
falls by Treason, his whole blood, all his children and kindred are tainted,
and his whole family usually suffers in his fall. For the Moon and Stars
borrowing their light from the Sun, when the Sun is darkened must need, be
dark themselves too: so that at this time there was a second night invaded
even the night it self. And this is an other Argument to prove the
Universality of the darkness. It was dark in Ierusalems Horizon (which is
called, umbilicus terrae, the Navell or the middle of the Earth) because the
Sun to them, to the Inhabitants was darkened; and it was dark, a tergo terrae,
in the other half, in the back parts of the Earth, because the Sun was
darkened not only to the Inhabitants, (for had he remained in his glory at
this time, he would have given primarily at the first hand, no light to them,
because the Earth was interposed betwixt their sight and it) but also to the
Moon and Stars, all whose light which they seem many times to be so
liberal of, as if it were their own peculiar, is nothing else but the
reflection of his beams.

And there may be three reasons given of this darkning of the Sun.

First, That it might upbraid the hard-heartednesse of the Jews and Soldiers
who crucified him, seeing that nature even in her insensible, parts did suffer
with Christ; and beget a compassion and fellow-feeling of his miseries even in
stony hearts, as we see it did in the Centurion, a Soldier, a man acquainted
with cruelties, blood, and massacres, a generation of people which are not
easily moved to pity by funerals or slaughters: and yet this man in the next
verse but one following my Text seeing what was done, is forced to give glory
to God, and say, of a surety this man was just. And if it wrought so upon this
Captain, this Roman spirit, O how did it work upon the tender heart of the
blessed Virgin, the mother of our Savior? upon John the beloved Disciple of
the Lord? and upon all those women who followed him from Galilee, and stood
afar off, looking upon him as well as the obscurity would give them leave? It
wrought so bitterly with them, that it is the note of an Expositor; That not
one of them who were present (I mean compassionatly present) at this sight,
did after suffer Martyrdom. Adeo enim vehemens (says he) fait ille crucis
gladius, adeoque ptarum animarum teneritudnem transverberavit, ut fuerit illis
pro Martyrio computatum: So vehement sharp and bitter was that fight unto
their wounded eyes, and (like a sword dividing the marrow and the bone) did so
pierce through their softened hearts, that it excused them from any
after-Martyrdome, the Lord thought that enough for them. They were even
Martyrs, in beholding the Martyrdom of Christ.

Secondly, That the taking away of this outward light might be a sign of the
subtraction of the true light out of the hearts of the Jewish Nation, which was
the effect of that unanimous voice amongst them; His blood be upon us and upon
our children. For we see that there has been a darkness ever since over the
hearts and understandings of that people, even unto this hour, denying Christ
to be come in the flesh.

Thirdly, That the naked body of Christ, (dying in that accursed manner,
exposed to the contempt and scorn of all who pass by) might not be looked
upon with joy by his wicked Tormentors and blasphemours, therefore is this
darkness sent to strike a terror into their souls, even when they supposed
to make themselves merry with the sight.

We have seen how Nature was affected at his death, for, for the state of his
Funeral, she hung Heaven and Earth with blacks: We are now to see how the
God of Nature takes the matter, Et certe indignissime: The veyle of the Temple
was rent through the midst -- But we must expect the gracious return of an
other Good. Friday for this discourse. *

THE SECOND SERMON, UPON The Resurrection of our Blessed SAVIOVR: Preached on
EASTER Day.
PSALM. 114. VER. 6. What aile ye, O ye Mountains, that ye skip like Rams,
and ye little Hills like young Sheep?


THis whole Psalm (which by the Institution of the Church, is appointed as
part of the Even-song for this blessed day of the resurrection of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ) is in the nearest and literal sense, meant of the
freedom of the children of Israel from the captivity Egyptian, when the Lord
by a mighty and stretched out arm redeemed them from the cruelty of Pharaoh,
freed their weary hands from making the bricks, their wearied feet from
traveling for straw, which was denied them (we know) and yet the number of
their bricks reserved. And this is as plain as may be, if we read the
beginning of the Psalm ver. 1. When Israel came out of Egypt, and the house of
Jacob from among the strange people. 2 Judah was his Sanctuary, and Israel his
dominion. 3 The Sea saw that and fled, Jordan was driven back. 4 The Mountains
skipped like rams, and the little H^lls like young sheep. And from thence
he proceeds unto the Question. What aileth thee, O thou Sea, that thou
fleddest, etc.

And the Psalmist in the next verse seems to render an Answer to his own
Question. For although our English Translations give it in the Imperative Mood,
and say, Tremble thou earth at the presence of the Lord, yet the best
Translations amongst the Latins, render it, The earth was moved, in the
Indicative Mood, which positively sets down a Thing or done or not done. A
facie Domini mota est terra, a facie Dei Jacob.

The old Psalter, St. Augustine, and Prosper, read it, Commotae, which
signifies motus cum motu, a motion with a motion, (i.) violently, the Earth was
violently or exceedingly moved. St. Jerome reads it contremiscit, the Earth
trembled. And the reason of this diversity of Moods amongst Translators I do
conceive to be, the diverse apprehending of the letter Iod in the Hebrew word,
for as they know who are grown to any proficiencie in the sacred Tongue, the
word Chuli does properly command, Tremble thou, or be thou moved, or be thou
moved in grief: yet by reason that the letter Iod is sometimes added to a word
merely for Ornament, and the greater grace of the sound, therefore Saint
Jerome, Saint Augustine, Prosper and others have rather chose the Indicative
mood, and say. The Earth was moved, or did tremble. And so Lorinus the
Jesuit. Quae vox (says he) proprie refert forma^ imperativi modi, interdum
tamen litera Jod additur ornatus tantum causa.

Genebrardus will have this motion of the Earth here to be a Metaphor, taken or
borrowed from the pains of a Woman while she is in Travail, Quae sese agitat
prae dolor. And of this mind is Aquila, who therefore translates the Hebrew
word Chul (...), Parturivit, the Earth was in travail, or did bring forth with
grief. And to countenance this Exposition, that place of the Prophet Habacuck
is very pregnant, 3.10. Viderunt te et doluerunt montes, The mountains saw
thee, and they were in pain or fear. Some of our English reads it, The
mountains saw thee, and they trembled; and the difference is not great, for in
the Latin it is presented to us in the inward cause, or perturbation, (which
was pain or fear) and in the English according to the outward expression or
effect of that fear, which is trembling.

But being that the slaverie of Israel in Egypt, under the cruel Taskmasters,
was but a type of the servitude of man under sin and the devil; and the
freedom of them from that bondage, did but typifie out unto us our deliverance
from the bondage of Sin, Hell, and the Grave; which work as upon this day
was fully perfected, Christ having overcome Death, which was the last of his
Enemies he had to subdue; this Text may be (nay it is) understood also in a
sense farther off, and Spiritual, lof the resurrection of our Savior, when as
upon this day, having broke the bonds of death in sunder (as Samson the seven
green cords wherewith the Philistimes bound him) He triumphed over the Grave.

And this second and allegorical sense, is either in the Figure, or in the
mystery.

In the Figure, and it is a kind of Prosopopaeia, attributing the actions of
joy, and leaping unto the mountains and hills, which are only proper to men
and other living creatures, and least of all to the ponderous mountains. This
Figure is very frequent in holy Scripture, and not only there, but also among
the Heathen Poets, and Orators. So Tully in his Oration Pro Marcello. Ipsi
Parietes curiae Caesari gratias agere gestiunt, The very walls (says he) of
the Senate House are ambitious to give thanks to Caesar. And Virgil in his 5.
Eclog: Ipsi laetitia voces ad sydera jactant
Intonsi montes --
The unshorne Mountains themselves do lift up their voices in joy: and if so,
then the aim of David in this Scripture, is to set out unto us the greatness of
that joy which the resurrection of our Savior did beget in the world, which
made the weighty mountains forget their nature, and for joy to skip about like
Rams: for I am not of their opinion who would understand this motion of the
hills in tristiorem partem, to be ob terrorem faciei domini, for the fear and
terror of the presence of God, although they be no mean Authors, such as
Cajetane, Iansenius, Genebrardus, Peregrinus, Herus, Philippus de Ports,
Bellarmine; but I do rather incline unto that other sentence of Lorinus and
others, who will have the cause to be nova laetitiae voluptas, and of this
opinion are many, if not the whole current of the Greek Authors, who interpret
it to be (...), an hyperbole or excess of joy: and to countenance this, I have
no less witnesses then the testimony of the word exultandi in the Latin, then
the word gestiendi in the Roman Psalter, Saint Augustine, and Prosper; the
word subsiliendi in St. Ieromes translation. Nor do I stay here, but I am also
able to produce the testimony of the Original it self, and the Greek, Rakad
and (...) (as my Author tells me) never signifying any thing else, qua^
saltare, subsilire, exilire prae laetitia, but to skip or leap about for joy.
And so here, exultaverunt montes. The mountains did leap out of themselves
(as it were) for joy, as the word signifies.

In the mystery; and then it signifies the joy of Angels and men, covered
under the names of Mountains and Rams, Hills, and young Sheep. -- But give me
leave to look back a little upon the literal meaning of the Text, as it points
at the coming of Israel from Egypt.

The Opinions are diverse, I will but touch them.

Titelman by these Mountains and Hills, would feign understand those rocks,
uneven places and precipices, which while the red Sea was in his natural
course, were covered by the waters; but when the Children of Israel were in
their passage through it, by the retiring of the waves, began to lift up their
heads and appear to the people.

Others understand it verbally of the Mount Sinai, which was mightily shaken at
the presence of the Lord when the Law was given, that Mountain being so big,
that the greater parts of it might be called so many several Mountains.

Agellius would understand this figuratively, of the neighboring Kings and
Princes, who at the report of this new and strange passage of the Hebrews
through the Sea, and the drowning of the Egyptians, were possessed with trembling
and amazement, as Moses sings in the 15 of Exodus 15. Then the Dukes of Edom
shall be afraid, and trembling shall come upon the great men of Moab.

Rabbi Isaac, and some other of the Hebrew Writers affirm this motion of the
Mountains to be real and literal, and understand it of Mount Sinai (with the
former opinion) but so as that this Mountain should turn and spread it self
over the Children of Israel like a Canopy, or cloth of state, -- but this
seems to be fabulous.

Trevetus makes mention of some other of the Rabbines, who report, that when
their forefathers removed their Tents from the river Zared, and pitched on the
other side of Arnon, in their passage great multitudes of the Amorites did lie
in ambush for them in the secret places of the valley and rocks of Arnon, which
thing the Lord, (the Keeper of Israel who neither slumbers nor sleeps)
perceiving, immediately caused the rocks and hills of Arnon to fall upon them,
and so destroyed them.

Lyranus and Aiguanus would understand this leaping of the Mountains
Causaliter; The Mountains of Arnon leaped for joy (i.) they caused the hearts
of the Israelites to leap in them for joy, when at the Torrent or stream of
Arnon, which divides the Moabites and the Amorites, the Hills which were on the
other side of the bank of the river, Miraculose inclinaverunt vsque ad partem
in qua erat populus, ut libere transire possent, Did miraculously at the
command of God, incline, and bow down themselves to the people who were on the
other side of the river, becoming (as it were) a bridge for them to pass
over. And for this they quote Numb. 21.14.15. Number. 21.14.15.
Wherefore it shall be spoken in the book of the Battles of the Lord, what
thing he did in the red Sea, and in the rivers of Arnon, and at the stream of
the river which goes down unto the dwellings of Ar, and lies upon the border
of Moab. We see that the Text joins the miracle of the red Sea, and the
business of the rivers of Arnon together, and therefore (say they) there must
needs be a miracle here, as well as at the red Sea.

Others of the Jewish Writers do concur with this last opinion, concerning
the bowing down of the Mountains, to give an easy passage to the Israelites:
but they deny it to be over the rivers of Arnon, and will have it to be done in
the vallyes; and unpassable hollownesses lying betwixt the craggy rocks of
Arnon. And even there is a disagreement betwixt those who are of this opinion
too. For some of them have a great mind to have these rocks and hills after
they had bowed down themselves to fill up the valley, and make the way plain
for the passage of the people (like Izachar in the 49. of Genesis) to see that
rest was good, and therefore to lie still, and couch down under the burden.
Those rocks (say they) after they had lain down to give them way, were
pleased with their new lodging, so that there they lie still till this day. And
this place they will have to be where the mountains of the Desert of Arnon do
requiescere et inclinare Paulatim donec terminentur in Ar, do lay down their
heads as weary, rest themselves, and end almost in a Plain by the City of Ar.
But others who are for the bowing down of them, are against the lying still of
the rocks, saying, that as soon as they had bowed down themselves, and done
the business. Divina virtute ad locum suum reversos esse, By an other miracle
did retire back again to their former place, to their old hibitation, where
they still remain, unless some Earthquake has displaced them since.

Amongst these, Cajetan also stands stiff for the real motion of these
mountains, and me thinks his reason is good for it, which is drawn from the
^ontext, for we see that this motion of the hills is reckoned, and reported in
the same Story with the dividing of the red Sea, and the beating back of
Iordane. The Sea saw it and fled, Iordane was driven back the mountains
skipped like Rams etc. both which, first were realities, and therefore great
probability that this was real too. But he can by no means digest that
interpretation of the rocks of Arnon. For (says he) first here is no mention
made of rocks, but of mountains: Secondly, not of mountains bowing down and
stooping, but of mountains leaping and skipping. I will trouble ye no farther
with strange opinions: only this I Will say, if this Motion of the Mountains be
to be understood in the proper and literal sense (as without any inconvenience
it very well may) then I have reason (with a good approved Author) to think
that it is the likeliest to be meant of Mount Sinai, which having diverse heads
or tops within the vast compass of it, might be called so many several
mountains. And this was done when the Lord from thence delivered the Law to
the People, for there we read in the 20. of Exodus 18. And all the Mount
trembled exceedingly. Exodus 20.18.
Which trembling of that Mountain I do apprehend, was not only caused by
terror and fear at the presence of the Lord but also that joy had a hand in
causing that action too. Joy and fear met together in the word reverence, and
so the mountain trembled. And thus we are able to bring this trembling of the
mountain, into the compass of the word in our Text, Exultaverunt montes, the
mountains leapt for joy, but their leaping proceeded from such a joy, as was
accompanied with a reverent fear, there was trembling mixed with their joy.

We come now to the second Interpretation, which is a great deal higher, and
quite removed from the letter, as this leaping and skipping of the mountains
and hills points at the joy which was at the resurrection of Christ.

And I told ye (as ye may remember) that it was either in the the Figure, or
in the mystery.

In the Figure, which is a Prosopopaeta, which does ascribe the actions of
living creatures to creatures insensible. Psalm. 98 8.
So in the 98. Psalm. 8. Let the stouds clap their hands, and let the
mountains rejoice together. Psalm 96.^. Let the field be joyful and all that
is in it, let all the Trees of the Wood rejoice. So that we need not, to make
this place good, be driven to that strange opinion which some attribute to
Origin, who ascribed a soul and sense to Mountains, Woods, Trees, and other
inanimate creatures.

In the mystery, and so it does depicture out unto us the joy of Angels and
men. But for our easier passage through the words, we will observe in the Text
these things.

Quid? What it is they do. They leap or ship.

Qui? Who they be that leap? The Mountains and the Hills.

Quomodo? After what manner? like Rams and young Sheep.

Quare? The cause or reason of this leaping. What ayle ye O ye mountains?
And that is expressed in the next verse, A facie domini m^ta est terra. a facie
dei Jacob. The Earth was moved at the face or presence of the Lord, It was the
face or presence of the Lord which caused this leaping. But I shall be
constrained for brevities sake, to join the Quid? the Qui? and the Quomodo
together, the action, the subject, and the manner of the action.

Richardus de Sancto Victore and others, who are for the mystical sense of
this Scripture, by the rams and lambs, will understand two Hierarchies of
the Angels, containing six of the Orders of the nine, so that (according to
him) the rams signify the first Hierarchy, the Seraphius, the Cherubin, the
Throni: the young sheep the last; Powers, Archangels, and Angels. (Sic parvis
componere magna --) By the Mountains and the Hills, must be meant (says he)
Contemplative and speculative men, and by the plain fields (which are implied
here) men of Action, Qui hujus vitae plana non deserunt, dum terrenis actibus
inserviunt, and in camporum morem ad hujus vitae usum in terrenis lucris quasi
quosdam terrae fructus ferunt: Who by reason of their secular employments are
said never to forsake the Plains of the Earth: but as the fertile fields, to
bring forth fruit for the use and service of man. Whereas the Contemplative man
(who is compared unto the Mountain) is commonly barren to the Earth, brings no
fruit to the Common wealth wherein he lives, except he joins action to his
Contemplation, but yet (like the Mountain) he is a great deal nearer heaven,
has a nearer access and acquaintance with the Lord, and is more fruitful to
heaven and God, although the fields (active men) be more fruitful to the
earth and man.

The leaping of the souls of these Contemplative and speculative men (meant by
the mountains and hills) is a metaphor borrowed from a bodily action. Now we
know that to leap corporally is totum corpus a terra suspendere: to take the
whole body, and for a while to remove it from the touch of the Earth, so that
for a little space it hangs (as it were) in the air. Et quid est aliud, (says
one) saltus spiritualis quam spiritum and totum quod spiritus est a terrenis
altenare? and what else is it to leap in the spirit, but to remove the spirit
and the soul from all earthly cogitations, and to climb up to the
contemplation of things invisible.

The mind of man while it has before its eyes incorporeall substances,
(whether of Angels, or the souls of men) and discourses within it self about
the nature of them, is said, ad se vel ad sua redire, and per planum ire, to
return to it self, it is then in its own proper place, and goes in a plain
course without either rises or falls, because the nature of that of which he
discourses is in plain or in rank with himself: but when ever he fixes a
contemplative eye upon God, who is the creating Nature of all things, and
suffers his soul to be busy upon meditation of his power, his excellence, his
wisdom, his eternity, his mercy, his justice, then is the mind said, quasi
dato saltu supra semetipsam ire, as by a leap given to go above it self. And
these leapers are either the Mountains or the Hills; or Contemplative (as I
told ye) or speculative men. They are called Contemplative quibus datum facie
ad faciem videre, to whom it is given to see God face to face, whose knowledge
is not clouded in riddles, aenigmas, in shadows, types, and allegories: but
behold the glory of God in nuda sua simplicitate. The speculative are they qui
per speculum in aenigmate vident, who see God and his power, and his wisdom,
and his greatness as it were by reflection, presented in a glass, which is
the Creator of the whole world, and the preservation and government of it. --
But here is mention made of three things in that part of the Text which is the
Copy or Original, of rams, of sheep, and of lambs, Sicut aerietes, and
sicut agni ovium, like rams, and like the lambs of the sheep: and therefore
in the other part of the Text which is the Transcript, we are to find three
things too, to poise in the comparison against the three other, and they I told
ye were the mountains, the hills, and the plain or even fields. (for
although they be not mentioned, yet they are implied) But here will arise a
doubt, seeing that in this comparison the rams and the mountains do hold the
highest place, the sheep and the hills the second, the lambs and the plains
the lowest degree of all: Why then, being that the mountains are compared to
rams, are not the hills compared rather to the sheep (which were to observe
the true order in the comparison) then to the lambs?

We answer, that there is a great and excellent reason for this.

The mountains and the rams, contemplative men, and Angels of the first
Hierarchy are compared together, to show that there is a similitude betwixt the
leapes of the spirit of man, and the leapes of those sublime and intellectual
Essenses: but for fear lest any man should think that this might be
comparatio ad gradum, a comparison of equality, and from hence be bold to
affirm, that the first order of men (contemplatives) does ex pari respondere
primo gradui Angelorum, directly equal the first Hierarchy of Angels, the
second order of men (which is the speculatives) the second Hierarchy, and the
third order of men (which are the men of Action and secular employment) the
third Hierarchy: therefore the Pen of David here (which was certainly guided
by the holy Spirit) does rather choose to in^ringe the order and method of the
comparison, and compares the Hills which are the second in order amongst men,
unto the lambs, which are the third and last amongst the Angels. And the same
answer gives Richardus, although in other words: Quod ergo dictum non est
tacuit Propheta (says he) pro removenda suspicione aequalitatis, ut and id
quod dictum, intelligatur pro ratione similitudinis.

But before we can learn truly after what manner the mountains and the hills
do leap, we must first look upon the pattern after which they do leap.

By those forenamed living creatures (I told ye) we might in a mystical
sense understand the three Hierarchies of Angels. The first three orders,
Seraphim, Cherubin, Throni, (which are likened unto the mountains) are they
which are immediately joined to God, who do inlighten all the inferior
orders, but do receive no illumination from any save from God. The three
second orders (which here lie in method in the similitude, although not
observed by the Psalmist, against the Hills) are Dominations, Virtues, and
Principalities, and these do both receive illumination from the higher orders,
and give to the inferior. The three last orders are Powers, Archangels, and
Angels, and these receive light or knowledge from the superior Hierarchies,
but have no orders below them to whom to communicate any illumination. Now for
every one of these orders to leap in his kind, is supra semetipsos ire, to
rise up in a Contemplation unto such things as are above their own nature. For
the first orders therefore to read the greatness, the wisdom and providence
of God in any of the inferior orders, or in subjecta creatura, in the Fabric
of the world, hoe descendere potius quam saltus dare, this is rather to go
down then to leap: To view the greatness and majesty of God in themselves,
in looking into their own pure nature, hoc illorum est per planum ire, this is
their plain way, they neither rise nor fall in doing thus. But they are said
to leap when they ascend into a simple and naked Contemplation of the Power,
the Wisdom, the Majesty of God as he is in himself, and so behold with
admiration that Fountain of beauty, of goodness, of order, of proportion. The
second and third Hierarchies they are only said to leap when they do rise in
a speculation into the orders above them, and from thence are furnished with
matter of admiration concerning the Divine power, and wisdom. For although it
be granted, that these inferior orders have also their simple contemplations,
do behold the face of God too, enjoy the beatificall vision as well as the
other; yet this may be called, illorum volatus potius quam tripudium, rather
their flight then their leaping: because we know he that leapes does not
multum elongere se a stationis suae loco, removes not himself far from the
place he was in before: which we find contrary in a flight, when the thing
that flies works it self (many times) into a vast distance. Therefore because
those orders of Angels which are here set out unto us by the name of rams in
their leapes, do never use but a simple Contemplation, and the other inferior
orders never but a speculation, most fitly has the Psalmist laid his
comparison together; Montes exultaverunt ut arietes, and colles sicut agni
ovium. For the mountains then to skip like rams is, when Contemplative men
in a kind of sacred ecstasy and overflowing of the soul, do climb up into
pure notions of the Deity, abstracted from speculations; do behold the face of
God not in the glass of the creature, but as he is in himself, all splendour,
all glory, all brightness, all goodness. And for the hills to skip like
lambs, is when speculative men do climb up into an admiration of God, by
beholding the works of his hand^, as St. Paul to the Romans 1.20. For the
invisible things of him, that is, his eternal power and Godhead, are seen in
the creation of the world, being considered in his works. Pensemus ergo, etc.
Let us therefore conceive (if we be able) what a mighty prerogative and grace
it is for our humane and frail natures, to be likened in the motions of our
minds unto the glorious Angels: And let us therefore praise the GOD of Angels
and men, who has made us a little lower then the Angels, to crown us with
glory and worship. O blessed soul and truly happy, who can take such leapes
as these; who leaving the dull senses asleep, can secretly steal from the
body, and mount up in a moment unto the familiarity of Angels, be partakers of
their joys, be present at their spiritual delicates, and with them leap from
one degree of knowledge and illumination to another, and with infinite delight
and admiration still be knowing of that immensity which can never be fully
known.

Lord let my soul ever leap after this manner, and I shall not envy all the
flattering courtship that the world can show me. But I make haste to the Quare,
the cause of this leaping: What aile ye, O ye mountains, etc. read but the
next verse, and the Question is answered, A facie Domini mota est terra (for so
good Translations as I told ye, read it) The earth was moved at the Face of
the Lord.

Hugo set down four several faces of Christ.

Fac^m,

1 Viventis: The face of Christ living, or the face of his Poverty. And this
face did he show in his Nativity, and after, in his whole life, being made
poor for our sakes, so that he had not so much as whereon to lay his head.

2 Morientis: The face of Christ dying, or the face of his Grief. And this
face did he show us upon the Cross, which seemed to becken to all Passengers,
and to say in the Prophet Ieremies words, Lam. 1.12. Have ye no regard all ye
that pass by this way? behold and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my
sorrow.

3 Iudicantis: The face of Christ Judging, or the face of his Anger. And this
face will he show to the wicked ones in the day of judgment.

4 Regnantis: The face of Christ reigning, or the face of his Glory and
pleasure. And this face will he only show to the Saints in the Kingdom of
Heaven.

But I must make bold in the midst of these four, to insert one face more of
Christ's, which Hugo Cardinalis did not think of, and that is

Facies resurgentis: The face of Christ arising from the dead, subduing the
grave, and leading Captivity captive. And this is the face of Christ meant
here, at the sight of which the Earth was moved. The Mountains skipped, etc.
And what thing is there so heavy, that could sit still and behold this face? O
let not us then be more insensible then the Mountains and Hills to which we
are compared: for we must know that the strength of the comparison does not lie
in the ponderousness of the Mountains: No, we ought not to imitate them in
this: but it does consist in the height, in their neernesse to heaven, and
their distance from the common roades of men. Lift up your heads therefore, O
ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory
will come in.

First then, O ye mountains of the earth, who do enjoy a vicinity and kind
of familiarity with God and heaven; Ye men of contemplation, who by the
advantage of your height, have a far clearer and nearer prospect of God, and of
the wonders that are in him, then they who are upon the little Hills and
Plains of the earth below; O lift up your heads on high in a thankful
acknowledgement and admiration of the wisdom, the power, the mercy of our
God, who sent his only Son in whom he was well pleased into the world, that
he by his poverty, his ignominy, his obedience, his death, might make an
atonement for our sins. And this is the day wherein that gracious work was
perfectly finished; this is the day wherein our Savior Christ having entered
into the house of that strong man, Death, and bound him, like a Giant refreshed
with wine, issued out of the Grave in triumph. Or once, This is the day which
the Lord has made, let us rejoice and be glad in it. For be sure that the Lord
looks for greater, higher, and more frequent leapes from you, for purer and
more exalted notions approaching near unto the contemplation of Angels, then
he does from the Hills and Plains: For to whom much is given, of him shall
much be required. So that as Saint Paul said of himself concerning preaching
of the Gospel, Woe is me if I preach not the Gospel: so may I say of my self,
and of all our whole Tribe the Tribe of Levi with me, of all the Priests of the
Lord, the Sons of the Prophets, who are as it were a portion set apart for
God himself, and like the mountains nearer heaven, are, or at the least
should be farther removed from the plains of the earth, worldly cares and
employments, to the end that being freed from these outward destractions and
disturbances, we should the more intend the honor of God, and the good of his
people. Woe he unto us if we above other men do not leap for joy, do not
sing songs of deliverance unto the God of our redemption.

In the next place, O ye Hills praise ye the Lord. It Is David's counsel,
Psalm 148. Ye speculative men, who are not yet grown up to the altitude of
mountains, ye who are not able yet to climb into a simple contemplation of
God: but do behold his wisdom and power in the Glass of the creature, in
the Creation and Government of the world: O do ye leap too; and although ye
cannot yet fetch such Masculine leapes as the Rams do, let not this
discourage ye. Here is a degree of comparison for you too, do it like the
Lambs, or the young ones of the Flock. Nor must we exempt the Fields, the
Plains of the Earth from bearing a part in this joy, the men of action and
secular business, they must come in for their share too: and although they
cannot leap or skip like the mountains or the hills, yet we will find out an
employment for them too. Whilst the mountains and the hills dance before the
presence of the Lord, and trace it in comely figures together, the fruitful
vallyes shall sing unto them as they pass, and this I am sure they are able to
do: For David in one of his Psalms brings them in in the very same action,
and makes the moving cause of it to be only the fruitfulness of the Earth.
The vallyes (says he) stand so thick with corn, that they do laugh and sing.
But we have a greater cause then the fruitfulness of the Earth to move us:
the fruitfulness of heaven is fallen upon us, and the Dayspring from on high
has visited us. He whom the other day we left hanging upon the Cross, the
scorn and laughter of Passengers, and has lain as imprisoned in the house of
death for three days and three nights, has now broken from the prison of the
Grave, and to our endless comfort and eternal Salvation, loosed and shaken
off the bands of death, not only for himself, over whom death shall have no
more dominion, but also for us too: For now since his conquest, Death has lost
his strength, nor shall the Grave be able now to hold any of us hereafter. The
force of the Prison wall is decayed, and through the breach which his blessed
Resurrection has made therein, shall we find a way unto eternity of living.

Let us therefore who are the Vallyes and Plains of the Earth, though we are
not able to leap and skip after the manner of the mountains and hills, who
have higher and purer revelations then our selves, although we cannot sing
unto the honor of our Savior in so heavenly a strain, or in so well penned
Anthemes as they; yet let us not fail to do our endeavors, though it be in
a more homely Music, for the Lord does not despise the Music even of an oaten
reed tuned to his Praise, and he can discover a sweetness, even in the harsh
note of a sigh or a groan which is pointed to him.

Let us therefore for this present join our selves in Chorus with old Zachary,
Luke 1. and say, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and
redeemed his people. Amen.

THE THIRD SERMON, PREACHED Upon Saint Peter's Day.
JOHN 21. VER. 17. He said unto him the third time, Simon the son of Jona,
love thou me? and Peter was sorry because he said unto him the third time,
love thou me? and said unto him: Lord thou know all things, thou know
that I love thee. Jesus said unto him, Feed my Sheep.


Upon the day dedicated to the memory of St. Peter, we have made choice of a
Text wherein we find St. Peter sorrowful: and indeed we should do wrong to
the holy Apostle, if we should at all remember him without his sorrow. Never
fear, that sorrow for sin will ever spoil the face of a good Christian:
it is the comeliest thing about him, and he does St. Peter the most honor who
pictures him weeping. Alas! to call to mind only the sins and imperfections
of this holy man, only to mention how shamefully he denied his Master, and to
leave out his bitter weeping, and his repentance (which is the best part of the
story) were to bring him upon the stage only to disgrace him; but that man
does St. Peter right, who remembers his repentance as well as his sin.

We have in this Scripture then these three things.

1. Peter's sorrow. He was sorry, says the Text,

Secondly, The cause of his sorrow. And that is (we see) our Saviors saying
unto him the third time, love thou me?

Thirdly, The effect of St. Peter's sorrow. And this is double; Nearer, or,
farther off.

The effect which I call the nearer, is St. Peter's answer. Lord thou know
all things, thou know that I love thee.

The effect of his sorrow which I call the farther off, is the reply of Christ
unto Peter's answer. Jesus said unto him, Feed my Sheep.

1. Peter was sorry.

What Peter might this be? That Peter who in the Gospel read for this day, by
reason of that clear Confession, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God,
was pronounced blessed by the mouth of Christ? That Peter to whom were given
the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven, so that whatsoever he binds on earth,
shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever he looses on earth, shall be loosed in
heaven? Yes, Even the very same Peter, even the very same Simon the son of
Jonas, whom our Savior himself in that 16. of St. Matthew, proclaimed blessed.
He is sorrowful.

First, Peter the blessed is sorrowful. Certainly then it is not altogether
such an accursed and hateful thing, to endure affliction and troubles here
upon earth, as it is supposed it is. Be comforted then thou who art in misery,
art persecuted or afflicted, for thou see that Saint Peter here, who was in
the opinion of no less then Christ, a blessed man, he was in sorrow, he was
grieved: which did not a whit diminish his blessedness, but rather increase it.

Secondly, Peter the holy is sorrowful. O then it is in vain to look for
true felicity here on earth. The greatest Saints of God (we see) are not
without their rainie days and tempests: a perpetual calm is only to be
found in heaven. Nay Peter who to his inward gifts and graces of the spirit,
had also an outward competency of corporal goods; he was full, he wanted
nothing, he was newly risen from a Feast, he enjoyed the company of his
friends, and his companions were round about him (no small blessing.) Nay, he
had the bodily presence of Christ himself. Nor was he furnished only for the
present, but he had also provision for many days, no less then a Stock of an
hundred fifty and three great fishes for hereafter; so that he might have said
with the rich Fool in the Gospel, Soul take thy rest, thou have goods enough
laid up for thee. No, all this cannot shut grief out of the heart of Saint
Peter. Peter for all this was sorry. Let us learn therefore from hence to know
that true joy (which is without any mixture of grief) is not to be found in
any earthly good whatsoever: not in thy riches, not in thy dainties, not in
thine honors, not in the multitude and greatness of thy friends. No; Seek for
that in any other place, except it be in heaven, and be sure that thou shall
lose thy labor.

2 But why is Peter sorry? because his Master asks him whether he loves him or
no? What could there be in this which could grieve Saint Peter? One would have
thought that this should rather have made him joyful, to hear his Lord, and
the Lord of the whole world, to talk so familiarly with him? to take such
particular notice of him, and of his love? No, this is not all. For we find
our Savior saying the very same words unto him twice before, and yet he was
not a whit moved at it then: but now he says unto him the third time: love
thou me? As if some secret influence had been wrapped up in those words, and so
convay'd into his soul, ye may discern a sudden alteration in the man.
What should the meaning of this be? Shall we say that there is any Magic or
Witchcraft in the number of three? We must not say it. But this we may say. A
hidden virtue, or power there was in those words of our Savior repeated thrice
unto him. Alas! at the first and second speaking of them, Peter did not know
the meaning of our Savior: but no sooner does he come upon him with that
question the third time, but then he begins to recollect himself, and verily
believe that there is something in it more then ordinary. As if Peter had
dialogued thus with himself. What should this mean that my Lord and Master
does so often repeat these words to me? Love thou me? love thou me?
love thou me? Would not this once named have served the turn? Is it
possible that Christ can affect empty repetitions, which are like clouds
without water? Certainly, all his words are ponderous; nor does a syllable fall
from his blessed lips, but what is full of meaning and mystery. No less then
thrice together, love thou me?

O my tormented conscience! I have it. One deep calls upon another, because of
the noise of the water pipes. Now our Apostle begins to dive a little into the
mystery of the number 3. and thinks with himself what he can call to mind
within the compass or intimation of that number which may concern himself.
And sure he shall not need to be long in meditation about it. If he chance to
be forgetful, we will bring the Cock again to waken his memory, and that
shall crow but once, to tell him that he has denied his Master thrice. O, it
was this which touched him to the quick; his mind presently upon Christ's third
repetition, ran back to his threefold denial. Now Peter understands the
intent of his Master; but yet (sure) not all his intent, for then he would
never have grieved for the matter. He fixes only upon that part of it which
did respect the heinousness of his former sin, and called that back to his
memory: it is likely he never thought at that time upon the other part of
Christ's intention, which was the good and honor of St. Peter, that by this
threefold open confession of his Lord and Savior, he might (as much as in him
lay) expiate his threefold denial of him. This was certainly the chiefest
reason why our Savior urges this to Peter the third time, that he might give
him an occasion to redeem the honor, which he had lost before. He denied
him thrice before, and now to make amends for that, he confesses him as often.

But it runs in the Text, And Peter was sorry because he said unto him the
third time, love thou me: which implies that Peter was not so much grieved
for the sin of his denial it self, as he was at the unkindnesse (as he
supposed) of our Savior: who first seems to make it a great doubt whether
Peter loved him or no, in asking him so often. And well he might doubt of it,
(although to speak properly, Christ could not doubt of any thing, because he
knew all things) for Peter by his former denialls had given him sufficient
cause to doubt. And secondly by this threefold Question seems to upbraid Peter
with the same business that the Cock told him of before. And this is the
nature of us all, who commonly do think so well of our selves that we account
it a great disparagement to have our faith, or hope, our love, or our religion
called in question. No; let us alone, we are well, we love God, and we love
Christ, we hope for heaven, and we know all shall be well with us. To what
purpose are all these questions? With Peter we are sorry if any one asks us
whether we love Christ or no? In the next place, we are of the same nature
with St. Peter too: by any means we do not love to hear of our sins. We
do not read here, that CHRIST was any whit plain or open with Peter. He did
not tell him of his sin in a diameter, in a straight line, for we find not
a word of any denials mentioned: but only tacitly and insinuatingly, does he
by his threefold confession, bring back to his memory his threefold denial,
which he knew could not choose but do it. It is likely that the rest of the
company who were present with them at this discourse, took no notice at all of
his meaning: it was only known to Peter himself, who had a vigilant monitor
within him, his conscience, quickening his apprehension, and yet for all this,
Peter is grieved. And it was well he was but grieved: he was not angry as many
of us will be now adays, when we hear our darling sins a little touched. O
ye will hug us of the Clergy, so long as we let ye alone; so long as we do
not bring back your sins to your memory, we are quiet and honest men, so
long as we will suffer ye to go to Hell in a Horse litter, a fine easy pace,
without any rubs or molestations in your way, we shall be accounted good and
worthy men amongst ye: but let us come once to shake off that baseness of
spirit, and tell ye of the dangerous estate ye are in by reason of your
sins (as it was with Belshazzar in the 5. of Daniel, at the sight of the
handwriting on the wall) the fashion of your countenance presently is changed,
and your blood immediately is up in arms, as if ye could find in your hearts
(were it in your power) to dash that blood in the face of him who reproves ye,
although afterward your cold hearts cried out for want of it. But thus did not
St. Peter; we do not read that he was angry, because Christ put him in mind
of his past sins, we find him sorrowful indeed, Peter was sorry, but the
effect of his sorrow was excellent. That is a good sorrow which begets a
confession of Gods omniscience, and such was St. Peter's. And so we are come to
the

3 Third thing I observed in the Text. The effect of Peter's sorrow. Which is
either nearer, and is the answer of St. Peter: Lord thou know all things,
thou know that I love thee, Or else farther off, and that is Christ's reply:
Jesus said unto him, Feed my sheep.

Lord thou know all things, etc. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs
of thistles? who would ever have looked for so fair a fruit from so bitter a
tree? If this be the fruit of sorrow, Lord give us enough of that sorrow, that
we may confess thy Wisdom, thy Omnipotence. But is it not every sorrow that
will do this? No, there is a sorrow unto vanity, and there is a sorrow unto
death; from which, Lord of thy mercy deliver us: But it is the sorrow only for
our sins, which is the tree upon which that goodly fruit does grow.

I make have to the last words, which is the thing I chiefly aim at.

Jesus said unto him, Feed my sheep. If thou do love me as thou professest
thou do, express it then in feeding of my sheep.

These words are mightily tumbled and tossed up and down betwixt us and our
adversaries the Papists. For they of the Church of Rome do suppose that this
Text makes very strongly for the Popes supremacy, who is (as they boast) St.
Peter's Successor, sits in his Chair, retaining still the same authority and
jurisdiction, which Christ then gave to St. Peter.

Here be three branches in this Controversy.

1 Whether our Savior by speaking these words to St. Peter, Feed my sheep,
did conferr upon him any supreme or universal authority over the rest of the
Apostles, and over the Church militant?

2 If so, whether this Authority and Supremacy was only personal, limited
and confined to the person of St. Peter, with whom it died; or whether
successive, to all his Successors?

3 Or if both these, whether St. Peter was ever at Rome, and so the Bishops of
Rome were his Successors? Or if this be granted, whether the Popes as they are
now, may be called S. Peter's successors? because, although we grant a
personal succession, yet we deny a succession of Doctrine. The old Doctrine
that St. Peter established at Rome is much impaired and corrupted.

And to begin with the last.

That Peter was never at Rome, or at least died not in the Bishopric of Rome,
(which is a thing they contend for strongly, for otherwise they of Antioch
might also boast themselves to be St. Peter's successors, for he was Bishop
there seven years) is a point mightily controverted and the Arguments which
are brought for confirmation of the negative part (I do acknowledge) do make
Bellarmine many times (as great a Scholar as he was) to awaken his best wits
to answer them. But the narrow limits of a Sermon will not suffer me to name
them, much less to urge them, nor will we quarrel much for this: For I
confess that I am much lead by the Authority of St. Ierom in his Book of the
famous men, notwithstanding all the arguments to the contrary of Velenus,
Illyricus, Calvin, and the Centuries of the Magdeburgenses, drawn either from
Chronology, and computation of years, and reigns of Emperors; Peter being as
we find in the fifth of the Acts, present at the Council holden at Jerusalem
amongst the Apostles and Elders of the Church, concerning the abolishing of
Circumcision: which Council was holden upon the eighteenth year after Christ's
resurrection: or whether they be taken from the Scripture (which I must needs
acknowledge can be at the best but confecturall and negative, which are no
good witnesses (even in our Common Law) against a deposed affirmative;) either
from those Epistles which St. Paul wrote from Rome, as to the Galatians, the
Ephesians, the Colossians, the Phil^ppians, the Hebrews, in none of which does
St. Paul make any mention of St Peter. He says indeed in the last to the
Colossians, (which was one of those Epistles he wrote from Rome) that
Aristarchus his fellow prisoner saluted them, and Marcus sisters son to
Barnabas, and Jesus which was called Iustus, and Epaphras, but not a word of
St. Peter's saluting them. Nor yet in that Epistle of his to the Romans (which
he wrote from Corinth) does he once remember St. Peter, or desire at all to
be commended to him, as ye may see in the last to the Romans. Greet Aquila,
and Priscilla, greet Andronicus, greet Vrbanus, salute Herodian, and Rufus, and
Patrobas, and Philologus, and a great number more: but not a word of saluting
St. Peter. Now say they, it was not a likely thing, that St. Paul should
amongst all these friends of his, so much neglect and slight St. Peter, as not
to remember him at all, if he had been at Rome. I do confess, this reason
has some show of probability in it, but according to my apprehension, these
things are answered well enough by Bellarmine. The words of St. Jerome are
(Englished) these:

Simon Peter, the son of John, of the Province of Galilee, and village of
Bethsaida, brother to Andrew, and chief of the Apostles, after his being
Bishop at Antioch, and his preaching to the dispersed Jews in Pontus, Galatia,
Cappadocia, Asia, and B^thynia, in the second year of the Emperor Claudius,
went to Rome to beat down the heresy of Simon Magus, where he remained in
the Chatre of Priesthood twenty five years, until the last year of Nero, who
crucified him with his head downward toward the earth, which was it seems his
own desire, adjudging himself unworthy to die after the same manner that his
Lord and Master did. Thus far St. Jerome.

And truly, Master Calvin and the Centuries shall pardon me, for I have great
reason for many respects to believe St. Jerome before them. Neither have the
Papists got much by this grant, by yielding that Peter lived and died at Rome,
for before they can bring their Argument to any head, they have two hard
Provinces to run through, two difficult businesses to prove. The first of
which is (as I told ye when I branched the que^stion) that the authority of
St. Peter above the other Apostles is hereditary, and derived to his
Successors; and next (which will be the hardest of all) to prove that St.
Peter had any such Supremacy given him. So that although we yield that St.
Peter was Bishop of Rome, and that all the Popes have been, and are his
lawful Successors, and grant farther that these lawful successors of St.
Peter have the very same authority and supremacy derived upon them which their
Predecessor had before given him by Christ. Yet for all this they have done
nothing, for he who is heir ex toto ass, of the whole inheritance of his
father, can be but heir of his whole inheritance, he can possess no more
then his father left him. Now we deny that St. Peter had any such Supremacy
given him, and they can inherit no more Supremacy then he had to bestow upon
them.

But they will prove it (they say) out of this Text. Our Savior says here to
Saint Peter alone, and that in the presence of other of the Apostles, Feed my
Sheep. He does not say to John, Feed my Sheep, nor to Andrew, nor to Thomas,
Feed my Sheep: but only to Peter. The whole charge is laid upon him. But did
I call it a charge or burden! O no (say they) this word Feed does not only
signify a charge or burden, but it also implies a dominion and sovereignty,
and for this they run to Homer, who calls King Agame^non (...), the
Shepherd, or the Ruler of the people. But it seems they are hardly put to
it, that they are forced to run to a blind Heathen Poet, for an
interpretation of Christ's meaning. A man might suppose that Saint Augustine
should tell them a great deal better, what kind of feeding is here
understood, who upon this very Text has these words. What else is meant by
this, Love thou me? Feed my Sheep, then if Christ had said, If thou love
me, think not of feeding thy self, but of feeding my Sheep, and feed them
as my Sheep, not as thine own; so feed them, that thou may seek my
honor and profit in feeding them, and not thine own. But let us say (as we
cannot deny) that this word feed does also express a kind of rule and
government over the Sheep; yet this makes no more for Saint Peter, then for
the rest of the Apostles, to whom our Savior gives the same charge and office,
though in other words, in the 16. of St. Mark. Go into all the world, and
Preach the Gospel to every creature. And this to whom? Not to Peter only, but
to the eleven. He appeared to the eleven as they sat together (says the Text)
and said unto them, Go into all the world, etc. And do but observe what Saint
Augustine says, not only concerning this, but also of that other place, in
which they have a greater confidence then in this, in the 16. of Saint Matthew.
Wherein our Savior (upon that confession of Saint Peter, Thou art Christ the
Son of the living God) tells him, that he will give to him the keys of the
Kingdom of heaven, so that whatsoever he looses on earth, shall be loosed in
heaven, and whatsoever he binds on earth, shall be bound in heaven. O the
Popes have a great mind to be the only heirs to Saint Peter of these words,
but they are not so hasty to lay any claim to that other speech of our
Saviors to Peter following in the same Chapter, Get thee behind me Satan,
because thou understandest not the things that be of God, but the things that
be of men. St. Augustines words are these in his 118. Tractate upon Saint John's
Gospel, writing upon the seamelesse coat of Christ, which the Soldiers cast
lots for and did not divide. Omnes interrogati, solus Petrus respondet, etc.
That question, Whom say ye that I am? was (says the Father) propounded to
them all, but only Peter answered for them. He was the mouth of the rest of
the Apostles, and therefore Christ says to Peter in the name of them all; To
thee will I give the keys of the Kingdom of heaven. And mark the words well.
Tibi dabo claves regni coelorum, tanquam ligandi and solvendi solus acceperit
potestatem, cu^ and illud unios pro omnibus dixerit, and hoc cum omnibus
tanquam personam gerens ipsius unitatis, acceperit. As if (says S. Aug.) Peter
had received the power of binding and loosing alone, when as he both answered
for them all, and received the power for them all. The words are as clear as
the Sun.

God forbid that I should go about any way to disparage or under value this
holy Apostle: No, we will willingly give him the honor that is due to him.
And indeed he had a kind of personal pre-eminence above the rest of his
fellows, and that by reason of his age, his faith, his valor, his love
toward his Master. Concerning his faith, we find that so great, that he
adventured himself to walk upon the face of the Sea to meet his Lord, when
all his fellows stood trembling in the Ship, and thought themselves scarcely
secure there. And although he had almost sunk in the action, yet this makes
nothing against him, for it argued a great Faith, in that he durst put
himself within the danger of sinking. And to give ye an answer to our
Saviors words in the 14. of Saint Matthew, when taking Peter by the hand, he
says unto him, (...); O thou of little says, wherefore do thou fear? Our
Savior does not call him here (...). O thou of no faith. But (...). O thou of
little faith. And it is true his faith was but little, if we make it look
toward the love and power of Christ who had the wind^ and the Sea, and all
creatures at his command, and whose love was as great as his power.

Peter's faith indeed, if it regards this, was but a little faith. But if we
make it respect the no faith of his fellows in this business, in comparison
to them, it may be called a great says. Then for his love and valor, we see
that it was only he amongst them who durst draw his sword in his Masters
quarrel. If ye object his denial to me: I answer, that that makes for the
courage of St. Peter: For in that he denied his Lord he was more valiant then
all his fellows: nor is this my conceit alone, but St. Augustines in one of
his Sermons de tempore, he was not afraid to come so near even to deny him.
The Shepherd was smitten, and all the Sheep were scattered, all the rest of
the Disciples (as soon as Christ was apprehended) forsook him presently, as
if they had never known any such man: but Peter, although it was afar off,
yet he followed him, and that even into the high Priests Hall. Where (it is
true) he told them he knew not the man; but this also is as true, that he did
tell them so. The other Disciples knew not the man, and were so fearful, that
they durst not come near to tell them so: but Peter is so courageous, that he
stands out a threefold denial. In his very denial he was val^anter then all
the rest.

Let us therefore ascribe unto St. Peter's God, for St. Peter's faith, for St.
Peter's love, for his valor, for his doctrine, for his life, for his
repentance, for his death, and martyrdom, all which are set up as so many
Sea-markes, to guide us into the Haven of eternal rest, (as due is) all
praise, honor, power, majesty, etc. Amen.

THE FOVRTH SERMON, PREACHED Upon St. John Baptists Day.
LVK. 1. Part of the 66. verse. What manner of Child shall this be?


I Cannot tell whether I should more commend the former Ages of the Church, or
lament our own: they in the Primitive times were so careful to take all
possible occasions to glorify God, in Himself, in his Son, ^e his holy
Spirit, in his Saints, that they did dedicate set days on purpose for his
worship, as the day of the Nativity of our Savior, the day of his Passion, of
his Resurrection, which was indeed the great day of the year, which did quite
abrogate the Jewish Sabbath; the day also of the Ascension, and the Feast of
Pentecost, wherein the Comforter was sent to the Disciples. Nor did their
devotion stop here, but because they might let slip no occasion to praise the
Lord, they also did set apart certain days wherein God should be glorified in
the anniversarie memory of his Saints. At ipsa sanctitas, and sanctorum simul
memoria frigidis his nostris temporibus exulant. But our times frozen with a
certain new upstart discipline blown from Geneva, are so far from affording
any honorable mention of Gods Saints, that many of us quarrel the very name.
And indeed to say the truth, what have they to do with the word, when the
thing which the word signifies is banished from them.

I do acknowledge, that the Church of Rome is something too ceremonious, too
complementall in regard of the Saints, and does bestow too much honor upon
them, many times even to the prejudice of Gods glory. But shall we therefore
(like fools or mad men) in a wild desire of opposition err farther on the
other hand? because they honor them a little too much, therefore shall we
dishonor them? God has been pleased to glorify them in heaven, like the
Stars in the Firmament. The just shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of
their Father, says our Savior in the 13. of Saint Matthew ver. 43. And
therefore certainly these are not fit objects of our scorn and neglect.

But to give (if it be possible) some satisfaction to the froward and ignorant
concerning these days dedicated to the Saints. If Antiquity would satisfy
them, I could send them to ^ertullian, St. Jerome, St. Augustine, and of later
times to Baronius Annals, to Bellarmine, who are not much branded for bearing
false witness of the ancient times. For certain it is, that this dedication
of days unto the honor of the Saints, (or to the honor of God in the Saints,
choose ye which) is of great Antiquity. The Romanists have indeed abused this
custom, and have multiplied the number of their Saints beyond the number of
their days, it may be have put in some into the number of their Saints, when
there has been neither such Saints nor such men. But it is no good argument
from the abuse of a Thing to conclude against the lawful use. But I will leave
Antiquity, which they care not for, and will deal with them by reason.

I was too blame to tell them so. I doubt my arguments will fare the worse for
coming to them in that livery. Carnal reasoning (as they call it) they cannot
abide. O that such people would but hear without prejudice. For what is he who
has not lost all that is man about him, when he shall hear the reasons which
are alleged for the dedication of these days, but must needs (me thinks)
retract his lunacie and folly, and call the former Ages wise, and our selves
happy; them for first instituting, and us for enjoying those blessed occasions
and means to build us up in devotion?

The days therefore dedicated to the memory of the blessed Virgin St. Mary,
the holy Apostles, and Martyrs, have many profitable and religious uses.

First, That upon those days we might join our rejoicing with theirs,
communicate together in our joy and praises of God. And for this it is that we
believe and confess in our Creed, A communion of Saints.

Secondly, that we might show our thankfulness both unto God and to them, who
are so solicitous for our good, and do so thirst after, and rejoice at our
salvation and glory. There is joy in heaven for one sinner that repents.

Thirdly, That we contemplating their virtues and graces, might be provoked to
an imitation of their godly lives.

Fourthly, That our Faith and Hope might by the consideration of them be
established, that, as we verily believe, that they are now glorified in Heaven,
who were once mortal men here on Earth, subject to the same passions, to the
same infirmities with our selves: so we following their steps in virtuous and
religious living shall one day also be removed from this earth, and enjoy with
them an everlasting vision of glory.

Fifthly, That God thereby might be honored. For if we so honor the memory of
the Saints, certainly this very action of ours must needs acknowledge him to be
more glorious, more honorable, who both made them men, and made them Saints.

Sixthly, That by meditating upon their happiness, and the beauty which they
are now possessed of, we might be persuaded unto a hate of all earthly things,
and only let our thoughts be taken up with Heaven, which while they lived
here, was their study, now is their habitation.

And lastly, That by the celebration of these Feasts, meeting at Gods house (as
we ought to do) praising, and raying unto the Lord, hearing his holy Word read,
or preached, we might be builded up to further degrees of knowledge and
devotion. And were there no other reason but this, me thinks it might move a
good Christian.

But I shall make a monster of this Child of mine, this discourse, in making
the head too bigg for the body; so that I am afraid you will get to the Text
before me, and say of my Sermon, as the people did here of St. John the
Baptist, What manner of Child shall this be? I therefore make haste to the
Text. And all they that heard these things laid them up in their hearts,
saying, What manner, etc.

Our whole discourse at this time shall be nothing else but an answer to this
question. And to whom is this question directed? I perceive there be many who
are provided to make an Answer to it. If ^ee ask the Child himself, stay but
a while until he has learned to speak, and he shall quote ye a Prophet
concerning himself and tell ye, that he is The voice of a crt^r in the
wilderness, saying, Prepare the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. If
ye ask his father, if we will have but patience until the Lord has given him
his speech again, which was taken from him for his unbeleefe; or if ye will
not stay so long, give him but Tables and he shall write it, that he shall be
called the Prophet of the Highest. And thou Child shall be called the Prophet
of the Highest, for thou shall go before the face of the Lord to prepare his
ways. If ye ask David this question, behold he stands ready to give ye an
answer in the 85. Psalm, and calls him by a high name indeed, no less then
justice, or righteousness, in the last verse of that Psalm, Iustitia ante eum
ambulabit: Justice or Righteousness shall walk before him. Or ask the
Prophet Malachy what manner of Child this shall be, and in his 3. Chapter he
shall tell ye of an Angel, Behold, I will send my Angel, (or my messenger)
before my face. Or if ye will not content your selves with the answers of
men, enquire of the Angel Gabriel, and he will instruct ye that he shall be
great before God. Or if ye will go to the Oracle it self, ask our Savior,
and hear what an account he gives of him, in the 11. Chapter of St. Matthew
11. verse: Verily I say unto ye, among them that are begotten of women, arose
there not a greater then John the Baptist.

If ye move a second question, and ask wherein John was great, ye shall give
me leave to spring a third, and to ask wherein he was not great? Great he was
in his conception, great in his nativity, great in his life, in his doctrine
great, in his office great, great in his sanctity, in his dignity and authority
great, great in his death, and great in his glory. In these so great, that
there was a doubt amongst the Jews whether he was not the Messiah or no, John
1. Certainly a great Majesty, a great beauty, a great holiness did appear in
this man, when it was made a question (and that amongst the greatest and
learnedest of the Jews) whether he were not the Messiah, and consequently the
Son of God or no. But this greatness yet is nothing, alas, it is no such
thing to be great in the eyes of men: but hear what the Angel tells old
Zachary in the 15. verse of this Chapter, Magnus erit coram Domino, he shall be
great in the sight of God. This is a kind of greatness which should strike us
all with admiration, that he should be great in the sight of Him, before whom
all the creatures of the world, all Kings and Emperors of the earth are
nothing? As it is in the Book of Wisdom 11.19. For as the dust of the
balance, so is the world before thee, and as a drop of the morning dew which
falls down upon the earth: And as the Prophet Esaias Chap. 40. ver. 17. All
Nations before him are nothing, and they are counted to him less then nothing
and vanity. What can be less then nothing and vanity? and what can be
greater in our sight, then all Nations? Yet in Gods esteem these two are laid
in the balance, one against the other, and all Nations proves the lighter. How
comes it then to pass that one particular man should be so great in his
account, when all Nations are nothing? We must know then that St. John was not
great by nature, but by estimation. Not by nature, for he was of the same
composition, cast in the same mold with us: but it pleased God to set a price
upon him. He was of the same matter and composition with us, subject to the
same infirmities, obnoxious (naturally) to the same sins, and therefore
observe that form of words well, which our Savior speaks concerning him in
the 11. of St. Matthew. (...). Verily I say unto ye, that amongst them who are
begotten of women, a greater then John the Baptist has not arose: by which
word our Savior does intimate unto us the natural corrupt estate in which St.
John himself was borne. Resurrectio enim praesupponit casum. For, to arise,
does presuppose a fall. As if Christ had said plainer; Amongst all the sons
of men, which were conceived in Original sin, and fell with Adam, a greater
then John the Baptist has not arose from that fall. And therefore it is plain
by this, that Christ was greater then he, although he came of a woman too. For
we cannot say properly, that Christ did arise, because Christ never fell with
Adam, was free both from original and actual sin. And see what haste this
blessed more then Prophet did make to arise from his corrupt estate of sin?
He did arise even before he was borne: the Holy Ghost did baptize him, did
sanctify him while he was in the womb of his mother, as ye read in the 15
verse of this Chapter, He shall be filled with the holy Ghost, even from his
mothers womb. And so he was great in his conception and nativity.

Next, he was great in his life and doctrine: so great, that we find St. John
the Evangelist in the first Chapter of his Gospel, having like an Eagle (the
hieroglyphick of St. John) for a while soared aloft, amongst the mysteries of
the Trinity, discoursed of the divinity, the original, the nativity of the
Word, and having finished that high flight, and stooping for the earth, the
very first thing he lights upon, is upon the Head of St. John the Baptist.
Tanquam in sublimiori vertice and cacumine totius mundi, as upon the very Top
or Cape of all the lower world. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was
with God, and that Word was God; and so he goes forward until he has wrought
himself out of our sight; whence descending toward us again, the first thing
(ye see) that he perches upon, is upon the Man John, 5. and 6. verses. (...).
5 ^
And the light shines in the darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not.
There was a man sent from God whose name was John, the same came to bear
witness of the light, etc. And certainly had not the holy Baptist been a
great and eminent person, the eyes of the Evangelist, which could not choose but
be dazeled by looking so long and so earnestly upon that bright Sun of Christ's
Divinity, turning his face downwards toward the earth, could not so suddenly
have discerned him.

Great he was also in regard of his dignity, authority, and office, which may
be thus illustrated by a similitude. Have any of ye seen a great King, or an
Emperor, going upon a solemn Procession, accompanied and waited upon by his
Princes, his Nobles, his servants? though ye have not, yet I hope ye have
fancies to conceive it. And without all doubt we shall account him the most
honorable amongst his Princes, whom we behold the nearest to the person of
the King, and whom the King peradventure admits to go in rank with himself.
Now all the Fathers, the Patriarchs, and Prophets of the old Testament did
walk before Christ our great and eternal King, who came in solemn Procession
into the world, a spectacle to men and Angels: and all the rest of his Court,
of his Train, who have lived since his Incarnation have followed after him.
And therefore of Abraham (who was one of the Pracurfores, of the forerunners
of Christ) says the Lord in the 17. Genesis 17.7.
of Genesis 1. I am God all-sufficient, walk before me and be upright. And
Hezekiah prays unto the Lord, Isay 38.3.
and says in the 38. of Isay ver. 3. Remember I beseech thee, how I have
walked before thee in truth. But concerning those in the new Testament we shall
find the phrase altered. Sequimini me, follow me. To Peter and Andrew in the
4. of St. Matthew, Follow me, and I will make ^ee fishers of men. To Matthew
sitting at the receipt of Custom in the 9. of his Gospel, Follow me, and he
arose and followed him; and to us all in the 9. of St. Luke ver. 23. If any man
will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow
me. But the holy Baptist was neither of the company that went before, nor that
followed. He was the end of the old Law, and the beginning of the new. All the
Prophesies of Christ before his coming run in this strain; Veniet Rex, ecce
Dominus veniet, the King will come; behold the Lord will come. So Isay, David,
and the rest. All they who have writ of him since, say, Venit Rex: misit Deus
Filium suum; The King is already come; God has sent his Son into the world.
But St. John the Baptist, who was a latere regio, waited upon the body of his
Prince, and was never found far distant from him, to show the greatness and
the honor which Christ vouchsafed him, in permitting that neernesse to his
own Person: his voice is neither with the Prophets, he will come, nor with
the Apostles, he is already come; but (like the Index in the margent of a
book) holding out his finger, he points to him and says; Ecce agnus Dei qui
tollit peccata mundi: Behold the Lamb of GOD which takes away the sins of
the world.

Great he was also in his death, being a Martyr, dying for the Testimony of
the Truth: and after all these greatnesses on earth (for never was there man
who had so many and so great Testimonies given him) we cannot choose (surely)
but believe that he must needs be great also in his glory.

But I find some small difference amongst Expositors concerning this
greatness of Saint John, which they will have to be not a greatness or rather
majority of Prophecy or revelation, but of holiness. And it is occasioned by
the doubtfulnesse of the exposition of those words of our Savior in the 11. of
St. Matthew, named to ye before; Mat. 11.11.
I say unto ye, that amongst them who are begotten of women, arose there not a
Greater then John the Baptist.

The quarrel, although it be of no great moment, is betwixt no mean Authors,
no less then St. Jerome and St. Chrysostom both ancient, learned and
religious Fathers: and it is this;

St. Jerome, by these words, There has not arose a greater then John, will by
no means have it to follow, that therefore John was greater then all the
sons of men: but that which naturally follows from hence (says he) is, that
none of the sons of men were greater then John. And so by his rule, although
none arose greater then John, yet there might be some who were his equals.

But Saint Chrysostom in his 27. Homily, in that which is called His imperfect
work upon Saint Matthew, contends (and me thinks very subtlely and strongly)
to prove from hence, that by natural consequence St. John the Baptist must
needs be greater then all that were begotten of women. To give ye his own
words; Cum tanta sit Iustitiae altitudo, ut in illa nemo possit esse perfectus,
nisi solus Deus, etc. Seeing that so great is the height of Justice, or
righteousness, that it is a thing impossible for any but God to be perfect in
it, I think (says our Father) that although according to the p^rblinde
judgment of men we may guess at an equality in the sanctity of several
Saints, yet in the all-discerning Eye of God, in the Divine scrutiny (and this
is Gods censure of John, and not the opinion of men) it is impossible but there
should be a difference in degrees of sanctity and righteousness. From whence
it follows (says Saint Chrysostom) that if none arose amongst the sons of
men who were greater then John, then John must necessarily be the greatest of
all the sons of men. For we are to consider of the way to Heaven as of a
narrow passage, cut in the side of some steep and rigid mountain, to the Top
of which we are to travail, which passage is so strait, S^ ^n h^ G^spel
that it will not admit two a breast, and therefore there can be no equality in
rank or line. Narrow is the way that leads to life, and few there be that
find it. Say (then) of any one that travailes that strait way, that there is
none before him, and this speech necessarily implies, that he is before all,
and all behind him. And the reason is, Non datur alia linea, nisi sursum and
deorsum; Because there is no right hand or left hand line given here; but only
the line of upwards and downe-wards. As it is in the faces of men: Thou may
travail the whole world over, ere thou find two faces which answer one
another directly in all parts. I will not deny but thou may pick out one who
may have a lip, or an eye, or a cheek, or some particular grace of carriage,
like to an other: but that two should agree so in all parts, that a judicious
eye should not distinguish, was never yet heard of: So it is in the souls of
men, they may in some graces, in some pieces of Sanctity, seem to go hand in
hand; but it is impossible they should be equal in all things: And where there
is a difference, there must, needs be degrees, majority, and minority. And
this is the ordinary excuse which they of the Church of Rome do make for that
Chorus, which they commonly sing in their private Masses to any of their
Saints: Non est inventus similis illi, qui conservaret legem Excelsi. His like
is not found, who keeps the law of the most High. And this they sing to any of
their meaner Saints. I will give ye the words of an Author of no small repute
amongst them, speaking of the very same comparison of the difference of faces
and minds; Alii aliis non omnino assimulantur, ideo privatim de anoquoque
meminit Ecclesia, and sine aliquo mendacio, Non est (inquit) similis illi, etc.
Therefore (says he) does the Church (and that without any imputation of
lying) say of every Saint, His like is not to be found.

Mat 22.30.
We shall be in Heaven (says our Savior, Math. 22.) as the Angels of God: and
the more holiness there is in us, the nearer we approach to the nature of
Angels, even while we live here upon earth. Now Aquinas tells us, that quilibet
Angelus constituit speciem; Every Angel does make a several species: So that
there is no numericall distinction of the Angels, but a specificall. And the
reason of this is, because those things which agree in the species, and differ
only in number, do agree in the form, and are distinguished only in regard
of the matter. But seeing the Angels are not compounded of matter and form,
but are without that principium and fundamentum distinctionis, that beginning
and foundation of numericall distinction, which is matter, therefore it is
impossible that they should be distinguished any other way, but in the species.
And the species are compared unto numbers: Ye cannot say that one number is
equal to another number, the number of 6 is greater then the number of 4, and
less then the number of 8. For as well in the species as in numbers, there is
no linea a latere, but only the upwards and the downward line, which implies
greater and less. So it is in the Saints, no equality: one must needs be
greater, and another less. And therefore S. Chrysostom concludes
substantially and subtly, If no man be greater then John the Baptist, and all
Saints compared amongst themselves, are either greater or less, therefore he
who has none greater then himself, must needs be greater then all. But I have
bin too long amongst these School delicacies.

Here is one thing remains to be explained concerning his last greatness, the
greatness of his glory. For our Savior adds in that 7. of S. Luke. Luke 7.28.
Nevertheless, he who is least in the Kingdom of God, is greater then he.

There be two answers given.

First, That this spoken in comparison of the Angels, who were only yet the
inhabitors of the Kingdom of God. For (say they) when Christ spoke these
words, the Kingdom of Heaven was not open unto the souls and spirits of men;
the Key of that was the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, till then there
were no men in Heaven. As if our Savior should have said, nevertheless all
this greatness of John which I have made mention of, the least in the Kingdom
of God (i.) the least amongst the Angels is greater then he, because John
notwithstanding all these commendations is but a man, but the Angelical nature
is far greater then the nature of man. But this answer carries along with it a
point in controversy, not yet determined amongst us, as granted, and therefore
cannot fully satisfy.

Secondly, The answer is. That he who is the least in the Kingdom of God, is
greater then John the Baptist, meaning that he is greater pro nunc, greater
while John lived upon the earth. And this greatness arises a securitate and
fruitione, from security and fruition. For he who rides in his triumphant
Chariot, must needs be said to be greater and happier then he who is yet in the
heat of the Battle, although this last be far the worthier and the
valianter: because this is yet in dubio certamine; but the other being freed
from the malice of his enemies, wears his Garland upon his head in security:
and therefore it is not said here, that he who is least in the Kingdom of God,
is holier or better then John; but is greater then he, which greatness
proceeds from a present possession of happiness.

We have hitherto Preached unto you of the greatness of this blessed Saint
St. John the Baptist. And what harm (I pray ye) is there in all this now?
There be a Generation of People (whether it be out of envy, or ignorance, or
pride, or from what other root it should proceed I know not) who cannot endure
to have any of the Saints of of God spoken well of; No, the mention of the
blessed and immaculate Virgin Mary, who was the Mother of our Lord and Savior
(a rich Cabinet, containing in it a far richer Jewel) whom the Angel of the
Lord accosts with this strange salutation; Hail Mary, full of grace, the Lord
is with thee; blessed art thou amongst women: This holy name (I say) if it
comes in usherd by the word Saint, is distasteful to many of them, such is
their madness, affording a more honorable mention of some of their new Saints
in a Funeral Sermon, then of her who was the Mother of Him, who redeemed the
World. But these people certainly, if they knew my thing, must needs know that
the greatness of the followers does redound unto the greatness of their Lord,
who is able to make and to keep such followers. And when we hear of the the
greatness of St. John the Baptist, me thinks we should all be carried up into
a consideration of his greatness who made St John. For if St. John was so
great, that by the Testimony of Christ himself, there was not a greater then
he amongst all who were begotten of Women; O how much greater then must he
needs be, who was, and is the Lord and Master of St. John! whose Herald, whose
forerunner, whose Minister he was, and (as he himself confesses) whose
Shoo-latchet he was not worthy to unloose?

Let such of us therefore who have bin any whit faulty in this kind, learn
hereafter to have a more honorable esteem of Gods Saints: and of the holy
days which are dedicated to their memory, and not suppose (with too many) that
they are days set apart only for licentiousness and drunkenness. No, the
good intent of the Church was, that there might be preserved an Anniversary
memory of the Saints, of their virtues and graces, of their lives and deaths,
to the glory of God and our own instruction, who following their good
examples, shall one day come to be Saints our selves amongst them. This was and
is the religious use of holy days, not excluding the Civil, which is to
permit honest and lawful recreations, only with this caution: First, serve
God, and then take thy honest and Christian liberty. Let us then make an end of
this discourse with praise and thanksgiving to Almighty God, for all
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Fathers, whose lives and
doctrine God has set up as lights to guide us unto the Kingdom everlasting:
but especially (as this day calls to our memory) for the blessed Saint, Saint
John the Baptist, who was great in his conception, great in his nativity, great
in his life, great in his doctrine, in his office great, great in his sanctity,
in his dignity, and Authority; great in his death, and great in his glory, and
yet for all these greatnesses, was, and is but the servant of thee who art the
great God.

To thy greatness therefore O Father, Son, and holy Ghost, we ascribe (as
due is) all praise, power, majesty, dominion, from this time forth and for
ever. Amen.

THE FIFTH SERMON, PREACHED Upon the blessed Innocents Day.
MATH. 2.18. In Rama was a voice heard mourning and weeping, and great
lamentation, Rachel weeping for her Children, and would not be comforted
because they were not.


Ye must not think it strange, if in the midst of all your jollity, amongst
so many strains of joy (the enlargers of the spirits and soul) to qualify
your mirth the better, and keep it within the bounds of moderation, we shall
interpose one sad note of mourning. Nor will it sound harsh to an ear that is
truly Musical; for to have nothing but Sun shine and fair weather, nothing
but smooth and prosperous days, while we live here on earth, (were it a thing
possible) is the same Solaecisme in man's life, which good Musicians observe
amongst those who are but Smatterers in the Science, who do Nauseam creare
nimia dulcedine, beget a kind of loathing and tediousness even out of the too
much sweetness of their Notes, and the frequencie of their (...). Nor can I
judge my self guilty of any Incivility, or want of good manners in that I have
in such a time of rejoicing, in stead of sprightfull Airs, presented ye with
the argument of a Tragaedie. For although I am not ignorant, that it was the
custom amongst the Ancients, whenever they were to come to a Feast, Omnia
tristia ad limen ponere, to leave all sad and heavy conceits behind them, and
bring nothing over the Threshold, which should cause grief either in
themselves, or in any who sat at meat with them. Yet I rather approve of the
way of that King (or Philosopher shall I call him, or both?) who continually
amidst the multitude of his dainties, had a deaths head served up in a Charger,
to put him in mind of his mortality. It favored of wisdom and Philosophy
this, although it was accounted no great point or Courtship.

And see if our Church does not observe the very same way of service at this
Festival time. The standing dish (as I may call it) Caput and cardo festi, the
head and the hinge of the Feast, is indeed the Birthday of our blessed
Savior, a day of mirth, and of lifting up the heart, but no sooner is this
past, but the next service is a head in a Charger, St. Steven the first Martyr.
And although the day of St. John the Evangelist be the next in rank, of whom
our Savior says to St. Peter, If he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?
(and fitly has the Church placed this day so near, and leaning as it were in
the bosom of Christ's day, being celebrated in the honorable memory of that
Disciple whom Jesus loved, and did often lean upon the bosom of his Master)
yet no sooner is this gone, but the very next service again, is not one but
many deaths heads in a platter, the day of the blessed Innocents, and that is
now. Verse 16. Then Herod seeing that he was mocked of the Wise men, was
exceeding wroth, and sent forth and slew all the male Children that were in
Bethleem and in all the coasts thereof, from two years old and under,
according to the time which he had diligently searched out of the Wise men.
Then was that fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet Jeremiah saying, in
Rama was a voice heard, etc.

The place of the Prophet Jeremy which the Evangelist St. Matthew quotes for
this Scripture, is the 31. Chap. verse 15. And this Prophecy was fulfilled in
the literal sense (as Cajetane says) in the Captivity of the children of
Israel, or of those ten Tribes, which were commonly called Ephraim. And the
reason why the Prophet Jeremy brings in Rachel here as weeping for her
children, is because that Ephraim the son of Joseph, whom he begot of
Potipheras daughter the prince of On, as ye may read in the 41. of Genesis,
was lineally descended from Rachel the mother of Joseph. But this Prophecy in
the mystical sense was not fulfilled until this cruel and bloody Massacre of
these poor Innocent children, by the command of Herod, and therefore says the
Text, verse 17. Then was that fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet
Jeremy. And the reason why Rachel is here mystically called the mother of
these slain Infants, is, because she was buried near unto this City of
Bethleem, as ye may see in the 35. of Genesis from whence she was called, Matter
Bethlehemitarum, the mother of the Bethlemites.

In Rama was a voice, etc.

I shall not need to trouble either you or my self much, to lay open to ye so
known a history: for to doubt that any (living especially as we do, in a
Church where there is such plenty of knowledge) should be ignorant of this, is
as much as to think that there may be a kind of people who know not whether
the Sun shines or not without a teacher. But because it is possible that
there may be such an ignorance amongst us, I will in a word or two relate that
unto ye, which ye may find set down a great deal more fully and sweetly in
the Chapter.

When our Savior CHRIST, according to the decree of God the Father from all
eternity, and according to all the predictions of the Prophets, in the fullness
of time (being by the vulgar Computation in the 3949. year of the worlds
creation, and withal the 42. of Augustus Cesars reign, and of Herod's about
the 34.) was borne in Bethleham a City of Judah, there was a Star sent by God
to conduct certain Wise men out of the East Country, (which is thought to be
Persia, and the reason which leads us to think this Country Persia, is the
very name Magi, which is a Persian word, and signifies as much as amongst the
Romans, Wisemen, amongst the Grecians, Philosophers, amongst the Indians,
Gymnosophists) who coming to Jerusalem, and enquiring where he was, who was
borne King of the Jews, Herod presently and all the City with him, were
startled at the question: and indeed, according to the policy of this world,
and Herod's principle he built upon, which was, that Christ was to be an
Earthly King, and a King of Israel, it was time for him to look about him, and
to seek by all means to crush this infant King in his Cradle: and therefore
immediately upon the arrival of the Wise men there, he calls all his Wise men
together too, all the Priests and the Scribes of the people, and demanded of
them where it was that Christ should be borne; and understanding by them, that
Bethlam in Judea was the place which all their Prophecies pointed at, he
craftily called unto him those Wise men of the East, and having told them the
place, he sent them away, bidding them to search diligently for the Babe, and
when they had found him, to bring him word* that he might also come and
worship him. Here were words fair enough, but he had a heart in the mean time
full of poison and black intentions. The Magi having received this command
from Herod, departed, and by the direction of the Star, having found Christ,
they offered to him their Presents of gold, frankincense, and myrrh; but being
warned by God in a dream that they should not return any more to Herod, they
went into their own Country another way. Whereupon Herod finding himself
deluded, grew instantly into a rage, nor could any thing quench his fury but
the blood of all the male children in Bethlam and the adjoining Country, from
two years old and downward. O he had thought he had made sure work with
Christ now. Ye have the sum of the whole story.

Nor is this Truth set out to us only in holy Writ, but also Heathen Writers
make mention of it.

Macrobius in the second book of his Saturnalls, brings in Augustus Caesar with
these words in his mouth, having heard that Herod amongst those slaughtered
innocent children, had slain also one of his own sons; Melius est (says
he) Herodis porcum esse quam filium. It is better to be Herod's hogg then his
son. For although Herod was by birth an Idumean, yet for the love of his wife
he suffered himself to be circumcised, and observed the rites of the Jews, in
abstaining from the slaughter of swine.

In Rama was a voice heard, etc.

I was almost persuaded to have given ye no other division of these words, but
what grief, tears, and abrupt sobs should dictate to me: but fearing if we
had observed no method, nor order in handling them, we should likewise have
observed no measure, but have wildred our selves in a wide Sea: I have made
choice therefore to see up some sea-marks, to guide us in our Course.

The grief then which is described in this Text runs through the verse in
these parts.

1 Subjectum doloris. Rachel. 2 Vbt doloris. In Rama. 3 Qualitas doloris. A
voice, heard, mourning, weeping, and lamentation. 4 Quantitas doloris. Great,
great lamentation, she would not be comforted. 5 Objectum doloris. Her
children, because they were not.
1 Rachel grieves. What was this Rachel? A woman certainly, for we hear
mention made of her children in the following words. A woman grieves, and no
wonder; for it was she who brought grief first into the world: for had not
Eve eaten of the forbidden fruit, there had been no such things known as
grief and sorrow. And see if this offspring of hers, this monster of her own
begetting, does not (like a natural and loving issue) stick close to her
side. This child of the woman, grief, has never left her, but still gone
along with her from its birth: nor is it a thing possible to work a divorce
betwixt them, for who can separate those whom God has joined together? Genesis
3.16. In dolor parturies* In sorrow shall thou bring forth children: It is
the curse which God laid upon the woman for her offense.

But it is the woman Rachel that grieves. What? that beautiful daughter of
Labans whose pleasing looks were of more force to bind Jacobs service to his
Uncle, then a strickt Indenture, for he served two Apprentiships for her? Is
there such a grace and beauty in bleare eyes, that the incomparable Rachel by
weeping strives to look like her sister Leah? Or did she perceive her father
Labans intent to give her sister first craftily into the embraces of Jacob, and
therefore by weeping does she hope to get the eyes of her sister, and so to
cozen the eyes of her father, as her husband Jacob had before gotten the hands
of his brother, and by them the blessing?

But why stand I expostulating with departed Saints, as if they were living
amongst us? Rachel long before the birth of Christ, the death of those
Innocents, nay long before Jeremy wrote this Prophecy, dyed, and was buried
(as ye may see in the 35. of Gen.) in the way of Ephraim, which is Bethleem.
How then is she said here to weep? Can the souls of Gods dear children, who
enjoy a blessed quietness, assume their bodies again to undergo grief and
misery? It is impossible. The resurrection of the righteous shall be only to
glory and happiness. No certainly, we will find out an interpretation which
shall be so courteous to suffer the body of that good woman to sleep in
quiet. Alas! she had grief and sorrow enough while she lived; we may very
well spare her from any further tears. She had her husband taken from her,
and in her room her sister given into his bosom, even before her eyes (no
small grief) and when, after a tedious expectation of seven years more, she
had obtained him, her barrenness (having always the fruitfulness of Leah
before her face upbraiding of her) was such an allay to her happiness, that
all her marriage joy was quickly out of mind, so that in the bitterness of
her soul she cries out to her husband in the 30. of Genesis ver. 1. O give me
children, or else I die. It was a strange and unwonted strait that Rachel was
in, give her no children and she dies; give her children and she dies too,
for they cause her death. In giving life to her son Benjamin, she lost her
own; for she died in Childbirth. Let the grief therefore she has already
sustained, suffice: She must not be called up any more from her quiet bed, the
grave, to grieve again.

By Rachel then, who because she was buried in Bethleem, was (as I told ye)
called the mother of the Bethlemites, in a figurative speech is meant the women
of Bethleem, and of the adjoining Country. The women of Bethleem grieve. Of
Bethleem? Can there be any place for grief to harbor in, in that City
wherein CHRIST, the joy of the whole earth was borne? Not long since we heard
the Angels telling the Shepherds (and we believed it then) that there was
tidings of great joy to all people. What means then this voice of mourning in
Ramah? The Prophet Elijah, 1. King. 17. for a little oil and meal, for a
poor entertainment which the widow of Zareptah gave him, was so courteous and
grateful to her, that he recompensed her with the restoring of her son to
life: And does Christ recompense the place of his birth, the place wherein his
Eyes (as he was man) first saluted the light, no better then with a payment of
grief? O how truly might the mothers of Bethleem have taken up that speech of
Zareptahs widow to the Prophet; What have we to do with thee, O thou man of
God? art thou come unto us to call our sins to remembrance, and to slay our
sons? Did the Prophet Elijah show his thankfulness so to the place where he
was for a while nourished, and shall He who is the God of all compassion, be
more ungrateful, more unkind, more cruel to the place of his nativity? Flesh
and blood would certainly interpret this to be ingratitude and cruelty. For
although he was not the efficient Cause of this massacre, yet he was the
procuring Cause, and withal had power if he had pleased to have prevented it:
and therefore by that Maxim of the Civilians may in some sort stand guilty of
it. What shall we think? Is there cruelty or injustice with God? God forbid
that we should entertain such a thought. No, the fault without all question is
in our apprehension of this thing, we do not judge rightly of it. No? do we
not judge rightly? let us therefore join all the rest of the parts behind
together, and run through them. And indeed I durst keep them asunder no
longer, for if I should have handled them all in order disioyntedly, I should
have been forced to give ye to a great a potion of Wormwood in this time of
Roses. Let us see then whether we do not apprehend it aright or no.

We have a grief here, and the subject of this grief, is Rachel, (that is)
the women of Bethleem. The vbi, the place of this grief, Ramah, or Bethleem,
and the adjacent Country, the place of Christ's Nativity, there the women
grieve. The quality of this grief, it is mourning, weeping, and lamentation;
the quantity of this grief it is great, great lamentation, she would not be
comforted: the object or cause is the death of their children, they were not.
Do we not yet apprehend it aright? It seems to me that we do. The
lamentation was great, and the cause was great it proceeded from, the slaughter
of their children, and this was done in Bethleem, the City wherein Christ was
borne, and it was done for his sake, for Christ's sake, who had power to have
prevented all this Do we not yet apprehend it aright? We will for a while
suspend our censures.

Me thinks I have a perfect Picture of that lamentable spectacle before mine
eyes now, and behold those women of Bethleem full of amazement, mixing their
lamentations with the churlish language of the Soldiers, death appearing to
them in as many several shapes, as there were Ministers or Instruments of
death. Here one, whilst her only Son to innocent that yet it has not
learned so much as to fear) is ravished from her breasts, and d^ ^t against
the stones, crying to the Executioner in St. Augustines words, Quid seperas a
me quem ^en^ ex me? Cruel and bloody man, why do thou separate him from me
who was borne of me? and whilst the stern Soldier charges her with a
countenance of death, she answers him as Androm^cha did Vl^ses in the Tragedy.

S^ vis -- coge^ Andromacham metu,
Vitam m^nare, nam mori votum est mihi.
What do thou tell me of death? if thou desire to strike a fear into me,
threaten me with life, for as for death, I number it amongst the greatest of
blessings. There another with disheveld hair, crying, Meme quae feci. What
has this poor Innocent done? The crime was mine, in bringing of a man-child
into the world: the crime was mine, I claim the punishment as my due. Or if he
be guilty too for being born, junge mortem, we are both offenders, let us both
dye. Thus does the poor Mother court the bloody Cutthroat for death, who
shows a new, kind of cruelty to her in being merciful. Then was the time (if
ever) wherein a man might have said, it is a happiness to be borne a Woman,
for they are past by, and only the male children are slain. The Soldiers of
Herod (like cunning Woodmen) pursue the best game, and let the Herd pass by
untouched.

I must not dwell upon this sight; but these and a thousand other several
shapes of mourning, weepings and lamentation, were to be seen in Bethleem. In
Bethleem, the City of Christ's Nativity, and all this was done for his sake
too, who had power and yet did not prevent it. Shall we call Christ
ungrateful for this? no: Est quidem injustus, dolor, rerum aestimator. Grief
is but a false Judge of things. Certainly then we do not apprehend this
aright. For Saint Augustine is of another mind, accounting the slaughter of
these children, a blessedness. Beata es o Bethlam terra Judah (says he) quae
Herodis regis immanitatem in puerorum extinctione perpessa, quae sub uno
tempore candidatam plebem impellis infantiae deo offerre meruisti. Blessed art
thou O Bethleem in the land of Judah, for suffering the cruelty of the King. God
was pleased to send a Present, a Token of his love unto the Sons of men, the
Babe Jesus; and thou alone of all the Cities of the world were found worthy to
send back again to heaven (as it were) in exchange, a Present, a Troop of
immaculate and candidate Infants. It was blessed also for the Mothers, who now
are proved fruitful to heaven, and are called the Mothers of Martyrs. Most
blessed of all it was for the Infants themselves, for besides the courtesy the
Soldiers did them, in taking them from a troublesome and painful life, they
had hereby the nearest Cut to heaven that it was possible for them to have.
Quam faeliciter nati (says St. Augustine) in primo nascendi limine, aeterna
vita obviam venit: vix dum gustaverant praesentem, statim transeunt ad futuram,
nondum ingressi infantiae Cunas, and jam perveniunt ad Coronas: rapiuntur
quidem a complexibus matrum, sed redduntur gremiis Angelorum. O how blessed
were these Children in their birth (says that Father) who were scarcely stepd
over the Threshold of this mortal life, but the life eternal met them at the
door: who had scarce time to taste what the Present was, before they were
tralated to the future; who were crowned with eternity even in their Cradles;
who were (indeed) snatched from the embraces of their Mothers, but in stead of
that given into the bosom of Angels to be cherished. Had they lived,
peradventure some of them (for ought we know) not to meddle with that media
Scientia) might have proved murderers themselves, some thieves, others riotous
persons, and most of them having run a tedious and troublesome course in this
life, at the last have gone down with sorrow into the Grave: but Herod
thinking utterly to undo them by his cruelty, conferres the greatest benefit
on them that mortality was capable of; sends them post unto Heaven.

For whom* and all other thy Martyrs and Saints departed in thy fear, we
praise thy holy name (O Lord) humbly entreating thee to give us of thy grace so
to frame our lives according to their good example, that when we depart this
life, whether it be by a natural death, or any other speedier way which thou
have appointed for us, we may rest with them in everlasting glory. Grant this
(O Father) for Jesus Christ his sake our only Mediator and Advocate. Amen.

THE SIXTH SERMON, PREACHED Upon Palm Sunday.
LVK. 19. Ver. 41. and 42. And when he was come near, he beheld the City and
wept for it;

Saying, O if thou had known, even thou, at the least in this thy day, those
things which belong unto thy peace! but now are they hid from thine eyes.


ANd when he. -- I am already stopped, and arrested here by wonder, nor can I go
any farther in repeating this verse, until I have quieted my self by asking
our Evangelist the same question which the Eunuch did Philip in the Acts, Of
whom speaks he this? of himself? or of some other man? What He is this in my
Text, who comes near unto the City, beholds it, and then weeps? I should
conjecture by the tenor of the precedent verses, that it was Christ who is
here meant, for we read there at the 35. verse, So they brought him to Jesus,
and they cast their garments on the Colt, and set Jesus thereon; and as he
went, in the next verse, and in the next to that, and when he was come near
to the going down of the mountain, and so the current of the same relatives
runs on in a fair and undisturbed Channel, until it falls into this Ocean
here in my Text into this Sea of tears which are wept for the City. And when
he was come near, he beheld the City. And might I go no farther, but stay
here, it would prove a very easy matter to persuade me, that this he here
has relation to that Jesus there: but when I begin to sound the next word, and
wept, I am again at a stand. For what construction, what agreement (me thinks)
is the best Grammarian in the world able to make betwixt those two words? He
and wept may easily stand together, but Jesus and wept? Certainly they are
terms incompatible; for can God, he who is the Creator of all the world,
can he mourn? if grief, and tears which are the effects of grief, be
nothing else but the fruits of sin, how is it possible that he should either
grieve or weep then, who is free from all sin?

But I must quietly subscribe unto this holy Truth, for St. John (who was
called the Divine amongst the Apostles) has taught me not to separate those
things which God has joined together; who in his 11. Chap. ver. 35. like a
holy Priest, who knits the hands in Wedlock, has married those two words
together, without the interposition, so much as of a syllable to forbid the
Banes. (...). Jesus wept. We are satisfied then now concerning this He in my
Text, so that we may go on unto his Progress, or the three steps, his
compassion takes toward the City. And so the Text dividing it self to our
hands: We have First, Christ's Appropinguat or his venit. He came near.
Secondly, His videt. And beheld the City. Thirdly, His Lachrymatur super illam,
and wept for it.


For as for the next verse, that belongs to this last part, being nothing else
but those singultus and lachrymae, those tears and abrupt sobs which Christ
did sigh out over the City. Or else if ye please thus.

The first of these verses does contain in it a threefold stream or river
arising from the Mount of Olives, the place whence Christ did set forth upon
his journey toward the City. The first of which is this, He came near.
Which running on calmly for a while in a smooth course, looses both it self
and its name in a greater, which is the second, And beheld the City: which
does not long enjoy its rougher Channel, but presently that is drowned too in
a far greater then it self, And wept for it: which third immediately also
(like a narrow Sea pent between two Mountains) disburthens it self in a
Cataract into this Ocean in the following verse, O, if thou had known, even
thou, at the least in this thy day (see, what abruptions be here! One high
coming wave following upon the neck of another) those things which belong unto
thy peace -- I have lost my self again. Praeruptus aquae Mons, a mountain of
Sea broke loose from the watery Continent, has made one of Neptunes Quos ego's,
an Aposiopesis in my Text, -- But now are they hid from thine eyes. Which is
the fluctus decumanus, the tenth and greatest wave, which seems to threaten
nothing but shipwreck and destruction.

But I will leave this turbulent Shore, and walk a while by the pleasant and
quieter banks of the Rivers.

And the first in order is Christ's appropinquat, he came near. What Christ
does here to this sinful City of Jerusalem, God does daily unto the sons of
men who remain obstinate in their sins. He draws near unto them, in
offering them mercy and forgiveness. He draws near to them in his Word,
read and preached: he draws near to them in the administration of his
Sacraments, whilst miserable and blinded Man neglects his visitations. Now,
we know that we cannot name this word appropinquat, he came near unto the
City, but we must presently imply, that there was once a distance betwixt this
He, and that City: So in like manner was there once a distance betwixt God and
us. Not on Gods part, for he is every where, and with his glorious presence
fills the whole world. If I ascend into Heaven, thou art there, (says David)
if I lie down in Hell, thou art there also: let me take the wings of the
morning, and dwell in the uttermost part of the Sea, yet thither shall thy hand
lead me, and thy right hand hold me: No, the distance, the separation is on
our parts, who like the Prodigal son, having received our Portion of our
Father, do go in longinquam regionem, into a far Country; not that any
Country can be far to God, qui coelum tenet palmo, and terram pugillo, who
holds the Heavens in his Palm, and the Earth in his Fist: but we are said,
Peregre proficisci, to go a far off, as Cain was said to go out from the
presence of the Lord. Upon which says St. Jerome, Sciendum non locorum
spatiis, sed affectu aut esse nos cum Deo, aut ab eo decedere. We are said to
be present with God, or to depart from him, not in regard of place, but
according to our affections. And that Conjunctive (...), (which St. Luke has
in this Parable, Cap. 15. ver. 13. (...), And there he spent his goods living
riotously.) amongst the Greeks does sometimes carry with it the force of a
reason: as if he had said, (...), etc. He went into a far Country, for
there he spent his Goods living riotously: making the latter nothing but a
reason or interpretation of the former. And indeed Sin is nothing a
posteriori, but an estranging of us from God. Depart from me, I know you not,
says Christ in the 7. of S. Math. 23. The reason follows in the very
appellation, Ye workers of iniquity, it was the working of iniquity that
wrought that separation. But yet such is the admirable mercy of the Lord, that
he does not leave us (we see) to our selves in this far Country,
administering unto Swine, desiring in vain to fill our bellies with the husks,
but he draws near unto us, but (as the Spouse in the Canticles) He stands
behind our wall, looking forth of the windows, showing himself through the
Grates. Ergo appropriavit Parieti cum adhaesit Carni, Caro Parts est, and
appropiatio Sponsi verbi incarnatio, says S. Bernard. The wall is our humane
Nature, his coming near, and standing behind that wall, the incarnation of
the Word. Tot in nostro ruinoso and pleno rimarum pariete invenit foramina,
quot nostra infirmitatis in suo corpore sensit experimenta. Every infirmity
which he had experience of, and did suffer in our frail nature was (as it
were) a chinck or a breach in our Wall. And how truly may we say here, that
Christ did look forth of our windows, and show himself through our grates,
when for the sins, and near approaching destruction of this City Jerusalem,
he broke forth into such abundance of tears; and well might Jerusalem (had
they but known at the least in this their day the things which belonged unto
their peace) hearing this bitter lamentation which Christ wept out for them,
have taken up those words of the Spouse; It is the voice of my welbeloved, for
it was his great love which caused that flood of tears. They were able when
they saw him weep for Lazarus to prognosticate presently, and tell what planet
it was which governed that shower of tears, for they cried out, Behold how he
loved him! But when he wept for them, their Astrology failed them.

And when he was come near.

That Christ did come near to Jerusalem, that God does daily come near to us,
we see here and perceive hourly: but what should move Christ to come near to
that City, what should move GOD to come near to us, there is the wonder O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that stonest the Prophets, and killest those who are
sent unto thee; In what part of thee did this attractive virtue lie, that thou
wast able to draw the Creator and Redeemer of mankind to a Visit? Was it thy
fair buildings? thy Ivory Palaces? thy proud aspiring Turrets? Alas, he had
before contemned the glory of the whole world, which the Devil showed him upon
the mountain. Was it the Temple? the house of the Lord, which brought him
thither? that instead of being a House of Prayer, was become a den of
Thieves, 46. ver. of this Chapter. Was it his last kind entertainment that
called him back again? If to be reviled, to be laid in wait for, to be
blasphemed, and to be called a confederate with the prince of Devils, has any
persuasive force, any winning or inviting Rethorick in it, then peradventure it
might be that. Was it the holiness of thy Priests, or the strict purity of
the sect of thy Pharisees, who cry, Touch me not, for I am holier then thou,
that caused him to take this Pilgrimage? Nil horum. No, the Loadstone was in
himself, it was his own goodness that brought him thither. For we find him
so far from taking any delight in the spectacle, that viewing the City, as
grieved to have seen so much as he did, he raises up a shower of tears, as
a watery curtain drawn before those Organes that he might see no more. And
what I have said to Jerusalem, may be said to all the sons of men; O ye
sons of men, who seek after lies, and pursue vanities; who leave the
fountain of living waters, to build ye Cisterns, even broken Cisterns which
will hold no water. Wherein can ye suppose your excellence does consist, that
God himself is found to follow after ye, to draw near unto ye? Is it in
your righteousness, or works? Is it in the matter whereof thou art
compounded? Is it in the fair structure of thy body? or in that which informs
thy body, the beauty of thy soul?

None of these. As for righteousness, thou have none of thine own. As for thy
works, they are corrupt, there is none that does good, no not one. The
materials of thy bodies frame, no better then a little red earth, from whence
thy grandfather Adam had his name. Go down into the Potters house (as the
Lord to the Prophet Jeremy) and there thou shall learn wisdom. If thou be
proud, there thou shall read a lecture of humility, and behold that which will
abate the haughtiness of thy spirit; there thou shall see thy poor kindred,
the Potters vessels, and say unto the Pitcher, thou art my Brother, and unto
the Potsheards, ye are my Sisters. No, we have no virtue in us to invite God to
come near us. The loade-stone too is in himself, it is his mercy that brings
him to us: and it should be our wisdom and gratitude, as God is pleased to
come near to us, for us to draw near to him, to meet him in the half way, to
arise with the Prodigal, forsake the far Country wherein we live, the Tents
of Kedar, and cry, I will go unto my father, and say, Father, I have sinned
before heaven and against thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son;
which if we do, this stream shall then take an other course, and instead of
falling into this dead Sea of tears it shall make pleasant Meanders, through
the same fragrant valleys it came through at the first, creep back again to
the fountains Head from whence it had its Original, the Mount of Olives, it
shall become a navigable and safe river to carry us back again to God, and
instead of husks the fatted Calfe shall be killed for us, and for weeping the
minstrels shall be heard to play in the house, whilst our elder brother stands
without, envying at the jollity. But alas, he stands without still, (God of
his mercy once bring him in) Jerusalem did not know in this her day, the things
which belonged unto her peace, and therefore we must follow the natural
watercourse of the Text, which now leads us to the place where it falls into
the second.

And beheld the City: Christ's vidit.

Foelix quidem illa Civitas (says one writing upon this place) si hac visione
non fuisset abusa; non enim solet ex Dei intuitu sequi perditio, sed salus. O
happy City, had thou made but a true use of this gracious Aspect: for
salvation, not destruction uses to wait upon the Eyes of God. Thus He looked
upon St. Peter, Luke 22. ver. 61. Thus He looked upon Zacheus in the figtree,
at the 5. verse of this Chapter. Thus did He look upon St. Matthew. in the 9. of
his Gospel. Which look, of a Publicane, of a receiver of Custom made him a
Disciple and Apostle of the Lord. And how truly may we all call our God by
the same name which Hagar Abraham's maid called him by the Well Beerlahairoi. Tu
Deus qui vidisti me, Genesis 16.13. Then she called the Name of the Lord who spoke
unto her, Thou God look on me. For all our happiness, nay all that we
have is comprised in that Title of God given by Hagar, Thou God look upon
us; and on the contrary all our misfortune, all our misery is comprehended in
this, Tu Deus qui avertisti oculos. Thou God have turned thy face from us, as
David in the 104. Psalm. Hide but thy countenance, and they are troubled.

The whole World is but like this City of Jerusalem to which Christ here draws
near and looks upon. And how? Why, meek, sitting upon an Ass, and a Colt,
the foale of an Ass. God looking upon the world from above, and being filled
with compassion toward it, that he might redeem it, descends (as it were)
from his Throne in Heaven, and gets upon an Ass used to the yoke, (i.) joins
himself to our humane nature, and subjects himself to our infirmities. Nor is
St. Augustine much differing from this, who in one of his Sermons de Tempore;
Haec Asina est Ecclesia, quae prius portabat Balaam, nunc autem Christum. By
this Ass (says he) is meant the Church, which first carried Balaam, the
great Sorcerer, the Curser, the Devil, it was once oppressed by him, but now
Christ himself rides upon it. He beheld the City. Christ sitting upon an Ass,
(i.) God and man, united together in one Person. He beheld as God and man, he
wept as man only. He beheld as God and man, and therefore a strange variety of
actions and passages must needs be at this time in the Eye of Christ. I do not
mean concerning those natural vicissitudes, changes, diversities of orders
and degrees, and the executions of them, which were, are, and always must be
in the world: as that at the same instant, some should be borne and some die;
the same moment of time, to produce both weddings and funerals, and a thousand
other several and diverse occurrences, being like the Monsters bred of the
slime of Nilus, not one in shape like unto another: but taking only the sins
which were committed, which were the procurers of the tears which follow. An
Age would not suffice to describe the spectacle. Once, Christ beheld the City,
God beholds the world, not only with the Eye of his compassion, but also with
a searching and observing Eye. He marks every action of thine, he hears
every word, though it be spoken in thy secret closet; nay thy thoughts which
like Embrios, imperfect births, lie smothered in thy breast, are not, nor
cannot be hid from him. How careful therefore ought we all to be through
the whole course of our lives. For if the woman in the 1. to the Corinths
11.10. 1 Cor. 11.10.
ought to have a covering upon her head because of the Angels: and if we are
to do nothing but comely things (in an other place) because of the Angels who
see and observe us. O how much greater regard then ought we to have of our
actions, knowing that God himself is the surveyor of them, in whose sight the
Angels themselves are not pure. O had we but this always in our minds, did
we but verily believe that the Eye of GOD was always upon us, certainly we
should not then sin against the Divine Majesty with such a high hand as we
do. Let us not deceive our selves. He who made the Eye, shall not he see? and
can there be any thing hid from him who created the light? He sees many times
and will not seem to see, because he would have thee to take notice of it,
and see it thy self, and so repent: but if thou will not, the time shall come
when thy eyes shall be opened (though too late) and thou shall be presented
with no other prospect, but that of thine own misery, and the wretchedness of
thine estate.

Tandemque fatebere --
Nec surdum, nec Tiresiam quenque esse Deorum.
And so we are fallen into the third river, which by the Tribute it receives
from the two former, emptying themselves into it, is become a fair and
navigable stream, and we will anchor here awhile.

And when he was come near, he beheld the City and wept. We find Christ in
the Gospel weeping thrice: At the Sepulcher of Lazarus, John 11. Here in my
Text, looking upon the City: and afterward in the Garden, in that triplicated
and vehement form of prayer; Father if it be possible let this Cup pass from
me, as the Author to the Hebrews interprets that part of Gospel, Heb 5.7. He
wept at the Monument of Lazarus to see men buried in their sins: he wept here
for the obstinacy and hard heartedness of the Jews: he wept in the Garden,
to see how little men esteemed sin, and that Sacrifice he was about to make
for sin: but that he ever laughed we cannot find. Ingemuisse illum legimus,
risisse non legimus: for indeed it was no part of his business which he came
about: he came not to enjoy the pleasures of the earth, but to expiate our
sins, to make an Atonement for us. We had laughed before, plus quam par fuit,
a little more then our shares, and he comes to weep for that laughter of ours.

He wept. I cannot yet be satisfied, the seeming palpable incongruity of this
form of speech does so trouble me. For how is it possible (me thinks) that he
should weep?

There be four Causes of grief rendered in the Schools, which we may call
forms of Identity. For there is not one of them but comprehends all the rest.

1 The first is Amissum bonum, and malum conjunctum. A lost or absent good, and
a present or acquired evil. I will not trouble ye with the dispute which of
these two has the precedence in causing this affection of Grief, neither need
they trouble themselves to make it a question amongst them, if privations were
the same in the apprehension of the soul, as they are in the things
themselves: For a present evil in it self being nothing else but the absence
or privation of a good; certainly it must be all one to grieve for the evil
that is present and the good that is absent. But being that grief is a motion
of the appetite following the apprehension of the soul, and that in the
apprehension the privation of a good has rationem cujusdam entis, the reason,
shape, or outward appearance of a certain thing that has a being, under that
shape, it may rather be said to be the object of grief, then the good which
is lost: because an evil that is felt and present, is nearer and more
sensible, strikes a deeper impression into the apprehension then the good which
is absent, although in themselves they be all one. As sickness, though it be
nothing but the privation of health, is nearer to the apprehension, and more
felt under the name and reason of sickness, which is a present evil, then it
is under the reason and name of the privation of good, which is health. But
which of them soever has the pre-eminence in the first place of object, does
not much concern us: Let it suffice us to know that neither of them both have
any thing to do with Christ. For how can he who is Goodness it self, lose
that which is good? and can any evil be said to happen to him, who is the
fountain from whence is derived all that is good.

Concupiscentia, concupiscence, or a desire of that absent good which we are
sensible of that we want. And as the first Cause was Causa sicut finis, the
object to which grief does tend, so this is Causa sicut unde, A Cause as from
whence the beginning of the motion is. As in the natural appetite of a stone
or any other heavy body being to move downwards, the cause as the end is the
place whither it tends, the center of gravity, having a kind of Magnetique
virtue in it, which draws it thither: The cause as from whence is the natural
inclination of that body arising from the form of it, which is heaviness. So
the cause of grief as the end, is the evil which is present; but the cause as
from whence this motion is, is the inward inclination of the appetite which
does incline chiefly, and in the first place to that which is good: and
secondarily and by consequence to the shunning of evil. Now this concupiscence
or desire longing after good, finding it absent, and in the room of it its
contrary which he hates, is immediately turned into a grief: or rather not
turned into a grief, but it still remains with the grief, to make the grief
the greater, continually desiring that which cannot be had.

But neither is this cause able to lay any hold upon Christ: for can he desire
any absent good, who has all that is good continually present with him.

3. The third Cause they will have to be Appetitus A desire of unity or union.
And this is nothing else but the second reason clothed in another phrase: Or
if there be any, it is but a little Metaphysical difference, which does not
consist in the thing it self, but in the reason of manner of apprehending the
thing. And so after the same manner that the desire of good was said there to
cause grief, so here the desire or appetite of Unity, which is nothing else
but good apparelled in another kind of dress, for the good of every thing
(we know) does consist in a certain kind of Unity. And therefore the
Platonicks, who were altogether for Harmony, and said, That the whole frame of
the world was nothing else but a Musical Instrument, set in tune by the hand
of that primum ens, and primum principium, which is God, do as well make unum
a Principium as bonum. Both which bonity and unity by the way of Participation,
although coming infinitely short of that excellence which is in the fountain
of that bonity and unity, is communicated to the creatures, as conducing to
their perfection. Now when any thing is cut off from this unity of the
creature, or added which is superfluous, (although it be but in his
apprehension only, and not really) finding his unity infringed, (which is the
perfection of the crearure) desiring this unity which is absent, and finding a
present impediment, immediately this desire begets a grief.

But neither can this cause come near or once touch Christ, for he is so
far from wanting or desiring this secondary unity, this unity of the
creature, that he is Vnus cum unitate prima, One with unity and bonity it
self.

4. The fourth cause which they render is this. Potestas cui non potest
resisti. A stronger power which cannot be resisted. For if a present or
conjoined evil be the proper object of sorrow, (as is already proved) then
that must needs be a cause of that sorrow which makes or works the presence or
conjunction of this evil, and that is a stronger power. For although many
times we suffer damage and hurt by a power which simply and in it self is
less (as in our slumbers we are often troubled and molested by a Gnat, so
poor a creature that one fillip of a man is able to destroy a million of them)
yet in that regard that it hurts, it must be called a greater. Si^n^nullo modo
major esset, nullo modo posset nocere (says Aquinas.) For if in some kind it
were not greater, it were impossible it should hurt us in any kind.

But what power in the world can be greater then he, to whom all power in
heaven and earth is given? We are not yet got out of the Labyrinth. Let us once
more consult with the Text. And when he was come near, he beheld the City,
and wept for it.

The knot is untyed, the verse interprets it self. He wept for it. Not for
himself. He does agere personam alterius. He wept for the City. Delirant
reges plectuntur Achivi, was the old saying. The Kings commit the offense, and
their Subjects suffer for it. But here we may justly invert that speech, and
say, Delirat populus, plectitur eorum Rex. The people, the Jews have sinned,
and their King, the King of the Jews, he bears the punishment of their
sin. And the City of Ier. might very opportunely have used those words of
David (with a little alteration) in the last Chapter of the second book of
Samuel. Behold I have sinned, yea I have done wickedly, but this Sheep what
has he done? What has he committed, that his eyes should send forth such
plenty of tears as they do? -- And wept for it. The wonder ceases. For now
we are able to find all those four several causes already mentioned, in
this grief of our blessed Savior.

First, For in the first place, Ier. had lost, she had quite deprived her
self of all her good by her sins and obstinacy: and evil was also hard at
her door. Destruction did hang over her head, like the sword in the twine
thread over the head of the Parasite in the Throne, waiting but when the breath
of the Lord would break it in sunder. And therefore he wept.

Secondly, There was concupiscentia, a desire of that absent good they were
deprived of. Which desire should have been in them, but because a kind of
Lethargy and Stupidity had seized them: he who bore the infirmities of us all,
entertaines it into his own bosom, into his own affections. He desired the
good of them, which they did not themselves, and therefore he wept.

Thirdly, he desired also their unity, their perfection, which does consist in
the concatenation, as it is tied to, or derived from (as the beams from the
Sun) that primum unum and bonum, that first One, unity it self, God. Which
chain of participation being broken, and a separation made by reason of their
sins, therefore he wept.

Fourthly, He perceived also that there was potestas fortior, a power which
was too strong for them, the power of hell, sin, and darkness, which did bear
rule over them, and therefore he wept.

He wept not for the dead City, for the walls which were shortly to be
overthrown, for her fair Towers and buildings which were shortly to be
demolished, for her Temple which he knew was afterward to be defiled, and
cast down to the ground, not one stone left upon another. He did not weep
principally (I say) for this. (Although peradventure his grief might cast an
oblique eye thither too) but the chief cause of his mourning was the sins
and blindness of the people. Which Action as it does confute the Heresies of
Valentinian, Cerdon, and others, who deny Christ to have had a natural body,
and affirm that he was not borne of a woman, neither had flesh, nor suffered
any Passion: but had a body merely fantastical, and did feign only to
suffer; and besides, shows unto us his infinite mercy (...). Which was touched
with a fellow-feeling of our infirmities: So especially it teaches us what the
true use of tears is. They are not to be lavished out upon every slight
occasion: but to be reserved to be spent for sin. That is their proper
object.

I do not go about to make a mutilation in our affections, or to Preach the
Doctrine of the Stoics to ye, who would have no passions at all; There is a
sorrow, there is a debt of tears which we owe (and Nature will exact the
payment of us) to the Urne of our deceased Parents, Children, religious
Governors, Kinsfolks, and Friends. Joseph weeps for his Father Jacob seven
days, Genesis 50. The children of Israel wept for Moses in the plain of Moab 30.
days. Deuteronomy. 34. But yet with Joseph we must weep for our Father Jacob but
seven days, (i.) our mourning must be moderate: we must not with the
Egyptians bewail him seventy days, as men without hope, as they did in the
third verse of that Chapter of Genesis. We cannot weep too much for our
sins, for any thing else we may.

There be other remedies which God has provided for our less dangerous
maladies, and we are to use them. If thou be deprived of thy goods, take
Jobs confection, and try what good that will do thee. The Lord gives and the
Lord takes away, blessed be the name of the Lord. Naked I came out of my
mothers womb, and naked I shall return again. Which very consideration (we
see) wrought a cure upon that good man. Do not weep for this, it is not worth
thy tears. Vnicus raptus est filius? (as St. Jerome to Paula, comforting her
for the death of her daughter Bresilla) Durum quidem, sed tolerabile, quia
sustulit ille qui dederat. Is thy only son, or thine only daughter ravished
from thine eyes by an untimely death? It Is hard, but yet to be endured, when
thou considerest that it is that same gracious God who lent thee that son or
that daughter that has taken them from thee again, neither must thou weep
too much for this.

But I cannot follow any more particulars, and I have dwelt too long in this
little Bay into which I diverted. We will now make out into the river again.

And wept for it, saying, (the force of the stream ye see carries me down
into the next verse) O, if thou had known, even thou, at the least in this
thy day.

Loquitur lachrymas. He does not only weep tears, but he speaks tears. One
word as it were) trickling down after another, separated from its fellows, as
if there were no acquaintance betwixt them -- O, if thou had known -- there
he stops -- even thou -- there he makes another stop -- at the least in this
thy day -- there he stops again -- those things which belong unto thy Peace!
-- What now? Like a great Violl with a narrow mouth, he is here quite stopped up
with his own fullness. Not a drop more yet. Those thoughts of sorrow which
knock at his lips for passage, like a crowd at a little door, while every one
strives to be first, the passage is clogged up, and none of them can get
through. But I discover something else coming out, -- But now are they hid
from thine eyes. Quid hoc Domine Jesus? quid hic sibi vult verborum saltus? What
should this mean? what dependence have these last words upon the former? Art
not thou, who art the Word it self, able to make a congruity in thy words?
Thou who wast able to create such a ravishing harmony in the world, one thing
so sweetly in a comely subordination depending upon another, can not thou
make music of a sentence? make that agree together? Yes. Here is agreement.
Here is Music. More, here is Rhetoric. More then that, here is the height,
the very iexcellence of all Rhetoric, in this broken speech of our Savior.
For if words be nothing else but our thoughts apparelled in ayery syllables,
but the expression of our thoughts; then of necessity those must needs be the
best words which come nearest to the true expression. (as that Picture is the
best, not that has the smoothest, or the most pleasingest countenance, but
which most resembles the life it represents) Now we would account him but an
ill describer of a Passion (whether of joy, sorrow, anger, or any other) who
makes his sense and words run in a fine, smooth, oily course, without any
breaches or abruptions: as if the Soul in that troubled sea of Passion (like
the King-fisher in the Halcion days) were at leisure to build a curious and
well-ordered nest of words. No, Christ here does so truly set forth to us the
Image of a troubled Soul, as they may seem not to be words which he speaks;
but as if sorrow scorning to use the help or mediation of words, should speak
it self in its own proper language, -- O, if thou had known, even thou, at
the least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace! What then?
As in that speech of the Father, who being found weeping, and the cause of his
sorrow demanded, answered, Filius, unicus, habilis, and pollens ingenio,
Adolescens, -- My son, my only son, a young man, of fair hopes -- and
being able to go no farther had his imperfect speech made up by a stander by,
relieving his halting sentence (though small relief unto himself) by adding
that word, Obiit diem, is dead, which he for the greatness of his grief was
not able to pronounce himself: So must we make up this imperfect speech of
Christ's, which the thought of the sins and neere-drawing confusion of the
City would not suffer him to finish. Si cognovisses and tu. If thou had but
known the danger thou art in, and me thy Savior, who am here at hand to
deliver thee out of that danger, -- What then? Thou would have wept, as I
do now; thou would have turned all thy jollity into mourning and repenting
thee of thy sins in sackcloth and ashes, would have sought for forgiveness
at me thy Redeemer? But now they are hid from thine eyes. Which latter part of
the verse, like the Serpent carries the sting in its Tail. For it was the
consideration of that indeed which caused all these bitter tears; namely
because their day was past, it was hid from their eyes.

But I am called back by the words of an Expositor. Domine (says he, entering
into a Dialogue with Christ) te rogo, cur inquis quod illi te non noverunt?
Lord, what do thou mean to say, they did not know thee? Did not the
Multitude carry Palms in their hands, (as ensigns of thy victory which thou
should obtain over sin, death, and hell) meet thee in the way? Did they
not spread their garments before thee? Did they not call thee with an unanimous
consent, The King of Israel? the son of David? crying, Hosanna, Hosanna, in
the Highest, blessed be the King who comes in the Name of the Lord.

What answer Christ himself would have given him, we do not know; conjecture
we may, and first thus. As for those people who met him in the way with Palms
in their hands (as upon this day, which from thence, by the institution of the
Church, still retains the name of Palm Sunday) with Palms I say in their
hands, and exclamations of great joy, which there are called a Multitude; Alas!
what were they in comparison of the whole City, but as a drop to the Bucket?
besides that multitude was but of the common ignorant sort of the people; few
of the Rulers, or Pharisees were there, and such as were there, were so far
from joining with them in that joyful confession, that they call to Christ to
rebuke the multitude, ver. 39. Master rebuke thy Disciples. But Christ who bore
the nature and infirmities of them all, did thirst after the salvation of them
all.

Again, he who is the searcher of the reins and heart, did peradventure
discover that however their outsides did flatter him, using a great deal of
fair Ceremony and religious Complement, yet for all that many of their hearts
were far enough from him. He perceived, for ought we know, some amongst
that multitude (such is the levity and inconstancy of the people) who, for all
their Hosannas now (drawn to it, it may be, for companies sake, or else for
the novelty and strangeness of the thing) were afterward as loud in the other
voice, Crucifige, crucifige, His blood be upon us and upon our children. And
therefore well might he say, they did not know him. They do not know Christ
truly, neither will Christ know them at the last day, who are only
worshippers of him in outward Ceremony, and not in the Heart.

The outward Ceremonies of the Church, the carrying of Palms in our hands,
(i.) the adorning of the House of the Lord with comely ornaments, is good,
novimus, we confess it. The spreading of our garments in the way, our
worshipping and crying Hosanna, bowing at the blessed Name of Jesus, is comely,
holy, befitting and reverent. Quis enim potest negare? but as the Poet to proud
Fabulla, Sed dum te nimium Fabulla landas,
Nec dives, neque bella, neque puella es.
But should there be too much stir kept about these things as is objected to
us, and the service of the inward man in the mean time neglected, they would be
in the esteem of God neither comely, reverent, nor holy. For he is more
pleased with the worship of the heart, then with all the outward pomp of their
Feasts and new Moons.

But this discourse is not altogether so fitting for the times we live in.
Alas! there are not such multitudes of us now, who are found meeting our
blessed Savior with Palms in our hands, worshipping and crying, Hosanna,
spreading our garments upon the Ass, and in the way: and yet for all this,
although the number be but small, compared unto the multitude of the mockers,
but live the gleaning after a Vintage; yet see if our new Pharisees be not as
busy now as ever the old ones were about Christ, crying, Master, rebuke thy
Disciples; and saying with Judas, (who was a Thief and carried the Bag)
Wherefore serves all this wast? To what purpose are all these Palms and
branches of Trees? all this worshipping, and crying, Hosanna in the Highest?
These garments spread in the way? all this outward Ornament and Ceremony?

It follows in the verse:

Had thou but known, at the least in this thy day, the things which belong
unto thy peace! but now are they hid from thine eyes.

Ye observe here that Jerusalem had her day of Peace, she had her time of
mercy and grace offered her. And ye may observe also, that Jerusalem did
neglect this proffered grace, it was hid from her eyes. Who was it that hid it
from her eyes? Why certainly our Savior Christ will prove the best Interpreter
of himself: Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, Mat. 23.37.
and stonest them who are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thee
together as a Hen gathers her chickens under her wings: but ye would not. He
does not say, but ye could not, but ye would not. Surely the fault was their
own. They had a day, and the Sun shone clearly over their heads, but they
hoodwinkt themselves, shut out the light, and would not see.

But I perceive this sea of tears is now proved a depth of doctrine (wherein
the Leviathan may sport himself) and all this while we have but stood upon
the shore and viewed only the troubled surface of this deep. Nor dare I
adventure any farther into it. The Well is deep (O Lord) and I have nothing
wherewith to draw. Let those who have lines and plummets fit for the
undertaking of such a work, sound and dive to the bottom of this deep. I
will content my self with St. Peter, to take a journey to Christ upon the face
of the Sea only, to walk with him upon the waves, and if I chance to sink, I
will pray with him and say, Lord save me I perish.

THE SEVENTH AND EIGHTH SERMONS, PREACHED Upon the two first Sundays in Advent.
CANT. 2.8. It is the voice of my beloved; behold he comes leaping upon the
mountains, and skipping over the hills.


THe Church, in her pious care and wisdom, has instituted no great Feast
through the whole year, but she has both appointed to it days of
preparation, and days of attendance. The solemn time of Lent that prepares us
for the great feast of Easter, which being come, we see it accompanied (for
the greater state) with two attendant Holy days: so likewise Whitsunday is
prepared unto us by Rogation week, and waited upon also, when it is come, by
its two Holy days which follow it. And this great and high Festival of the
Nativity of our blessed Savior (which now draws near upon us) as it has its
twelve days of Attendance, so it has four Sundays of preparation, which are
called the Sundays in Advent, the ancient Christians styling the birth of
Christ, or his coming in the flesh, by the name of Advent. And why there be
four Sundays, or weeks preparative ushering in this Feast, some do take
upon them to affirm, that it is to signify to us the four Advents of our
Savior. The first, is Adventus ejus ad homines. Secondly, In homines. The
third, Contra homines. And the fourth, Super homines. The first, His coming to
men, in the flesh. The second, His coming into men, in the spirit. The third,
His coming against men, at the day of each particular man's death. And the
fourth, His coming above men, in the day of judgment. Of all which Advents of
Christ, this mystical Text of ours may be understood.

Behold, he comes leaping upon the mountains, and skipping over the hills.

There be some Interpreters who write upon this place, who accommodate this
Text to the freedom of the children of Israel from the 70. years captivity in
Babylon, by Cyrus the Persian. The first and second verses of this Chapter,
they will have to understand those times of deportation, when Nebuchadnezzar
like a furious tempest, did sweep and carry before him all that was precious
in the land of Israel, Her King, her Princes, her strong men of war, all her
cunning workmen, all the treasures of the house of the Lord, all the treasures
of the Kings house. 2. Kings 24. ver. 1. I am the Rose of the field, the Lilly
of the vallyes. ver. 2. Like a Lilly among the thorns: so is my beloved
amongst the daughters.

And this they will have to be a Prophetical complaint of the Church in those
lamentable times, exposed to all depopulations, and conculcations of the
barbarous enemy. Iuxta florem in agro sine munimento.

The third verse. Like the Apple Tree amongst the Trees of the Forest: so is
my beloved amongst the Sons of men.

This they will have to depicture out the quiet, though poor estate of those
reliquiae populi, those relics of the people, which were left behind under
the tuition of Gedaliah, who here (they say) is meant by the Apple tree, under
whose shadow they had delight. Humilis hic erat ad proceritatem priorum regum,
vel ad altissimos Cedros qui florebant in Babyloniis montibus: And he indeed
was but a shrub, the Thistle of Libanus, if we compare him with their former
Kings, or with the tallnesse of those Cedars, which (though in captivity, yet
in some sort) did flourish upon the mountains of Babylon. I might lead ye
farther down with me into the Wine-Cellar, and tell ye what they will have
meant by that ( the King had me into his Wine-Cellar, and love was his banner
over me) namely their enemies land, partly Babylon, partly Egypt, whither much
of the people at the cutting off of Gedaliah, did undertake a voluntary exile.
Introduxit me Rex in Cellam vinartam, non in domum convivii (as one notes) The
King had me into his Wine-Cellar, not into his banqueting house, which you
shall find if you look into the 7. of Ecclesiastes, rejoicing in another
name. The heart of the fool is in the house of mirth: In domo comp^tationis.
As if the Spouse had said here, The King had me into a melancholy and
sorrowful Cave, in locum subterraneum, into a Caverne of the earth, (as ye
know most of our Wine-Cellars be) yet notwithstanding there she found Wine:
The Spirit and the Word, which be often compared to Wine, still bore them
company. Nec Ecclesiae in his miseriis consolatium defuit, cui Carcer vino
refertus. It was impossible that the Church in these miseries, should want
comfort, when her very prison was a Wine-Cellar.

But I come to this verse in the Chapter, which I have chosen for my Text: and
this they will have to be (as I told ye) the coming of Cyrus to their
deliverance. It is the voice, etc. She falls into an abrupt mention of it, as
if from a far she had heard the voice of her welbeloved calling to her, and
distracted (as it were) with joy at the unexpectedness of the news, she
breaks forth into this sudden ecstasy, It is the voice of my welbeloved. And
this is nothing else (say they) but a Prophecy of that great joy which all
those Captive Jews did feel at the rumor of those warlike preparations of the
Medes and Persians against Babylon; for now they knew that the time of their
Manumission was at hand, which was prophesied by Jeremy in his 50. Chapter.
The latter part of the verse sets out unto us the speediness of his coming.
Behold he comes leaping upon the mountains, and skipping over the hills. As
the Comic Poet says, Cervum cursa vincit, and gallatorem gradu. He came
leaping over Nations, and striding over Kingdoms, as if he had had Styles on.
And as it is in the next verse, My welbeloved is like a Roe, or a young Heart.
How quickly did he leap over the Armenians? Lydia? Hyrcan^a? The Bactrians?
Susians? Carians? Phrygians? Cappadocians? With that lightness that he scarce
left any footsteps behind him: so soon did be vanquish them.

But me thinks this interpretation is too dull and earthy, and far below the
dignity and majesty of this so divine a Song. So that we may say of this
Text, as Christ did once to the people concerning Solomon, A greater then
Solomon is here: So may we say certainly, a greater then Cyrus is here, is
meant, here, of whom Cyrus himself was but a Type. The coming of that true
Cyrus in this place is meant that Conqueror, who made preparation for war,
who came into the world, assumed our flesh, by him sanctified, and made the
weapons of his righteousness to redeem his chosen Nation, whom Nebuchadnezzar
(the devil) had carried into Captivity (into Babylon.)

This Text then may set forth unto us either the coming of our blessed Savior
in the flesh, when in the fullness of time he was borne of the Virgin,
suffered the frailties of humane Nature, and at the last, death for the sins
of the world: Or else his coming in the Spirit to each particular faithful
soul.

But before I fasten upon any of these, give me leave to take up an
Observation or two by the way, which cannot be very well passed over in
silence.

The first is, that hearing goes before seeing: The Church first hears the
voice of her Savior, and afterward she sees him. This is the order which the
holy Spirit observes in many places of sacred Scripture. Hear O daughter and
see, as ye have it in Isay, and as it is in the last of Job; I have heard of
thee by the hearing of the ear; but now mine eye has seen thee: And in the
second of the Acts, when that Comforter which Christ had promised, came unto
them, ye shall read that first upon a sudden there was a sound heard from
Heaven, as of a mighty and rushing wind, and after the Cloven Tongues like fire
appeared.

If ever we hope to be made partakers of that beatificall vision hereafter in
the heavens, which the blessed Angels so thirst after, and though they daily
enjoy, yet can never be filled with, One glimpse of which upon the mountain,
was enough to make Peter cry out, Lord it is good for us to be here, let us
build three Tabernacles, one for thee, one for Moses, one for Elias, he never
thought of building of one for himself: He could have been content to have
lien himself without a shelter, so be might still have enjoyed this blessed
sight. If ever (I say) we look to see the face of God hereafter with joy, we
must first hear his voice; hear him in his Prophets, hear him in his
Apostles, hear him in his Priests, in the dispensers of his Word and
Sacraments.

The second is, that the Church no sooner hears but presently she knows him
by his voice. It is the voice of my Welbeloved (says she.) She lays it down
peremptorily. My sheep know my voice, says our Savior.

If we understand this Text, of the coming of Christ in the flesh, ye may be
pleased to consider with me; 1 His motion. He is said to come. 2 The manner of
his motion, which is double. Of his dignation, he leaps upon. Of his
repudiation, he skips over.
3 The way, which is double too, according to the duplicity of the manner. Of
his dignation, or mercy, he leapes upon the mountains. Of his repudiation, or
anger, he skips over the hills.



In every motion (we know) there be two terms.

1 The place or term from which the motion is begun.

2 The place or term where the motion cease.

The place from whence Christ came, was heaven.

The place he came to, was the earth.

En quantum saltum dedit (says St. Bernard upon this place) a summo coelo ad
terras! and mark the propriety of the phrase well. Saltum dedit, he gave a
leap: this journey of his was voluntary. And therefore to take that objection
away, which might be made out of the seventh of St. John's Gospel, verse 28. Yet
I am not come of my self, but he who sent me is true; says St. Augustine in
the same place. Quod videtis me in carne, ipse me misit. In that ye see me made
manifest in the flesh, in that relation, he sent me. And immediately after, Vbi
audis, ipse me misit, noli intelligere naturae dissimilitudinem, sed gerentis
authoritatem. When thou read this word, he sent me, do not by that
understand, or thereby gather, that there is any dissimilitude or disparity in
the Nature in the Deity; but rather conclude the authority of him who was sent,
who indeed himself was the sender. Victus es O Archangele, transiliit te, qui
praemisit te (says St. Bernard) quem modo in coelo reliquisti, in utero
reperis. O Archangel Gabriel, thou art overcome, he who sent thee, is arrived
before thee, him whom but now thou leftest in Heaven, thou find in the
womb. Observe therefore what our Savior Christ says himself in the third of
St. John's Gospel, verse 13. when he was upon earth, discoursing with
Nicodemus. For no man (says he) ascends up to heaven, but he who descended
from heaven, the Son of Man, which is in heaven. He does not say, which was
in heaven, but which is in heaven. A miracle! In terra loquebatur, and in coelo
se esse dicebat. That very instant wherein Christ spoke those words upon earth,
he was present in heaven. Semper enim ibi erat Christus, quo fuerat rediturus.
For Christ was ever there, never departed from that place, to which he was to
return. Wherefore St. Augustine glosses upon this place thus; Sic venit ut
inde non abscederet; sic redit ut nos non derelinqueret. He so comes from
heaven, that still he remains there: he so returns thither again, that
still we have his presence here. Quid miramini? Deus hoc facit. Why do ye
wonder? it is God who does all this, whose glorious presence fills the whole
world.

And this may give some satisfaction to that objection which may be made; How
can God be said to move? to come or to go? to ascend or descend? when there
is neither ubi nor quando in Deo, neither relation of place, nor time in God?

It is answered, That it is true that God is every where. If I ascend into
heaven thou art there: If I lie down in hell thou art there also, let me take
the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost part of the Sea, yet
thither shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand hold me, says David. But
yet the manifestation of his presence is not every where. God is said to come
to a place, when he is pleased there to manifest his presence. So CHRIST is
said to descend, to come into the world, into this lower world, when he out of
the riches of his mercy, did vouchsafe to appear in the flesh

And for the other branch of the objection, that God cannot be said to move,
because his actions are not limited or measured by time: it is true again,
For St. Augustine, In aeternitate sempiternus est dies, qui nec praeceditur
hesterno, nec excluditur crastino. In eternity Time has no place: for there is
a day which has neither a yesterday to go before it, nor a to morrow to
thrust him out of his place. But yet in regard of us, God may be said to do
many things in time I, that very gracious act of Gods in assuming our humane
Nature, is said to be done in the fullness of time, Gal 4.4. When the fullness
of time was come, God sent his Son made of a woman.

Now we have seen how God may be said to move or to come, let us look upon
the manner of his coming, and the way both together. Behold, he comes leaping
upon the mountains, and skipping over the hills.

He leaps upon, he skips over. The Spirit of God like the wind, moves which
way it lists. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy.

Ecce venit saltens in montibus, transiliens colles. But what should these
mountains signify? If we take them for the mountains, which St. Matthew in
the Parable of the lost Sheep speaks of Cap. 18. ver. 12. Wherein the ninety
and nine were left: For St. Bernard makes the point there, (...), he left the
ninety and nine in the mountains, and not he left the ninety and nine and
went into the mountains: If (I say) we understand it thus, then without all
question the blessed Angels are here meant, when that good Shepherd who laid
down his life for his Sheep, did leave the ninety and nine (that infinite
multitude which had not erred) in the celestial mountains, in heaven, in
rest, and safety, and came down into the wilderness upon earth, in pursuit
of that One which had strayed poor mankind, which at the length he found, and
with joy returned to those heavenly habitations. What are these mountains then
but those glorious Citizens of heaven, which our Savior calls there Sheep? Vt
ipsi sint montes, qui and oves (says a Father) that these mountains and the
sheep might be all one. But this may seem very harsh, that mountains should
feed upon mountains: and indeed if we take it according to the literal
sense, it sounds very unpleasantly, but if according to the spiritual meaning,
it is full of mystery and sweetness.

Christ the wisdom of his Father, who is the Shepherd of both those Flocks,
(as well of those glorious and triumphant Angels and Saints, which feed
securely upon the Mountains, which are in heaven; as also of the poor remnant
that is below in the vallyes, here on earth) does feed both indeed with the
same food, but not after the same manner. We who are Pilgrims here, in the
course of our Peregrination, do eat our bread, (our spiritual bread I mean)
in the sweat of our brows, For is illum labor and aerumna mendicentes,
begging it from door to door, for God will have us so to do to exercise us.
There is no grace which we receive, but it costs us a great deal of toil and
vexation. We get it either by turning over the writings or hearing the
well-digested labors of godly and learned men, or in searching the holy
Scriptures; or else we read the invisible things of God, his eternal power
and Godhead, in the Creation of the world, in the things that are seen, 1. to
the Romans. But the Angels they have a nearer and an easier cut to knowledge
then this. They need not foradge abroad for it, they have their provision
brought home to their hands. For although we cannot say that they have it of
themselves; Yet in themselves they do receive with no less facility then
happiness. They are not put to the trouble of discourse, to compose, to
divide; but by one simple Act (as in a clear and cristall glass) they either
behold all things in their proper nature, in their causes, which the Schoolmen
call their knowledge of the evening: Or else they read all things purely and
clearly, in the word, in the beatificall vision, and this Knowledge is called
their morning Knowledge; for as much difference as there is betwixt the
glorious increasing morning, and the duskie, gloomy, and declining evening; so
much (nay a thousand times more) is there betwixt these two knowledges. So that
these mountains may in some sort be said to feed upon, or in the mountains,
(i.) in themselves: because they have, and do find in themselves (without
stirring abroad for the matter) continually viewing the face of God,
continually looking into the word of life, means whereby still to perpetuate
their happiness.

But ye will ask me how did Christ leap upon these mountains? St. Bernard
shall tell ye. Saliebat in montibus (i.) in Angelis in quibus and loquebatur,
and suam hominibus exhibebat presentiam. He leaped upon these mountains, the
Angels, when in their similitude he did speak, and vouchsafe his presence to
the Patriarchs and Prophets in the old Testament. But he does not dwell here:
for mark the Text well. Behold he comes leaping. Ita salit, ut transilit. He
so leapes upon these mountains, that at the last he leaves them too: For he
took not upon him the nature of Angels; but the seed of Abraham, 2. Hebr.
And if we look into the verse immediately following my Text, there ye shall
find him standing behind our wall; Lo he stands behind our wall (says the
Spouse) looking forth of the windows, showing himself through the Grates. He
stands behind our wall, (i.) our humane nature.

Transiliens Colles. Skipping over the hills. These hills, or little mountains
which he here will not vouchsafe so much as to touch in his journey, but
leaves them without any footsteps of his mercy imprinted on them, may be
understood of the Apostate Angels, those powers of darkness which rule in the
air, which are not to be reckoned amongst the mountains, those blessed and
erect Spirits which stood. For they through their pride have fallen from the
height of their excellence wherein they were created: but yet they are not
fallen so low, that they can deserve the name of vallyes, they are hills
still, tumentes colles, hills through their pride, hills, through their
barrenness. And therefore we may not without reason conjecture that these are
the hills here, (being placed inter montes perfectorum and valles paenitentium,
In the midst betwixt the mountains of the perfect and excelse Angels, and the
vallyes of humble and penitent sinners upon earth) which our Savior is said to
skip over.

Surely that curse which David laid upon the mountains of Gilboa. 2. Sam. 1.
Where Saul, Jonathan, and the Worthies of Israel fell in the battle, had a
further reach in it, then only to those material mountains (though not in
the intent of griefe-sick David, at that time, yet in the intent of the holy
Spirit, which then inspired David.) Ye mountains of Gilboa, upon you (says
he) be neither dew nor rain, for there the shield of the mighty is cast
down. What is this Gilboa here, but a Type of the Devil? That overthrow of
Saul and the Worthies of Israel, but a figure of those many spiritual
massacres, overthrowes, and cruelties which he does execute amongst the sons
of men? How were the mighty slain in the midst of the battle, (says David
there) O Jonathan, thou wast slain in the high places! How are the mighty
slain here, in the midst of the battle, (may we say too) How many thousand of
the host of Israel have perished upon these accursed hills? and still do
perish daily? And therefore no wonder if he who is the dispenser of grace, does
pass by these hills without once sprinkling them with the dew of his mercy.

It was a strange conceit of Origin, who would have our blessed Savior to
leap upon these Hills too: nay more, to be crucified again the second time
in the air, for the redemption of the Devils. This error ye shall find
refuted by Epiphanius, in his Epistle to John of Jerusalem. By St. Augustine,
in his 21. book de Civitate Dei, cap. 17. and 23. By St. Jerome, upon the 3.
chap. of Jonas. By Gregory in the 9. book of his Morals, 45. And by others,
and by the same in other places.

And whereas we find Ruffinus in his first invective against St. Jerome, to
ascribe this heresy to St. Jerome, it is most injuriously done, and proceeds
(as may be supposed) from the malice of his emulous Adversary. For St. Jerome
was so far from countenancing of this error, that if we trace him into
other parts of his works, we shall perceive him to be one of the sharpest
enemies that this Opinion had. Besides the place above quoted, it appears by
his 2. Apology against Ruffinus; out of his 1. book against the Pelagians; out
of his Epistle to Pammachius concerning the errors of John of Jerusalem; out
of his Commentaries upon the last words of Isaiah. The place of St. Jerome
which Ruffinus traduces against him, endeavoring to fix that aspersion upon
that learned and devout Father, is out of his Commentaries upon the Epistle to
the Ephesians: Where it plainly appears that St. Jerome did not speak there
ex propria sententia, but in the person of Origin. But for your better
satisfaction I will name ye three or four places, which shall be enough to
put to silence for ever such a monstrous conceit. The first is, that which I
named before in the second to the Hebrews: For he took not upon him the
nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham. And again, Romans 6.9. Knowing that
Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more, death has no more dominion
over him. And again Matthew. 25.41. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. If any should chance to answer
these words, and say, That it is true, the fire here is called an everlasting
fire, but it does not therefore follow, that their mansion or abiding in that
fire, must be everlasting too. Our Savior shall take away the answer
presently, who concludes both the fire, and also their mansion or continuing in
that fire to be eternal, at the last verse of that Chapter of St. Matthew. And
these shall go into everlasting pain, and the righteous into life eternal.
Christ skips over these hills.

But let us (if ye please) stand still awhile and view the situation of these
hills: and we may find them placed (if we do but superficially behold them)
most pleasantly for their prospect. They are not so low, but their eyes can
climb up in contemplation to behold those sublime mountains above them, the
holy Angels: nor yet so high, but that they are able with ease to take a
perfect survey of the valleys; Of men on earth. Yet if we do but with a
serious and narrow eye consider them, we shall find this place to be assigned
unto them by God, for their greater vexation. In poenam suam medium locum inter
coelum and terram, de coelo cadens sortitus est, ut videat and invidiat. God
has allotted this middle place betwixt heaven and earth, to the devils who
fell from heaven, to aggravate their torments. For how miserable is he when he
lifts up his eyes to heaven, and there beholds the infinite number of
mountains, (of which he himself was once a part) which like burnished gold
with their divine radiance dazzle the beholders eyes, sounding and resounding
with Hymns and heavenly Songs, (of which Quire he himself was once a member)
abounding in grace, tall in glory? But how much more miserable; when he looks
down upon the valleys, upon mankind below? and sees them rich in faith?
flourishing in hope? beautified in charity? adorned with virtues, as with
flowers? full of good works, as laden with pleasant fruit? the cool and
crystal Fountains (Meander-like) gliding, playing, and making amorous knots
upon their bosoms; and all this while himself (who was once a Lucifer, an
Angel of light) neglected, contemned, hominum ludib^tum factum, and opprobrium
Angelorum, become a scorn and wonder, both of men and Angels?

O how this should set us all on fire me thinks to send up praises and
thanksgivings unto our merciful God? to lay our selves down a sacrifice at
his feet? and (if it were possible) to send up our very souls in thankful
acknowledgements of his divine grace? For what were we better then those
beautiful Angels who fell? yet they are passed over; and we are taken to
mercy: Christ skips over those hills in indignation, but stays us with
flagons, and comforts us with Apples. We are the valleys which he waters with
his mercies; and what were the valleys more then the hills? O thou fairest
amongst the sons of men, chiefest of ten thousand, What is thy welbeloved
more then another welbeloved, that thou art so pleased with her beauty? What
difference is there betwixt the hills and the valleys, save only the
fruitfulness, which is an adventitious thing, and the effect of thy goodness?

Let it be our parts therefore, seeing that God has been so gracious to us,
to skip over the hills, and to water and make us fruitful, and pleasant, who
are the valleys, to imitate them so far, who (as David says) do stand so
thick with corn, that they do laugh and sing: let us sing therefore the
praises of him who has made us thus fruitful, and with the holy Psalmist say
always, The Lord be praised. Amen.

Behold, be comes leaping over the mountains, and skipping over the hills. Or
if ye please, we may understand this Text thus. He leaped upon the
mountains, he skipped over the hills: (.i.) he passed, he overcame all the
difficulties and miseries of our nature, those craggie rocks, and thorny
mountains of our humanity: nay, he passed over that Mount Aetna of Gods wrath
too, which had he not endured, without all question would have broke forth in
fire and sulphur to the destruction of the whole world. And so his

1. Leap was A gremio Patris ad uterum Matris: From the bosom of his Father,
into the womb of his Mother.

2. De utero in Praesepe: Out of the womb of his Mother into the Manger.

3. De praesepe ad Crucem: Out of the Manger to the Cross.

4. De Cruce in Sepulchrum: From the Cross into the Grave.

5. De Sepulchro ad Inferos: From the Grave into hell.

6. And sixthly, From hell, he leapes again into Heaven.

De inferis Victor remeavit ad Coelos, says Saint Jerome in his 26. Chapter of
his rule of Monks, where ye may also find all these leapes of our Savior set
down. And this motion of Christ, had the Philosophers no arguments at all to
prove it, is sufficient to evince, the circular motion of all others to be the
most perfect: He came from heaven first, and he never leaves moving till he is
got into heaven again. And if we do but mark, we shall find Christ in the
five first leapes to follow us, who had leaped the same leapes before him. But
wherefore did he follow us? Ad sanandum and subveniendum. We out of the pride
of our hearts, and the crafty suggestions of the devil, did undertake these
leapes to our own destruction: but he out of the abundance of his mercy,
follows us in our own tract, to seek and to save that which was lost: but in
the sixth he goes before us to prepare a Kingdom for all such who believe in
him.

The first leap which we took was from heaven, from Paradise, from the
bosom of our Father, from the favor of God, into the womb of our Mother,
into the state of corruption, which is the common Mother of us all. I have said
unto corruption thou art my mother, and to the worms, ye are my sisters. But
see; we had no sooner taken this leap, (this fall rather, where we might
have lain for ever, had God not bin as merciful as he is just) but presently
Christ adventures after us, for although he was not exhibited until the
fullness of time; yet the virtue of his conception, nativity, passion, and
resurrection, was in efficacy to believing Adam. He who is immortal became
mortal, he who is the Son of God, and thinks it no robbery, to be called
equal with the Father, became the Son of man took upon him the form of a
servant, that we who are the Sons of men, might be made the Sons of God.

2. Our next leap was into the Manger. We became beast. Man being in honor,
says the Text, (that is, in the state of innocence) had no understanding, but
was likened unto the beast that perishes. Iumenta (puto) dicerent, si loqui
fas esset (says Saint Bernard) Ecce, Adam factus est quasi unus ex nobis.
Certainly (says that Father) the very beasts themselves) had God been pleased
to have bestowed upon them an articulate language (as he did once upon Balaams
Ass,) would have spoken those words simply and without a figure, which God did
at that time figuratively and in a Sarcasme, Behold, man is become like one of
us. For indeed what was he else but Beast then, having lost his excellence,
lost his understanding, lost his immortality, and (in one word) turned his
glory, the image of God wherein he was created, into the similitude of a Calfe
that eats hay? But does Christ leave us here? No. His mercy follows us
hither too. Inde est (says the same Father) quod panis Angelorum factum est
faenum, positum in praesepio, appositum nobis tanquam jumentis; And therefore
he that is the bread of Angels, was made grass, became hay, (For the Word was
made flesh, John 1. And Isay shall tell us in the fourth Chapter what all flesh
is, and yet not Isay neither, but the spirit, for a voice said, Cry, and he
said, What shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and the grace thereof as the
flower of the field) he was laid in a Manger to become food for us, who had
through our own disobedience made our selves beasts. And therefore how well
may we take up that holy rapture of St. Bernard immediately following? Heu
tristis and lachrymosa mutatio; ut homo, Paradise accola, terrae dominus, coeli
civis, domesticus Domini Sabbath, etc. O sorrowful and lamentable change! that
man, the Inhabiter of Paradise, the Lord of the earth, a Citizen of heaven, a
houshold-servant of the Lord of Hoasts, brother to the blessed Angels, and
co-heire with the celestial powers, upon the sudden should find himself for
his infirmity lying in a Stable, for the likeness that he holds with the
Beast standing in need of Fodder, of grass! But much better, and with a far
greater reason may we turn the stream of this ecstasy and cry; O grata
stupenda, and lata mutatio! ut Paradisi dominus, coeli and terrae conditor,
Dominus Sabbath, Rex Angelorum, etc. O happy change, blessed and ever to be
wondered at! That the Governor and Maker of Paradise, the Creator of all the
world, the Lord of Hoasts, the King of Angels, God blessed for ever, should
lay aside his Majesty, come down from heaven, leave the innumerable company
of holy Angels, and be content to become a poor, naked, and distressed
Infant, whose best room at his Nativity was a Stable, a Manger his Cradle? O
the height and depth of the wisdom and mercy of God! He who was Lord of all
the world, chooses no better room then a Stable. Non quia non potuit, sed quia
homo noluit. Not because he was not able, but because Man would not suffer him.
A Paradox! Would not man suffer him? How then was he God? Understand aright.
The sin of man and his own mercy would not suffer him. The end of his
coming was to seek and to save that which was lost, Mankind: And where should
he seek for him, but where he was? Et ecce nunc de grege facta est egregia
creatura. For behold now, Man who was once a glorious creature, has taken up
his habitation with the beast.

Our third leap, -- but stay, we should be worse then beasts if we should
thus lightly skip over this blessed leap of our Savior, this time of
preparation for that great approaching Feast (instituted by the Church) seeming
to envite us to a further honorable mention.

O dies plena miraculorum (says St. Augustine) Creator fit creatura; qui
immensus est capitur; incorporeus carne vestitur; videtur invisibilis, etc. O
day full of wonders! The Creator is become a creature; he whom the heavens, and
the heaven of heavens cannot contain, is this day comprehended: he who is
incorporeall, is clothed with flesh; he is handled now, who cannot be
touched; he who is the Ancient of days, is this day become an Infant; or if
ye will have all in one word, Nascitur Deus, God himself is borne. Qui natus
est primo sine matre in coelis, body natus est sine patre in terris. He who
was borne in the heavens from all eternity without a Mother, is this day borne
on earth, without a Father.

Barbara Pyramidum sileat miracula Memphis.

Let Egypt now cease to talk of her molehills of brick, the Ephesians of
their Temple, Babylon of her walls, Rhodes of his Colosse.

Vnum pro cun^is fama loquatur opus.

And let this fill the mouth of all the world.

Nor is this all. For then we might indeed wonder, but without any comfort to
our selves: now let us add joy unto our wonder. For natus est nobis puer.
There is borne to us a Child, borne to us a Savior. This was that day, to see
which the holy Patriarchs and Prophets of the old Testament so thirsted after:
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth: for thy love is better then
wine, Cant. Chap. 1. Abraham saw this day, and that but in Landscape, a far
off, and yet for all that (says our Savior) he rejoiced. And well was it
called a day, for then the Sun of righteousness did rise to the world, which
before lay steeped in darkness. Blessed are the eyes (says Christ to his
Disciples, Luke 10.23.) which see those things which ye see; for I tell ye
that many Kings and Prophets have desired to see the things that ye see, and
have not seen them. Upon which words, St. Bernard descants thus; Quare nisi
quia nox erat, and nondum venerat illud expectatum mane, cui fuerat repromissa
misericordia? Why (says he) could they not see these things? Because it was
night as yet, and that longed for morning was not broke which David so
earnestly prayed for in his 143. Psalm; Let me hear thy loving kindness in
the morning, for in thee is my trust. How truly may we call John the Baptist
the Morning-starre? for as that ushers out the beautiful Sun, so did he
Christ. He was not that light, (says St. John in his 1. Chap.) but was sent to
bear witness of that light; that was the true light which lights every man
who comes into the world. John was but as a Torch-bearer before that
Bridegroom, who came out of his Chamber, rejoicing like a mighty man to run
his race.

But to leave this sacred mystery with admiration, being a Theme fitter for
the pen or tongue of an Angel then of a weak man, let us come unto our selves.

And what shall we render to the Lord again for all this now? I will tell
ye. Since it has so pleased God so to love the world, as to give his only
begotten Son to us; let us think nothing too good, nothing too dear for
him: let us so love him again, as to dedicate our selves unto him. Since
Christ has vouchsafed to take such a leap for us, to come from heaven to
earth: let us in all thankfulness leap from earth into heaven to him. But ye
will ask me, how? Hic labor, hoc opus est. This is a thing indeed desired of
all, (for who would not be in heaven?) but it is full of difficulties. I
answer, therefore the more noble, the more to be desired. The way to honor is
up hill, the passage craggy and thorny, but be not dismayed, for this journey
which I speak of is not a corporal, but a spiritual journey. Take thou no
care how thy body which must be laid down in the dust, nor how thy soul when
it is separated from thy body shall be carried into those heavenly
habitations: trust thy Savior with this, who will take custody of thy soul
when thou layest down thy Tabernacle, and in his good time, raise up thy body
too to immortality. If thou whilst thou art herein the body, can take thy
thoughts from the earth, and send them on a holy Embassage to heaven, if thou
can raise up thy thankful heart to a blessed acknowledgement of the mercy of
God in thy Savior Jesus Christ, who came down thus to thee, I dare say in
this thou have leapt from earth to heaven: which moving and stirring of thy
soul (like a troubled box of precious Ointment, whose virtuous odours slept,
till they were awaked by stirring) shall make thee smell sweet in the nostrills
of God. Thy lips, O my spouse, (says Christ in the 4. Chapter of this Song)
drops as honey combs, honey and milk are under thy tongue, the savor of thy
garments, is as the savor of Lebanon, Camphyre, and Spikenard, and Saffron,
and Calamus, and Cinnamon, with all the Trees of incense. Which is nothing else
but to show us by the similitude of these earthly things, these odoriferous
delicacies which are most acceptable to our sense, how pleasing and grateful
are the lips, (i.) the confessions, the prayers, the thankesgivings of his
whole Church in general, or of every faithful soul in particular unto God.

We have a saying amongst us, and it is a true one, Ingratum si dixeris, omnia
dixeris, Name but the ungrateful person, and thou namest every thing that is
bad. But alas! how truly may we quite invert this saying, and inverted apply
it our selves. Omnia si dixeris, ingratum dixeris; Name all things, name all
the benefits, all the bounties, all the mercies, which God with a liberal hand
has heaped upon mankind, without weight, without measure, without number; Nay
name this mercy of all mercies. So God loved the world, that he gave us his
only begotten Son. Yet for all this thou may call man ungrateful: For
where is our wedding apparel at the Celebration of these Nuptials? Where is
our faith? where is our charity? where is our newness of life in these days
of preparation? where are our praises? our Songs of deliverance?

Vox quoque Maerim
Iam fugit ipsa, lupi Maerim videre priores.
We are Pythagoreans now, Harpocrates or the Woolfe has seen us, such a
heavy silence is fallen upon us. If ye ask me how ye shall honor this
time truly, Saint Augustine shall tell ye, Cogita Deum Patrem mittentem,
cogita Deum Filium venientem, cogita teipsum immerentem: Think upon God the
Father in mercy sending his Son; think upon God the Son in mercy come,
being sent of the Father, and when thou have done this, think upon thine own
unworthiness, and do this seriously, and it cannot choose but work in thee a
love toward God, a hating of thy self, and thy sins, a charity to thy poor
brethren; and once, adorn thee with all the graces fitting the celebration of
so blessed a time.

Our third leap, was de Praesepe ad Crucem, from the Manger to the Cross,
from Beast to the curse due to sin. Cursed is every one who hangs upon a
tree. But does Christ leave us here? No. He leapes after us hither too; No
sooner are the two thieves upon the Cross, but lift up thine eyes, and thou
shall find him in the midst of them, crying to the penitent, This day thou
shall be with me in Paradise. And do but read that speech of Christ to
Judas, in the 13. of Saint John's Gospel. And then tell me whether we may not
truly call this a leap of his or no, a leap of joy, a leap of an earnest
desire. The consideration of which (me thinks) cannot choose but make our
hearts leap within us too, at the 27. verse. And after the sop, Satan entered
into him, That which thou do, do quickly.

What should this be which Judas was about, that we find our Savior wooing
him to such a speed in the execution of it? That which thou do, do quickly.
Why, if ye will needs know, it was to betray him to the death of the Cross.
This was the action to the performance of which our blessed Savior courts his
betrayer. Of such a love as this can no Stories make mention. Had it been to
receive a Kingdom, to have had his brows begirt with some imperial Diadem,
to have mounted a triumphant Chariot, and from thence to have beheld all his
enemies dragd in fetters after him, we should not then have wondered that he
had leaped toward it, and murmured at the heavy paces of time: but when we
consider that that which he made love to was death; more, an ignom^nious death,
the death of the Cross, the company be so longed to be with, no better then
Thieves; (He was numbered with the transgressors) when we consider that the
best welcome he could expect, besides the pangs of death, would be the bitter
taunts of his enemies, the banquet they entertained him with (composed by those
two harsh and unequall-handed Confectionaries, Cruelty and Scorn) no better
then gall and vinegar, that he should leap toward this, and be so desirous to
have this done quickly, here is the wonder.

I should here describe unto ye those thornie mountains and craggy passages,
which Christ overcame in this leap of his from the Manger to the Cross, but
this is an Antheme fitter for Good Friday; nor do I think it honorable
enough for this Argument to be handled in a discourse that is only passant,
the greatness of the Theme duly chalenging a Tractate of its own, wherein
it may command, not serve as an Attendant. And indeed so do all the other,
but we must not swell up Sermons into volumes, my intent now being only to
give you a glance in my passage, to leap only upon these mountains as I
pass by, and not to fix or dwell upon any of them: For should I affect
largeness here, ye see I might take occasion from this Text, to write the
whole History of Christ.

We have brought him (ye see) to the Cross, and there he remains the scorn
and laughter of the multitude. But shall we leave him so? Pilat then and the
Jews have done as much for him as we. Although we are not able to help him in
his misery, and can only with his acquaintance in 23. of S. Luke 49. Stand a
far off beholding those things, yet this we may do too, we may join with
those people in the 48. verse of that Chapter, who came together to that sight,
and beholding the things that were done, smote their breasts and returned. O
let us smite our breasts too, as acknowledging all those blows and stripes
which fell upon his sacred body, to be due to us.

Nos nos qui fecimus, in nos convertite ferrum. That Spear which pierced his
blessed side, ought to have been pointed against our breasts: for we have
sinned, we have done wickedly, but that Lamb what has he done?

I had here broken off this discourse for this time, but that I considered, to
suffer him to hang a week upon the Cross, had been a greater cruelty then
was shown by the Jews themselves, who because it was the preparation of their
Sabbath, took him down. Let us therefore with the good and just Counselor
Joseph, go to Pilat, and beg the body of Jesus, and ere we depart,
accompany him to the Grave, where, till we return again to draw the
Curtains, and bid good morrow to the rising Sun, we will wish his flumbers
sweet and peaceable. And so we are come to his

4. Leap. De cruce in sepulchrum: From the Cross into the grave.

Into the grave? O tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in the streets of
Askalon, lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of
the uncircumcised triumph. Ye mountains of Gilboa, upon you be neither dew
nor rain, for there the shield of the mighty is cast down. Into the grave?
What should the Lord of life do in the lodgings of death? Sure he has no
business of his own there? Yes. Because his mercy is his own, therefore the
business is his too. He was that good Shepherd, who leaving behind him the
ninety and nine, came in pursuit of that one which had strayed, poor mankind.
And where should he seek for man, but where he was? In sepulchro positus.
Death had carried him away captive, and Christ to redeem him, breaks into the
strong hold of this mighty man, and being mightier then he, overcomes him,
binds him, and sets the prisoner at liberty. And this was all the business he
had in the grave. He came not as owing any homage to the Lord of that dark
mansion, nor yet was it any debt of his own which brought him thither, but the
end of his journey was to pay the ransom for captivated man, who had taken a
leap thither before him. And as before he could not be at rest, but thought
every hour an Ag^ till he was got upon the Cross; so when he was there,
still he has a longing desire to go forward on his journey, and now is as
earnest to be in the grave, as he was before to be upon the Cross; and
therefore he cries out, sitto, I thirst. Sitio, art Christus, non doleo, says
St. Bernard: and a little before, the same Father, Bone Jesus, coronam spineam
sustines de tua cruce and vulneribus taces, and prosola fiti clamas dicens,
sitio. O blessed Jesus, thou had a crown of Thorns upon thy Head, thy wounds
were all fresh and bleeding; and yet not a word of them, thou make no mention
at all of the pangs and torments thou enduredst, thou criest out only for a
little thirst; as if thou who wast able to suffer the piercing of the nails,
could not suffer a little dryness in thy body? Say Lord, what was it thou
did thirst for so? The same S. Bernard shall give you his answer. Certe
solam redemptionem hominis, and gaudium humanae salutis. It was the salvation
of man, the consummation of his redemption which he so longed for, and not the
vinegar and the gall they gave him in the Crusa, there could be but little
pleasure in that.

But see: Joseph has entreated Pilate for the body, he has prepared the
linen clothes to wrap him in, and a Tomb for him hewn out of a Rock,
wherein yet was never man laid: Here we will leave him sleeping for a time,
desiring God of his goodness to make us truly sensible of these his mercies,
that as he leapt over these mountains, difficulties, and thorny passages to
come to us, so we may leap over all impediments of sins, of innate
corruptions, of inward and outward temptations, that we may skippe over all
those hills, barracadoes, bulwarks, and trenches which the world, the flesh,
and the devil (our three grand enemies) do cast up daily in our way, to
hinder our journey toward him, that he may alter the speaking Person in this
Dramaticall song, and say of us, as the spouse here said of him:

It is the voice of my welbeloved, behold [shee too] comes leaping upon the
mountains, and skipping over the hills.

THE EIGHTH SERMON, Being a continuation of the former Discourse upon the same
words.
WE left CHRIST (as ye may remember) in the Grave, being the fourth leap he
took in his journey to Man's redemption, the Stone rolled before the mouth of
the Sepulcher, the Soldiers watching him: O the Jews verily believed that
they had made sure work with him now. And let them enjoy that conceit a while,
it will not long continue with them.

But what sudden Calm dwells on the face of Hell? The Lord of Heaven has
taken a leap thither too. He has triumphed over death and the devil already
in his Portall (as I may call it) his outward house, the grave: and now he
pursues him even into his inward Palace, his strongest hold of all, and there
he conquers him too. To use St. Augustines words in his Sermon De descensu
Christi ad inferos. Me thinks I see those legions of darkness, those
multitudes of evil Spirits which fell, and all the Common people of that
gloomy habitation, stand in a maze at the arrival of Christ in that place, and
calling to one another in that Fathers words, Quisnam est iste terribilis, and
niveo splendore coruscus, invasor iste, non debtor, exactor non peccator,
judicem videmus, non supplicem, venit jubere, non succumbere, eripere non
manner. What terrible armed man have we here! Who is this, who is clothed with
light and majesty as with a garment? and looks more like an invader then a
debtor? a punisher of sinners, then a sinner? who has rather the face of a
Judge, then of a supplicant? the end of whose journey hither is not to obey but
command? not to stay here as a prisoner, but rather to carry along with him
even Captivity it self captive? O Princeps noster, hiccine est ille de cujus
tibi semper futura morte plaudebas? O Lucifer our Prince, is this he
concerning whose future death thou have so much comforted and applauded thy
self? Is this he in whose destruction thou have promised us so many and so
ample spoils? at whose death thou did hope the whole world should be added
to thy Empire? Ecce ^am tot as tibi tenebras suo fulgore fugavit, and omnes
tuos carceres fregit, captivos ejecit, ligatos solvit, luctus eorum in gaudium
commutavit? Behold now, his presence has let in the day into this place of
darkness, which never knew the Sun till now. All thy prison walls are broken
down, thy captives set at liberty, and all their mourning and lamentations are
turned into the voice of joy and gladness. Quid est quod facere voluisti? What
is it that you have done? in pricking Judas and the Jews forward to hang this
man upon a tree, thou have wrought the destruction of thine own Kingdom. -- O
ye mountains fall on us! Hell it self is not deep enough to hide us from
his presence. What have we to do with thee, O thou Son of the most High?
Art thou come to torment us before our time? How terrible is his voice? Thunder
does but whisper to it; and an enraged Sea is low as the breath of Eunuchs.
Many other the like speeches does Saint Augustine, at the sight of Christ in
hell, bring in the devils uttering.

I am not ignorant that there be many who will by no means understand this
Article of our Creed, concerning Christ's descension into Hell, to be literal:
but some of them by Hell will understand the Grave, because they do find the
word Infernum taken many times for the Grave in holy Scripture. But Calvin
himself (who was not very sound in this opinion, as we will show ye after)
has sufficiently confuted such as these from the very order of the Articles in
the Creed, his descension into Hell being mentioned after his burial. Inst.
lib. cap. 16. sect. 8. Quantae enim oscitantiae fuisset rem minime difficilem,
etc. For what a negligent oversight had that been (says he) in this
compendium and brief of our Christian faith, to have explained (or rather gone
about to have explained) a sentence, which is plain enough already, by another
that is more difficult? For when ever two Speeches expressing the same thing,
do follow one another, the latter of those ought to be the Exegesis, or
Interpretation of the former. Thus much Mr. Calvin. But there be others (and
amongst these Calvin himself) who by Hell in that Article of our Creed, do
mean those many torments (iratum Deum) and bitter pangs, such as they who be
in Hell do feel, which Christ endured in his Agony, but especially on the
Cross, when he cried, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

And Calvin excuses (for them) the infringing of the order of the Articles here
in these words; Inst. lib. 2. cap. 16. sect. 10 Nimis frivola adeoque ridicula
est eorum exceptio, qui dicunt hoc modo inverti ordinem, quia absurdum est
Sepulturae subjici quod praecessit: ubi enim quae in hominum conspectu passus
est Christus, exposita fuerunt, opportune subjicitur, invisibile illud, and
incomprehensibile judicium quod coram deo sustinuit. There is something I
acknowledge in this, but neither do I find weight enough in this, nor in any
thing that Calvin, or Beza, or Brentius can say for their opinion, to lie in
balance against all those great names in Antiquity, and learning, who are all
strong for the contrary, such as Cyrill: Catech. 4. Ambrose lib. de mysterio
Paschae. cap. 4. Hilary lib. 10. Trinit. August. 99. Epistle ad Evod.
Chrysostom, Eusebius, and others. I will not trouble ye with any of their
arguments, which ye shall find fully answered by others. Only there is one
argument which that much admired Catechism written by Master Vrsine, does
hug as a precious thing not to be answered, and of that a word. If Christ did
descend into hell (says he) it must needs be by his humane soul, for as for
his body, that was all this while in the Grave: and for his Godhead, in respect
of that he could not be said to descend, because that was as well in Hell as in
Heaven, filled all places before. It could not be by his humane soul, because
he had before upon the Cross committed that into the hands of his Father.
Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. But this is nothing. As though Gods
arm were shortened: Or to be in hell were to be out of his hands. Psalm. 139. If
I make my bed in hell, thou art there also. To this I confess, that the
Catechism does reply, that it is cavil. A very easy way of Confutation they
have, and it may satisfy some, only for my self, I crave leave to be out of
that number. But these are but the opinions started by some of our new men; the
ancient Fathers stand stiff for a local descension, and not only for a
vertuall.

It is to no great purpose for us to know the exact time when this Article of
Christ's descension into hell (which before was but implicitly there) was
expressly interposed in our Creed; for by a general consent of all sides, it is
agreed that at the first it was not in all Churches. For Irenaeus who was a
neighbor unto the Apostles times (who being a child, did hear Policarpus in
Asia, which Policarpus was a Disciple to Saint John the Evangelist) in his
first book Adversus haereses, Cap. 2. repeating the Apostles Creed, makes no
mention at all of this Article, but directly goes from the Passion to the
Resurrection. No more does Tertullian, in the beginning of his books Contra
Praxeam, and in his book De velandis virginibus, no more does Origin in the
beginning of his books De Principiis, no more does S. Aug. in his book De fide
and Symbolo, all which Fathers did both repeat and expound that rule of Faith,
delivered to the Universal Church by the Apostles, and yet name not that
Article at all, but pass immediately from the Sepulture to the Resurrection, so
does the Nicene Creed. But let not this trouble us, for although it was not
there expressed, yet it was necessarily implied, it being convenient, that as
the body of Christ did descend into the place of bodies; so the soul of Christ
should also descend into the place of souls.

Moreover, St Cyrill in that forenamed place, Catech. 4. and 14. And St.
Chrysostom in his 2. Homil. de Symbolo, both read it, and expound it; and now
it is generally received amongst Writers of all parties; The Catechismes of
Luther, and Calvin, Peter Martyr, the Centuries, and all with one consent
entertaining it, though differing in the Exposition.

The Papists indeed undertake (and are very punctual in it) to tell us what
Christ's employment was there, which was to Preach to the Prisoners (they say)
and to redeem the Patriarchs, Prophets, Fathers, and holy men, who dyed under
the law, from that Limbus they were before kept in.

And Saint Augustine seems to come something near this opinion, in one of his
Sermons De Tempore, descanting upon that place of the Prophet Hosee. Cap. 13.
Ero mors tua o mors, ero morsus tuus Inferne, O death I will be thy death; O
Hell I will be thy biting, (for so the word signifies, although our English
Translations render it otherwise.)

Id namque (says he) quod occidimus, agimus ut penitus non sit; ex eo quod
mordemus partem abstrabimus, partemque relinquimus. From that which we kill we
take all, the whole being of it; of that which we bite, we only take a part
and leave a part. So in regard of his own Elect Christ has killed death
utterly; but in that respect that but part of the Sons of men are redeemed
from Hell, and a part left behind, therefore Christ is not said utterly to
kill Hell, but only to bite it: they be St. Augustines own words, Quia vero
ex inferno partem abstulit, and partem reliquit, non occidit funditus, fed
momor dit infernum. Because at his going into Hell he took but part away with
him, and left a part there, therefore he is not said utterly to kill Hell, but
only to bite it.

But this place of St. Augustine may be answered with the same words that
Bellarmine answers that argument of Calvin's, drawn from that place in the
second of the Acts, to prove that Christ did undergo the pains of Hell, verse
24. Whom God has raised up, and loosed the sorrows of Hell: Now says Calvin,
No man can be said to be loosed from that to which he was never bound.

Bellarmine (letting slip the advantage he had of him by the Original: the
Greek copy reading it, (...) the sorrows of death, and not of hell) does
answer him thus; Solutis doloribus, hoc est, irritis effectis, solvit enim
Christus dolores inferni, non quibus tenebatur, sed ne teneretur. Christ did
loose or unty the pains of Hell, (a metaphor taken from the chains of
Captives, or the Nets or traps of Hunters, for so St. Augustine, to whom
Bellarmine indeed was beholden for his answer, Solvi possunt laquei venantium
(says he) ne teneant, non quia tenuerunt) not because those pains had ever
taken any hold of him, but because by the virtue of his perfect obedience and
bitter sufferings he had taken away the power from those Chains of darkness,
so that they were not able once to touch him. So will we be bold to borrow
that sentence of St. Augustine to answer (or rather to interpret) his own
words. Christus momordit infernum, hoc est, partem hominum a potestate abstulit
inferni, non quos infernum tenebat, sed ne teneret omnino. Christ did bite
Hell, (that is) took a part from thence, not that ever that part (meant of the
Patriarchs, Prophets, and holy men dying under the Law) was holden there in
chains; but because Christ did bite or destroy that power, which (had it not
been taken away) would have kept them there captives for ever. Thus dare not
we upon mere presumptions of our own, go so far as the Papists: with more
Christian modesty we may rest in this. That Christ really did descend into
Hell, not to suffer any thing, only to be a greater terror to the damned
Spirits, and to triumph over the Devil, even in his own house.

But the face of the Dance begins to alter. Christ is no longer the only
Masker now: The mountains and the hills which he leaps upon, begin to join
with him, and do leap themselves. What ayle ye O ye mountains that ye
skip like rams? and ye little hills like young sheep? What ails them? If
ye will be pleased but to accompany me to the Sepulcher, there we may
peradventure learn the cause of this so great and sudden joy, discover what
powerful kind of Music this is, which adds wings to the heels of
Mountains, and against all Philosophy makes heavy things move upwards.
Certainly what ever it be, it cannot be less then the strain of an Angel,
which carries such a virtue along with it. And it is the music of an Angel
indeed. Resurrexit, non est hic. He is risen he is not here: why seek ye
the living amongst the dead? O pleasant and most ravishing Song! Come hither
all ye who excel in music, who have power to charm the souls of men, and
can lead untamed Tigers by the ears after you, make the Lions forget what
creatures nature framed them, and follow you like Lambs in a flock together;
draw near and be confounded, hang your Harps upon the Trees, sit down by the
waters of Babylon and weep, for ye are vanquished all. Let the memory of
Orpheus die for ever, and let not Arion be hereafter mentioned; for alas, all
that they could do (and invention was forced to play the wanton in
expressions, and feign them miracles too) was but only to make a poor Dolphin
so kind to carry him to shore, a creature which naturally is in love with
Music, or else to gather a few scattered stones together to build the walls
of a City: But behold, here a note which makes the ponderous Mountains trace it
in a ring. And what strain should this be? Why only this, resurrexit, he is
risen? What if he be risen? What does this concern the Hills and the
Mountains? Cannot he rise, but they must needs rise out of their places too
to express their joy?

At his death, the inanimate world had but two things in it that were precious,
the Sun and the Temple, and we find them both mourners at his Funeral.
That great light of heaven seeing him die upon the Cross, full of grief and
indignation mufled himself up in a dusky garment of clouds, nor did he judge
the sons of men worthy of any light from him who had put out the light of the
world. The Temple which was the glory of the whole earth, rather then it will
want a mouth to utter the sorrow it conceived at that spectacle rends in sunder
to give it vent. But the days of wearing black are now past, the time of
mourning is gone, else how comes it to pass that Mount Sion leapes like a
young Heart, and Syrion like an Unicorn? He is risen says the Angel. But who
is this that is risen, that the mountains are so pleasant at the business?
Why, it is the Lord and maker both of the mountains and valleys, that same
great Lord who tells us that all the beasts of the forest are his, and the
cattle upon ten thousand Hills: He who in the pursuit after us leapt out of
heaven into a stable, endured the frailties and miseries of our Nature, he who
suffered the reproaches of his enemies, was scourged, reviled, spit upon,
crowned with thorns; he whom but now we left in the grave, guarded with
Soldiers, as if the fetters of death were not strong enough for him, He is
now risen. The joyfullest news that ever was heard upon earth. (This is the
day which the Lord has made, let us rejoice and be glad in it.) For if he had
risen no more, but that Death had had the victory over him, his miraculous
conception, his stupendous birth, his cruel sufferings, his ignominious
death, and all that he has endured for us, had not a whit availed us. But now
we see to our infinite comfort, that the house of death was too weak a Prison
for him, and the gates of Hell were not able to prevail against him. Let not
us therefore who have a greater interest in this blessed news then all
creatures whatsoever, be more stupid then the heavy mountains which in an
ecstasy of joy, are found leaping and skipping, Psalm. 114. Not that the
mountains did really leap, but by a kind of Prosopopaea, to intimate unto us
that infinite joy, those glad tidings which now were come unto men, even the
weighty mountains themselves (which are the unlikeliest part of the world for
any such motion) are brought in by the holy Spirit to trace it in a dance.
Which figure does first accuse us men, both of ingratitude and stupiditie.
Secondly, it does incite us to shake off that drowsinesse. It does accuse us
first; For how can we at all be accounted worthy of that great benefit, who
suffer our selves to be overcome even of senseless creatures in expressions of
joy. Or go farther, and suppose that these mountains were sensible, that they
were able to move out of their places, yet what does the rising of Christ
concern them? Had he never died at all, or being dead, had he never risen,
we may conjecture that their estate had been all one; the Sun had sent as
gentle rays upon them as he does now, they had had their vicissitudes of
seasons and times as well as now; the Stars had looked upon them with the
same Aspects, and the air which circumscribes them, had been as courteous to
them as now. The resurrection of Christ, has not purchased any blessedness or
immortality for them. For they shall smoke when the Lord touches them, and
melt like wax at the presence of God, when he comes to judge the whole earth.
But let us look into our selves, and we shall find multitudes of arguments
inducing us, nay enforcing us to a thankful acknowledgement of his mercies.
He was borne, not for himself, but for us: he endured misery not for
himself, but for us: he dyed for us, not for himself: for us he was buried,
for our sakes he went down into hell, and came from thence in triumph, and he
rose again for our justification. We were before children of darkness and of
the night: but now by his resurrection we are made heirs of the light and
day. Before we were the cursed children of Adam, under the dominion of death
and hell: but now by his resurrection we are adopted the blessed sons of
God, and made inheritours of life everlasting. And are these small favors
(think ye) that we take no more notice of them, but sit still (like Solomon's
sluggard) with our hands in our bosoms, and suffer the very hills to take our
office from us? Let us at least join our selves with them in this rejoicing,
for fear least hereafter for this neglect we be glad to woo those mountains
to fall on us, (and be denied,) and to cry unto the hills, Cover us from the
presence of that angry and just God, whose loving kindness we have contemned.
We have our Graves too, even while we live here on earth, to arise out of, the
graves of our sins. There is a twofold resurrection, as well a resurrection
from sin, as from death: and let that man never hope to be a partaker in the
second, (which is from death) unless he have his part in the first, in the
rising from sin. And being risen from the graves of our sins, let us leap
upon the mountains, grow on from strength to strength, from Altitude to
Altitude, from one degree of perfection to another, until at last we come to
leap upon those mountains amongst which Jerusalem which is above is situated.

We are now come to take our last farewell of Christ's corporal presence, till
we shall enjoy it for ever. For hark what the Spouse says in the last verse
of this second Chapter of the Canticles. Until the day break, and the
shadows fly away, return my welbeloved, and be like a Roe or a young Heart
upon the mountains of Bethel. Return my welbeloved. He is now returned to the
place from whence he came; he came from Heaven first, from Bethel, from the
house of God, and (as I told ye before) to prove the circle of all figures to
be the fullest of perfection, he does not leave moving until he comes into
heaven again, till he leapes upon the mountains of Bethel. Lift up your
heads O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and the King of
glory shall come in. Who is the King of glory? The Lord strong and mighty, even
the Lord mighty in battle. Quae vox utique non propter divinitatis potentiam,
(says St. Jerome sed propter novitatem carnis ascendentis ad dextram Dei
ferebatur. Which words were not spoken in regard of the power of the Deity; But
in respect of that new thing which was about to be done, the placing of flesh
at the right hand of the Father. And this is the sixth and last leap I told
ye of, which Christ did take upon his journey toward man's redemption. In the
five first he traced our footsteps, who had leaped the same leapes before him:
but in this he leaves man behind him, and makes have before to prepare his
Mansions for him. In my Fathers house there be many Mansions.

This was that leap of which he himself foretold his Disciples, in the 16.
of S. John verse 16. Modicu^ and non videbitis me, and ite^modicum and
videbitis. A little while and ye shall not see me, and again a little while and
ye shall see me; for I go to my Father. O modicum and modicum (says St.
Bernard) O modicum longum pie Domine, modicum dicis quod non videmus te? A
little while? and a little while? Gracious God and Savior, do thou call
that but a little while wherein we are deprived of thy presence? Salvum sit
verbum Domini mei, longum est, and multum valde nimis. This is a language Lord
we understand. Not to call him who is Truth it self into question for his
words, this which thou call but a little while, seems to us almost as
long-lived as eternity. Call it a thousand Ages (Lord) and not a little while.
But the devout Father has found a reconciliation. Veruntamen utrunque verum
(says he) and modicum meritis, and non modicum votis. It is but a little while
indeed if we respect our own merits, our sins having deserved that we
should be deprived of him for ever: but it is more then a little while, if we
regard the fervent desires which all true and zealous Christians have of his
coming again, an earnest longing for the thing we love and want, spinning
every moment of delay, into a year of days.

He is ascended into the heavens, his enemies here on earth are all subdued
unto him, the wars which he came about are fully ended. Sin, Hell, Death,
and the Grave, do all lie prostrate before his feet, and he as Conqueror
returns into heaven, which is his native Country, In jubilatione and voce
Tubae, as the Psalmist 47. Psalm. He has subdued the people under us, and the
nations under our feet, God is gone up with Triumph, even the Lord with the
sound of a Trumpet. In voce etenim Tubae mos est victorem redire de praelio,
says St. Jerome. For this is the music wherewith the Victor is accustomed to
return from the spoil of his enemies.

He is ascended into the heavens: What business then have we here upon earth?
Our head, our Captain is above. O let our conversations be above too. Let us
lift up our eyes unto the Hills from whence comes our help; all our help
comes from the Lord. What have we to do with the earth any more, or earthly
affections? Woe to us that we are constrained to remain in Meshech, and to
have our habitation in the Tents of Kedar. Our GOD, our Redeemer is in heaven,
sitting at the right hand of the Father; let our hearts be there too, for what
is there now left upon earth worth the loving? Christ's Ascension does call for
our Ascension. The journey (indeed) our souls have to Heaven is great, and we
want wings to carry us; but let us take comfort, for our Savior has promised
us his aid. St. John 12 32. And I when I am lift up from the earth, will draw
all men unto me.

We have done with this Text, as it was interpreted by some of the Fathers, of
Christ's coming in the flesh: We now intend (by Gods assistance) to give ye
only a Paraphrasticall Discourse of the second Interpretation, which points
out this Scripture as meant of the coming of our Savior in the Spirit, to the
Church in general, to each faithful Christian soul in particular.

And the same divisions will serve us still: we have here.

1 His Motion. Behold he comes. 2 The manner of his Motion, Of his dignation.
Of his repudiation.
3 The way. Double too, according to the manner.
Of the motion of God, how he may be said to come or go, to ascend or
descend, we have already in the beginning of this Discourse told ye, and
therefore we must come directly now to the manner. And first, of that manner
of his motion in the Spirit which respects his mercy.

And this has either an eye to the end of his journey, in this word he comes,
venit, non abit, he does not turn his back and fly from us, but he comes
toward us. For had he leapt, had he leapt never so joyfully, and not have come
leaping, made his approaches toward us, but have leapt from us, we had had but
a small part in this joy; but now let our hearts leap within us, for he comes
leaping: Or else the manner of his motion has an eye unto himself, in this
word leaping. He comes leaping, and so the meaning of it is; Laetus est ipse
Spiritus, the holy Spirit it self leapes (that is) is joyful; (for we know
that the outward leaping is an effect of an inward joy) the holy Ghost is full
of joy, and takes a great deal of delight in the journey which he makes to
men. Or else it has an eye unto us, in the same word leaping, and so St.
Bernard understands it. Salit (id est) dat ut saliat, says he. He leapes,
that is, he makes them leap, he fills them with joy and gladness, whose
hearts are thought worthy to be made Temples of the holy Ghost.

He comes.

We sit still, it is he who comes. Certainly in all good manners and reason a
man would think that it should belong to us rather to have gone to him, then
to him to have come to us. We, who were the offending persons, we who had so
maliciously sinned against so gracious a Father, without whose reconciliation
we had for ever perished, we sit still, and he comes. The Cedar in Libanus
comes to the Thistle in Libanus, -- the expression is not full enough. -- The
Eagle of the mountains makes a journey to the Gnat in the valley, -- nor yet
-- but why should I hunt about for comparisons betwixt things which are
infinitely distant? If ye will have all in one word: The omnipotent everliving
God comes to poor man, who indeed (as David said of himself) may be truly
called a worm and no man. Here is therefore place both for our joy and
thankfulness; the journey which the holy Spirit takes, it is toward us, it is
not from us, he comes. Let us therefore take up the Harp and Timbrel, tune our
souls into a pleasant Key, rise up, and meet our Lord and Master, who out of
his incomparable mercy does vouchsafe to visit his poor servants; nor let us
be without a song in our mouths to entertain him with. Sing we thereforee
with holy Zachary; Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and
redeemed his people, and let our lives and conversations continually sing this
Antheme too. For God is pleased indeed to hear a voice without an Instrument:
but he is delighted more, when that voice is joined to the music of a Harp,
when there is a consent betwixt the fingers, (the works of the hand) and the
confession of the lips. And let us be as merry as we can, we shall find the
holy Spirit to be as joyful as we; for he does not only come, but he
comes leaping. That great God, who is so infinitely happy already, that nothing
can be added to his blessedness; he, who has no need at all of any service of
ours, nor of the beautiful Angels themselves; he, who if the whole host of
heavenly spirits had fallen with Lucifer, and all mankind had perished
eternally, had been yet the same God he is now, infinitely good, infinitely
perfect, infinitely happy; yet he comes rejoicing, he comes leaping to us, as
though our happiness were an addition to his own. With what alacrity, with
what cheerfulness, with what thanksgivings (O it is a string which cannot be
touched too often) ought we then to meet him? What preparations can be too
great to bid him welcome? Deck up thy self then in all thy best ornaments,
make clean, and adorn the Temple of thy heart, that when the holy Spirit
comes and beholds the sweetness of the lodging, he may fall in love with it,
and to thy great joy say unto thee, I am pleased with the habitation, and in
this house will I abide for ever, and so he shall leap in thee according to
St. Bernards meaning, that is, thy soul shall be filled with joy.

But this joy is not to all. En discretos and circumspectos sponsi saltus,
says the same Father; Behold how the holy Spirit does choose out the places
upon which he will leap; he does not leap every where, but only upon the
mountains.

Upon the mountains. Salit in montibus. Hoc est, in perfectis in coelo
vicinioribus, qui divina and coelestia meditantur, quique in terram tanquam
parvum aliquid and vile despiciunt ex alto.

He leapes in the mountains, that is, in those who are perfect, in such as are
near unto heaven, whose meditations fly a higher pitch then earth, or earthly
things, who being mounted and placed upon the top of divine contemplation,
look down upon all things below them with a kind of neglect, and beheld all
the men upon earth, and all those glorious Cities and great Kingdoms of the
world, as Charon did in Lucian (when by the aid of Mercury they had made that
goodly pile of mountains to take the better prospect of the earth) (...), who
told Mercury that he saw men moving up and down like so many Pismires, and a
few little nests wherein they cabened, which were the great Cities of the
earth. Men who do not over-prize the world, these are they upon whom the holy
Spirit will leap. But he will have nothing to do with those men who look
through their eyes upon the world, as through a multiplying Glass, which
presents every object to the sight far bigger then indeed it is, whose
thoughts are all taken up with earthly cares, who with the fool in the
Gospel, dream of nothing but of building bigger barnes, of enlarging their
worldly possessions, no matter how, although it be by the ruin of all their
neighbors round about them, the whole bent of whose studies and endeavors is
to multiply their earthly Mammon, never so much as thinking of the riches
celestial; or if it fortune that such a religious thought at any time crowd
into their hearts, it finds no long entertainment, but out it is thrust again
with this answer, I am not now at leisure to think of heaven, meet me at
Master Doctors, when I am old, or when diseases and infirmities have made me
fit to entertain such melancholy thoughts, (as it is in the Story of that poor
old ignorant woman, who being sick, and the Priest desiring her to think upon
heaven, and call upon God for his mercy; answered him, That she hoped it was
not come to that yet.) No, the Spirit of God takes no delight to leap upon
such places as these, this is too foul, too fenny a ground for him, he leapes
only upon the mountains, upon men whose meditations are high, and pointed to
Heaven.

Or else Salit in montibus, hoc est, in seperatis a mundo, and a confluxu
populi. He leapes in the mountains, that is, in such as are separated from the
world, and the great conflux of people. My Dove (says Christ in the 14. verse
of this Chapter) Thou art in the holes of the rock, and in the secret places
of the stairs. The Spirit of God many times leaves populous Cities, great
concourses of people, and vouchsafes his presence rather where two or three are
gathered together, though it be in the Desert. The Shepherds who were in the
field, watching their Flocks, (and that by night too, when all things were
quiet, and silent) had a vision of Angels appeared to them, when Herod and all
the Grandees in Jerusalem, who were in a throng of people, knew of no such
thing. Hagar so long as she was in Abraham's great family, had no vision at
all; but no sooner got into the Wilderness of Beer-sheba Genesis 21. but
presently the Angel of the Lord appears to her, and comforts her, saying,
Hagar, fear not, for the Lord has heard the voice of the child. And the
reason of this is, because these places are many times too full of tumult,
noise, and confusion, to admit of the quiet approaches and operations of the
holy Spirit. Besides, where a multitude of men is, there must needs be a
multitude of sins too. O si possemus in talem ascendere speculam, de qua
universam terram sub pedibus nostris cerneremus! It is S. Ieromes wish. O
(says he) that we could but climb up into such a mountain, from whence we
might discover the whole earth under our feet, what a strange various
spectacle would it afford us? Nay, were we but able at one time to behold the
diverse affairs of one City, it would astonish us, to see a company in this
place lying in wait for the blood of the innocent, in that place another knot
combined together to defeat the Widow and the Fatherless of their possessions,
here a troop making have to the Stews, there others thundering out oaths and
blasphemy in a Tavern, here a profane crew laying their heads together, how
they may cozen God of his Tithes. These and a thousand other affairs of the
same nature though of diverse faces, may a man betray where there is a multitude
of people. And can the holy Ghost take any delight (think ye) to leap in
such places as these? We have an old saying, and it is a true one, Exeat Aula
qui vult esse pius. He who desires to lead a devout and godly life, let him
remove himself as far as he can possibly from the noise and tumult of the
people. If he would pray, let him (with our Savior) go up into the mount of
Olives; if he desires visions, if he has a mind to set himself apart for
contemplation, let him (with the Prophet Daniel) retire himself to the quiet
and pleasant bank of the river Tigris, for it is a very hard thing for a man
to be conversant in the business of the world, and not to have his heart taken
up too much with them; to touch Pitch, and to escape with clean fingers. So
difficult a thing has it seemed in all Ages, that many godly men were afraid
to stand the danger of it, but fled some into Monasteries, some into Caves,
some into the Wilderness, turning Anchorites, and muring up themselves from
the company of all men. Amongst which multitude I will only name that worthy,
learned, and devout Monk St. Jerome, who durst not abide the eyes of the Roman
Ladies, but (being a man of a noble Parentage and Family) hid himself in the
Wilderness from the allurements of the world. Nor yet was his Solitude nor
Hermitage able quite to protect him; for (as he confesses himself) many times
when he was in his Cell, having no other company with him save his own
betraying thoughts, his fancy would present unto him the beauties of Rome
dancing before him. And if this to him, and to him in the Wilderness, how
would his mind have been carried away, had he been actually present to
behold their ravishing and bewitching motions?

Mistake me not, I know it is not for all men to live sequestered from the
world; for as God has made some for a contemplative life (who indeed of all
men are the most happy, being void of cares, of strifes, of envyings, of
backbitings, (things which such men as are any whit versed in the business of
the world, do find too frequent and troublesome) and has no employment, but
only to pray and send up praises unto his gracious Creator, and Redeemer) so
he has framed some men also for Action: and it would be a very cruel and
unjust sentence, if we should exclude all such from any Commerce with the holy
Spirit, and so shut off the unlimited goodness of God only in a Cloister.

Christ, who has taught us indeed, that it is easier for a Camel (or rather a
Cable rope, for the Greek word signifies both) to enter into the eye of a
needle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God, has withal
told us, that there is nothing impossible with God. Cornelius although a man of
service and employment, for he was Captain of the Band called the Italian
band, a devout man (a rare thing in a Soldier) he had his vision of Angels we
know: So Nicodemus amongst the multitude of his secular affairs, he had his
lucida intervalla too. But how? Why, Cornelius was not altogether taken up with
his warlike employments, but had his times of retiring, and retreating to
privacy and devotion: For we read in the 10. of the Acts, that he prayed
continually; (that is, often) and Nicodemus he had his sallies out too from his
cares and worldly troubles. He did per posticum fallere clientem, he made his
journeys privately to Christ by night. And herein is the greatness of a man's
spirit, the goodness of his heart and devotion toward God, shown, in that he
is able in the midst of a crowde of Clients, and secular employments, to set
some hours apart for the service of his GOD. To live a retired life, and to
turn ones back upon the world, is (I confess) of the two the safer way, but
yet savours the more of the Coward: and to run the course of the active and
employed man, though it be more dangerous, yet withal it is more honorable,
if he be able to overcome all those provocations, and in spite of business to
be religious. And they who can do thus, may very well be reckoned amongst the
number of the quiet and solitary Mountains, on which the holy Spirit comes
leaping. For although sometimes they may be called Plateae potius quam montes,
Streets or high ways rather then untroden mountains, by reason of their
employments; yet so long as their secular cares do not make too deep
impressions in them, when they betake themselves again to the meditation of
heavenly things, all the other vanish away as if there had never been any such
footsteps to be seen: but rather on the contrary the footsteps of the blessed
Spirit appear in all their actions. For what place soever the holy Ghost is
pleased to leap upon, be sure that thou shall find the footsteps of God left
behind there, so that he who runs may read them, and be bold to affirm,
and say, The Lord has traveled over this ground. And the footsteps which the
Spirit of God leaves behind are these; Truth, mercy, love, peace, meekness,
obedience, humility, and the other links of that sacred Chain of virtues.

If thou would not therefore cozen thy self (as many do now adays, who are
continually boasting that they have the spirit, that they know they are
illuminated by the spirit, and I pray God it be not another kind of spirit then
they suppose it is) but certainly know whether thou be one of these
Mountains upon which the holy Spirit leapes, or no; enter into thine own
heart and there observe what kind of footsteps are imprinted in it. If thou
find truth there, a sincere heart, void of all hypocrisy, all dissembling,
thy thoughts, thy words, and thy actions, all agreeing together, all of one and
the same tincture; if thou find there bowels of compassion toward thy poor
brethren, thy fellow members of Christ's mystical body, if thou discoverest
there a gentle dove-like meekness and humility, an obedience to the higher
Powers for conscience sake, take comfort to thy self, and praise thy gracious
God, for be confident there the holy Spirit has leapt: and be not afraid to
say with waking Jacob, Genesis 28. after he had seen the vision of the Ladder,
and was redeemed from sleep, Certainly the Lord is in this place and I knew
not of it. But if in the room of these virtues, thou find their contrary
vices: if instead of Truth, thou find hypocrisy; for mercy, cruelty and a
hardened heart; if for obedience thou find a proud, sullen, and surly
refractorinesse to all authority; if in the room of humility, thou find
nothing but pride, and a magnifying of thy self above thy brethren, (as
commonly such people as do boast so much of the spirit, are the proudest and
disdainfullest generation under the Sun) if thou find these impressions upon
thy heart, thou have just cause then to fear that the holy Spirit never
traveled over that place; for these do not look like the footsteps of God,
these are the impressions and footsteps of the Devil rather, these are those
Hills rather which the holy Spirit is said here in my Text to skip over;
Transiliens colles: and so we are come to the last thing I observed,

The motion and way of his repudiation or anger.

Transiliens colles, hoc est, superbos:

Transiliens colles, hoc est, steriles, qui neque tam alti sunt ut divina
meditentur, neque tam humiles ut poenitentiam agant, Tubera sunt quaedam
terrae. He skips over the hills, (that is) barren men, solifidians, who are
enemies to good works; He skips over the hills, that is, proud men, who are
not so high that their thoughts and meditations do reach heaven; nor yet so
low that they can be reckoned among the valleys of the humble and penitent:
they are only certain swellings of the earth.

But why does God skip over these? Is there any respect of persons with him,
that he leapes upon some, takes some to his mercy, passing by, and skipping
over others?

I will give you an Answer, which shall not have many words in it, but I
suppose it will be full enough to give satisfaction to any knowing man:
Transilit colles, quia invenit tales, non quia fecit. He passes by the hills
because he finds them hills, and not because he makes them so; for God is not
the Author of sin. When we are tempted, let no man say, that he is tempted
of the Lord, for God tempts no man, but we are tempted of our own lusts and
corruptions.

I am the Rose of Sharon, the Lilly of the vallyes, says our Savior in the
first verse of this Chapter, not of the hills, no; God resists the proud, and
gives grace unto the humble and meek. This was the sin which cast the once
blessed Angels from Heaven, and it is this which shall keep all proud men
both from glory hereafter, and from grace here. It is impossible for grace and
pride to lodge together under one roof. If there be any of us here (as indeed
we are all of us naturally) tainted with this swelling sin of Pride, let us
know that so long as we are hills, puffed up with high imaginations of our own
worth, the holy Ghost will have nothing to do with us, but will pass by us;
and to be passed by, and forsaken of God, we know what a terrible thing it is,
drawing after it no less then eternal destruction both of body and soul. Si
sic enim actum est de Angelo, quid de me fiet terra and cinere; (says St.
Bernard) ille in caelo intumuit, ego in sterquilinio. For if God dealt so with
Angels, what will become of me who am but dust and ashes? They sinned and grew
proud in heaven, but I upon a dunghill; and who does not account pride a more
tolerable vice in a rich man then in a beggar? If he paid so dear for having
his heart lifted up within him, who was a great and powerful Prince under the
King of Heaven, in that celestial Hierarchy, if he was punished after that
manner for his pride, who was a happy and beautiful creature, (Quid de me
exigendum (says the same Father) and misero and superbo?) What torments will
be exacted from me who am both miserable, both wretched, and proud too? Let
this holy meditation therefore of St. Bernards sink deep into the heart of
every one of us, that we may pluck down our plumes again, and with the holy
and lowly Prophet David, in the humility of our hearts, cry unto the Lord, and
say, Lord what is man that thou should regard him? or the Son of man that
thou should be so mindful of him? So shall the holy Spirit take pleasure in
thee, and thy Savior have delight in the beauty of thy soul. (For a broken
and a contrite heart, O Lord, will thou not despise) and so shall thou be able
with a great deal of joy and comfort to repeat these words, and say, It is
the voice of my welbeloved, behold he comes leaping upon the mountains, and
skipping over the hills.

(...) TWO SERMONS UPON The Parable of the Pharisee and the Publicane, St.
Luke, 18.
who went up into the Temple to Pray.
Preached at VPPINGHAM, upon their Feast day, or the day of the Dedication of
their CHVRCH. (*)
St. LVKE 18. VER. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 9 He spoke also this Parable unto
certain who trusted in themselves that they were just, and despised others.

10 Two men went up into the Temple to pray, the one a Pharisee, the other a
Publicane.

11 The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with him self; O God I thank thee,
that I am not as other men, Extortioners, unjust, adulterous, or even as this
Publicane.

12 I fast twice in the Week, I give Tithe of all that ever I possess.

13 But the Publicane standing a far off, would not lift up so much as his
eyes to Heaven: but smote his breast, saying, O God be merciful to me a Sinner.

14 I tell ye this man departed to his house justified rather then the other:
For e^try man who ^alteth himself shall be brought low, and he who humbles
himself shall be exalted.


NOt to disturb the quiet Ashes of that great Philosopher Plato, nor to
disparage the learning of him, whom his own Age, and all Ages since have
admired, I am constrained to tell him (though unwillingly because he is not now
amongst the living to answer for himself) that, deep however his reach was,
and profound his judgment in other things, yet his learning failed him
mightily in the Computation of his great year, which he would have to contain
some thirty and odd thousands of our vulgar or solar years; which space of
time (according to his opinion) did not only terminate all the several and
diverse motions and Aspects of the Planets and fixed Stars; but also did set a
Period to the affairs of the World. For those years being expired, every
thing was to return unto the former estate it was in at the beginning, all
things were to become new, and to run round again as in a ring, (from whence
the year takes its name, Annus from Annulus) the same men, were at the same
time, after the same manner to be borne again; and those men to do the same
things, speak the same words, at the same time they did before; and after the
same manner, and at the same time to dye. The conceit is strange; but let him
enjoy it peaceably for me concerning the substance of it, not that I subscribe
to his opinion, but because I can spend my time better then in opposing it.
Only for the time of the revolution of this great year I must make bold to
confute him, for (by his favor) he has ascribed too great a length to it. Nor
will we travail far for this confutation, no farther then to the Text.

It can not be by the received Computation since CHRIST did take up this
Parable, any more than 1603 years, for he was of the Age of thirty before he
was baptized, and began to preach, and at that time there were men living
(says the Text) who trusted in themselves that they were ^ust and desposed
others. For we find ^t the very occa^on why our Savior speaks this Parable,
and what were the^ Why the Sect of the Pharisees people who cried, Touch me not
for I am holier then thou.

Annus iam rev^vitur Platomeus. Plato's year is come about already, the same^
men who lived in Christ's time do live now, and these same men do speak the
same words, do the same actions which those men did then: For never was the
world fuller of Pharisees then it is at this hour; Men who trust in themselves
that they are just, and despise others: and therefore (according to the rule
and Law of that great year) needs must Christ too, in his Priests, in the
dispensors of his word (for he speaks in us) again take up the same Parable
against them.

Two men went up into the Temple to pray, etc. I will not trouble ye with any
curious or elaborate division, but will strive to be as plain as I can
possible. In handling therefore this Parable, we will take it naturally as it
lies in the Verses.

And Pharisee and Publicane. actions and gestures of these two men, who went up
into the Temple to pray, the manner how they composed themselves in that holy
exercise. forms of the Prayers they made. And Christ gives upon them.


The one a Pharisee.

The Pharisees were a Sect amongst the Jews, (for the very word Phares
signifies Division, or a Sect) a sort of people who separated themselves from
the prophaner multitude (as they called them) highly esteemed amongst the people
for their strict manner of living, professing Continence, Virginity, Fasting,
to keep the body in subjection, the flesh from Rebellion, they used to sleep
upon boards, upon stones, or else upon Thorns, upon their foreheads they wore
scrooles of Parchments, wherein were written the ten Commandments; which
Schedules were called by them Phylacteryes, (...), from a word which signifies
to keep, because by the use of them the Law was preserved and kept in memory.
Nay, to speak truly, they which the Pharis^es wore, were rather called (...),
large Phylacteryes; for in a vainglorious and proud humor they did enlarge
their Phylacteryes far above the ordinary bigness, and therefore our
Savior, Math. 23.5. finds fault with them for this very thing. Mat. 23.5
All their works (says he) they do to be seen of men for they make their
Phylacteryes broad, and make long the fringes of their Garments. The Jews (as
ye may read in the 15. of Numb. 38.39.) were commanded by the Lord to make
them fringes upon the borders of their Garments, throughout their generations,
and to put upon the fringes of the borders, a Ribband of Blew silk. The
reason, the Lord renders himself, in the next verse. Number. ^
And ye shall have the fringes, that when ye look upon them, ye may
remember the Commandments of the Lord, and do them. And again, in the 22. of
Deuteronomy. 12. Thou shall make thee fringes upon the four quarters of thy vesture,
wherewith thou coverest thy self. And the reason of this (says the Talmud)
was to stir them up to Prayer, which Garment was called Talith, a winged
Coat, (our prayers being like the silver wings of a Dove wherewith we fly up
to Heaven) and therefore the Prophet Elisha, who continually is said by them to
wear this kind of Garment, was called Elisha cum alis, ELISHA with wings: but
these fringes of an ordinary length would not serve the Pharisees: No, they
must have a newfangled conceit of their own, they must by all means seem
holyer then the people, and make long the fringes of their Garments. They
ascribed much to the virtue of the Stars, and believed that all things
happened by Constellation, and yet for all that ascribed Free Will to Man. They
affirmed the immortality of the Soul (...) (contrary to the Sadduces) and
believed that God should come in Judgment. And of this Sect were Nicodemus and
Saint Paul before his Conversion. But all this while I have showed ye their
fairest countenances: will it please ye to see how our Savior CHRIST paints
them out in their own proper colors. For as he will not bestow any
flattering lines upon them, to make the pictures of them seem lovelyer then
the life: So without all question, he who is truth it self, will be so just,
that he will not wrong them a whit in the description: they are like to have
their due from him, and no more. Look into the 23. of Math. and there ye
shall have them set out unto ye to the full.

Math. ^.
5 Verse. All their works they do to be seen of m^n, they love the chief
place at Feasts, and to have the chief seats in the Assemblies, they love
greetings in the Markets, and to be called of Men R^bl^, Rab^.

14 Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye devour widows
houses, even under a color of long Prayers.

15. Woe, etc. For ye compass Sea and Land to make one of your profession:
and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the Child of Hell and your
selves.

24. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, blind guides, who strain
at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel.

25 Woe, etc. For ye make clean the outside of the Cup and Platter, but
within they are full of Bribery and excess.

27. Woe, etc. For ye are like unto whited Tombs, which appear beautiful
outward: but are within full of dead men's bones and all filthiness.

Ye have had a plentiful Character of a Pharisee, and me thinks ye seem to
be full of him, and begin to loath him. But can it be possible, that there
should be such men living now? Yes, Plato's year has made a speedy return,
it is come about already. We have at this hour a Sect of New Pharisees sprung
up, in every branch of the description answering the old ones; nay, in many
points of Hypocrisy and vainglory, going beyond them quite.

But before I go any farther, give me leave to tell you how many kinds of
Pharisees there were.

There were five sorts of Pharisees; for, as for the Pharisee for love, who
obeyed the Commandments for the love of virtue, and respected especially the
commands affirmative, who was only if any) the good Pharisee and the Pharisee
for fear, who was subject to the Law only in a servile fear of punishment,
and had a chief regard only to the negative part of the law, I do not count
them, although the Talmud makes them two distinct kinds.

Pharisee Sichemite, and this was he, whose only end in turning Pharisee, was
gain; and he had his name from Sichem, or Sechem the son of Ha^or, who
defiled Dinah the daughter of Jacob, and after for the love of her suffered
himself and persuaded all his people to be Circumcized. Genesis ^4.

Phariseus truncatus, the Pharisee without feet, and the reason of his name,
was; because when he walked, continually he was seen to go a heavy leaden
p^ce, scarcely lifting up his feet from the ground, as if he had had no feet
at all to use. And to what end tended this du^ and earthly behavior of his,
think ye? Only to increase his ^pute and opinion amongst the people, of his
Meditation, he desired to be taken for a Contemplative man, and to seem so
careless of earthly things, that he would walk (for^ooth) about in the
would, as if he ca^'d not whether he walked (...); ^ll the faculties of his
soul and body w^ so pu^ and taken up in heavenly meditations, that not (...)
much as his very feet were at le^sure to car^ him up and down.

Phariseus impingens, the winking Pharisee, the Pharisee who used to break his
face, and took delight in it, it seems, and his fashion was, whenever he had
occasion to walk abroad, to prevent these fleshly motions and provocations, which
might be darted into his soul by looking upon women, to shut his eyes
continually, so that many times for want of sight, he would dash his head
against a Pillar or a wall until the blood ran about his ears.

The fourth, was the Pharisee Dic, etc. the boasting Tell me but what it is
that I ought to do, and I will do it. And of this sort, the young man in
this, 18. cap. of St. Luke, may seem to be. Verse, 18. who came unto CHRIST,
and said, Good Master, what shall I do to inherit aeternall life? who, as
soon as CHRIST had told him what he should do, replied presently, All this
have I done from my youth. But observe here how our blessed Savior meets with
this vainglorious Man, in his own Element, beats him (as we use to say) at
his own weapon. He comes to CHRIST with a Master what shall I do? intending
to justify himself. And JESUS answered him, sell all that thou have, and give
to the poor, and follow me, and thou shall have treasure in heaven. But what is
his answer? not a word. When he heard those things (saves the Text) he was
very heavy, for he was marvailous rich. Where is his Et faciam now? his I will
do it? we here not a word more of him, but out he steals in private. And of
this very Kind, this Pharisee in the Parable may seem to be.

Pharisaeus Mortarius, the Pharisee with the Mortar upon his head: and his name
was derived from the fashion of the Hat he used to wear, being like unto a
deep Mortar wherein spices are beaten. And this Hat when he walked abroad,
being so planted upon his head that he was neither able to see above him, nor
of any side of him, but only the ground, and the way before him, was pretended
to prevent all vain objects for having recourse unto his eyes, which might
distract and scatter his thoughts, so that he could not be so intent upon the
contemplation of Spiritual matters, as he desired to be.

I have dwelt something long upon this word Pharisee, and to show you any thing
of him, I could not be shorter. But we must not yet leave him; I must needs
borrow a little time of ye to insist upon the Parallel, in comparing the old
Pharisees and our new ones together.

All these kinds of Pharisees is this Age of ours able to produce with ease.
And

Pharisee Sichemite amongst us, he who will suffer himself to be circumciz'd
for the love of Dinah. And this is he who for gain, (Quid non mortalia pectora
cogis
Auri Sacra fames!)
Though it be quite contrary to his Nature, circumcizes every Thing about him.
Circumcizes his Hair, crops that as short as his Eyebrows, and places
Religion in that shortness, (otherwise we would not much blame him for it:)
Circumcizes his Honesty, oh, he must not have too much of that by any means.
He is in this a true observer of that Italian Proverb, which tells us that he
who will thrive, must have Poco di matto, e non molto d' honesto. A little of
the Fool, and not too much of the honest So he be but able to talk ye an
hour together in the phrase of the Scripture, to abuse and profane the holy
words of Gods book by his impertinent applying of them, then he is a sanctified
man, to who^ a little dishonesty and cheating in his actions can do no harm.
One of Gods Children he assures himself he is, and the greatest argument for
this assurance, is because (like a Parrot) he can prattle a little of the
Scripture, and understands just as much as the Parrot does her Ave-Caesar. But
me thinks, if they did but a little understand, they might easily discover the
weakness of this argument: For it is not the having of Gods word in thy mouth
only, that will profit thee at the last day; but it is the squaring of thy life
and actions according to the rule of this Word. He circumcizes his
Understanding too, mortifies that, it is a profane thing to be learned; and
therefore I think it is, that many of us of the Clergy (sighing I utter it)
who are their Leaders, and the great Rabbines amongst this sort of people, do
so little regard our study, but all the Week long, do run up and down upon
visits, trifling away our time in eating and carrying News from house to
house: So that the day of the Lord, comes stealing upon us like a Thief in the
night, and takes us unprepared, going many times into the Pulpet, (but
circumcizing the Common Prayers too as we go) without any, or at least without
much praemeditation. Hence it is, that so many senseless Tantologies, so many
dry impertinences proceed from us, even to the making cheap, and dishonor of
Preaching, many of us never taking any pains, until we are got into the
Pulpet: there I acknowledge some of us are painful enough, both to our selves
and others. Whereas if we would but lay out that time, in visiting the Fathers,
which we throw away in visiting the Daughters, the Mothers, and the Sisters;
but buy the acquaintance of the subtle Schoolmen, the grave Councels, the
Histories and Annals of the Church, (able to make us wise in Religion) the
wholesome and learned Commentatours, with the expense of that time we spend in
Currents and shallow Pamphlets, we might then be furnished with ancient and
true learning, which would not suffer us to call Antiquity, Noveltie; Nor do
they only circumcize their Understandings, but also that other faculty of the
Soul, their Wills too, taking away that Freedom which the Lord has bestowed
upon them. And all this is for the love of Dinah; of Gain, of Vainglory, in
desire of Government although it be but over a Molehill: for the love of the
Idols of their own Imaginations.

Pharisee I told ye of, is the Pharisee without f^, the Pharisee with the
Leaden-pace, which behavior of his did gain him from the People, the Title of
a Contemplative man. Nor are we without this kind of Pharisee amongst us: a
company which walk heavily about, and affect a kind of sullen gravitie, as if
it were a thing impossible for a man to be Religious, unless he should tell
his steps; and measure the distance betwixt his paces. It Is true the Wise man
says, A man is known by his Gate, and that there is a levitie of carriage to
be avoided is true too: but it is also true, that there is a mediocrity to be
used: God has given us feet, and we are to use them soberly, but not affectedly
and vaine-gloriously. There be too many in the world, whose feet move sadly
(indeed) and slowly, catching at the good opinion of the multitude: but I could
wish it were not so easily to be proved, that in the mean time their hearts
are nimble enough in contriving of mischief against their Brother, their
Tongue's too quick to wound their Neighbors reputation; as if they meant to
confute that Tenent of Philosophy, and prove that the Soul is not Tota in
qualibet part.

The third Pharisee was the winking Pharisee, who his Eyes for fear of
Tempting Objects, but ever when he walked abroad was accustomed to wink, and
rather adventure the breaking of his Face against a Wall or Pillar, then to let
in any vain spectacle into his Soul, whereby to withdraw his meditations from
Heavenly things. The pretended intent of this man's winking, I neither must nor
dare accuse; for we ought (as much as in us lies, and as much as the condition
of our lives will permit us) to prevent even the occasions of evil: and
therefore DAVID tells us, that He has made a Covenant with his Eyes that he
look not upon a woman: yet when our Savior tells us, that all the works which
they did were to be seen of men, as it is in that aforementioned place of St.
Mathewes Gospel, Mat. ^ 5.
23.5. And that they shut up their Gates only to cozen the world, when the
Enemies which they pretended to bar their door against, Lust and
concupiscence, were too tenderly entertained within their bosoms before, which
of us can see the blood run about the ears of such a man, and not be moved
rather to laughter then to pity? And have not we of this kind of Pharisee
too? who go abroad continually with a narrow and demure countenance, as if
they were put into a suite of Wainscot, and had noe use of any joint about
them? who might easier be persuaded (were it in their power) to remove a Bishop
out of his See, then by the least motion of their Necks, to bring a Set of
their ruffes out of order. And yet the world knows too well that many of these
people, though their faces be but narrow, and their sight limited (as it were)
to the ground they tread on, are of spread, large, and vast intentions to do
mischief.

We have also the Pharisee Dic, etc. the boasting Pharisee with us, the
Pharisee with the mortar on his head too -- but I should enlarge this discourse
too far, if I should follow every particular to the full, the field I have to
walk in is so ample. And I perceive already that it begins to swell beyond the
just proportion of a preface; I will therefore briefly tell ye what is meant
by the other word, Publicane, and so we will proceed in the Parable.

The other a Publicane.

The Jews bring subject to the Empire of the Romans, as all other Provinces
belonging to that warlike and wise Nation did, did pay Tribute unto the Senate
and People of Rome; and the Public officers who were appointed for the
gathering together of this money, were called by them Publicanes, Quia res
publicas sua cura administrabant, because by them the public money was
exacted from the People, and paid into the Common bank. A condition of men,
who, by reason of the many open wrongs, oppressions, and injuries done by them,
were as much hated and scorned by the multitude, as the Pharisees on the
contrary were had in high repute and honor amongst them. Nay they were had in
such abomination amongst the Jews, that it was accounted an unclean thing to
tate with one of them. And therefore, it is reckoned amongst the great
distastes which the Scribes and Pharisees took against our Savior, that he
did eat with Publicanes and Sinners. Why does your Master eat with Publicanes
and Sinners.

Now CHRIST knowing well in what high esteem this Sect of the Pharisees were
amongst the people, for the strictness and holiness of their lives, who
indeed were but cunning Maskers in Religion, and under that veyle of
counterfeit devotion did shroud cruelty, oppression, lust, hatred,
covetousness, etc. and seeing how much the Publicane was contemned, whose
sins lay more open to the view of the World, then the others, and knowing
besides that his Auditors about him, were people who trusted in themselves that
they were just and despised others (as the Character of them is given at the
first verse of the Text) that he might confute them concerning their own
seeming-righteousnesse, and make it appear to them, that God sees not as
mortal man sees, he takes up this Parable against them, saying. Two men went
up into the Temple to pray, the one a Pharisee, the other a Publicane.

The next thing we have to do is to examine the actions of them both. And we
see it is with them, as it is the life of men (set out unto us by Pythagoras in
the Greek letter Y, our y) who, while they are young and in their tender
years, whether they be virtuously or vitiously inclined, all go up in a
straight line together, as it is in the lower part of that letter, and no
difference is perceived; but when they come to the parting point, to years of
knowledge, heat, and vigor, they who be vicious do go by the left hand way,
which is plain and broad: the virtuous take up toward the right hand line
which is steep and narrow. So here, the Pharisee and the Publicane (like that
Letter of Pythagoras) for a while go together in their actions; and (like that
letter) part at the Top. One takes to the right hand, the other to the left.

The way they go together is this. They both go up into the Temple; and they
both go up into the Temple to pray: and they did both well in thus doing.

For, for the first, in going to the Temple, observe how the Holy Ghost does
insinuatingly and stealingly, even before a man can be aware of it, in this
very phrase of Scripture, set a price upon the Temple more then upon any other
place. For he calls the going into the Temple an Ascension.

Two men went up into the Temple. Esteem then as meanly as thou will, of Gods
House, the Church, it is the highest, the best place about the Town or City
thou liv'st in, how ever thou may think to the contrary. And I would to God
there were not too many of a contrary belief: these places then would be more
frequented then they are, and more reverently thought on. It is true, God is
indeed every where his blessed presence fills the world: yet he is more
especially present, in such places as these which are set apart only for his
Worship.

Before the Dedication neither this House nor the ground it stands on, had any
more Holiness in them then other places: but as soon as the Dedication of
this House had stamped Gods Image or Superscription upon it, then it ceased to
be Caesar's, to be for any common or secular use. Give therefore, etc. This Holy
ground we now stand upon, before the setting of it apart for Gods Worship, was
like the Possessions of Ana^ias and Saphyra in the fifth of the Acts, which
PETER tells them were their own, whilst it remained (at the 4 verse)
appertained it not unto thee? and after it was sold, was it not in thine own
power? The possession of that men was his own, and he might have done what
ever he had pleased with it before; but when he had separated it from a Common
use, and intended it for God, it was no more his own, neither was it lawful
for him then to do what he pleased with it. So it is with our Churches; before
they were built, or before they were dedicated, we might have done what we
would, or with the ground, or with the Houses, we might then have sitten here
with our Hats upon our heads, we might have made them sleeping rooms, we
might have come hither to have talked, or to have sat and mused upon secular
affairs an hour or two; (as I fear some do) thou might then have come
hither (as many women do) to see who wears the newest fashioned lace, to
discover who has the neatest dress, or the best gown in the Parish. All these
things and more, whilst this place was thine own, thou might have done here,
(supposing these things lawful in themselves to be done) thou might have
sold Doves, or exchanged money here, while this place was thine own: But the
Dedication has set Gods mark upon it, so that now thou can not do these
things in this place without manifest Sacrilege, and I dare be bold to
pronounce him a Church-robber, who shall dare to come into Gods house without
reverence.

Two men went up into the Temple. Let the Mathematicians dream as they please,
That all the Lines drawn from the Center to the Circumference are of equal
length: Divinity has her Demonstrations as well as the Mathematics and as
true too; and she tells us that the Temple stands upon the higher ground. This
is one of her Aphorisms, and I challenge all Geometry, or Ouranometry to
disapprove it, Thou art nearer Heaven when thou art in a Church, then when thou
art in any other place. They went up into the Temple, and they went up to pray:
and they did both well in doing this too: for my House (says the Lord) shall
be called the House of Prayer. We do not read in any place that it is called
the House of Preaching, but the House of Prayer, for that is the chief use of
these Houses, and we do then honor God the most when we pray to him.
Preaching is a holy institution of the Lords, but there be degrees in
Holiness. Prayer is a more holy institution, we must not then go up into the
Temple (as many do) only to preach, ot to hear Sermons, with a contempt and
scorn of the Common Prayers of the Church: but we must go up also to Pray,
Preaching now adays is made an Idol of amongst many, who are grown to be all
Ear, no Heart, no Hand, no Lap; whilst Praying (and I sigh to think it which
is the chiefest part of Gods Worship and Honor, is, if not altogether, yet too
much neglected. In the Name of God although ye will not allow Prayer (as ye
ought) the Pre-eminence, yet at the least let Praying and Preaching (like two
T^in Sisters) lovingly go hand in hand (...). But I know I shall be answered
that they do not contemn Prayer, but that they pray (and that in the Church
too) as much as any. There is indeed ^t^ ^e thing, which they call Prayers,
like the tw^ half Moons in a Parenthesis, compassing in (...) Sermons at both
ends, (the comparison I acknowledge is too unfortunate, for many of their
Sermons do too truly square with a Parenthesis, whose nature is such, that it
may as well be left out as put in, and no harm done.) And it is possible I
confess, that they may in these their extemporary and tedious discourses,
before and after their Sermons, understand what they say themselves; but what
profit shall the Congregation receive, who are down upon their knees before
God? How shall they understand, or how shall their Spirits join with thine
when they know not what it is that thou art about to say? It is as much as if
thou should pray in an unknown Language, and how shall He then who fills
the room of the ignorant, say Amen unto thy Prayers? Whereas if thou would
pray according to the command of the Rubricke and Canon, the people then might
know what thou would say, and so join in devotion with thee. But the Spirit
must not be limited (they say) and therefore we must not be bound to observe a
set form when we pray. No? Then down with all Laws and Discipline, for the
Spirit must not be limited. Does not our Savior limit thy Spirit when he
bids thee pray thus. Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. For where there is an
injunction to do a thing thus, there must needs be a not thus, employed: and
where there is a thus, and a not thus, of necessity there must be a
limitation. But if this Argument were of any force at all, it would make
against themselves. For they who will but mark the carriage of this sort of
people, shall observe a kind of coldness and fastidious way wardnesse hanging
upon them while the Holy Prayers of the Church are in motion, but as soon as
ever their Ministers begin to vent their own bold presumptuous and confused
Raptures (enough to strike a terror into a Godly man, to behold how
confidently unprepared they come to discourse with their Maker) as if their
Souls were taking leave of their bodies, and nothing but Heaven and it is joys
were in their eyes, each part of them seems to be in contention which shall
overcome in expressions of devotion: their hands are lifted up, their knees
bended which before were stiff, their eyes fixed upon them while they pray, all
their members disposing themselves into postures of zeal. And let me now ask
them but one question. In this devout carriage of the body (which I durst not
find fault with were it charitas ordinata, a rectified zeal, do they ^oyne
with their Minister (as they call him, and ^ruly or else at that time has every
one a particular Prayer of his own? The latter sure they will not grant, for
then they fall into gross absurdities: but it will satisfy me if they
confess the former, for then I am sure their Spirits are limited. Either they
pray the same Prayer with their Minister, or else they pray another; that they
pray ^ther they will not acknowledge, if the same, then certainly their Spirits
are bounded in that, as well as if they prayed with him in the Prayers of the
Church. But this is but a Cavil. Alas! We know too well, both the Original
and into of these tedious, disorderly and unprofitable Prayers. They are not of
such Antiquity but there be some yet living, who can remember both how, when,
from ^ence, and by whom they were brought into our Church, in a mere
opposition and contempt of the Book of Common Prayers. But why then brought
in, and why still continued, in contempt of that, I acknowledge I understand
not: for if we look into the Order, Method, and Disposition of that Book, we
shall find it sweet and harmonious; if into the sufficiency of it, rich; and
full: for what thing is it thou would name in thy Prayers (whether it be by
the way of Confession or thy sins, or of Thankesgiving for Benefits received,
or of Petition for the future) but thou may furnish thy self with there,
more perfectly, lively, and more compendiously expressed, then all thy wit can
possibly contrive.

They went both to pray: And whether went they? Why, into the Temple.

Private Prayers are good, thy Closet-Devotions, when none are admitted into
the Dialogue but only God and thine own Soul, are good and acceptable to the
Lord, the Prayers of thy Family are pleasing to God too: but the public
Prayers of the Congregation, which are put up to God in the Temple, in the
place dedicated to his Worship, are more pleasing, more availeable: for we know
that he has promised his presence in a more especial manner, where two or
three be gathered together; which place may be most fitly interpreted of the
gathering together of the Congregation in Gods House. For a Family cannot
proproperly be said to be gathered together, because they are but as one body
which is compact and contiguous, which needs no gathering. A Gathering does
presuppose things that are scattered and separated.

But now the Pharisie and the Publicane must here shake hands: and it is to be
feared that they will never meet again; no, not in Heaven.

FINIS.
THE SECOND SERMON, Continuing the Discourse upon the same words.
The Pharisee stood.
I This is done like himself indeed, he comes into the Temple to Worship, and
when he is there he stands. He is too good it seems to bow his Knee before the
Lord. Thus did not MOSES and AARON who fell both upon their Faces before the
Lord. Numb. 16. Saying, O God, Numb. 16.
the God of the spirits of all flesh, has one man sinned, and will thou be
wroth with the whole Congregation? Thus did not DANIEL, who (in his 6. Chap.)
no less then three times every day was down upon his Knees praying to God.
Thus did not CHRIST himself, who in the 22. Luke 22.
of Saint Luke, Kneeled down and prayed. And yet this sinful proud Pharisee,
a worm of the Earth he comes into the presence of the Lord, and out-faces him
(as it were) in his own House, stands in a peremptory confidence of his own
merits, with a daring countenance, a stretched-out Neck, and a Knee stiffer
then the Pillars of Heaven: for JOB tells us in his 26. Chap. That they tremble
and quake at his reproof. O that we had not too many such Pharisees now
adays, who come into the Church stiff as the Pillars which underprop it. For
whom they reserve their Knees I cannot tell, certain I am, they are very
sparing of them toward God: and whether the Lord has deserved to have their
Knees or no, I will put it to their own judgment. He made our Bodies as well
as our Souls, and sure we owe him Reverence with them both.

But our bowing before the Altar, toward the East end of the Church, troubles
our standing Pharisees very much.

If I could suppose that their prejudicate opinions would give them leave to
hearken to reason, I should endeavor to give them what satisfaction I am able.

Body as well as with the Soul. And therefore that Argument is but frivolous,
to say that God is a Spirit, and he must be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth.
It is true, God is a Spirit, and he must be worshipped in Spirit, but how?
Fundamentaliter, non exclusire, Fundamentally, the Foundation of thy worship
must be laid in the Spirit, (without which all the bowing in the world (I
acknowledge) is worth nothing in the Eyes of God:) but not exclusively,
excluding the bodily Worship. Nay, it is impossible that thou should worship
God in Spirit and in Truth, except it be also expressed in the body, never tell
me of thy inward and bare Spiritual worship; Can precious Ointment be
concealed? Can fire in the midst of combustible matter lie hid? The Body is but
the Instrument and Servant of the Soul, and follows her Dictates. This being
granted, the next thing we must force ye to grant, is, that this bodily
Worship is to be given especially in the Church, for therefore come we to
Church, and therefore were Churches built, for the Worship of God. Now what is
External worship?

The Greek word (...), coming from the Verb (...), which signifies
Congeniculo, vel in genua procumbo, to bow, or to fall down upon the Knees,
will tell us: And ye shall find, that in most places where the vulgar Latin
Translation renders it Adoravit, it is as much in the Hebrew, as Incurvatus
est, he was bowed, or he was bended in his body. To Worship then outwardly, is
to bo^ the Knee or the Body; and this ought to be done and this ought to be
done in the Church especially.

But why then toward the East? I will strive to satisfy ye in that too. I
hope ye will yield, that if we do it at all, we must needs do it with our
faces pointed to one particular place, and why to that place rather then to an
other, the reasons are excellent, and they be reasons which the Primitive ^nes
^ad.

The Heathens were all great worshippers of the Sun, and therefore they used
to worship toward the East, the place of the Suns Rising, where their God
appeared to them first in the Morning: But the Lord because he would not have
his people the Jews to imitate the Heathen, therefore by his command the Arc
was set in the West part of the Tabernacle, and afterward of the Temple when
it was built in the holiest place of all. And Aquinas gives another reason,
which he calls the Figurative reason, and it is this. Because the whole State
of the former Tabernacle, was ordained to signify the Death of CHRIST: and
this is figured out unto us by the West, according to that in the 68. Psalm.
Sing praise unto Him who rides upon the Heavens, as upon a Horse. For so it is
in the English: but the truth of the Interpretation according to the Original,
is; Qui ascendit super occasum, Dominus nomen illi. Who rides upon the West,
the Lord is his Name. Who rides upon the West (that is) who tryumphs over
Death, signified by the West, the place where the Sun sets. And indeed if ye
observe, ye shall find almost all the Ceremonies, all the Sacrifices of the
old Law to point only at the West of CHRIST, at his Death, at the setting of
our Sun of Righteousness. But no sooner had this Sun (who for a while was
set unto the World) recovered the East and was Risen again from the Grave, but
immediately this West worship of the Jews, was abolished. For His Death did
set a Period unto all their Ceremonies. Nay, the Temple it self (we know) not
long after was Destroyed, as being now of no use: because CHRIST had already
suffered, at whose Death, the Worship of that Temple, did point. And therefore
the Christians of the primitive times, who now had a new Law, the Law of the
Gospel, which did and does chiefly look unto the East of CHRIST, unto his
Resurrection, that they might acknowledge against the Jews (who were Enemies
to CHRIST, and denied him to be come in the Flesh) that he was both come, dead,
and risen again, they did turn from the West to the East. The Jews even to
this hour do Worship toward the West, still expecting when CHRIST should
come, and set, and dye: At nos a tergo ponimus mortem Christi, a front
Resurrectionem and adventum ad judicium. But we turn our Backs upon the West,
as professing CHRIST'S Death to be past, and behind us: and point toward the
East as confessing his Resurrection, and expecting his coming again to
Judgment, who shall come, as he himself tells us in th 24. of St. Math verse.
27 As the Lightning which comes out from the East, and shines into the West,
and therefore the C^u ^n has thought f^ in the burial of Christian bodies, so
to dispose of the situation of them in the Grave, that they are placed with
their Faces (as it were) looking into the East, expecting the coming again of
their Lord and Savior in his Glory. I might here add that the East is the
Nobler part of the World, wherein Gods Greatness and Majesty does most
appear, being manifested in the motion of the Heavens, which is from the
East. I might also tell you, that Paradise was situated in that part of the
World, for so it was if we'll believe the Translation of the Septuagint. in the
2d. of Genesis Quasi quaeremus ad Paradisum redire, says Aquinas, as if by
worshipping thus we sought to return back to Paradise, from whence the Sin
of our first Parents drove us. I could add also, that the Sun, the Day, and
the Light, have their blessed and comfortable inroades upon us from that Part
of the World: and being that we are to worship a God whose Infinite Majesty to
us is invisible, and only yet to be seen in the Works of the Creation;
therefore we bend our selves in this Religious action toward that Part of the
Creation, which is the most Glorious and by consequence of greatest virtue to
excite and inflame our present Devotion. And this may give you some
satisfaction concerning our turning toward the East at the Hymns, the
Doxologies, and Prayers. For these and other Heavenly reasons has the Church
thought good to make the East part of the Temple, to imitate the Holiest place
of the Jews, which was in the West; and therefore, there they have placed the
Altar or Communion Table, where the Body and Blood of our blessed Savior is
administered unto the people, where the Prayers and Thankesgivings of the
Congregation (like a Sacrifice of Incense) is by the mouth of the Priest
offered unto God: and before or toward this place do we worship God. It is a
scandal and an ignorance, gross as Egyptian darkness, which may be felt,
to say, that we bow to the Altar or Table: No, we bow to God, and the having of
that Table in my sight when I bow (putting me in mind of the mercies and
Sufferings of my Savior) cannot choose but make me bow the lower.

Seeing that the stiff knee of this Pharisee has put me into this discourse, I
would willingly give all the satisfaction I could possible, and truly I would
thank that man who but would whisper an objection into me, that I might by
Gods assistance endeavor to answer it, -- and I have received one already, from
which of ye it comes I know not, and it is this.

We ought (ye say) when ever we come into the Church, to join with the
Congregation presently, if they be at Prayers, then (indeed) to kneel with
them; if hearing the Lessons or the Sermon, immediately to settle our selves to
that; if they be standing up confessing their Faith, then to join with them
and intend that What? without so much as once taking notice what Place it is
ye are come into? Without so much as once acknowledging God to dwell in that
House? Ye durst not thrust thus rudely into the Presence Chamber of a King.
His Chair of State would strike a greater awe into ye. Ye ought to do thus!
Who told ye that ye ought to do thus? I never heard any say so, but your
selves, and I do not hold your credit so good in Learning, that your bare word
should pass in a Controversy of this high Nature. But suppose I yield that
ye ought to do thus: I Will tell ye of another thing which ye ought too, and
ye shall not only take my Assumpsit for it; ye shall have a Canon of the
Church to back it. Ye ought also to join with the Congregation in coming to
the Church betimes; before divine Service is begun; not to stay lurking (...)
your houses till the Confession, and Absolution be past, nay many times till
the Psalms be done, because ye would prevent the standing up at the
Doxologyes betwixt them, nay sometimes till the Lessons, and the Popery of the
Letanie (as ye call it) be over, and then come stealing in, as if ye were
sent for Spies, to see what Religion we are of. This ye ought to do also, and
then we will allow ye to join presently with the Congregation: for so ye
shall have time enough before ye come to the public duty to worship God, and
acknowledge the ground ^ee stand upon to be Holy.

But I hear another object. Will not presently Kneeling down in my seat when
I come into the Church, and saying a private Prayer lifting up a private
Ejaculation to the Lord, serve the tu^ne without first bowing and prostrating
my self before the Altar?

I answer; do but so, and no man shall find fault with thee: thou do well
in doing it; but yet he who does the other too, and does it truly from his
heart, and withal knows the reason why he does it, does a great deal better.
And therefore until thy judgment be a little better informed, at the least
suspend thy censure of those men who do it. Be not too rash in accusing them
of Popery or Superstition. Who art thou that judge another Servant?

For if thou will observe a little in cool blood this Nuda genu flexio (as I
may call it) this naked bowing before the Altar which is not accompanied with
Prayer, but is only a Praeludium or Preface to it, besides the acknowledging
of the ground to be holy and dedicated to God, and besides the stirring up of
mine own devotions, and thed evotions of others by beholding that humble and
reverend gesture, thou shall find to be done, not without a great deal of
caution, not without a great deal or reason and mystery.

Ye will not be discontented I hope if I make it plain to you that our
Savior CHRIST himself has taught us this very same Method of Adoration. Look
but into the Lords Prayer, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. He first lays
down the Foundation of our Religion, of our Devotion; a Father we have, a God
there is, a great God a God which is in Heaven. This being done, before we are
taught either to pray for our own Salvation, in saying thy Kingdom come to
us, before w^ are taught to pray for our Daily bread, for the forgiveness of
our Sins, or for any thing which concerns our selves, we are t^ght to say
hallowed be thy Name: VV^ must first seek and desire the glory of God, and
then ^u^ own Salvation: and not only so, but we are to desire Gods glory
first, in the abstracted notion, only for and in regard of himself,
Sanctificetur, it is St. Chrysostomes Note. CHRIST does not teach us (says he)
to say sanctificemus, let us sanctify thy Name: but sanctificetur,
impersonally; sanctified or hallowed be thy Name, without the joining of any
person to it, to show us that we ought to desire Gods honor principally and in
the first place, without any respect unto our selves, as He is the chief good,
and the chief happiness; which is a great deal more thanke-worthy, then to
do it with relation to our own happiness: as we are partakers of that chief
good and happiness. And this very method do we observe at our entrance into
Gods House: we do not immediately fall down to our Prayers, for that were to
worship God in respect of our selves: but first of all before we come to lay
any claim unto him by our Prayers, we humbly prostrate our selves before the
Altar, as acknowledging him to be the great God, in the abstracted notion,
without any respects unto us; as if by that gesture we should repeat that
first Petition of the Lords Prayer, and say, Hallowed be thy name;
impersonally. So that if there should be a Heathen amongst us in the
Congregation, and should but behold that reverent behavior, he could not
choose but break out and say; Certainly there is a God in this place, and I
knew not of it. When we bow then at our first Entrance into the Church, we do
(as it were) acknowledge Gods Image and Superscription to be upon that House:
and in so doing we worship God as he is the great God, but afterward when we
Kneel down and pray to him, then we worship him as he is the Good, the
Gracious, and the Merciful God, in relations to us. Our first bowing without
Prayer, acknowledges his Omnipotency and Independencie: Our second bowing
accompanied with Prayers, does confess his Mercy and the Communication of his
Goodness. If thou will then fall directly upon thy Knees to thy Prayers, is
soon as thou enterest the Church, and ^o worship God only as a good and a
gracious God to thee, I bl^e thee not for it, enjoy thy Liberty. Only take
heed thou be^st not too lavish in thy Censures against them who do^ the other
too, and are able to show better reasons for the doing of it, then thou for
leaving it undone.

But all that I can do will not bring the Pharisee (I see) to stoop, we must
be forced to leave him as we found him, standing* Let us hear what he does
more. (...). The Pharisee stood, and prayed thus with himself. We have too
many such Pharisees now adays, who pray with themselves, by their good wills
they would never join with the Congregation^. But I have touched upon that
already. The thing which I (...) from these words, (...), h^ p^y'd with
himself, is this. See what the effect of his standing of his Pride is.

The Prayers of the Just and Humble do use to pierce the Clouds, and knock at
the Cares of Heaven for entrance and are admitted: but this vain glorious and
proud man by boasting of his own merits, and standing with a stiff Knee
before the Lord, has even clip^ the wings of his Prayers; so that instead of
ascending unto God, they remain heavy things at home with him: all that he
can do cannot persuade them to take wing, he prayed with himself, they went
no farther: God heard him not. The Lord hears not sinners, he esteems (...)
of the Prayers of the proud and disobedient. For although the reverent gesture
of Kneeling or Prayers, and at the blessed Eucharist, and other ^re C^emonies
of the Church, be not absolutely and primarily of the Essence of Religion,
^though secondarily they are, for obedience is of the Essence of Religion, and
to do those things the Church commands is Obedience) yet it shows forth a
great pride, and a spirit of contradiction in them who refuse them. It is
acknowledged that the chiefest Sacrifice and which is most acceptable to the
Lord, is a Contrite heart: yet I say again, that where the Heart is contrite
there the Body will express Humility. The Knee of that man cannot be stiff,
whose heart is broken it is both against Philosophy and Divinity: the heart is
like the great wheel in a Clock, it sets all the other members a working.

He stood and prayed thus with himself Let us now hear what it is that he
prays.

O God, I thank thee that I am not as other men, Extortioners, unjust,
Adulterers, or even as this Publicane. I fast twice in the Week, I give Tithes
of all that ever I possess.

It Is well the Holy Scripture tells us that this is a Prayer, certainly we
should hardly have believed it else. It has a strange beginning, nay the whole
air of it is something harsh to be called a Prayer. Iustus in principio
accusator est sui. The just and godly man, he commonly begins his Prayer with
an accusation of himself: so ABRAHAM in the 18. of Genesis 27. praying for the
Sodomites. Ge. 18.27
Behold, now I have begun to speak unto my Lord who am but dust and Ashes. As
if Abraham had said, let not my Lord be angry although I who am a Sinner my
self, do entreat for other Sinners. So JACOB Genesis 32. O God of my Father
ABRAHAM, I am less then all thy Mercies. So DAVID in the 2. of Sam. 18. Who am
I O Lord God, and what is my House that thou have brought me hitherto? So
DANIEL chap. 9. O Lord, Righteousness belongs unto thee: but unto us
confusion of Face. And thus do all Godly men begin their Supplications: but
the Pharisee he expresses in other kind of language, God I thank thee, I am
not as other men, etc.

It may appear at the first, that the Pharisee did well in doing thus. For St.
PAVL tells us in his 5. to the Ephesians. That we ought to give thanks always for
all things unto God the Father. And DAVID and EZEKIAS, and S. PAUL himself,
and ZACCH^EUS, do all of them speak of their good works. Why then is the
Pharisee condemned for this? I answer, that it is one thing to praise God for
the good things that are in us, as acknowledging him to be the Author from
whence we have all those good things. Another thing only to name God formally
and coldly in our Thankesgivings, and presently to get upon our own wings, and
share aloft in a conceit, either that these things we enjoy come from our
selves, (...) G^ by our deserts, and so ascribe that commendation to our
selves, which is due to the Lord. And thus did the Pharisee. What have thou O
man, that thou have not received? Wherefore then ^rt thou lifted up as if thou
had not received (...) ^ha^emus (says one) non quia boni si^us, (...) quia
bonus est Deus. Those things we have, we have not because we are good, but
because God is good who gave them.

Let us only once more hear the swelling words of this proud man concerning
his Privatize or Negativ. Righteousness.

I am not as other men, Extortioners, ^y^st, Adulterers, or even as this
Publicane.

Ah! this is a string too much touched upon by our new Pharisees. There be no
greater justifiers of themselves, no greater censurers of others in the world,
then they? They praise God they are not as other men, or even as that
Publicane. It is the ordinary language of them. But see if this vainglorious
Phari^, even whilst he is in the midst of (...) boast, nay observe, if the very
speaking o^ these ^ds do that make him guilty of the ^ome (...), that he
endeavors by his speaking to clear himself o^. He says, he is neither an
ex^ortio^er, ^er est, (...) my man who has but half an eye, (...) whether he
be not both these, even in saying that he is neither of them.

For first, he is an Extortioner and unjust man in respect of God: in this
very speech he (...) God (...) his Honor, and the glory that is due to H^. In
believing himself only to be good, he does detract from the Lords goodness,
which is, su^ communicativum, communicative of it (...), no^ limit^ to one,
two, or a thousand, but is common to all. It was a high pride in this Pharisee,
which could persuade him, that the spacious and unlimited goodness of God
would be imprisoned in his breast only, which is diffu^ve as the Light. But
the Nature of Pride is to be alone: all other sin^ ^ces do delight in company.
Lust desires a companion, it is not the sin of one: Intemperance rejoices in
company, there must be good follows, or else the sport's worth nothing.
Covetousness desires company too, that he may get by them. Sola superbia
solitudinem quarit, socitatem non patitur, only Pride, that desires solitude,
cannot endure any partners. It is not unfitly compa^d unto a high and raging
wind, which throws down a^ before it: Like some of our great men, who
de^pulate whole Towns, only to mend the^ ^spect. The proud by his will would
have no man stand but himself, all must croute^ and (...) him to tread upon.

Secondly, he was unjust in respect of the ^licane, in condemning of his
Brother, and (...) out any witnesses, and that before his ca^ heard. He was
both the ^ge, party and w^ himself, and pointing with his finger (...) kind
of scorn and ^empt, (...) sentence. Or even that Publicane.

Mortui Pharisaei, sed vivunt mores, The old Pharisees indeed are dead, but
their manners (even in this too) are still alive with us. We have too many of
these Judges who will digito monstrare and dicere hic est, most wickedly and
presumptuously even enter into Gods secret Decree, and undertake to tell who
has grace, and who shall be saved and who not. And this kind of (people might
they be Canonizers of the Saints) certainly would deal with the Heaven of the
blessed, as the Astronomers have done already with the eight Heaven, who have
filled it with Bears and Lions, and Serpents and Dogs. These are they who can
epsy a mote in their Brothers Eye; O, they have the sharpness of an Eagle,
when they look upon others; but let them reflect upon themselves, and they
have no better then Owls eyes; they cannot perceive the beam that is in their
own. I will only send these to our Savior in the 7. Math. 71.
of St. Math. 1. (a known place) Judge not that ye be not judged.

And so much of the Pharisees privative or negative righteousness, a word or
two of his positive Justice.

I fast twice in the Week; I give Tithes of all that ever I possess.

One would have thought that the Pharisees had been wise men. The Scribes and
Pharisees, why, they were the only men inrepute amongst the people for their
holiness and wisdom: but I see that Paradoxe is true.

Nemo improbus sapit, No wicked man can be wise: he may be ^raf^ and witty to
contrive mischief, but to be wise, he cannot be and so SOLOMON tells us, who
continually in his Proverbes, makes a wicked man and a fool Synonimyes, they
signify with him the same thing. For would any man who had never so little
spark of wisdom in him, being a Petitioner, and hoping to move compassion of
his misery in the heart of him to whom he makes his Petition, lay all his
State, his Pomp, and his bravery open before him? We would account him but an
unskilful Beggar, who, being to ask an Alms, would (if he had them or could
borrow them) put on Rings upon his fingers, adorn himself with Jewels, cloth
himself in fine linnings, Scarlet or Purple, and by this means hope to move
the hearts of men to a pity of his condition. No, we see our ordinary Beggars
are too crafty in this. They lay open only their rags, their wants, their
infirmities, their diseases, their blindness, their lamenesse, their
dumbness; ye shall be sure to hear them preach to you of this, or behold
them making signs to ye as ye pass: But of their sound parts, ye hear no
mention made of them, nor of their riches, if they have any in private, because
they know that this is no way to gain compassion. Yet our Pharisee (foolisher
then any of these) coming into the Temple, (where all state and conceits of
our own greatness should be laid aside) to humble himself before the face of
Almighty God, instead of coming in thoughts and words apparelled in
Sackcloth and Ashes, puts on no less then two of the best and (...) we will
come directly to his paying of Tithes, and I hope it will not disturb your
mirth much to hear a little concerning this.

But it is likely that this may also relish to some of ye, as bitter is a
dish of meat boiled in Wormwood. I cannot help it if it does, hear it you
must; the fault is in your palate and not in the meat. I hope there is no
Antipathy betwixt this dish and any of ye present: if ye can endure the fight
of it, although ye the not of it, let me entreat ye to be so mannerly as to
fit the Meal out.

I give Tithes of all that ever I possess.

I trust to God there be not many now who will deny Tithes to be due ex jure
divine, by the Law of God, so that I hope I may spare the proving of it,
although some I confess whose names are up for great Rabbines in Israel, have
endeavored to express their great learning, and deep insight in Antiquity,
by bearing arms against the Church in this quarrel, And the truth is, he who
undertakes such a popular war, such a plausible subject, his a great
advantage on his side.

Facile credimus quod volumus.
The greater number would have it to, an^ sl^der arguments and weapon, will
serve thy m^n when the adversar^ is willing to (...) overcome We see here the
Pharisee does it, and it is (...) those things wherein he puts his ^st (...)
concerning his justification. They were (...) paying their Tithes, that they
did it unto Minte and Commin. And of this our Savior himself beats witness
in the 23. of St. Mat verse 23. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, ^
Hypocrites, for ye tithe Mine and Commin and Annis, and leave the weightier
matters of the Law, as judgment and mercy and truth. And he does not only
bear witness that they do it, but he commends them for doing it too. For
although he pronounces a woe against them for neglecting of judgment and
mercy, yet he approves of their Tything even unto such sm^ll matters in the
latter part of the verse These things ye ought to have done, and not to have
left the other undone. But here our new Pharisees come short of our old ones.
For I appeal to the consciences of most men, whether they can truly say with
this Pharisee, I give Tithes of all; and and if ye come short of them, ye are
in a lamentable estate for hear what truth it self says in the 5. of St.
Math. 20. For I say unto you, except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. What will become of ye then (O think of it for your own
sakes) when your righteousness shall come short of theyrs? If ye enter not
into the Kingdom of Heaven, consider then what place it is into which ye
shall enter.

But did I commend the Pharisee for this? If I did. I must retract it all: for
mark the propriety of the phrase well he uses. I give Tithes of all that I
possess He does not say, I pay Tithes, as confessing them due, but I give, as
if they were only benevolences: and so it is in the Latin, Do decimas. Upon
which Stella has this note. Cum ait do, rectius diceret reddo, cum Dei sunt;
When the Pharisee says I give Tithes (says he) he ought to have said, I pay
Tithes, because they belong to God, they were none of his to give.

Tithes and Parsonages, are Offices, not Benefices, however we have lately
fastened that Title upon them. I give Tithes. O this is a word, which we cannot
choose but be all in love with. We would feign bring the Clergy to be under our
girdles, to live upon Benevolences and Gifts only, and then we think we
should be safe. Ye might then sin (ye think) and go to Hell quietly without
controlment, if ye had the Preachers tongue in your Pocket once; whereas now
these Parsonages where the Tithes are exacted as due, and not as gift, do make
the Churchman not so careful to cut out his Doctrines in that fashion which
shall please you, as to endeavor to please God, and discharge a good
conscience. These Tithes too (ye say do make the Priests proud and stately:
whereas your Lecturers are meek and humble, striving to give content to all
who otherwise should come short of their wages I answer, it the Priest be
proud, it is a great fault in him: and he shall one day answer for it. But take
thou heed that Pride in thee does not make thee call that pride in him, which
is not pride, but only a Justice, and true proportion in his carriage: for
then thou shall answer for that. Peradventure thou would construe that to be
humility in him, which indeed would be baseness if he should do it. Alas!
every little thing of us who has but scrap^d a p^ch'd estate together, a
company of poor Cottages, (broken and cra^e as their Titles) by what means ^o
matter, though the Widow and the Fatherless curse us and all our posterity
for it, must affect a kind of greatness now; and as it was with wicked Haman
all our greatness is nothing, we cannot sleep with it, unless MORDECAI the
^ew will bow to us, unless we can make the Parson stoop to our greatness. O
it is an infinite eyesore to us to see him thrive and prosper in the World.

But ye deceive your selves, the Office of the Priesthood is not so
contemptible a thing, as ye would have it. If any will be great amongst you
(says our Savior) let him be your Minister. I do not go about to exact an
absolute sovereignty over the La^tie. No, give us in the name of God, but that
respect which belongs unto that holy Character, and we require no more. As we
desire not to be Lords over you; so neither must you be Lords over us, and
oppress us, as if we were of the dregs of the people. As we must not be so
proud, but that we must visit the Widow and the distressed, I even administer
unto the necessities of the poorest wretch in the Parish, so on the other side,
we must not be so base, to flatter the greatest. And this CHRIST himself has
taught us by his own example, who did not refuse to touch the poor Leapers in
the Gospel with his own blessed hands, and so cured them: and yet ye see he
used an other kind of behavior to the great ones of the Jews, the Scribes,
and Pharisees. To their faces often h^ calls them Hypocrites, painted
Sepultures, Murderers of the Prophets, c^ren of the Devil, and pronounces woe
upon woe against them. For he knew that the disea^s of the Leaper and Pharisee
were different, and therefore required a different Plaster. And yet for all
this, ye will not dare (I hope) to call him proud or stately because he did
not croutch to them. O ye would ^e keep the Parson low amongst ye, that he
might not be able to recover his own, it is one of the greatest cares of some
men, and therefore they apply themselves against him, as against the comino^
Enemies.

But take heed, for in detaining thy Tithe, thou do not only rob the
Priest, if that were all it were no great matter) but thou robb'st God, thou
robb'st thine own Soul, both of Temporal blessings, and also of Eternal;
(Decima and dives esto, Tithe and be rich is the common Proverb^ Thou drawest a
curse upon thee, when by saying thy Tithes truly thou might procure a
blessing. But for fe^e thou might suppose, t^ (...) but only the Arguments
of us Clergy, (...) ye I ^we, for our own profit; for ^lt ^s which I have
said, I will deliver thee over to the place of the Prophet, Mal. 3.8. Will a
man (...) Yet ye have robbed me, but ye say, wherein have (...) robbed thee?
In Tithes and ^rings. ^ee are (...) with a curse, for y^ ^ave robbed me, even
this wh^ Nation. C^ (...) Hebrew phrase: (...) cursed had been (...) cursed
with a^ (...) it shows ^e greatness of it, a double curse, a curse of Soul
and Body. It follows in that Text of Malachi, Bring ye all the Tithes into the
Storehouse, that there may be meat in mine House, and prove me now herewith,
says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open the windows of Heaven unto you,
and power ye out a blessing without measure. Here be cursings (ye see) and
blessings laid before ye. And I leave it to your own discretions which ye
will choose. If this will not work upon you, go on in your Sacrilege and grow
fat.

I have done the Pharisee wro^ his in honest man, (now I think on it better
compared to many of our times. Seeing that he cares not for the word paying, it
is well that he will give his Tithes it is more then thousands will do in our
Age To give Tithes now is almost become a Prodigy, Sacrilege is grown to
that height, Virtue and Religion become so frozen, that those few honest
Patrons who are left, are afraid to give their Parsonages freely, for fear of
being accounted but raw and simple men in the world. No, now they are become
almost the Staple commodity of the Kingdom, and are sold as ordinarily as
Wool, or Iron, o^ Horses.

To speak what other strange ways there be, of bargains, of wa^ers, of
gratifying my Lady for her good wish, of taking any false pretended Title at
the first, and then ^ully (as they call it buying the ti^ Title, w^ must be
called (for s^oth) (...) Title of Coreberat^ or else of A^v^ons, passed in
private to (...) the presentation of his Clarke, who if he refuses to ^e^le to
the ^ea^e is brought him, upon that is presently outed, of the 2000 l. bond
which lies by the Patron to keep his Clarke in aw^. Citizens books are many
times crossed with them, and they are to make the best Markets they can of them:
There (...) the Sym^ of I some and you some, There is the Sym^ of quietness,
when the Priest before he can get the presentation must enter into bond or
promise holily, all his life to be a Fool, and a betrayer of the Church, (that
is) to be quiet and sit still till the Patron encloses, depopulates, and does
what he list with the Lordship. Tillage is a troublesome thing, alas, it
shall be better for the Parson, he shall have a fine little cloase or two laid
next his house, about the bigness of that which Lupus give Martial.

In quo nec Cucumis jacere rectus,
Nec serpens habitare tota possit,
Quod formica die comedit uno.
A cleanely sweet dwelling he shall have, and a quiet life, fit for
contemplation; only keep a Maid and have 4 or 5. Cowes to live on: and if he
prove a quiet and an humble man (for that is the word they use, which signifies
in the true dialect, base and will croutch to his Worship, and preach what
doctrine he pleases, then it is likely he may have 2. or 3. meals a week at
the Hall or the place (as they

These and many other sordid and devilish call it.)

ways there be, which I swell to utter. God of mercy deliver me and every
honest man from over knowing them, but only by hatred and (...).

We have now done with the Pharisee; I con(...) have presented him to ye in
long garments, (...) indeed we should have committed a Solecisme (...) dress
^n otherwise) but we will make (...) is in the Publicane, he shall appear to
ye in ^r robes.

(...) the Publicane standing a far off, would not (...) up so much as his
eyes to Heaven; but smote (...)est, saying; O God be merciful to me a
(...)nner.

(...) to be four degrees (we see) in this Publicanes ^mility.

1. He stands afar off. 2. With a defected Countenance: he does not lift up
so much as his eyes to Heaven. 3. He beats his breast.
And 4. as if that blow upon his breast had wake(...) heart which before slept
in sin and security, ^s lips and heart join together in this humble short,
yet powerful Prayer, O God, be merciful to me a Sinner.

1 He stood afar off.

The Pharisee stood too as well as he; but he stood t^dly For the holy Spirit
in this Scripture by ^ng barely and nakedly that the Pharisee stood, (...) to
accuse him for so standing as he did: but he^ qua ^tion which is and (...) the
Pub^, (...) of standing. He (...) a ^arr^

Observe here the infinite Wisdom and Goodness of God, who out of Sin
which is the filthyest and the most odious thing in the world, does bring forth
Humility, one of the beautifull'st pieces amongst the Virtues. That Workman
deserves admiration, who can not only of Gold and Silver it self, but also
out of the very dross, frame curious and rich works. Our Sins are as
dross, nay, we our selves are little better; as we read in the 22. of Ezekiel.
18. Son of man the house of Israel is unto me as dross, Ezekiel. 22 ^
they are even the dross of silver. And yet such is the mercy and wisdom or
our Heavenly Father, that out of this dross of our Sins, many times does he
make blessed works, wherefore says St. AUGUSTINE upon the 104. Psalm. Deum
non permissurum fore pecc^tanisi si ab illis aliqua essent bona perventura, God
would never suffer (says he) sins to be committed but that out of those
very Sins he does produce some good: as he did out of the sins of ^his
Publicane, he brought forth Humility. He stood (...) far off.

To be a far off from God, is indeed) the natural place of a Sinner: (Sin
does make a man a stranger to God, as it is in the Parable of the Prodigal
Son, he went into a far Country) and to stand a far off, to take notice
of, to be sensible of the great distance we have with God by reason of our
Sins is the first step to our Conversion and Happiness. The Pharisee he
enters boldly a great way into the Temple (as it is naturally employed, for this
word but, is an opposition to every member of the verse) but the Publicane he
thinks any remote corner in it, good enough for him. And see the virtue that
is in Humility. The eyes of the Lord pass by the Pharisee, (as near as he
stood) as being unworthy to be taken notice of, and immediately find out the
Publicane as far off as he was. The eye^ of the Lord are upon those who are
meek in the Land. He resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble.

The 2. step of his Humility, was his defected countenance. He would not lift
so much as his Eyes to Heaven. Even for very shame, he was afraid to look up
toward that part of the Creation, wherein Gods glory does most appear. This
is the true humility of the heart indeed, this is the true submission, when a
man out of the consideration of his Sins, does rise into a consideration of
the divine Majesty, against whom those Sins were committed, and so trembles
and quakes at the thought of it. Thus did Esdras when he prayed for the
people. O my God (says he) I am confounded and ashamed to lift up my face unto
thee, because our iniquities are multiplied over our head, and our sins are
gone up before thee into Heaven. Thus did MARY MAGDALENE in the 7. of St. Luke.
She accounted her self unworthy to appear before CHRIST, to look up to the
Heaven of his Face: and therefore, she got behind his back, kneeled down at
his feet, washed them with her tears, and dried them with the hayres of her
head. Nor would she arise from thence, as if her eyes had been in love with
the Earth, till she heard that comfortable word, till the heavy burden of
her sins which pressed her down, was removed from her shoulders by the voice
of CHRIST, saying; Thy sins be forgiven thee: and then she rose up and went
away in peace of Conscience.

His third step was, He smote his breast.

He was angry with the Inhabitant, and because he could not come at him, he
takes his revenge upon the house he lives in; he knocks at his door: Cor credo
evocaturus for as, and that with a great deal of indignation. It was his heart
which had offended him, it was that which was the first entertainer; nay, the
first contriver of all his Sins.

As our Savior says in the 15. of St. Matthew. Out of the heart come evil
thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, False witnesses, slanders.
It is therefore, our own heart, and our own perverse and froward wills, which
we ought to strike upon, according to that in the Prophet Joel. 2. cap. verse.
13. Rent your hearts, and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God,
etc.

The fourth and last thing, is his Prayer. O God be merciful to me a sinner.
It is a short Prayer, this: but it is full of life and efficacy. And h^re be
three things in this Prayer, which ought to be in all our Prayers.

First, he professes both the Mercy and the Power of God, in acknowledging it
to be he alone, who both can and will forgive sins. It Is the Prerogative
royal of God, this: as the Lord himself says by the mouth of the Prophet
Isay. 43.11. I, even I, am the Lord, and beside me there is no Savior. And at
the 25. Verse. I, even I am he, who puts away thine iniquities for mine
own sake, and will not remember thy Sins. For who can forgive Sins, but
only he who is free from all Sin.

Sinner, with ^ce making mention of any good thing he had. Not a word of his
Fasting, nor of his paying of ^es, nor of any good work that he had ^one. All
his hope all his confidence is placed in the Mercy of God.

And as he does first acknowledge God to be the Author of all forgiveness, and
secondly, confess himself to be a Sinner: So he does in the third place
acknowledge himself to be the only Author of his own Sins. He does not
accuse God, as many do, who by countenancing that fatal Stoicall necessity,
do make even God the Author of their Sins; he does not accuse the Devil, he
falls not out with the Stars about the matter, nor does he post off his sins
unto others, as our first Parents did in Paradise: ADAM, he blames the Woman:
nay, he is so bold as to lay the fault upon God himself, for giving him such a
troublesome woman. The woman whom thou gave me to be with me, she gave me of
the Tree, and I did eat. The woman she posts it off again to the Serpent No,
the Publicane goes no farther then to his own breast. He neither strikes at
God, nor at the Devil, nor at the Stars, not at any of his companions, who
might entice him peradventure) to wickedness: but he knew that his Enemies,
were only those of his own house; and therefore, he knocks only at his own
door, he strikes upon his own breast, and says; O G^ (...) merciful to me a
sinner.

I must leave CHRIST'S censure of these two men until another time: but yet it
is a verse of (...) difficulty to be understood, it desires rather a P^raphrase
then an expo^tion; and surely the very ^ding of it to ye, will give ye
satisfaction enough. The sum of all, is this. The Pharisee came into the
Temple stiffely and proudly, as if he meant to affront the Lord in his own
house, his behavior ^s stout, his Language peremptory, and daring, he boast,
of his own good works, he scorns and condemns his brother. The Publicane on
the other side, enters reverently, humbly, defectedly; dares not so much as
cast his eyes up to heaven, the Throne of his offended God, but as angry with
himself for sinning against so gracious a Father, he beats his breast, as if
he meant to be revenged on his heart, which was the first contriver of all his
Transgressions, he confesses his Sins, and desires Gods mercy. And now, hear
CHRIST'S judgment of these two, and that shall close up our discourse.

Verse. 14. I tell ye, this man departed to his house justified rather then the
other. For eve^ry man that exalts himself, shall be brought low; and he
that humbles himself, shall be exalted.

FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED At the Assizes at Huntington in the Shrievalty of Sir Capell
Beedles.
Exodus 34. last verse. And the Children of Israel saw the face of MOSES, that
the skin of MOSES face did shine, and MOSES put the veyle upon his face again,
until he went in to speak with God.


THe Lord by the mouth of his Prophet DAVID in the 82 Psalm, verse. 2. speaking
of Magistrates, says, I have said ye are Gods. He who is the beginning of all
things, begins that verse; nay, he begins it after the same manner as he began
all things, as he did when he drew the first draught of this fair Picture of
the World. Genesis 1.3. And God said, let there be light, and there was light.

And he begins the verse thus, not only to teach as how we should begin all
our actions, A love princip^, in all our voyages set forth from the Temple,
begin at God (as we do now, observing the ^dable custom of our Nation, and so
indeed we ought to do, especially in assures of such consequence, when the
lives and estates of men are to be laid in the balance) but also to let us and
all those whom there he styles Gods. Know, that it is he who is Alpha Deorum,
the first beginning, the Fountain of the Gods. He is the Ocean, they but
r^valets derived from it. And as it was he, who said to them there in the
Psalm, I have said ye are Gods. So it is he, who says to this Alpha inter
Deos minorum Gentium, in my text (as I may call him) to MOSES, one of the
greatest amongst the deputed Gods, I have said thou art a God. For although we
read, that the people saw the face of MOSES to shine here, I, so gloriously,
that AARON, and the Children of Israel were afraid to come near him, verse 30.
Yet if we look into the next verse going before, we shall find this luster to
be none of his own, like the Stars which every night do light their T^pers
a fresh, at the Sun, he did but (...) ^ct the be^mes he received from God,
verse 29 And it came to paste, when MOSES came down from Mount Sinai, that the
skin of his face did shine. Mount Sinai where he had been forty days and
forty nights with the Lord. It was from thence he had his glory.

The vulgar Latin Translation reads this place thus, Et erat facies Mosi
Cornuta: and MOSES had horns upon his face: from whence grew that custom
amongst some Christians, (derided by the Jews) to picture MOSES with horns,
which error was occasioned by the vicinity of the w^ Hebrew words, Keren,
which signifies a horn, and Karan, to shine. Nor yet was this opinion without
its favorers, for Tostatus approves it. Emisit radios (says he) tanquam
Cornua, ficut and radij a Sole derivati Cornu spectem praese ferunt. He did
dart forth beams from his glorified face, like horns; as the beams which
issue from the Sun do seem forked, but I will trouble ye no farther with
these controversies, nor with Cajetans opposing to this interpretation, nor yet
with the strange glosses of some ignorant Rabbines, who affirm, that MOSES
face was said to be horned, because it was so dried up with fasting those 40.
days and 40. nights, that nothing but skin was left upon the bones of his
Cheeks, which did so stick out Vt acuta velut Cornua viderentur; that they
showed like horns. As though that omnipotent God, who was able to preserve him
all this while miraculously without meat or drink, were not able also to
keep his body from decay and dim^nution,

Without all question, the genuine meaning of this place, is (as our Transl^our
renders it MOSES face did shine: For the Chal^ Paraphrast gives it thus, The
brightness of his face was multiplied, and the Septnag^nt, (...), his face was
glorious, and St. PAVL in the 3 to the Romans (...), for the glory of his
countenance or person, which glory God did bestow upon him for these reasons.

1 That it might be a sign of Gods favor toward him, and that his prayers
for the people were heard.

2 That it might be a means to increase the reverence of the people toward
him.

3 That the law might thereby become glorious, when the given of it was so
glorious.

4 That it might signify that inward illumination shining unto them in the
purity of his life and doctrine.

5 Vt per hoc significetur Iustitiam legis facie ten^ solummodo esse gloriosam.
To show, that the Justice which comes by the Law, is only glorious in the
Face, (1) Outwardly: but with God it does not seem so. For which last reason
(I do confess) I am beholden unto Origin, who in his 12. Hom. upon Exodus
Nihil in lege gloriosum habet Moses preter sol am faciem, MOSES in the law had
nothing glorious about him, but his Face. They are his own words, Vultus est
Sermo legis, manus opera, the face of MOSES (says he) is the letter of the
law, his hand the works of the law. Now because no man living can be justified
by the works of the Law; therefore, we find MOSES his hand Leprous, Exodus, a,
Et in Sinum reconditur, tanquam nihil perfects operis habitura And therefore,
as ashamed he hides it in his bosom, as an unnecessary member, unable to do
any thing that was perfect. His feet, they had no glory, ^o, contumeliam
potius, (says he) nay rather they are branded with shame, for he is commanded
by the Lord, Exodus 3. to put his shoes from off his Feet, Put thy shones from
off thy Feet, for the place thou stand on is holy Ground. Et hoc fieret
(says the same Father) Non s^ne al^ ujus formae myster^. Nor is this without a
m^t^i^.

To begin at the head of man, (as being the nobler member) his foot, his
novissima pars: his last part, by which the Prophet Daniel will teach us to
interpret longissime futura, future things which are the farthest off; as in
the vision of NAB^CHADNEZZAR, the Head of gold, signified the present
flourishing Monarchy; by the feet of clay, were meant novissima and longinqua,
things which were to come last in order. So that MOSES being commanded to put
his shoes from off his feet, was shown, that the latter times should come,
when He (1) the Law, should have his shoes plucked from off his feet, as
unwilling; nay, rather (as altogether) unable to raise up seed unto his
Brother. Deutr. 25. By which Ceremony, the Wife of his deceased Kinsman (that
is, the Church in general, or each faithful Soul in particular; who, ever
since the death of her former husband, her original Righteousness, which dyed
in ADAMS fall; had lived in Widdow-hood) was to be delivered up unto another,
which was CHRIST, and his merits; and his name, (that is, the Law to be call^
i^ Israel Domus discalceat vsque in ho^ternum di^m, the House of him whose
shoe was plucked off, for ever -- But the sweet relish that ^s in these sacred
mysteries his carried me^ of^tre away. I will return, and by Gods assistance,
and you Christian patience, try what we can find o^ from hence to make for our
pre^ent occasion without any wresting, or violence off^ to the wor^s.

And what should hinder us, but we may find something? For we have first God
here, who is as I told ye Alpha Dec^um, the first of the Gods, by whom,
through whom, and for whom all the rest of the Gods Kings and Judges) are.

Secondly, we have MOSES, the Civil Magistrate Gods Vicegerent, and not MOSES
barely, but MOSES glorified, MOSES with his fare shining, MOSES as it were)
upon the bench: and next we have the People looking upon the face of MOSES. And
to these, that ye may read a true Character of this meeting of yours, in my
Text, we have also MOSES face veyl'd. (1) The strict rigor of the Law, which,
like the glystering of MOSES countenance, strikes a terror into the people,
and makes them afraid to come near ye, covered with the veyle of Equity, or
(...), which is as Aristotle defines it, Eth. lib. 5. cap. 10. (...). A
certain Correction, or mending of the Law, being deficient in some cases,
which the Lawgiver, himself, were he present, would have added to the Law.
And this is nothing else, but a wise and religious consideration and weighing
of the circumstances of such facts as are to be laid in the balance of
Justice. Thus have we here a complete Assizes, or rather the platform, which
shows us what they should be.

GOD.

The MAGISTRATE, PEOPLE, and EQVITIE.


And so the ^ext is easily divided, not to be too curious*

We have here, -- 1. GOD, and the Magistrate. 2. The People, and Equity.


First, God and the Magistrate; for they must Author of his glory, MOSES as the
Subject.

Secondly, The People and Equity, which must veyle, MOSES accommodated to the
Capacity of the weak eyes of the people.

Or else if ye please, thus.

Here are the two several Aspects of MOSES.

1 As he looks upon God. 2 As he looks upon the People.
Like the double face of the Moon when he is in Conjunction with the Sun;
that half part of her Orb with which she respects the Sunn^ is glorious, and
filld with light: her other (...) that looks upon the Earth, is dark and
charged with obscurity.

From the first Part of my Text, the first Aspect of MOSES, do naturally arise
these two Positions.

1 That the face of MOSES, of the civil Magistrate is glorious. They are Gods.

Secondly* That this glory of theirs comes from the Lord, it is he who has
said, they are Gods, and his dixi is a Feet. With him to say they are Gods, is
to make them ^o.

Of the First.

I shall not need to quote much Scripture to prove the excellence of the
Magistrate, for to say, they are Gods there in the Psalm, is to say, all that
can be said, and again, Exodus 22. Dijs non maledi^as, thou shall not rail
upon the Gods, nor speak evil of the ruler of thy pleople. Homer calls them,
(...), The Sheepheards of the people, and Plato, (...), Saviors. But what need
we seek any farther, or travail to Heathen writers for Ti^l^s for them, when
we have the Lords own ipse dixit, He has said, they are Gods.

It is accounted a grand subtlety and a great piece of Art in an Orator, to
persuade his Auditors that they are that, that they are such men already, as he
would have them to be. Now God, (the best Orator in the World humbling himself
into the way of Art, vouchsafes so far to descend to our Capacity, as to use
the same manner of Rhetoric He has said they are glorious, he has said they
are excellent, on purpose to persuade them to be so. Let them take heed
therefore what they do, Agere uti nome^ clutt, behave themselves agreeable to
the Title he is pleased to bestow upon them, lost they be found strivers (as
much is in them is to prove the God of all truth, a liar. Be glorious, be
excellent, endeavor to have your faces shin before the people. Let your light
so shine before men that they seeing your good works, may glorify your Father
which is in heaven. And ye have no other way in the World to obtain this
glory, but the same which MOSES had to get his. To go up into Mount Sinai, and
consult with God. And so we are come already to the second Position, 2. ^
for indeed they cannot be long kept a sunder; ^y, they cannot be separated at
all, so near is the kindred, the relation betwixt them. For, no sooner is your
glory named, but God immediately steps in, nay indeed he was there before, for
he is the Author of your glory; without God, no glory at all, no shining of
the Countenance.

And it will not be amiss to see the manner of MOSES consulting with God,
when he did obtain this glory. At the 28. very of this Chapter, So he was
there with the Lord forty days, and forty nights, and did neither eat bread,
nor drink water.

By this Lent, this forty days fast, which MOSES kept here in the Mountain,
and afterward CHRIST himself in the Wilderness, imitate^ by us at this time,
or at least should be, as far as our weak Natures will suffer us) St.
Augustine would understand the life of Man, being days of sorrow and
affliction, according to the Mystical number of weeks, which a woman with
Child goes before she is delivered. Nor is it merely St. Augustines
observation. For, if ye look narrowly into the 16 of S^ John's Gospel, verse
21. Ioh. ^
Ye shall ^nde our blessed Savior himself to imply so much, speaking how his
Disciples should weep^ and lament. (A Woman ^es he) while she travaileth has
sorrow, because her hour is come; but as soon as she is a delivered of the
Child she remembers no more the anguish, for joy that a man is borne into the
World: And ye now therefore are in sorrow; but I will see ye again and your
hearts shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man take from ye. And that is the
Christians Easter, his death, when he shall keep a perpetual Sabbath unto
the Lord, with continual Hallelujahs in his mouth. The forty days, and forty
nights, do typifie then the life of man; but what is meant by the fasting? The
same Father shall tell us Iejunium quod probat altissimus, non solum intermissa
corporis refectio, sed a malis artibus factu disce^sio. The true Lent which is
plea^ing to God, is a Spiritual fast, a fast from Sin, and this thou must
observe all the forty days, that is, the whole course of thy life. Thou must
fast from Bribes, from Gi^ts, thou must not suffer thine eyes to wander after
the fatness of the Ox in the Stall, nor the Wether in the Pasture, thy
fingers must not itch after the plumpe Gold in the Bag, to divert the course of
Justice; nor must thou respect the person of thy Friend, Kinsman. Nephew or
Favorite, thereby to wrong the Fatherless or the Widow. Thou must make a
Covenant with thine eyes, thou must not look upon such a great Ladies letter
upon the Bench, nor yet remember what such a Lord your Honorable Friend, spoke
to you in private, for there is a Lord above, more Honorable then he, who
expects justice from thee. This is the true for^y days Fast of MOSES, which
the Governors of the People, they who sit in the Gates of Princes, should
observe. For know, that although y^ ^t there at the Stern, and govern things
as ye^ please; yet God stands in the midst of ye, as it is in the first verse
of that 82. Psalm. The Lord stands in the Congregation of the Gods. Stands
with attention, stands with power. Nor can the Nimble-oyld fingers of your
Notarie, set down the things he hears half so fast, so truly, so exactly, as
God will record every word and action of yours. You cannot give the Beam the
least touch with your little finger in private to cast the rising scale down
again, but God will observe it; nay more, set it down in his note-booke, and
afterward reward it.

If thou will have thy countenance shine before the people, if thou desire to
be accounted honorable amongst them (as who does not desire to be honored?)
if thou expect'st reverence from them, Ergo ut mirer^ur te non tua primium
aliquid? That they may give unto ye that honor ye expect, do ye give unto
them some noble specimen, some sign, that ye deserve that honor: which
honor and shining of the face, (as I told ye) is no ways to be got, but by
imitating MOSES, by going into Mount Sinai, and consulting with the Lord: (1)
By dealing uprightly, by squaring all thy Actions and sentences according to
the rule of justice, and the word of God. What a propost^rous course then do
all they take, who in seeking to find this shining of the countenanc^* do
leave Mount Sinai, where the Lord keeps his residence, and is to be spoke
with, and come down into the Valley, into the Crowd to seek it? Yet such
there be; who seek for it in Popularity, who seek for it, amongst gifts, who
seek for it in Names, and Titles. But alas! what can these poor helps do?
They are but like the Fucus and Cerusse, that fill up the wrinckles in an old
decayed Face, which can neither endure the fire nor Sun.

Nobilitas sola est atque unica Virtus. It Is Virtue alone, which is the true
Nobility. For could a man directly say to me, here runs the blood I derived
from Brutus or Germanicus, this vein is filled with that I received from the
ancient stock of the Persian Kings, here the active and fiery spirits of
Julius Caesar dance; should his Titles be grown into such a Volume, that he
who undertakes to repeat them, should stand in need of a Dinner in the midst:
yet, if he cannot derive his Pedigree as well from Mount Sinai, from Virtue,
from Religion, however I may outwardly (as it is requisite I should) give him
reverence, yet for all this, he shall be to my inward esteem and thoughts; but
as one of the common rank.

Aut Pastor, aut illud quod dicere no^o. It has been, and still is, the
custom of some Princes and great Potentates, that they might keep themselves
in repute and estimation with the people, to reserve themselves close, and not
to appear too commonly unto the vulgar; because, the frequent sight of the
Prince does diminish and make cheap the glory of Majesty: As we see it is
verified in the Sun, that excellent and beautiful creature of the Lords, which
because we have it in our eyes every day, is not much regarded: it rises, it
climbes to its Altitude, and when it is there, it descends again, it sets, and
all this while no great notice taken of it; because this journey of his is
quotidian, is ordinary; whereas, if it should appear unto us but once in an
Age, what gazing and wondering there would be at it? Not to disparage this
custom, I must rather commend the worldly policy of that way which Alexander
the Great, took to maintain and increase his esteem and adoration amongst
his Subjects, who refusing to be called the Son of Philip, gave out, that he
was begot of Jupiter Hammon, descended lineally of a God, and so he was
believed to be.

Both these ways if ye search into them, will meet in one, and make a fair
Path for the Magistrate to walk in. For first, to maintain and increase his
renown, let him reserve himself (in the name of God) from the People, let him
keep himself close, appear not to them too commonly, nay let him not appear
unto them at all. (1) Let him be removed, keep his convenient distance from
them in his manners, in his actions, be not polluted with their sins. As a
Ruler is a God in Authority, so he should be a God in Purity of life and
Example.

Each vulgar Paper carryer, each Beta ^ogulatorum can be Am^idexter, take Fees
with both hands, let not the Magistrate come (for shame) amongst such, nor
participate in their Villainy. I could instance in the rest of their Enormities,
amongst which it does not become their dignities to appear. And this is truly
to remove themselves from the fight of the people, and this is also with
Alexander, (for I told ye they both met in one) to proclaim themselves the
Sons of God, and this must be done too as he proclaimed his Parentage, by his
Actions. God has called them Children of the most high, and it is their parts,
by their actions to prove themselves Sons of such a Father. Which if ye do,
ye shall be glorious, ye shall have honor and renown, the skin of your Face
shall shine, and the children of Israel shall see it too.

We have done with the first Aspect of MOSES.

We will now draw the Curtain, the Veyle before his face, and a while look
upon that.

And MOSES put the Veyle upon his Face again, etc.

The second Part of the Text.

The reason, why MOSES put this covering upon his face while he talked with the
people, without all doubt, according to the letter, was that, which is rendered
by the holy Ghost in this Chapter: The people were afraid to come near him.

And this fear of theirs, was -- partly Necessary. Voluntary.


Necessary, by reason of their infirmity, for indeed they were not able to
look upon the glory of his countenance.

Voluntary, and that was for Reverence; verily believing (as they well might)
that there was, Divinum aliquid et magnum, some great and divine matter,
signified by that unwonted splendor of his.

But we are not always strictly to keep our selves to the literal meaning
of Scripture: For St. BERNARD having rendered two or three several senses upon
one place, says thus: Non sane a prudente de diversitate sensuum indicabar,
dummo^o veritas utrobique nobis patrocinetur et charitas, cui scripturas
servire oportet. There is no wise man (says he) who will blame me for this
diversity of senses, so long as Truth and Charity are my Patrons. For why
should that displease us in the sense of the Scriptures, which we daily
practice and allow of in the use of outward things. It is St. BERNARDS own
comparison. In how many several employments is water used amongst us? Nor is
the Divine word to be tied to one meaning, so long as we stray not from the
rule of Truth, nor contradict other Scripture) but may be applied to the
diverse uses and necessities of the Soul.

The mystical reasons then of this Velamen, this covering of MOSES, may be
diverse, according to the diversity of the Laws given by him:

Which, were either -- Moral, Ceremonial, Judicial.


By the Covering that was upon the face of the Moral law, some of the ancient
Fathers would understand the humanity of CHRIST, whereby the terror of that
glittering Countenance was taken away, so that the Sons of men by the
interposition of that veyle, were now become able to look upon that Face,
which otherwise had been too full of horror for them: the putting on of that
Covering was the fulfilling of the Law, and the perfect obedience of CHRIST to
every Iota in it: For although he was not exhibited until the latter times,
yet the virtue of his obedience (being in efficacy before his exhibition) did
put a Covering upon the Face of the Law from the beginning.

The Veyle upon his Face, as the giver of Ceremonies was the Cermonies
themselves, the shining Counnance was that which was meant by those Ceremonies,
being shadows of things to Come, as the Apostle calls them.

And why may not we understand by this Veyle upon the Face of MOSES as the
giver of the Law Judicial, that covering of Aequitie which should be upon the
Civil Magistrate? and this Aequitas, (for so the Latins render that word
which the Greeks call (...), from (...) juxta, and (...), convenience or
Simile) is nothing else but an apting or proportioning the punishment to the
Fast. As in this plain instance. A young man compeld by hunger, steals from
his neighbor, bread or other necessaries whereby to releeve and sustain
Nature. The strictnes of our law says (now as I suppose) that this man must
dye. But the Judge weighing the circumstances of the fact; as first, the
offendour is a young man rash, and unexperienced in the world, a young man, not
gray hayr'd in iniquity, nor sinning upon inveterate custom, peradventure it
is the first offense, and therefore there may be hope of his amendment.
Secondly, he did not sin malitiouslie, or to maintain his riot and
intemperance, but driven to it by necessity: therefore, the Judge in his
wisdom mitigates, takes off the edge a little from the rigor of the law, and
afflicts a milder punishment upon him, and more convenient to his fact.
Wherefore the Greeks confound those two words (...) and (...), just and
merciful, they are used amongst them for Synonima's, for words that signify
the same thing. So St. PAVL, 2 Cor. 10.1. joins them there both together
(...), per mansuetudinem and aequitatem CHRISTI, both which words, insome of
our English Translations, we shall find to be put in one and the same fence, I
PAVL beseech you by the meekness and gentleness of CHRIST; So near is the
affinity betwixt the words, nay so near is the affinity too betwixt the nature
of the things meant by the words, that that Magistrate can not be just except
he be merciful, nor merciful unless he be just. For however they may seem
at the first Sound, there is no opposition but a sweet and harmonious
Agreement betwixt them, for Mercy and Truth do love and kiss each other.

Now this (...), this Veyle which is to cover the Face of MOSES, of the
Judicial Magistrate, that the people may not be afraid to come near him, is
necessary, and that for these reasons.

1 Because the divine law does defend and approve of it. Witness those Cities
of refuge which were in the Land of Israel. For the Letter of the Law runs
directly thus, He that smites a man that he dye, shall dye the death, Ex.
21.12. There Is the naked Face of MOSES, terrible to the People. ( Sermo legis,
Mosis facies, as Origin calls it, the letter of the Law is the Face of MOSES,
but the Veyle that is put over this Face, follows in the next verse. And if a
man has not laid wait, but God has offered him into his hand, then I will
point thee a place whether he shall fly.

set purpose, with a praemeditation, and deliberate mind. As the Thief who
spoils the Traveller of his goods and life. An other offends (...),
necessitated to it, as I in defending my self slay mine Enemy. A third (...),
accidentally, as a man in casting stones or timber from his house, kills his
Neighbor. Now that all these three should be punished alike, is the unjustest
thing in the World.

language is only general; as Aristotle has it, Leges universaliter solum est
loqui, the Laws can only speak universally; and therefore, because general
rules can not agree to every individuum, to all particulars, the industry and
wisdom of the Judge is required in their interpretation, who is as Aristotle
in an other place calls him (...), lex animatae, the living or speaking Law, or
the Soul of the Law.

which Gellius in his 12. Book, cap. 7. Makes mention of, concerning the woman
who had poisoned her husband and her Son, who being brought by her Accusers
before the Areopagites, defended her self, not by denying the fact, but by
laying open the cause that induced her to it, which was, because they had
before poisoned her Son, which she had by her former Husband. The matter
appearing full of difficulty to them, they commanded both the parties redire
post Centissimum annum, to come again 100 years after; signifying by that,
that they were not able either to acquit or condemn.

Fifthly, Besides all this, that (...), the letter Antiochus, where the Roman
Legate made a compact with him, to leave him the half part of his Ships: now
the rule or rather the reason of the Law required and expected, that the
Ambassador would have left to Antiochus, the half part of his Ships, entyre,
whole, and fit for service: but he interpreting the bargain deceitfully, yet
not a whit declining from the naked words of the Instrument drawn betwixt
them, but rather keeping himself close unto them, cuts all his ships in the
midst, so that not one of them remained unto him good for any thing.

Against that thundering Argument of such who oppose this Equity, and cry; Fiat
justitia licet con fractus corruit orbis, Let Justice be performed although
the foundations of the world crack for it; we have not only Aristotle's
answer, who says, that Justice and Equity, do not Discrepare in genere, sed
gradu quodam, they are not contrary, but do only differ a little in degree,
Equity making up what the Law in it self was deficient in, being (as I said
before) only universaliter loquens, able only to speak generally, and not to
every particular case, in which cases equity interprets the Law, not opposes
it: but what is more then all this, we have the example of God himself, for
it. In the day that ye eat of that Tree ye shall dye the death. There was
the Law which he gave to our first Parents; this Law was presently broken. But
does God now deal with them according to the strict sentence of this Law? No.
Out of his infinite (...), his admirable mercy, whereas he might have justly
slain them presently, he suffers them to live that they might have a space for
Repentance. The like are frequent in the Scriptures: nay, the whole world is
nothing else but a great Book, full of the like examples. For alas! should the
Lord have executed the strict rigor of Justice upon every one of us, we had
been carried immediately from the womb of our Mother unto the Grave. I am not
so far a Patron for mercy, that I desire Justice should any whit suffer; No,
I subscribe to that voice, Fiat Iustitia. Let Justice be done, though the world
parish, but yet with Aristotle's limitation.

Equity does not any way change, oppose, or alter that Ius natural, that
natural justice, but having degrees, it mittigates the strictness of the Law,
where the Lawgiver has not left any thing expressed.

I have shown ye thus far what this Veyle is, and the necessity of it to be
over the face of MOSES, the Civil Magistrate: I will now descend to the manner
both of the framing and wearing it. And because the wearing of it belongs to
the Magistrate upon the Bench only: the framing of it to many and diverse kind
of people, I will follow a while the Particulars.

These five several sorts of men, then do concur to the framing or making
of this Veyle.

The Accuser. Witness. Iury-man. Advoca^e or Pleader. Officer.


I can but touch upon them, and first for the Accuser, whether in Judicial
Controversies, or in causes criminal, who brings the materials for this
Covering. Let him take heed that he be not found a rayser of false reports, a
speaker against his Brother. Psalm. 50. And one who slandereth his own mothers
Son. For be sure then, that the Lord will go on with the 21. verse, And will
reproove thee, and set before thee the things that thou have done.

We know one of whose greatest and most glorious Titles, it is to be called the
Accuser of the Brethren, and know, that whoever he be that participates in the
Action, must also have his share in the Name, and afterward inherit the
punishment too. If thou will do the works, exercise the Trade of the Devil,
which is to accuse falsely, expect no other recompense but the reward of the
Devil, which is to perish utterly: -- But what is it to accuse falsely? Not
only, Struere de proprio calumnias Innocentiae, to create a false report upon
an innocent person merely of our own heads, which the Orator calls,
vernaculum crimen, a domesticke crime, such a crime as is borne with us at home
in our own breasts, and has no being but there. (Such an one was that of
Iezebels, where it was Naboths Vineyard that had blasphemed, and not himself)
but also to aggravate a small crime, and so to blow it up into a quantity, when
through the multiplying-Glasse of a little glozing Rhetoric, they can make an
Ant seem an Elephant; which was so common amongst the Roman Pleaders, that
CICERO calls it Accusatoria Consuetado, the Custom of the Accusers. And it is
to be wished, that it was not too frequent amongst our Word-Merchants, who sell
air and Syllables as men do horses in a Fair, he who bids most is the
welcommest man, be the Cause what it will.

An other way of accusing falsely, is, when thou tel'st the Truth, (though it
be nothing but the Truth) with a wicked intent, aiming to do mischief. So
Doeg, though he told Saul nothing but the truth concerning Ahimelech the Priest
his releeving of David, yet because his intent was ill, and he was pricked
forward by mischief, to make that narration, we shall find DAVID, Psalm 52.
Branding him with the Title of a Liar. Thy tongue imagines wickedness, and
with lies, thou cuttest like a sharp Razor.

2. The Witness is the next in rank. And let him only know this, that as he
is here brought to bear witness against his Neighbor; so shall his own
conscience one day be brought to bear witness against him, which (if it find
him peccant) shall never leave calling and crying in the cares of that great
and righteous Judge, until he have passed that irrevocable Sentence against
him. In what a desperate condition then, are all they who make no more of
bearing false witness against their Neighbor, I, and in taking the just and
powerful Judge of all the World to record that their false Calumniations are
Truths, then that Emperor did of cutting off the heads of Poppies. O consider
this, you who are to lay your hands upon the Book. It is not the abatement of
the thirtieth part of a Fine, when you depose in your Landlords cause, nor the
Summering of a Horse, or a Cow, it is not the countenance of the best man (as
ye call him, that is, the richest man) in the Parish, who (if thou swearest
for him lustily and to the purpose, and come to him beforehand, to know of
your good Master what it is that will do the deed) peradventure will, when
thou have drawn Gods curse upon thee so by thy perjurie that thou art not able
to live honestly, adventure his credit with the two next Justices to make thee
an Ale-housekeeper, and so thou shall live upon the sins and intemperance of
the People, cursed both of God and men. Alas, it is not this, nor greater things
then these thou shall gain by thy oath, which can lie in balance against the
displeasure of so great and righteous a God, whom thou (as much as in thee was)
have endeavored to make a mock of.

Iurer, almost the same admonition will serve for him. Thou shall not follow a
Multitude to do evil. Exodus 23. When thou take thy oath, consider with thy
self (whether it be upon the life or estates of men, thou go) that thou
swearest to bring in thy verdict (as thy conscience shall dictate to thee)
according to truth and Justice. Thou art not bound to follow the first man
(like horses in a Teame) because he has the fairest Feather in his Crown,
because he has been an old Iury-man, and has laid many a poor Clergy man on
his back, has got himself a name amongst the easy swearers of the Laity.
No, thou art first bound (as far as thou can) to search out the Truth, to
receive thy informations attentively and seriously, before thou go out, and
then laying all by-respects a side, to deliver thy conscience clearly and
plainly: For it is you who have a great stroke in making this Veil of
Equity, which is to cover the Face of the Magistrate. He can but examine the
Witnesses, hear the testimonies, inquests, and arguings, and afterward give
you an Information of all this: It Is you who are Vitae and necis tam potentes
Causarum, in whose power the life and death of Causes do chiefly consist. The
Magistrate or Judge, (like the hand in a dyall) may often times point to the
wrong hour, and yet no fault in him, but in some of the wheels which are out
of Frame. For it is his part, to proceed and give sentence secundum probata
tantum, according to the Testimonies and Allegations only.

4. The next in order, is the Councellor or Pleader, God) may in some sort, be
called little Gods too. But I wish I could not call a great part of this Tribe
too truly, the deities of Nilus, the Gods of the Egyptians, Garlic and
Onyons, whose chiefest virtues are to force tears from the Eyes of their
votaries.

O Sanctas Gentes quibus nascuntur in hortis
Numina! --
But I forgot my self; I should have left out the first part of the verse: for
such are the abominable corruptions which many of them use now adays, that we
may call them, the holiest and the happiest Nations, who have no such Gods at
all grow in their Gardens.

I do not speak against all, mistake me not, there be honest and worthy
Lawyers amongst us.

Nor do I go about any way to disparage the calling: For the true use of it is
honorable, being to defend the oppressed, to maintain or else recover the
right of such as have been trodden down by their too potent Adversaries. --
Put when Rhetoric -- I wrong the Science, I must not call it so, rheumaticke
and obstreperous noise goes about to make the guilty innocent, and the innocent
guilty, to Carusse ore the Blackamoore, and to prove the Leopard to have no
spots: when a little bold, wild and Sophisticate language, is able to make head
against Truth and overcome it, and the cause Ad mensuram pulmonis Advocati aut
Hares aut non, flourishes or languisheth according to the strength of the
Advocates lungs and boldness, or rather to the depth of the Clients purse and
opennesse. -- I do not only accuse these times, this disease was ever rise
amongst the ancient Romans; nay, it has been in use ever since Jupiter had a
beard: In Saturnes reign peradventure it was otherwise, Aut sub Jove nondum
barbato. But the Antiquity of it proves not the lawfulness, ye have a saying
in the Law. Nullum tempus occurrit Regi, No custom can prescribe against the
King; and by the favor of Law, this is as true in Divinity, no prescription
against GOD, the King of Heaven and Earth. He brings but a weak argument, who
concludes what ought to be from what has been. Such a color, Murder might
have for it self, who is able to derive its pedigree as far as Cain.

It is to no purpose for me to lay open the sacred thirst of Gold that is in
these men, I might as well tell ye, that there is a Sun or a Heaven, which we
all aknowledge: nor can I hope, if I should repeat it, to be heard; the
Masculine, delicious and charming harmony, which the gold makes in the Bag, I
know would out-musicke me, would sound sweetlier and louder in their ears then
all that I could utter.

The second branch of St. PAVLS distinction of Tongues would outcry the first,
the Tongue of Angels would be louder then the Tongue of Men. But yet for the
discharge of my duty, I must let such men know (but surely this is a very
fruitful place for controversy, I see few of them at Church, if they had
nothing to do, it is likely they would be here) who make the sacred place of
Justice no better then the Stage of a Mountebanke, having received their Fee,
who leave the cause many times, where peradventure the whole estate of the
Clyent lies at stake, and fall upon their Brother pleader, or upon the person
of the man whose cause is in hand, or upon the clothes and behavior of some of
the witnesses or parties, hunting after crude and indigested impertinances,
which walk (like apparitions or ghosts) in the shape of Jests, thereby (as I
suppose) to catch the easy care of the circumstant Iurer, or Country
Gentleman, who will reserve them for his holy day reports amongst his admiring
neighbors; that however, these Musicians of Pythagoras, these Angels who play
upon the Spheres, may for a time delight them, and they may dance after their
music too, yet at the latter end they shall have but a harsh close, they shall
end in a discord.

5 And so for the Officer, who by bribes taken in which book there shall be no
enterlining, no blotting out, no putting in, but all his actions shall appear
fair, and in a full Character.

All these five sorts of men, have a hand in the framing and making this Veyle
which is to be put upon the Face of the Civil Magistrate; but yet not
altogether so, but that the Judge has the overseeing of this their Work. If
he perceives, that the Accuser brings materials unfitting, and which will not
conduce to the making of the Covering of Equity, he may so canvase the
business, either by examination, or if that will not do, by delay, so that at
the, last the Truth may be found out: For he does ill purchase to himself,
the title of a man of Expedition and Dispatch, who hastens causes, and ends
them before they be ripe. If he finds a palpable malice and confederacy in
the Witness (who is here in the second rank of workmen) it is in his power (I
take it, for my want of experience in these matters will not suffer me to be
confident) to deny him his Oath; If he perceives ignorance, supinitie, and
negligence in the Iurer, he may impannell new ones. If Sophistry, Cavelling, or
Meram Superbientem lasciviam verborum, an unnecessary trifling and wantonness
of of words in the Advocate, his wisdom, sharp insight, and experience
(peradventure he himself once being a Pleader, and so knowing the way of them
the better) may look through that Veyle of forced language, and view the
realities, and after those direct his sentence. If in his Officer he finds
Bribery and Corruption (as the best Princes and Magistrates in the world
sometimes cannot be without bad Officers) it is in his power to rectify that
too.

But these things ye know better far (I confess) then I am able to direct
ye: yet it is not a bare knowledge of them that will benefit ye in the last
day: but Happy are ye if ye do them. It it not the knowledge that swims
above in the brain, but that which sinkes down into the heart, takes root in
the affections, and brings forth fruit in actions, that will then profit thee:
For to whom much is given, of him much shall be required; not only the
Principal which was trusted to the understanding and Theorye, but also the
interest which is expected from the Practick part.

There is another kind of Veyle too, which is to be put upon the Face of
MOSES, which is the same that our Hieroglyphics in the emblem put before the
Face of Justice, whom they picture out by a woman having a Covering before her
eyes, and a pair of balance in her hand: and this is to denote unto us the
impartiality that should be in a judge: he should be blinded, not his
understanding, for that cannot be too quick-sighted; but to show us, that there
should be no respect of persons in him. Exodus 23.3. Thou shall not countenance
(no not) a poor man in his Cause. And if not a poor m^n, much less does it
become him to put off his Veyle that his Eyes may let in the greatness, the
favor, the Friendship of the rich, and potent For if the person of any man
should be accepted, certainly in all equity it is the person of the Poor; but
ye see here is a strict command against this.

Do therefore all things as being assured, that you your selves one day shall
be ungodded again, (for he who has said ye are Gods, has also said that ye
shall dye like men.) For the time shall come when a poor Vrne shall hold your
Ashes, all, that little all which shall remain of your voluminous greatness,
when that Eternal Justice, shall poize the balance with an equal hand,
wicked AHAB shall then answer for NABOTHS Vineyard, and IEZEBELL for the blood
of the Prophets. Have but this therefore in your minds, and the God of all
Justice and mercy direct your actions: labor to go up into the Mountain with
MOSES, and consult with the Lord, (1) Be just and righteous, let your faces
reflect those cornua lucis, those beams of light ye shall there receive from
God, and with MOSES your faces shall shine amongst the people, ye shall be
honored and reverenced, (ride on then, and good luck have ye with your
honor) and having past a glorious life here below, the end of the Text shall
be the end of your days; Ye shall go up again and speak with God: where
your discourse shall never be interrupted so long as there is Eternity. For if
with MOSES ye live in the Mountain, and converse with GOD, that is, be
employed in his service, and do Justice, ye shall also with MOSES, at the
length, hear that invitation of GOD to him in the 32. of Deutr. 50. verse. Go
up into the Mountain and dye, ye shall depart this life in the favor of the
Highest.

FINIS.

