AN ANSWER TO THE FIRST PART OF A CERTAIN CONFERENCE, CONCERNING SVCCESSION,
PVBLISHED not long since under the name of R. Dolman.

AT LONDON Imprinted for Simon Waterson, and Cuthbert Burbie. 1603.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
MOst loved, most dread, most absolute both borne and respected Sovereign, to
offer excuse for that which I needed not to have done, were secretly to
confess, that having the judgment to discern a fault, I wanted the will not
to commit it. Again, to seek out some colors to make it more plausible, were
to bring in question the sufficiency thereof. Therefore without further
insinuation either for pardon or for acceptance, I here present unto your
Majesty this defense, both of the present authority of Princes, and of
succession according to proximitie of blood: wherein is maintained, that the
people have no lawful power, to remove the one, or repel the other: In which
two points I have heretofore also declared my opinion, by publishing the
tragical events which ensued the deposition of King Richard, and usurpation of
King Henry the fourth. Both these labors were vndertake^ with particular
respect, to your Majesty's just title of succession in this realm: and I make
no doubt, but all true hearted Englishmen will always be both ready and forward
to defend the same, with expense of the dearest drops of their blood. The Lord
vouchsafe to second your honorable entrance to the possession of this crown,
with a long and prosperous continuance over us.

Your Majesty's most humble and faithful subject. Io: HAYVVARD.
Qui tibi Nestoreum concessit pectus e^ ora,
Nestoreos etiam concedat Jupiter annos.


To R. DOLEMAN.
YOu will think it strange Master Doleman, that having lien these many years
in quiet harbor from the tempest of men's tongues, you should now feel a
storm to break upon you; peradventure you were persuaded (as every one
suffers himself to be beguiled with desire) that this silence did grow,
either upon acceptance of your opinion, or from insufficiency to oppose
against it. I assure you neither; but partly from contempt, and partly from
fear. The contempt proceeded from the manner of your writing, wherein you
regard not (...) but (...): not how either truly or pertinently, but how
largelye you do wright: endeavoring nothing else, but either to abuse weak
judgments, or to feed the humors of such discontented persons, as want o^
disgrace has kept lower then they had set their swelling thoughts. The fear
was occasioned by the nimble ear which lately was borne to the touch of this
string: for which cause our English fugitives did stand in some advantage, in
that they had free scope to publish whatsoever was agreeable to their pleasure;
knowing right well, that their books could not be suppressed, and might not be
answered.

It may be you will question, wherefore I have not answered your second part:
it is ready for you, but I have not now thought fit to divulge the same; partly
because it has been dealt in by some others; but principally because I know
not how convenient it may seem, to discuss such particulars, as with general
both liking and applause are now determined. I forbear to express your true
name; I have reserved that to my answer to some cast Pamphlet which I expect
you will cast forth against me: and I make little doubt but to drive you in
the end to such desperate extremity, as (with Achitophell) to sacrifice your
self to your own shame, because your mischievous counsel has not bin
embraced.

AN ANSWER TO THE FIRST CHAPter; whereof the Title is this.That succession to
government by neerenesse of blood is not by law of Nature or divine, but
only by humane and positive laws of every particular common wealth: and
consequently, that it may upon just causes, be altered by the same.
HERE you begin, that other conditions are requisite for coming to
government by succession, besides propinquitie or prioritie of blood; which
conditions must be limited by some higher authority then that of the King, and
yet are they prescribed by no law of Nature or divine. For otherwise, one that
wants his wits or senses, or is a Turk in religion, might succeed in
government; which you affirm to be against al reason, law, religion, wisdom,
conscience, and against the first end of Institution of common wealths. And
that Byllay, who maintains the contrary, does it in favor and flattery of
some particular Prince.

What co^ditio^s are requisite in succession besides priority of blood, and by
what authority they are to be limited, I w^l the^ examine when you shall
propou^d: but for your reason of this assertion, you must heave other men the^
Billay out of credit, for reason, law, conscience, and wisdom, before you carry
it for clear good. As for entire co^trariety in religion, or difference in
some particular points thereof, whether it be a sufficient cause of exclusion,
or no, I will refer my self to that place, where you do strain your strength
about it. In disabilities to govern, Baldus In c. 1. tit. de success. feud.
does distinguish, whether it be natural, or accidental; affirming, that in
the first case it suffices to exclude, because he that is incapable of
government from his birth, had never any right of succession settled in him: in
the other it does not suffice; because he that is once invested in right of
succession, cannot be deprived thereof without his fault. Many do follow this
distinction; Io: Igneus In quaest^an rex Franc ae r^c^gn s^at ^uperiorem.
does limit it, to such dignities as are not absolute: But I^son In ^^emo. D. d^
l^g 1.
, Angelus In ^^u^ praetor. non autem. D. de Iudi.
and diverse others do indistinctly hold, that the eldest son of a king or other
governor, although he be borne either ^urious, or a fool, or otherwise
defective, cannot therefore be excluded from his succession. These affirm, that
any end of institution of common wealths is, if not fully, yet better
satisfied, by appointing a protector of the state (as upon diverse occasions it
has bin usual) then by acknowledging another prince; as well for other
respects, as for that by continuance of succession in one descent, a fair and
ordinary occasion is removed, both of mutiny and invasion. For enemies will not
readily attempt, and subjects do most willingly obey that prince, whose
ancesters have worn out those humors both of hatred and contempt which do
commonly accompany new raised estates. I will not confirm this last opinion, by
the example of Neptune the son of Saturn; who, although he was lame on both his
legs, yet had the government of the sea allotted to him: but I will co^firm it
by the practice of Athens and Laced^mon, the two eyes of Graecia, as Leptines A
pud Aristor. thetor. 3. ca. 10.
and Iustine Lib. 5.
do aptly term the^. Herodotu: In cerpsychore
reports that when Alexandrides king of Sparta left 2, sons, Cleomenes the
eldest, distracted in wits, and Dorieus the youngest, both of ability and
inclination to all actions of honor, the Lacedaemonia^s acknoledged Cleomenes
for their king. Agesilaus also the famous king of Lacedaemon was lame, as
Plutarch and Probus Aemilius In eius vita.
do report. Paul. Orosius Lib. 3. ca. 2.
says, that the Lacedaemonians did chose to have their K. halt rather the^
their kingdom. Herodotus Vbi. 5.
also writes that after the death of Codrus king of Athens, Medon his eldest
son, and Neleus the next, did contend for the kingdom, because Neleus would not
give place to Medon, who was by reason of his lame legs, if not unable, yet
unapt to govern. The matter being almost brought to the sentence of the sword,
it was mediated between the^, that the controversy should be decided by the
Oracle of Apollo-Apollo was consulted; by whose judgment Medon was declared
king. Josephus Antiqu. 14. ca. 1
has left recorded, that Aristobulus and Hircanus, after a long and cruel
conte^tion for the kingdom of Jury, made Pompeie the judge of that right which
by arms they were unable to decide. Hircanus alleged that he was eldest
brother; Aristobulus excepted, that Hircanus was insufficient to govern a
realm. Hereupon Pompei gave sentence, that Aristobulus should give over the
kingdom which he did vsurp, and Hircanus be restored to his estate. The like
judgment does Liuy Lib. 1.2. belli Iu^^ci.
write, that Annibal gave for the kingdom of that country, which is now called
Sauoy Allobroges.
restoring Brancus unto his right, from which he had been by his younger
brother expelled. And although Pyrrus did appoint that son to succeed, whose
sword had the best edge, yet was the eldest acknowledged, who bare the least
reputation for valor. Lisander moved the Lacedaemonians to decree, that the
most sufficient, and not alwais the next in blood of the ligne of Hercules,
should be admitted to the kingdom; yet Plutarch In Lisan^i.
says, that he found no man to second his advise.

I will add an example of later times. Ladislaus, a man more famous for the
sanctity of his life, then for his kingdom of Hungary, left by his brother
Grisa two nep^ewes; Colomannus the elder, who was dwarfye, lame, crooke-backt,
crab-faced, blunt and bleare-eyed, a stammerer, and (which is more) a Priest:
and Almus the younger, a man free from just exception. Yet these respects set
aside, a dispensation was obtained from the Pope, and Colomannus,
notwithstanding his deformities and defectes, was accepted by the people for
king Mich^el Riccius.
. Girarde Lib. 1. de l c. st^^e de France.
writes, that the custom of the French was to honor their kings whatsoever
they were, whether foolish or wise, able or weak: esteeming the name of king
to be sacred, by whomsoever it should be borne. And therefore they supported in
estate, not only Charles the simple, but Charles the 6. also, who reigned many
years in open diste^perature and disturbance of mind.

So you see, that the practice of many nations have been contrary to your
conceit: and that the interpreters of the civil and canon law (good
arbitrators of natural equity) either bear against you, or stand for you
only when disabilitie is natural: adding further, that if the excluded
successor has a son, before or after succession does fall, free from any
such defect, the right of the kingdom descends unto him. This affirms
Baldus Cons. 389. lib. 2.
, Socinus Cons 4^. lib. 3.
, Cardinal Alexander In. c. 1. tit. an mu^us vel imperfectus.
, and before them, Andreas Iserna. In c. vlt. tit. ^ pif. vel ab.
Because the inhabilitie of parents does not prejudice the children, especially
in regard of their natural rightes l. 3. D^le interdic. and rel. l. 2. C^de
libert. and co^. lib ^diui fratres. D. de iur. patr l quaeritur D. de bo lib.
panor. cons. 85. lib. 1. Io. Annd. in c. significasti de so. comp.
: neither is it any impediment wherefore they should not enjoy either
privilege or dignity from the person of their grandfather. Magis est (says
Vlpian In l. vii. in fi. de senate.
) vt aui potius dignitas prosit, quam obsit casus patris. It is fitter that the
son should receive profit by the dignity of his grandfather, then prejudice by
his fathers chance.

And this (we may think) is a reasonable respect, wherefore other interpreters
have not allowed their principal opinion, in repelling him who is disabled by
birth. For if another be once possessed of his place, it will be hard for any
of his children to attain their right: Whereupon difunion, factions, wars
may easily arise. It is inconvenient (I grant) to be governed by a king, who is
defective in body or in mind: but it is a greater inconvenience, by making a
breach in this high point of state, to open an entrance for all disorders,
wherein ambition and insolency may range at large. For as mischief is of that
nature that it cannot stand, but by supportaunce of another evil, and so
multiplieth in it self, till it come to the highest, and then does ruin with
the proper weight: so minds once exceeding the bounds of obedience, cease not
to strengthen one boldness by another, until they have inuolued the whole
state in confusion. We find that Gabriel the youngest brother of the house of
Saluse kept his eldest brother in close prison, usurped his estate, and gave
forth for satisfaction to the people, that he was mad. I could report many
like examples: but I shall have occasion to speak more hereof in the further
passage betwixt us.

After this you conclude three points.
1 That inclination to live in company is of nature. 2 That government and
jurisdiction of magistrates is also of nature. 3 That no one particulare form
of government is natural; for then it should be the same in all countries,
seeing God and nature is one to all.
But before I join with you, either in contradiction or consent, it shall not
be amiss to declare briefly, what we understand by the law of nature, and by
what means it may best be known.

God in the creation of man, imprinted certain rules within his soul, to
direct him in all the actions of his life: which rules, because we took them
when we took our being, are commonly called the primarie law of Nature: of
which sort the canons c^ius natural. did. 3
account these precepts following. To worship god: to obey parents and
governors, and thereby to conserve common society: lawful conjunction of man
and woman: succession of children: education of children: acquisition of things
which pertain to no man: equal liberty of all: to communicate commodities:
to repel force: to hurt no man: and generally, to do to another as he would be
done unto: which is the sum and substance of the second table of the decalogue.
And this law Thom. Aquine 1.2. q. 94. d. 2.
affirms to be much depraved by the fall of man; and afterward more, by
error, evil custom, pertinacie, and other corrupters of the mind: and yet
does it yield us so large light, that Saint Paul romans cap. 2. and 3.
did esteem it sufficient to condemn the gentiles, who had no other law
written.

Out of these precepts are formed certain customs, generally observed in all
parts of the world: which, because they were not from the beginning, but
brought in afterward, some as a consequence or collection, others as a practice
or execution of the first natural precepts, are called the secondarie law of
nature, and by many also the law of nations. Gaius, quod naturali^ ratio inter
omnes homine^ constituit, id apud omnes peraeque custoditur vocaturque ius
gentium. l. ix. D. de just. and iur.
says: that which natural reason does constitute among all men, is observed
by all alike, and termed the law of Nations: and the same is called by
Justinian just. de ter. deni.. singulorum.
; the law of nature. Cicero in re consensio omn. u^ gentium, lex naturae
putanda est. i. Tuscal.
likewise says: the consent of al nations is to be esteemed the law of nature.

But this is to be taken, not as though al nations have at any time observed
one usage alike: it is not necessary faith Baldus in l 1. C. de testam.
, that the word al^ should carry so large a se^ce: neither has it ever bin
brought into knoledge what customs all nations have held in use. And it is
most certain, that there is not one point or precept of the law of nature, but,
by reason, partly of the weakness, partly of the corruption, which the fall of
Adam fasten in his posterity, some people have at all times, either neglected
or else depraved: some being so dull as they could not perceive, others so
malicious as they would deny, that which nature did lay before them. Yea, such
is either the weakness or wilfulness of our judgment, that they who are not
only admitted but admired for wise men, do many times disagree in determining
what is most agreeable to nature: much less may we either expect or imagine,
that al nations, so different, so dista^t, never so much as now, and yet not
now fully discovered, should iu^pe in one judgment for uniform observation of
any custom: neither is that no natural right, as Zenophon 4. Socrat.
notes, which many daily do transgress.

And therefore Donellus In com. in. 6.
did unjustly reject the description which Gaius gave of the law of nations, by
taking the word al in the amplest sense. S. Ambrose Ad ephesians. 4.
and S. Hierome Tit.
did in this sort declare it; that we are to take that for a decree of nations,
which successively and at times has been observed by all. But as for any one
time, as it is to be judged the decree or custom of a whole city, which has
passed by consent of the most part, although al have not allowed, and some
perhaps have opposed against it c. ^. de decret. ab ord. fac. l. 32. de legi.
; so is it to be esteemed the law of nations, the common law of the whole
world, which most nations in the world are found to embrace.

And because government was not from the beginning, but induced as a
consequence of the primary precept of nature; to maintain humane society:
therefore whenever we speak of natural government, we are intended to
mean the secondary law of nature, which is the received custo^e, successively
of al, and always of most nations in the world.

Out of this we may gather, that three rules do chiefly lead us to the
knowledge of this law. The first is that which Cicero ad Q. fratrem. prouocandu^
ad sensus.
in the like case gives: to appeal unto se^ce: because there is no man but by
the light of nature, has some sense of that which nature does allow. S.
Augustine interiori nescio qua conscientia i^aec sentimus. de vtti. cred.
says, I know not by what inward conscience we feel these things: and
likewise Tertullian omn^ malum aut timore aut pudor natura perfu^it. in apol.
: Nature has tainted all evil either with fear or with shame. Whereto agrees
that which S. Ambrose lice possin: negare, non possunt tamen non crubesc. 1 c.
3. de offic 14.
says: although they deny it, they cannot but show some tokens of shame.
Herupo^ the authors of the civil law l. 3. si auro. D. de vsur. l. 8. D.
quib. mo. pi. sold. 15. de cond. l. 14. D. de nup.
do reject that for unjust, which is not demanded without show of shame. For,
as Cassiodorus 7. var. 16.
writes; God has given ^l men such a sense of justice, that they who know not
the laws, cannot but acknowledge the reason of truth.

But because this light of nature, in many men is exceeding dim; the next
rule is to observe what has bin allowed by those who are of greatest both
wisdom and integrity, in whom nature does show her self most clear. For as
Aristotle says topic. prin.
; that is probable which proved men do approve. Among these, the first place
pertains unto them, who by inspiration of god, have compiled the books of
holy scripture: to whom as attendants we may adioyne the ancient counsels and
fathers of the church. The next place is to be given to the authors of the
civil law; whose judgment has bin these many hundred years, admired by
many, approved by all, and is at this day accepted for law, almost in all
states of the christian common wealth. To these also we may adioyne, as
attendants, their interpreters of most approved note. The third place is due to
Philosophers, historiographers, orators and the like; who have not unprofitably
endeavored to free nature of two clouds, wherewith she is often ouercast:
gross ignorance, and subtle error.

But because natural reason, as Alciate 5. consil. 38.
affirms, does sometimes vary, according to the capacity of particulare
men; even as the sun, being in it self always the same, gives neither
heat nor light to all alike: the third rule follows, to observe the common
use of all nations, which Cicero ipsius vocem naturae de nature. deot.
calls; the voice of nature: because as Aristotle 15. prob. 3.
has written, it is not done by chance which every where is done. Plato 8. de
legib.
says, this shall be the proof hereof, that no man does otherwise speak: and
likewise Baldus 4. consil. 496.
, I dare not disalow that which the world allows. And in this common law or
custom of the world, three circumstancies are to be considered: antiquity,
continuance, and generality.

Now then your first position is so cleerelie true, that you do but guild
gould in laboring to prove it: for man is not only sociable by nature, but
(as Aristotle 1. polit.
affirms) more sociable then any other living creature. These notorious
points, the more we prove, the more we obscure.

Your second is also true, for as Tullie says sine imperio n^c d^mus vlla, nec
ciuita^, nec gen, neel ominem vniu^t sum genus state, n^c re^um natura om^^ nec
ipse den. que m^^dus potest. ^. de legib.
Without empire, neither house, nor city, nor nation, nor mankind can stand,
nor the nature of all things, nor in a word, the world it self. Whereto
agrees that of Aristotle (...). 1. polit. ca. 3.
: government is both necessary and also profitable. But whereas you bring in
proof hereof, that there was never people found, either in ancient time, or
of late discovery, which had not some magistrate to govern them, neither is
it necessary, and yet false. It is not necessary to have so large a consent
of nations, as I have declared before: and it is false that in all times and
nations there have been magistrates. After the deluge, magistrates were not
known until kings did arise, as hereafter it shall appear. The Jews were
often without either magistrates or government: Whereupon in certain places
of the book of Judges ca. 17. ver. 6. and ca. vlt in si.
it is thus written: In those days there was no king in Israel, but what
seemed right to every man that did he.

Sometimes Democraticall government does draw to a pure anarchie; and so does
the interregnum of elective principalities. Leo Aser reports, that in Guzala,
a country of Afric, the people have neither king nor form of government;
but upon days of mart, they elect a captain to secure their traffic. The
same author delivers, that the inhabitants of the mountain Magnan, upon
the frontiers of Fez, have noe form of common wealth, but do stay trauailers
(impartial judges) to decide their controversies. Leo himself was arrested to
be their judge, and when he had spent many days in determining their
debates, he was in the end presented with hens, ducks, geese and other of
their country commodities, which served only to discharge his host. And if
this your reason should be of force then were not sociabilitie natural,
because many men have made choice to live alone.

But how the^, will you say, is nature immutable? It is in abstracto, but it is
not in subiecto. Or thus: In it self it is not changed: in us, by reason of
our imperfectio^s, it is. Or else more plainly, it is not changed, but it is
tra^sgrested. But nature, you say, is alike to al. Not so, good sir: because
all are not apt alike to receive her: even as the sun beams do not reflect
alike upon a clean and clear glass, and upon a glass that is either filthy
or course: And in many, not only men, but nations, evil custom has driven
nature out of place, and sets up it self in stead of nature l. si quis
post. humos. D. de lib. et posth.
.

Your third conclusion, that no particulare form of government is natural,
does not find so easy acceptaunce. Your only proof is, that if it were
otherwise, there should be one form of government in all nations; because god
and nature is one to all. But this reason I have encountered before: and yet you
take pains to puff it up with many waste words; how the Romans changed
government; how in Italy there is, a pope, a king and many dukes; how
Millaine, Burgundy, Loraine, Bavier, Gascoint, and Britain the less were
changed from kingdoms to dukedomes; how Germany was once under one king, and
is now divided among dukes, earls, and other supreme princes; How Castile,
Aragone, Portugal, Barcelona and other countries in Spain, were first
Earldomes, then Dukedomes, then several Kingdoms, and now are united into
one; how B^eme and Polonia were once Dukedomes, and now are Kingdoms; how
France was first one kingdom, then divided into four, and lastly reduced
into one. How England was first a Monarchy, under the Britains, then a
Province under the Romans, after that divided into seven Kingdoms, and
lastly reduced into one; how the people of Israel were first under Patriarchs,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, then under Captains, then under Judges, the^ under
high Priests, then under Kings, and then under Captains and high Priests
again.

I will not follow you in every by way whereinto your errors do lead (for
who would have adventured to affirm, that the children of Israel were under
Abraham and Isaac; and that the Britains at the first were under one King,
whereas Caesar reports that he found four kings in that country which is
now called Kent) but I will only insist upon the principal point; in regard
whereof, all this bundell of words is like a blown bladder, full of wind,
but of no weight.

For first you do but trifle upon terms, in putting a difference between
Kings, Dukes, and Earls, which hold their state with sovereign power. We
speak not of the names, but of the government of Princes. Supreme rulers may
differ in name; they may change name also, either by long use, or upon
occasion: and yet in government neither differ nor change.

Secondly, it is a more vain jest to put a difference (in this regard)
beweene a great territory and a small. If a kingdom be enlarged or
streight^ed in limits, the government is not thereby changed: if many
kingdoms be united into one; if one be divided into many; the nature of
government is no more altered, then is the tenure of land, either when
partition is made, or when many parts accrewe into one. The knot of doubt is,
whether it be not natural, that one state, be it great or small, should
rather be commanded by one person, howsoever entitled, then by many.

And if we descend into true discourse, we shall find, that the very
sinews of government do consist, in commanding and in obeying. But obedience
can not be performed, where the commandments are, either repugnant or
uncertain: neither can these inconveniences be any ways avoided, but by
union of the authority which does command.

This union is of two sorts; first, when one commands; secondly, when many
do knit in one power and will. The first union is natural; the second is by
mean of amity, which is the only band of this collectiue body: and the more
they are who join in government, the less natural is their union, and the
more subject to dissipation. For as Tacitus says Arduvm semper codem loci
potcutiam and co^cordiam esse. iiiii. annal.
: aequalitie and amity are scarce compatible.

Natural reason teaches us, that all multitude begins from one, and the
ancient Philosophers have held, that from unity all things do proceed,
and are again resolved into the same. Of which opinion Laertius In pr^ncipt^
lib. d^ v^tis ^ententi^que Philosophorum.
reports that Musaeus of Athens was author, who lived long before Homer: but
afterward it was renewed by Pythagoras, as Plutarch Lib. de dogmatis
Philosophoru^.
Alexander In successionibus Philosophorum.
, and Laertius Lib. 8. de vi^is and sententiis Philosophorum.
do write: who added thereunto, that unity is the original of good, and
dualitie of evil: And of this opinion Saint Hierome Lib. 1. contra Iouinian.
was also, whose sentence is repeated in the canonical decrees c. nuptiae. 32.
di. 1.
but under the title and name of Saint Ambrose. Hereupon Homer does oftentimes
call good (...), and applies the term (...), to affliction and trouble.
Hereupon Galen Lib. 6. de sanit. tuend.
also writes, that the best in every kind is one. Plato produces all
things from one In Timaeo.
; measures all things by one In Philebo.
; and reduces all things into one In Epinomide.
.

The whole world is nothing but a great state; a state is no other then a
great family; and a family no other then a great body. As one GOD rules
the world, one master the family, as all the members of one body receive
both sense and motion from one head, which is the seat and tower both of the
understanding and of the will: so it seems no less natural, that one state
should be governed by one commander.

The first of these arguments was used by Soliman, Lord of the Turks Anno.
1552.
. Who having strangled Sultane Mustapha his son, because at his return out
of Persit, he was received by the soldiers with great demonstrations of joy;
he caused the dead body to be cast forth before the army, and appointed one
to cry; There is but one God in Heaven, and one Sultane upon earth. The second
was used by Agesilaus, to one that moved the Spartans for a popular government;
go first (said he) and stablish a popular government within your own
doors. To the third Tacitus Vnum imperii corpus vnius animo regendum videtur.
1. annal.
did allude, when he said: The body of one Empire seems best to be governed
by the soul of one man.

In the heavens there is but one Sun; which Serinus (...).
also applies unto government, in affirming, that if we set up two suns, we
are like to set all in combustion.

Many sociable creatures have for one company, one principal either governor
or guide; which al authors take for a natural demonstration of the government
of one.

And if you require herein the testimony of men, you shall not find almost
any that writes upon this subject, but he does, if not allege, yet allow
that of Homer: (...) one Lord, one King. Plutarch declares both his own
judgment concerning this point, and also the consent of others, in affirming
(...). in Enagora.
that all men did acknowledge, that the government of a King is the most
excellent benefit that God has given unto men.

Callimachus says, (...).
that Kings proceed from god: Homer affirms, (...).
that they are cherished by god. Your self do show In cap. 1.
out of Aristotle, Seneca, Plutarch, S. Hierome, S. Chrysost^me and S. Peter,
that monarchy is the most excellent and perfect government, most resembling
the government of god, and most agreeable unto nature. But what do you mean
to acknowledge all this, and yet to deny that monarchy is natural? do you
take it to be above nature? or how else is it most excellent and perfect? how is
it most agreeable to nature, and yet not natural? can any action be most
agreeable to justice, and yet not just? I know not by what strategeme, or
cunning cranck of the schools, you can be made agreeable to your self.

But now if we consider the general custom of al people, we shall find that
all the ancient nations in whom the laws of nature were least corrupt, had no
other government: as the Assyrians, Medes, Persians, Parthians, Indians,
Scythians, Sirians, Phoenicia^s, Arabia^s, Egyptians, Africans, Numidia^s,
Mauritania^s, Brita^s, Celtes, Gauls, Latins, Hetruscanes, Sicilia^s,
Athenia^s, Lacaedemonia^s, Corinthia^s, Achaea^s, Sicyonians, Candia^s, and in
one word, all. Tullie says certu^ est omnos antiqua^ gentes regibus paruisse.
3. de legib.
: it is certain, that al ancient nations were under kings: with which opinion
Salust in Caulin.
consents; and Iustine also, where he says principio tersu^, gentium
nationumque imperium p^nes r^ges crat. lib. 1.
; the e^pire of nations at the first was in the hands of kings. And when the
people of Israel desired a king, they alleged that al other nations were
governed by kings 1. reg. 8.5.
.The Athenians were the first (as Pliny affirms) who set up the government
of many, whose example certain other towns of Greece did follow, rather
blinded by a^bitio^, the^ led by judgment. Among these, if the highest
authority were in the least part of the citisens, it was called aristocracy; if
in the most or in all, it was termed democracy; wherein you confess in ca. 2.
that neither they did nor could any long time continue; but after many
tumults, seditions, mutinies, outrages, iniusticies, banding of factions, and
inundations of blood, they were in the end either dissolved or vanquished, and
reduced again under government of one.

The state of Rome began under kings; it atteined the highest pitch both of
glory and greatness under emperors: in the middle time, wherein it never inioyed
x. years together free from sedition, Polybius says that is was mixed; the
consulls represe^ting a monarchy, the senate, an aristocracie, and the common
people a democracy: which opinion was likewise embraced by Dionysius
Halicarnasseus, Cicero, Cantarine and others. But many do hold that the state
of Rome at that time was populare: which seems to be confirmed by the famous
lawier and cou^sailer Vlpian, where he says vtpote cum lege re^^a quae
denu^crio cius lara est, populus e^ and in eum omne sur^m im: cusuin and pot.
statem consera l 1. D. de c^^st pr^ne.
that the people did grant al their power and authority to the prince.
Whatsoever it was in show, in very deed it was always governed by some one
principal man. Liuie wrighteth of Scipio sub vmbra cius vrbem terratum d^minam
latere, ^^us nutus ^ro decretis patrum, pro justice populi ^sse. lib ^0.
, that under his shadow the city was protected, and that his looks were in
stead of laws: and likewise of Papirius cursor nemo erat quo magis innixa res
romana, qu m^in Papirio cutsore c^tatet. lib. ^.
; that he sustained the Roman affairs. So said Thucidides, that Athens was in
appearance populare, but Aristides was the true monarch thereof: and Plutarch
in^pelopid.
also affirms, that Pelopidas and Epaminondas were no less then lords of the
populare state of Thebes: but after the death of these me^, both the states of
Athens and Thebes floated in tumults, as the same author observes in pericle,
, like a ship in a tempest without a pilot. So did Peter Sodarine Gonsalonier
of Florence give forth, that the title of popularity was used as a mask, to
shadow the tyranny of Laurence Medices: but Florence did never so flourish both
in honor, wealth, and quiet, as under that tyranny. Also in actions of weight,
in great dangers and necessities the Romans had recourse to one absolute and
supreme comma^der, which Liuie calls trepidi patres ad summum au^ilium
decurrunt Dictatorem dici placuit. lib 6.
the highest refuge; whose authority as the Romans did most reuere^tly respect,
so was it many times fearful to their enemies. Of the first, Liuie says
Dictatoris edictum pro numine semper obseruatum. lib. 6.
; the Dictators edict was always observed as an oracle: of the second tantus
erat dictatoris terror apud hosts, vt co creato statim a manibus discesserint.
lib. co.
, so soon as a dictator was created, such a terror came upon the enemies, that
they departed presently from the walls. Likewise in cases of extremity the
Lacedaemonians had their high governor whom they called Harmostes; the
Thessalonians had their Archos; and the Mytilenians also their great
Aezymnetes. Lastly, Tacitus reports ve recte prudentes quidam de vita Augusti
post mortem eius inter se conferentes, dix^runt, non aliud discordantis patriae
remedium suisse, quam si ab vno regeretur. ann. 1.
that certain wise men discoursing of the life of Augustus after his death,
affirmed rightly, that there was no other mean to appease the discordes of the
state, but by reducing it under the government of one.

Let us now take a view of our present age. In all Asia, from whence Tullie
says, in epist. 1. ad Q. Fratreu^.
ciuility did first spread into other parts of the world, no government is in
use but by a monarch, as appears by the Tartarians, Turks, Persians, Indians,
Chinans and Cataians: no other government is found to be founded in all the
cuntries of Afric: in America also and all the west parts of the world, no
other is yet discovered: in Europe only, upon either declining or cha^g of the
empire, a few towns in Germany and Italy did revive again the government of
many: some are already returned to a monarchy, and the residue in their time will
do the like, even as all others have done which have been before them.

What then shall we say of this so ancient, so continual, so general consent
of all nations? what can we say, but conclude with Tertullian in apolog.
. these testimonies, the more true, the more simple; the more simple, the more
common; the more common, the more natu^all; the more natural, the more divine.

But because ambition is a most fiery affection, and carries men blindfold into
headlong hopes, whereby many do aspire to bear rule, neither they good, nor
with any good either means or end; the custom or law of nations has by two
reins endeauored to keep in this raging desire: by succession and by election.
And yet again, because election is most often, if not always, entangled with
many inconveniences; as first, for that the outragies during the vacancy, are
many and great; every one that is either grieved or in want, assuming free
power both for revenge and spoil. Secondly, for that the bouldest wins the
garla^d more often then the best; because the favor of the people does always
taste more of affection then of judgment. Thirdly, for that they who do not
leave their state to their posterity, will dissipate the domain and work out of
it either profit or friends; for so we see that the empire of Germany is
plucked bare of her fairest feathers. Fourthly, for that occasions of war are
hereby ministered; and that, either when one takes his repulse for indignity;
upon which ground Frauncis the first, king of France, could never be driven
out of practice against Charles the 5. emperor; or else when by means of
factio^s many are elected, as it happened in Almaine when Jews of Bauier, and
Albert of Austria were elected Emperors, whereupon eight years war between
them did ensue; and as it often happened in the Empire of Rome, when one
Emperor was chosen by the Senate, and another by the Soldiers, and sometimes
by every legion one; whereby such fires were kindled, as could not be quenched
without much blood. For these wars are most cruelly executed; because the
quarrel leaves no middle state inter summum and praecipitium; between the
highest honor and the deadliest downfall.

For these and diverse other respects, it has bin observed, at most times in
all nations, and at all times in most, that the roialtie has passed by
succession, according to propinquitie of blood. We read that Ptolomie, who
after the death of Alexander the great seized upon Egypt, and part also of
Arabia and of Africa, left that state to his youngest son: but Trogus said,
and out of him Iustine Lib. 16.
, that it was against the law of Nations, and that upon this occasion one of
them did work the death of the other. And therefore when afterward Ptolomie
surnamed Physcon, at the importunity of his wife Cleopatra, would have
preferred his youngest son to the succession of his kingdom, Iustine says Lib.
39.
, that the people opposed themselves against it; but Pausanias Lib. 1.
more probably affirms, that they reuersed his order after his death.

The same course was held in Italy by the Hetruscanes, Latins, and those
Albanes from whom the Romans took their original. Liuie Lib. 1.
writes that Procas king of the Albanes appointed Numitor to succeed in his
estate, but Amulius his younger brother did usurp it by force: hereupon
Dionysius Halicarnasseus Lib. 1.
says; that Amulius held the kingdom against right, because it appertained to
his elder brother.

Among the Graecians, during the space of six hundred years, wherein they were
governed by kings, we find but Timondas and Pittacus who were elected, the one
of Corinth, the other of Negropont; the residue held their states by order of
succession, as Thucidides affirms, encou^tring therein the opinion of
Aristotle. Liuy writes Belli macedonici. lib. 10.
, that Perseus king of Macedon said, that by the order of Nature, the law of
Nations, and the ancient custom of Macedony, the eldest son was to succeed
in the kingdom. Diodorus Siculus Lib. 16.
, and Iustine Lib. 7.
do report, that by this custom Alexander succeeded his father Amyntas, before
his younger brother Phillippe.

Herodotus In Euterpe.
declares that the same order was observed among the Troianes; affirming, that
after the death of Priamus, the kingdom was not to deuolue unto Alexander,
because Hector was before him in years. The same also does appear by that
which Virgil writes: Aeneid. 1.
Praeterea Sceptrum Ilione, quod gesserat olim,
Maxima natarum Priami.
The Scepter which Ilione, when she the state did stay,
The first daughter of Priamus, with royal hand did sway.


Out of which place Seruius Maurus does collect, that women also did use to
govern. But more plainly this custom of the Troianes does appear, by that
which Messala Coruinus Lib ad oc^au. August.
writes, that Troius had two sons, Ilus and Assaracus; and that Ilus by
privilege of his age succeeded in the kingdom.

The Persians also, who for a long time held the reins of all the nations
near unto them, had the same order of succession, as Zenophon In Cytopaed.
witnesses; which is also confirmed by two famous histories; one between
Artaxerxes and Cyrus, whereof Plutarch In Artaxerxe.
makes mention, the other between Artabazanes and Xerxes, reported by
Herodotus In polyhimnia.
and Iustine Lib. 2.
; wherein Artabazanes alleged, that it was a custom among all men, that the
eldest son should first succeed. Agathocles, and out of him Athenaeus do write,
that the Persians had a golden water (for so they term it) whereof it was
capital for any man to drink, but only the king and his eldest son. Whither
this water were drawn out of the river Euleus, which inuironeth the tower
Susis, and the Temple of Diana, whereof Pliny Lib. 6. ca. 28.
writes, that only the kings of Persia did drink; or whether out of Choaspis,
whose waters Herodotus does report to have bin boiled, and carried after the
king in silver vessels; or whether both these were one river, I will neither
determine nor discourse.

In Siria, which is called Assiria (as Herodotus Lib. 7.
, writes) and also Phoenicia, Palestina, and Mesopotamia, as appears by
Pliny Lib. 5. ca. 12.
Eusebius De praeparar. euang. lib. 10.
and diverse other, the same custom is proved by that which Iustine lib. 34.
,and L. Florus Lib. 46.
do write, that Demetrius, having bin delivered by his brother Antiochus, king
of Siria, for an hostage to the Romans, and hearing of the death of Antiochus,
declared to the senate in open asse^bly, that as by the law of nations he had
given place to his elder brother, so by the same law, the right of succession
was then cast upon him. The Parthians, who being thrice attempted by the
Romans, in the time of their chiefest both discipline and strength, were able
to bear themselves victorious, did always acknowledge for their king, the
next of the blood of their first king Arsaces Justin. lib. 14. and 41.
. Among the Germans also, who were of force to defeat five consulare armies
of the Romans, Tacitus De morib. Ger.
affirms that the eldest son did entirely succeed, only the horses did
fall to the most valiant. And that this was likewise the custom of the Jews,
it is evident by the whole history of their kings, especially where it is said
2. Chron. ca. 21.
, that Ioram succeeded Iosaphat; and the reason added, because he was the
eldest.

I should but burn day (as the saying is) in running further upon particulars.
Herodotus In polyhimnia.
does aduow it to be a general custom among al men, that the first in birth is
next in succession. Certain ages after him S. Hierome In epist ad onagrium,
and in genesis 49.
said, that a kingdom is due unto the eldest. In late ages our selves may see,
that the Tartars Turks, Persians, and all the Asiaticks have no other form of
co^stituting their kings. No other is followed in all the countries of Africa.
In the west Indies no other is yet discovered; Insomuch as when Frances
Pizaire, in the conquest of Peru, had slain Atibalippa the king thereof, the
people brake into show, some of joy, all of contentme^t; because he had made
his way to the kingdom, by murdering of his elder brother. In Europe it is not
long since all the Monarchies were successiue. When the Empire of Almaine was
made elective, it became in short time so either troblesom or base, that diverse
Princes refused to accept it: of late it has bin settled in one family, but
has as yet little increased either in dignity or in power. The people of
Denmark, Sweden, Hungary, and B^eme, do challenge to themselves a right of
election, but they accept their king by propinquitie of blood. So they did in
Polonia, until the line of Iagello was worn out, and then they elected for
king, Henry duke of Aniou in France: since which time, they have always in the
change of their kings, exposed their state to fair danger of ruin.

Upon this both general and continual custom Baldus Cons. 275. vol. 2.
says, that kingdoms are successiue by the law of nations; affirming further,
L. Ex hoc iure D. de just and iuro. semper fuit, and semper erit. etc.
that always it has been, and always it shall be, that the first borne
succeeds in a kingdom: wherein he is either followed or accompanied with
open cry of all the choice interpreters of both laws; as namely the
Glossographer, Johan. Andreas, Hostiensis, Collect. Pet. Anchoranus, Antonius,
Imola, Card. Florentinus, Abb. Panormitanus in c. Licet. de voto.
, Oldradus Cons. 94. and 274.
, Albericus in prooem. D.. Discipuli.
, Angelus Cons. 287.
, Felinus in c. Prudentia^ de offic. de leg.
, Paul. Castrensis in l maximum. C. de lib. praeter. and cons. 179 li. 1.
, Alexander Cons. 25. lib. 5.
, Barbatius Cons. 2.
, Franc. Curtius Con. 67.
, Guido Pape Deci. 476. and con. 60.
, Card. Alexander in c. 1. tit de his qui feud. da. poss. and in c. Qualite^.
tit. Si de feu. su cont. inter do.
, Philip. Francus in ^ub de test. lib. ^. and inc. grandi. de sup. ^cque prael.
, Jason in l. 1. D. de constable. prin. and in l. n^mo. de leg. 1.
, Philippus Decius, Carol Cons. 225. ^^ 289.
. Ruinis Cons. 25. lib. 1
, Anto. Corsetta Tract. de pu^. and excel. regia q. 9.
, Ripa in ^ quart. ad l. Falcid.
, Calderine Cons. 9. tit de feud
, Alciate in l. Obuenire. D. de verb. fig.
, and many other of somewhat more ordinary name. Who all with full voice do
agree, that in kingdoms and other dignities, which cannot be either valued or
divided but they are dismembered, the eldest son does entirely succeed. And this
many of them do call the law of all Nations, derived from the order of nature,
and from the institution of God; and confirmed by the Canon, civil and other
positive laws.

For the succession of children, is one of the primarie precepts of nature cius
natural. did. 1.
: whereby his mortality is in some sort repaired, and his continuance
perpetuated by his posterity. But among all the children, nature seems to
prefer the first borne, by imprinting in the mind of parents the greatest
love and inclination toward them, as diverse of the authors before alleged do
affirm; and as it may appear by that of the prophet Zachary Z^ch. 12.10.
, And they shall lament over him as men use to lament in the death of their
first borne: and likewise by that which is said of David 2. Reg. 13.21.
, that he would not grieve his son Ammon, for that he loved him, because he
was his first borne. Hereupon Lyra In Exodus cap. 11
, and before him Saint Augustine in term. de septem plagis
and Saint Chrysostom in Genesis hom. 51
do affirm that the last plague of the Egyptians, which was the death of their
first borne, was the most sharp and heavy unto them. For nothing (says Saint
Augustine Vbi ^.
) is more dear then the first borne. Aristotle, Pliny De h^sto. anim^^. lib
6. cap. 1^.
, Aeltane Lib. 11. cap 40
, and Tzetzes do write, that the same affection is also found in certain
beasts. Histor. chilia. 4. cap 126.


And to this purpose is that which Herodotus De it otu animal lib. 3. and lib.
15. cap. 13.
reports, in Arato.
, that when the Lacedaemanians had received an oracle, that they should take
for kings the two sons of Aristodemus and Aegina, but give most honor unto
the eldest, and they were ignorant which was eldest, because the mother and the
Nurse refused to declare it; they observed which of the children the mother did
wash and feed first, and thereby found out that Eristhenes was the eldest.
Lucian (...). in dia logo (...)
cites the love of the first borne, as grown into a proverb. Gregory
Nazianzene says (...).
, that all men have a sense thereof. Saint Ambrose Lib. 2 de Cain and Abel.
cap. 2.
writes, that in this respect God called the people of Israel his first borne
Exodus 4.
, for that they were, not most ancient, but best beloved. Lastly S. Chrysostom
Homil 5 aduersus Iudaeos.
affirms that the first borne were to be esteemed more honorable then the
rest.

And this natural precedence both in honor and in favor, seems to be
expressly ratified by God; first where he said unto Cain, of his brother Abel
Gen 47.
, His desires shall be subject unto thee, and thou shall have dominion over
him: according to which institution, when Jacob had bought his brothers right
of birth, Isaak blessed him in these words Genesis 27.19.
Be Lord over thy brethren, and let the sons of thy mother bow before thee:
Secondly, where he forbids the father to disinherit the first son of his
double portion; because by right of birth it is his due Deuteronomy. 1.17.
: Thirdly, where he makes choice of the first borne to be sanctified to
himself Exodus 13.2. and 22.19. and 34. 19 Leuit. 27.26. Number 1.13 and 8.16 and
18.15. N^hem. 10.36. ^zech. 44.30.: Luk 2.23.
. And whereas God has often preferred the youngest, as Abel, Isaac, Jacob,
Judah, Phares, Ephraim, Moses, David, Solomon, and others; it was no other then
that which Christ Matthew. 19.30. and 20.16. Marc. 10.31. Luc. 13.10.
said, that many that were last should be first: and that which Saint Paul
has delivered 1. Cor. 1. circa si.
, that God has chosen the weak, and base, and contemptible things of this
world, least any flesh should glory in his sight. So has Herodotus written
lib. 7.
how Artabanus the Persian, in complaining manner did confess, that God
delighted to depresse those things that were high.

But if the first borne die before succession fall; or if being possessed of
the kingdom, he die without issue; his right of birth deuolueth unto the next
in blood: and if he dies in like manner, then unto the third, and so likewise
to the rest in order. This is affirmed by Albericus in preoem D. Discipuli Et
in L. donationes. C. de d^n. inter vir. and ^x.
; and may be confirmed by that which Baldus says In L 2. C. de iur. Emphyt.
, that succession has reference to the time of death, and respects the
prioritie which is then extant Per l. Ex facto. ^ Pen. D. ad Treb.
. And again Cons. 275. lib. 2.
, He is not said the first borne in law, who dies before the fee opens, but
he who at that time is eldest in life. And this opinion is embraced by Alciate
in l. Proximus. D. de ^e^b. sig.
; because as Celsus says L. ^x d^obus. D. de vu^g. and pu^.
; Primus is dicitur ante que^ nemo sit, He is first who has none before him.
Iaco. A retinus, Cinus, Albericus and Baldus do form this case in l. Si quis
priorit. talem. D. de secund.
: There is a custom, that the first borne of the first marriage should
succeed in a baronnie; a certain baron had three wives; by the first he had
no children, by the other two many; the first son of the second marriage
shall succeed: because (as the glossographer there says) the second marriage
in regard of the third is accounted first. Baldus Ibid.
does extend it further; that if he has a son by the first marriage; and
he refuse the baronie, the first son by the second marriage shall succeed in
his right: and so he says it was determined in the kingdom of Apulia, when
Jews the kings eldest son was professed a friar. And this decision is
allowed by Alexander in addit. Bar. l. 1. c. Qui habebat D. de bo. poss. ^ nt.
tab and in disp^t. in cip. Sigism and.
, Oldradus Cons. 92.
, and Antonius Corsetta in t. act de pot. and excel. reg. q. 10. and q. 74.
: and is proved by plain text of the canon law, both where the second borne
is called first borne, when the first borne has given place in c. quaeritur..
item opponitur 22. q. 2.
; and also where he is called the only son Vnigeni^us.
, whose brother is dead c nam and ego. Dever. fig.
. But because it is a notorius custom that the nearest in blood does succeed,
although perhaps removed in degree, I will labor no more to load it with
proof: for who will proclaim that the sun does shine?

But if we should now grant unto you (which is a greater courtesy, then with
modesty you can require) that no particular form of government is natural:
what will you conclude thereof? what inference can you hereupon enforce? That
there is no doubt but the people have power to choose and to change the
fashion of government, and to limitte the same with what conditions they
please. What Sir? can you find no third? but that either one form of
government is natural, or that the people must always retain such liberty
of power? have they no power to relinquish their power? is there no
possibility that they may loose it? whether are you so ignorant to think as
you speak, or so deceitful to speak otherwise then you think. There is no
authority which the people has in matters of state, but it may be either
bound or straightened by three means.

The first is by cession or grant: for so the Romans by the law of royalty
Lex regia.
yielded all their authority in government to the Prince. Of this law Vlpian
L. 1. de constable. princ.
makes mention; and Bodin De rep. lib. 1.
reports that it is yet extant in Rome graven in stone. So the people of
Cyrene; of Pergame and of Bithynia, did submit themselves to the Empire of the
Romans. So the Tartarians commit absolute power both over their lives and
their livings to every one of their Emperors: and so have our people many
times committed to their king the authority of the parliament either
generally, or else for some particular case. For it is held as a rule, that any
man may relinquish the authority which he has to his own benefit and favor
L. Si st^its and ib. Bar. and Bald D. de dam. infect.
. Neither is he again at pleasure to be admitted to that, which once he did
think fit to renounce L. Si q^^s iusiarandum. c. de reb. cr^d.
. And as a private man may altogether aba^don his free estate, and subject
himself to servile condition Inst. de iur. Person.
, so may a multitude pass away both their authority and their liberty by
public consent.

The second is by prescription and custom, which is of strength in all parts
of the world, least matters should always float in uncertainty, and
controversies remain immortal L. 1. de vsucap.
. And that this authority of the people may be excluded by prescription, it is
evident by this one reason, which may be as one in a third place of
Arithmeticke, in standing for a hundred. Every thing may be prescribed,
wherein prescription is not prohibited L. vlt. C. de praesc. long. temp. I.
sicut c. de praesc. 30. ann.
: but there is no law which prohibiteth prescription in this case; and
therefore it follows that it is permitted. And generally, custom does not
only interpret law L. Si de interpretatione. D. de Ll.
, but corrects it, and supplieth where there is no law L. Omnes populi. De
just. and sur. l. Sed and ca. D. de legib.
: in so much as the common law of England, as well in public as private
controversies, is no other (a few maxims excepted) but the common custom of
the Realm. Baldus says e. 1. de Feud.
, that custom does lead succession in principalities, which Martinus c. 1. de
ali. Feud.
advises to fix in memory, because of the often change of Princes: and the
particular custom of every nation is at this day, the most usual and assured
law between the Prince and the people. And this do the Emperors Honorius and
Arcadius L. Testaments omnia. C. de test.
, in these words command punctuallie to be observed: Mos namque retinendus est
fidelissimae vetustatis: the custom of faithful antiquity must be retained:
which place is to this sense balanced by Pau. Gastrensis, Frane. Aretinus, and
Phil. Corneus; who terms it a moral text. The like whereto is found also in
the Canon law, c Ridiculum 12 di.
: and noted by the Glossographer in c Quanto de transl., ral.
, Archidiaeonus in c Domino. 50. di.
, Romanus in L. ^ive^o D. de sol. Mat.
, and Cepola. Neither were the Fathers of the Nicene council of other opinion,
who thus decreed: Let ancient customs stand in strength (...).
: Whereto also agrees that old verse of Ennius, in tract. de imper
Moribus antiquis res stat Romana virisque:
Customs and men of oldest sort;
The Roman state do best support:
which is cited by Saint Austin De ciuit. D^. lib. 2. cap. 21.
; and esteemed by Cicero lib. 3. de repub.
both for brevity and truth, as an oracle. To the same sense Periander of
Corinth said (...).
, that old laws and new meats were fittest for use: which saying Phauorinus
in Gellius did in this manner a little vary: Live after the passed manner,
speak after the present Viue moribus praelentibus, loquere verbis praesentibus.
. Hereto also pertains that edict of the censors mentioned by Suetonius Lib.
de clar. thetor.
, and Aul. Gellius Lib. 15. c. 11. and lib. 1. cap. 10.
: Those things which are beside the custom and fashion of our Elders, are
neither pleasing, nor to be adjudged right Quae praeter consuetudinem and morem
maiorum fiu^t, neque placen^, neque iecta videntur.
. Of this point I shall have occasion more particularly hereafter to write.

The third means whereby the people may loose their authority, is by way of
conquest. For howsoever Saint Augustine 4. de ciuit.
, and after him Alciate 5. Cons. 132.
, do disallowe ambition of enlarging Empire; and term wars upon this cause
great theeueries Grandia latrocinia.
: Whereupon Lucane lib. 10.
, and his uncle Seneca 1. de benesie.
, called Alexander the Great, a great robber of the world Orbis terratu^ praedo.
, Yet there is no doubt but the sentence of victory, especially if the war
was vndertake^ upon good cause (as the conqueror being made his own arbitrator
will hardly acknowledge the contrary) is a just title of acquisition l.
Postliminium D. de captiu.
; reducing the vanquished, their privileges, liberties and whole estate, under
the discretion of him that is victorious. Caesar says; He gives all that
denies right Arma tenenti omnia dat qui iusta negar.
: which sentence is approved by Couaruuias Reg. peccatum p. ^.. 9.
; affirming, that the victor makes all which his sword tou^heth to be his
own. So says Baldus in rub. C. de la. Ii.
, that he does his pleasure upon the vanquished: and again Caesar in the
speech of Ariouistus Vt qui vicissent, iis quos vicissent, quemadmodu^ velint
imperarent.
; it is the law of arms, that the victorious should command those whom they
have subdued, even as they please. Clemens Alexandrinus says ^irom. 1.
, the goods of enemies are taken away by right of war. Isocrates Archid.
has written, that the Lacedaemonians did by title of victory in this sort
maintain their right. We hold this land given by the posterity of Hercules,
confirmed by the Oracle of Delphos, the inhabitants thereof being overcome by
war. Which was not much unlike that which Iephte captain of Israel
expostulated with the Ammonites Iudic. 11.23. and 24.
. Are not those things thine which Chamos thy God has possessed? but
whatsoever the Lord our God has conquered, pertains unto us. Yea, God does
expressly give to the people of Israel, the cities which they should subdue
Deuteronomy. 20.
; some into full possession, others into servitude and subjection: by which
title Jacob also had given to Joseph his partage among his brethren, even the
land which he had taken from the Amorites with his sword and with his bow Gen
48, 12.
. It was usual to the Romans, and as Appian says 1. Ciu.
, just, to retain principal or direct dominion, in all things which they
brought under the sway of their sword. Brissonius 4. de form.
has collected certain examples of the form of yielding unto the Romans,
whereby al profane and sacred, al humane and divine matters were submitted
unto them.

Seeing therefore that the people may so many ways loose both their power and
their right in affairs of state, is not your ignorance aduenturous so
generally to affirm, that if no one form of government be natural, there is
no doubt but the people have power both to alter and limit the same, as they
please? Can no law, no custom, no conquest restrain them? Your pen does
range, and your judgment rage beyond al compass and course of reason. You
should have said, that there is no doubt, but if by all or any of these means,
the right both of succession and government be settled in one family, according
to propinquitie and prioritie of blood, the people may neither take away nor
vary the same: and if they do, they commit injustice, they violate the law of
nations, whereby they expose themselves, not only to the infamy and hate of
al men, but to the revenge of those who will attempt upon them. For it is not
only lawful but honorable, for any people, either to right or revenge the
breach of this law; against them which contemn it, as monsters; against them
who know it not, as beasts. Saint Augustine says v. de ciuit.
; If a City upon earth should decree some great mischiefs to be done, by the
decree of mankind it is to be destroyed. And as in the state of one country
any man may accuse upon a public crime Inst. de pob. iud.
, so in the state of the world, any people may prosecute a common offense: for
as there is a civil band among all the people of one nation; so is there a
natural knot among al men in the world.

You close your conclusion with this conceit, that the word natural Prince, or
natural successor, is to be understood of one, who is borne within the same
Realm, and that it is ridiculous to take it, as though any prince had natural
interest to succeed. But what construction will you then make of that which
Herodian delivers Herod. lib. 1.
, in the speech of Commodus the son of Marcus? Now has fortune given me unto
you for prince in his stead, not drawn into the state, such as they were, who
were before me; nor as one that glories in the purchase of the Empire* for I
only am borne unto you and brought up in the court, never swathed in private
clothes, but so soon as I was borne the imperial purpure did receive me, and
the sun beheld me at once, both a man and a prince. Consider these things, Ture
principem ^olite, non datu^, sed ^atum.
and honor your prince by right, who is not given, but borne unto you. Girard
Lib. 1 del ^e^ate de France.
goes further in writing of Charles the Simple, that he was king before he was
born. Say therefore again, that it is ridiculous to take the word natural
prince, for one that has right of succession inherent in him by birth; and I
will say that this mirth will better beseeine a natural indeed, then any man
that is wise. But let us now consider the further passage of your discourse;
both how you are able to fortify this foundation, and what building it is able
to bear.

TO THE SECOND CHAPTER, which is entitled,Of the particular form of
Monarchies and kingdoms, and the different laws whereby they are to be
obtained, holden and governed in diverse countries, according as each common
wealth has chosen and established.
IN this chapter you spend much speech in praising a monarchy, and preferring
it before the government of many; which you do to no other end, but to
insinuate your self either into credit, or advantage to draw it down* even
as Ioab presented Amasa with a kind kiss, to win thereby opportunity to
stab him 2 Samuel 10.
. For in the end Fol. 21.
you fetch about, that because a Prince is subject, as other men, not only to
errors in judgment, but also to passionate affections, in his will; it was
necessary, that as the common wealth has given that great power unto him, so
it should assign him helps for managing the same. And that a Prince receives
his authority from the people, you prove a little before Page 17.
, for that Saint Peter terms kings Humane creatures 1. Pet. 2.
, which you interpret to be, a thing created by man; because by man's free
choice, both this form of government is erected, and the same also laid upon
some particular person.

I know not in what sort to deal with you, concerning this interpretation.
Shall I labor to impugn it by arguments? Why, there is no man that wants
not either judgment or sincerity, but upon both the natural and usual sense
of the words, he will presently acknowledge it to be false. Shall I go about
either to laugh, or to rail you from your error, as Cicero in the like case
persuaded to do? But this would be agreeable neither to the stayednesse of
our years, nor the gravity of our professions. I am now advised what to do;
I will appeal, as Machetes did before Philip of Macedon Plutarch. in probl.
, from your self asleep, to your self awake; from your self distempered by
affection, to your self returned to sobriety of sense. Do you think then in
true earnest, that a humane creature is a thing created by man, or rather that
every man is a humane creature? Is a brutish creature to be taken for a thing
created by a beast? Spiritual, Angelical, or any other adiunct unto
creature, what reference has it to the Author of creation? And if it were so,
then should al creatures be called divine, because they were created by God, to
whom only it is proper to create; and in this very point, Saint Paul says
Romans 13.
, that all authority is the ordinance and institution of God. Neither needs
it to trouble us that Saint Peter should so generally inioine us to be obedient
to all men, no more then it troubled the Apostles, when Christ commanded them
to preach to all creatures Marc. 16.
; according to which commission, Saint Paul did testify Col. 1.23.
, that the Gospel had been preached to every creature under heaven: but
Saint Peter does specify his general speech, and restrain his meaning to
kings and governors; in which sense Saint Ambrose Ad Auxentib.
cites this place, as it follows: Be subject to your Lords, whether it be
to the king, as to the most excellent, etc.

This interpretation not only not relieuing you, but discovering very plainly
either the weakness or corruption of your judgment, it rests upon your bare
word, that kings have received their first authority from the people; which
although I could deny, with as great both countenance and facility, as you
affirm, yet will I further charge upon you with strength of proof.

Presently after the inundation of the world, we find no mention of politic
government, but only of oeconomical, according as men were sorted in
families: for so Moses has written Genesis 10.5
, that of the progeny of Iapheth, the Isles of the Gentiles were divided after
their families. The first, who established government over many families, was
Nimrod the son of Cush, accounted by Saint Chrysostom Hom. in Genesis
the first King: which authority he did not obtain by favor and election of
any people, but by plain purchase of his power. Hereupon Moses calls him a
mighty Hunter Genesis 10.9.
, which is a form of speech among the Hebrews, whereby they signify a spoiler
or oppresser. And this does also appear by the etymology of his name; for
Nimrod signifies a rebel, a transgressour, and as some interpret it, a
terrible Lord: and names were not imposed in ancient times by chance or at
adventure, as Plato in Cratylo.
, one of natures chief secretaries, and among the Latin writers Aul. Gellius
^oct. Attic. 9. cap. 4.
do affirm.

Many hold opinion, that this Nimrod was the same, whom the Grecians call Ninus:
which seems to be confirmed by that which Moses says Genesis 10.
, that he did build the City of Niniue. Of this Ninus, Iustine writes Ninus
primus dicrut bello parta retinuisse, cum priores contenti victoria* imperio
abstinuissent. Just. 1.
that he was the first who held that which he did subdue; others, satisfied
with victory, aspired not to bear rule. Nimrod founded the empire of the
Assyrians, which continued by succession in his posterity, until it was
violently drawn from Sardanapalus to the Medes. From them also Cyrus by
subversion of Astyages did transport it to the Persians; and from them again
the Grecians did wrest it by conquest. After the death of Alexander, his
captains without any consent of the people, made partition of the empire among
them; whose successors were afterward subdued by the armies and arms of Rome.
And this empire, being the greatest that ever the earth did bear, was in the
end also violently distracted, by diverse several either conquests or reuolts.
Leo After writes, that it is not a hundred years, since the people of Gaoga
in Africa had neither king nor Lord, until one having observed the greatness
and majesty of the king of Tombute, did enterprise to attain sovereignty
above them; which by violence he effected, and left the same to his posterity.
And because I will not be tedious in running through particulars, give you an
instance of any one people, which has not diverse times received, both Prince
and government by absolute constraint, Et Phillidasolus habeto; and I will
yield to all that you affirm. But failing herein, you shall be enforced to
confess, that in many, yea in most, if not in all countries, the people have
received liberty, either from the grant or permission of the victorious
Prince, and not the prince authority from the vanquished people.

What helps now do you imagine, that the people have assigned to their
Prince?

The first, you affirm to be the direction of laws. But it is evident, that
in the first heroical ages, the people were not governed by any positive
law, but their kings did both judge and command, by their word, by their
will, by their absolute power; and, as Pomponius says l. 2. de orig. iur.
, Omnia manu a reg^bus gubernabantur: Kings governed all things: without either
restraint or direction, but only of the law of nature.

The first law was promulged by Moses; but this was so long before the laws
of other nations, that Josephus writes Contra Appianum.
, It was more ancient then their gods: affirming also, that the word Law is not
found in Homer, or in Orpheus, or in any Writer of like antiquity. Of this
law of nature Homer makes mention in these words: (...):
And they who keep the laws which God has prescribed.
And again, (...)
(...).
Uncivil and unjust is he, and wanting private state,
Who holds not all civil war in horror and in hate.
And of the justice of kings he writes in this manner. (...)
(...)
(...).


In which verses Chrysostom affirms lib. 2. de regno.
by the judgment of Alexander, that Homer has delineated the perfect image of
a King: but that he makes mention of any positive laws, I do rather doubt
then assuredly deny. For Kings in ancient times did give judgment in person,
not out of any formalitie in law, but only according to natural equity.
Virgil says Aeneid, ^.
: Hoc Priami gestamen erat cumiura vocatis
More daret populis.
This was the robe which Priamus did always use to wear,
When he the people to him called, their causes for to hear.


Which he does also affirm of Aeneas Aeneid. 3.
, Dido Aeneid. 1.
and of Alcestes Aeneid. 5.
. The like does Herodotus report lib. ^.
of Midas king of Phrygia, who consecrated his tribunal to Apollo: and the
like also does Plutarch in Apopht,
of diverse kings of Macedonia: Philarchus affirms in Athenaeus, that the
kings of Persia had palm trees and vines of goulde, under which they did sit
to hear causes.

But because it grew both troublesome and tedious, for all the people to receive
their right from one man At cum ius aequabile ab ^no viro homines non
consequerentur, inuentae sunt leges. Offic. 2.
; laws were invented, as Cicero says, and officers also appointed to execute
the same.

Another original of laws was thus occasioned: When any people were subdued
by arms, laws were laid like logs upon their necks, to keep them in more
sure subjection: which both because it is not doubtful, and to avoid
prolixitie, I will manifest only by our own example.

When the Romans had reduced the best part of this Island into the form of a
province; as they permitted liberty of law to no other country under their
obedience, so here also they planted the practice of their laws: and for this
purpose they sent over many professors, and among others Papinian, the most
famous both for knowledge and integrity, of all the authors of the civil
law. Again, when the Saxons had forced this Realm, and parted it into seven
kingdoms, they erected so many settes of law; of which only two were of
continuance, the Mercian law; and the West Saxon law. After these the Danes
became victorious; and by these new Lords new laws were also imposed, which
bare the name of Dane-lawe. Out of these three laws, partly moderated,
partly supplied, King Edward the confessor composed that body of law, which
afterward was called Saint Edwards laws. Lastly, the Normans brought the
land under their power; by whom Saint Edwards laws were abrogated, and not
only new laws, but new language brought into use; in so much as all pleas
were formed in French; and in the same tongue children were taught the
principles of Grammar. These causes we find of the beginning of laws; but
that they were assigned by the people for assistance and direction to their
kings, you bring neither argument, nor authority for proof; it is a part of
the dross of your own devise.

The second help, which you affirm that common wealths have assigned to
their kings, is by parliaments and privy councelles. But Parliaments in all
places have bin erected by kings; as the parliament of Paris and of Montpellier
in France, by Philip the Fair; the parliament in England by Henry the first;
who in the sixteenth year of his reign Ann. 1116.
, called a council of all the states of his realm at Salisburie, which our
Historiographers do take for the first Parliament in England; affirming that
the kings, before that time, did never call the common people to counsel.
After this the privy council at the instance of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, was also established; and since that time, the counselors of
state have always bin placed by election of the Prince. And that it was so
likewise in ancient times, it appears by tha^ which Homer writes: (...)
First he established a council of honorable old men: And likewise by Virgill.

-- gaudet regno Troianus Acestes.
Indicitque foru, et patribus dat iura vocatis:
Acestes of the Troiane blood in kingdom does delight,
He sets a Court, and council calls, and gives each man his right.
I will pass over your course, foggio, drowsy conceit, that there are few or
none simple monarchies in the world, (for it would tire: any ^to toil after
your impertinent errors) and will now rip up your packet of examples, whereby
you endeavor to show, that the power of kings has bin brideled by their
subjects. But what do you infer hereby? What can you enforce? will you rake
over al histories for examples of rebellion, and then argue, a facto ad ius;
that every thing is lawful which you find to have bin done? Justinian says:
Non exemplis, sed legibus iudicandum l. 13. C. de sen. and interloc. om. iud.
: We must judge facts by law, and not law by facts, or by examples: which
Alciate 5. Cons. 33. and 6 50.
and Deciane 3.100.
do term a golden law; because there is no action either so impious or
absurd, which may not be paralleled by examples. Will you prove it lawful to
use fleshly familiarity with the sister, with the mother in law, with the
natural mother? You have the example of Cambyses for the first, Caracalla for
the second, Dionysius and Nero for the third. The Jews upon whom God had
settled his choice, did at times (beside many other enormities) erect male
stews 3. Reg. 14. and 15
. Of the two nations, whose examples you use, the Romans and the
Lacedaemonians, the first did the like under diverse emperors, as Lampridius
writes; and in more ancient times allowed also parricide of children Gell.
lib. 5. ca. 19.
: the other would sort themselves by fifteen and twenty families together,
and hold both wives and goods in common. I omit the unnatural customs of
diverse other nations; and will now declare, how in straining a few examples to
countenance your conceit, you are constrained to bear your self no less
cunning in concealing truths, then bold in auouching things which are, not
only uncertain, but plainly false.

It is true which you write, that the kings of Sparta, by the institution of
Lycurgus, were obedient to the officers called Ephori; but these were titular
kings, having no other power but a single voice among the Senators: and because
all affairs were carried by consent of the people, the estate was then esteemed
popular. Afterward Theopompus, by pretense of an Oracle, drew this authority
from the people, to a Senate of thirty; whereby the government did change into
an Aristocracie; and yet the naked name of kings was retained. By this
shuffling of rule the Lacedaemonians were continually tossed with tempests of
sedition, ceasing not to wade in their own blood (as before you have
acknowledged) until in the end they were brought into subjection; first, by
the Macedonians; afterward by the Achaeans; and lastly by the Romans. I will
not say now what reason have we? but what a shame is it for us, to open our
cares to these Vtopicall state-writers? who being mellowed in idleness, and
having neither knowledge nor interest in matters of government, make new models
upon disproportioned ioints, borrowed from nations most different in rule.

You affirm by the testimony of Liuie, that for offense taken against
Romulus, because he reigned at pleasure, and not by law, the Senators did cut
him in pieces: in which short assertion many base untruths are included,
beneath the degree of any vile word. Liuie writes that he sorted the people
into order, and governed them by laws Iura dedit.
, and that he was also both advised and valiant in the field; even such a one
as Homer describes: (...) Both a good king, and courageous commander.
Concerning his end, Liuie writes, that in taking muster of his army, a thick
tempest did arise, after which he was never seen; wherein he is seconded by
Solinus, Eutropius and the rest: only Liuie adds, that there was a rumor, but
very obscure, without any certain either author or ground; I will add also
without probability, that he was torn in pieces. For how probable is it,
that such a fact, in the open view of his army, could be very obscure? how
probable is it also, that the people would first tear him in pieces for his
injustice, and then worship him for a God? Further, with what either confidence
or conceit do you allege this report of Liuie, for his opinion? I find your
fetch; you apprehend every thing which may, if not confirm, yet countenance
that doctrine, which lately you have drawn out of Cerberus den; That it is
lawful to contriue the death of kings.

That the people were grieved against Seruius Tullius for reigning without
election: it is a mere fantasy, a dream, a devise. Liuie faith Tanto
consensu quanto haud qui^quam alius ante rex est declaratus.
, that he was declared king with such a consent, as no man had bin before him.

That Tarquinius neglected the laws of government prescribed to him by the
common wealth, it is an ougly untruth. Liuie says, that he brake the ancient
manner of kings before him: but for laws Pomponius affirms i^^. 2. D. de
orig^^r.
, that at that time the Romans had no laws but from their kings, and that
Sextus Papirius reduced them into one volume, which was called the civil law
of Papirius i^s ci^^le ^apirianum.
, and that when the people expelled their kings, they abrogated their laws
also, and remained twenty years without any law.

Lastly you add, that the Romans did expel their kings, and erect Consuls in
their steed: but you suppress that which followed, which I hold for a common
consequence of ye like disorder: First, that for this cause, they were
presently almost overwhelmed with wars: secondly, that in this state, they
never enjoyed long time free from sedition: lastly, that as Tacitus says,
Nullum esse discordantis patrie remedium, quam vt ab vno rege^etur. annal^
there was no means to appease these tumults, but by returning to a monarchy
again. All this I write, rather to manifest the manner of your dealing, then
that I hold it much regardable what Romans did.

Your examples of our present age I will wrap up in these few words. All
nations, very few excepted, do consent in this form of government; first, to
be under one Prince; secondly, to accept him by succession, according to
propinquitie of blood: in other circumstances, either for in augurating their
prince, or for the manner of managing and executing his government, not two
nations in the world in all points do agree. And yet is not this diversity
raised, by any laws which the people do prescribe unto their Prince, as you
do most grossly, yea peeuishly, yea maliciously affirm; but by the
particular laws and customs of every nation, in which the consent of the
Prince, either secret or express, sometimes only is sufficient, always
principally does concur.

Upon this diversity of customs you conclude, that it suffices not to
allege bare propinquitie of blood. What? not where that custom is established?
as I have declared it to be in most nations of the world? does difference of
customs make all custom void? does diversity of custom in some circumstances
take away the principal custom of succession by blood? This cleaves together
no surer then sand; you loose both labor and credit in obtruding unto us these
weak and loose arguments, without either force of reason or form of Art.

Your instance of the law Salicke in France, does offer occasion to enter into
a large field, wherein I could plainly prove, that there was never any such
law made to bind the descent of the crown of France; and that it has bin
the custom in most parts of the world, not to exclude women from succession in
state: in so much as Beda in Act. cap. 8.
and before him Eusebius lib. 2. cap. I.
, and Pliny lib. 6. cap. 29. and 30.
do^ write, that certain people were governed only by Princes of that sex.
But because this is a matter both of long discourse, and not proper to our
purpose, I will contain my self within this observation; That the exclusion of
King Edward the third from the crown of France, upon this pretense, was the
cause of the effusion of their brauest blood, and of the spoil, wast, and
conquest of all that Realm. I acknowedge that the English have lost the
possession of that conquest; and that was by means of domestical wars, for
excluding the nearest in blood from the crown; into which unquiet quarrel,
you do now endeavor again to imbarke us. Yet no man can assure that the
miseries of France for this cause are at an end. Rams recoile to strike
harder: we are gone rather back then away: I will not presage, but any man
may conjecture, that our minds and our means will not always want the favor
of time.

After all this you proceed a degree further: that it is lawful upon just
considerations, not only to put back the next inheritour of the crown, but
also to remove him who is in full possession thereof. And y^ is plain (you
say) not only by the grounds before by you alleged, but also by example of
the Romans and Graecians: and because God has commonly concurred in such
judicial actions of the state; not only in prospering them, but in giving
them also some notable successor. And yet you protest you are far from their
opinion, who upon every mislike are ready to band against their Prince; and
that you esteem the tenure of a crown, if once it be settled, the most
irregular, whereto every man is bound to settle his conscience, without
examination of title or interest; but only by the supreme law of Gods
disposition, who can dispense in what he lists: and that notwithstanding you
are as far, from the abject flattery of Billaie and others; who affirm,
that Princes are subject to no law or limitation at al, and that they succeed
by nature and birth only, and not by admission of the people; and that there
is no authority under God to chasten them. These you call absurd paradoxes;
and herewith you settle your self to show in the next Chapter, what good
success has insued the deposition of Princes.

Concerning your protestation, we may say unto you as Isaac said to his son
Jacob Genesis 27.22
. The voice is Jacobs voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau: You speak
fair, and therewith also well; but the maine drift of your discourse, is
nothing else but a tempestuous doctrine of rebellion and disorder: you being
therein like the boatman, who looks one way and pulls another; or rather
like the image of Ianus, which looked two contrary ways at once. It is a rule
in law; That a protestation contrary to a man's act, will not serve to relieve
him Protestatio aetui contraria non releuat.
: only this shall serve to convince you, either of false or of forgetful
dealing, when we come to that place where in flat words you maintain the
contrary.

Concerning the querele which you lay against Billaie; as I have not seen what
he has written, so will I not interpose between him and you. I never heard of
christian prince who challenged infinite authority without limitation of any
law, either natural or divine. But where you term it an absurd paradoxe, that
the people should not have power to chasten their Prince, and upon just
considerations to remove him; I am content to join with you upon the issue.

And first I note the manner of your dealing, in that you have omitted to
express what these just considerations may be. For seeing there has bin no
king, who is not noted of some defects; and again, no Tyrant, who has not
many commendable parts (as Plutarch writes In Dionys.
that Dionysius excelled most princes in diverse points of justice and virtue)
it is a matter of dangerous consequence, to leave these considerations
undetermined and at large. But who sees not, that you do it out of policy,
that you may upon every particular occasion, declare such causes to be
sufficient as you please?

How then do you prove, that upon any cause, the people have power to
dispossess their prince? This is plain (you say) not only by the grounds
before by you alleged, but also by example of y^ Romans and Graecians. The
grounds by you alleged, are two. One in your first Chapter, that because no
one form of government is natural, the people have power both to choose, and
to change, and to limit it as they please. The other ground is in this Chapter;
that because there are diverse laws and customs in matters of principality,
it suffices not to allege bare propinquitie of blood.

Why; but had you no text of scripture, no Father of the Church to allege? No
law? No reason? No better example? No surer ground? It is more then this
which you bring against your self, in citing out of Saint Peter 2. ca. 2.10.
; The Lord knows to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment; and
especially them that despise government, and speak evil of those that are in
dignity. And out of Saint Jude ver. 8.
: Likewise these dreamers despise government, and speak evil of them that are
in authority. Besides also, you have alleged out of Saint Romans ^ 3.
Paul: Let every soul be subject unto the higher power; for there is no
power but of God: Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God; and they that resist shall receive to themselves judgment.
And likewise out of S. Peter: 1. ca. 2 ver. 13
Submit your selves to every humane creature, whether it be to the king, or
unto governors; for so is the will of God. To which places we may likewise ad
that, which S. Paul did write unto Titus Tit. 3.1.
: Put them in remembrance that they be obedient to the principalities and
powers. And writing to Timothy 1. Tim. 2.2.
he exhorts us also to pray for them, that we may lead under them a
peaceable life.

But perhaps you will say, that the Apostles did not mean this of wicked
princes. Trifler: the Apostles spoke generally of al: Saint. Peter 1. Pet.
2.18.
makes express mention of evil Lords. And what princes have ever bin more
either irreligious or tyrannical, then Caligula, Tiberius, Nero, the infamy of
their ages, under whose empire the Apostles did both live and write.

Bellarmine the great master of controversies perceiving this to be
vnanswerablie true, did in another sort rather cut then untie the knot:
affirming In tract. de. exemp. clericorum.
that at that time it was necessary to admonish the Christians to perform
obedience to their kings, least the preaching of the Gospel might otherwise be
hindered: which is as if in direct terms he should have said. Sir Kings:
whilst our heads were under your girdle, we were content to curry favor, by
preaching obedience unto the people: but now we have got the wind of you; we
must plainly tell you, that you hold your crowns at their courtesy and favor;
and have no power in effect, but as lieutenants general. I know you will make a
sower face at this; it will go very much against your stomachs; but there is
no remedy, you must take it down; they are your good lords; they may
dispossess you.

Profane Bellarmine: is Christian Religion a mere policy? does it apply it
self only to the present? Does it turn always with the time? May the
principal professors thereof say, as an infidel Moore did, when he violated the
faith which he had given unto christians? We have no bone in our tongues that
we cannot turn them which way we please. We seee plainly that you say so:
and it is as plain, that it was far from the true meaning of the Apostles. S.
Jude ver. 16.
writes sharply against those, who had men's persons in admiration because of
aduvntage. S. Paul also says Galat. 1.10.
: Go I about to please men? If I should please men, I were not then the
servant of Christ.

I will give you an example of another time. Nabuchadnezzar king of Assyria,
wasted al Palestina; took Jerusalem; slew the king; burnt the Temple; took
away the holy vessels and treasure: the residue he permitted to the cruelty
and spoil of his unmerciful soldiers; who defiled al places with rape, ruin
and blood. After the glut of this butcherie, the people which remained, he led
captive into Chaldaea, and there commanded, that whosoever refused to worship
his golden image, should be cast into a fiery furnace.

What cruelty, what impiety is comparable to this? and yet the Prophets
Jeremiah ca. 29.7.
and Baruch ca. 1.11.
did write to those captive Jews, to pray for the prosperity and life of
him, and of Baltazar his son, that their days might be upon earth as the
days of heaven: and Ezechiel ca. 17.
both blames and threatens Zedechia, for his disloialtie in reuolting from
Nabuchadnezzar, whose homager and tributarie he was. What answer will you make
to this example? I am wisely busied to cast forth this question; what answer
can you make, which your own knowledge will not convince?

Many other places there are in holy Scripture, whereby not only our actions
are tied to obedience; He that does presumptuously against the ruler of the
people shall die Deuteronomy. 17.12.
: but also our words, Thou shall not speak evil against the ruler of the
people Exodus 22.28. Act. 23.5.
; yea, our secret thoughts: Detract not from the king, no not in thy thought;
for the fowls of the air shall carry thy voice Eccles. 10.20.
. The reason hereof is not obscure: Because princes are the immediate ministers
of God Romans 13.
; and therefore he called Nabuchadnezzar, his servant Ierem. 25.9.
; and promised him also hire and wages for the service which he did Ezech.
29.18.
. And the Prophet Esaias cap. 25.
calls Cyrus, a profane and heathen king, the Lords anointed. For, as
Solomon says Prou. 21.1.
, The hearts of kings are in the hands of the Lord: and he stirs up the
spirit, even of wicked Princes to do his will 2. Chron. 36.22.
: and (as Iehoshaphat said to his rulers 2. Chron. 19.8.
) they execute not the will of man, but of the Lord.

In regard hereof David calls the^ gods Psalm. 82.
; whereof Plato also had some sense, when he said (...) in polit.
, A king is in steed of god. And if they do abuse their power, they are not to
be judged by their subjects, as being both inferior and naked of authority,
because all jurisdiction within their realm is derived from the^, which their
presence only does silence and suspend: but God reserueth them to the ^orest
trial: Horribly and suddenly (says the wise man Sap. 6.
) will the Lord appear unto the^, and a hard judgment shall they have.

You Jesuits do yield a blindfold obedience to your superiors, not once
examining either what he is, or what he does command: and although the Pope
should swerve from justice, yet by the canons Extrauag. Vna^ sanctam. de maio,
and obed,
, men are bound to perform obedience unto him, and God only may judge his
doings: and may a king, the Lords Lieutenant, the Lords anointed in the view
of his subjects, nay, by the hands of his subjects, be cast out of state? May
he, as was Actaeon, be chased and wooried by his own hounds? Will you make him
of worse condition, then the Lord of a Manor? then a parish priest? then a
poor schoolmaster, who cannot be removed by those that are under their
authority and charge?

The law of God commands that the child should die, for any contumely done
unto the Parents. But what if the father be a robber? if a murderer? if for
all excess of villainies odious and execrable both to God and man? Surely he
deserves the highest degree of punishment; and yet must not the son lift up
his hand against him: for, as Quintilian says in declam.
, No offense is so great, as to be punished by parricide. But our country is
dearer to us then our selves Cic. offic. lib. 1
: and the Prince is the father of our country Pater patriae.
: whose authority, as Baldus notes in l. senium. C. qui test. fa. poss.
, is greater then of parents: and therefore he must not be violated, how
impious, how imperious soever he be.

If he commands those things that are lawful, we must manifest our
obedience by ready performing. If he inioine us those actions that are evil;
we must show our subjection by patient enduring. It is God only who seateth
kings in their state; it is he only who may remove them. The Lord will set a
wise king over the people which he loves, as himself does testify 2. Chron.
1.
. And again, For the sins of the land the kings are changed Prou 28.2. 2.
Chron. 28.6.
. As therefore we endure with patience unseasonable weather, unfruitful
years, and other like punishments of God; so must we tolerate the
imperfections of Princes, and quietly expect either reformation, or else a
change.

This was the doctrine of the ancient Christians, even against their most
mortal persecuters. Tertullian says Apolog. 37.
, For what war are we not both serviceable and ready, although unequal in
number, who do so willingly endure to be slain? neither want we strength of
number: but God forbid, that religion should be maintained with humane fire.
From him also Saint Cyprian, a most studious reader of Tertullian, as Saint
Hierome de sacr. ec. Tert.
notes, in like manner writes Ad Demet.
: Although our people be exceeding copious, yet it does not revenge it self
against violence: it suffers. Saint Augustine says ^actum societatis humanae
generale regibus obedire. Confess. lib. 2.
: It is a general paction of humane society to obey kings. Which sentence is
assumed into the body of the canon law Did. 8. c. qu^ contra.
. In a word, the current of the ancient fathers is in this point concurrent;
insomuch as among the^ all there is not one found, not any one; one is a small
number; and yet I say confidently again, there is not any one, who has let
fall so loose a speech, as may be strained to a contrary sense: How then are
you of late become, both so active and resolute to cut in sunder the reins of
obedience, the very sinews of government and order? Whence had Benedetto
Palmto, a Jesuit, his warrant, to incite William Parrie to undertake the
parricide of our Queen? whence did Annibal Codretto, another Jesuit, assure
him, that the true Church made no question, but that the fact was lawful?
Whence did Guignard, a Jesuit, term the butcherie of Henry late king of
France, an heroical act, and a gift of the holy Ghost? Whence did he write of
the king, who now there reigns: If without arms he cannot be deposed, let
men take arms against him; if by war it cannot be accomplished, let him be
murdered? Whence did Ambrose Verade, rector of the college of the Jesuits in
Paris, animate Barriers (as he confessed) to sheath his knife in the kings
breast; assuring him by the living God, that he could not execute any act more
meritorious? Whence did the commenter upon the epitome of Confessions,
otherwise the seventh book of decretals, commend all the Jesuits in these
terms Tyrannos aggred untur, lolium ab agro dominico ^u^llunt.
, They set upon tyrants, they pull the cockle out of the Lords field?

It is a rule in nature, that one contrary is manifested by the other. Let us
compare then your boisterous doctrine with that of the Apostles, and ancient
Fathers of the Church, and we shall find that the one is like the rough spirit,
which hurled the heard of swine headlong into the sea Matt. 8.
; the other like the still and soft spirit which talked with Elias 1. Reg. 19.
.

Neither was the devil ever able, until in late declining times, to possess
the hearts of Christians with these cursed opinions, which do evermore beget a
world of murders, rapes, ruins and desolations. For tell me, what if the
prince, whom you persuade ye people they have power to depose, be able to make
and maintain his party, as K. John and king Henry the third did against their
Barons? What if other princes, whom it does concern, as well in honor, to see
the law of Nations observed, as also in policy, to break those proceedings
which may form precedents against themselves, do adioin to the side? what if
whilst the prince and the people are (as was the frog and the mouse) in the
heat of their encounter, some other potentate play the kite with them both; as
the Turk did with the Hungarians? Is it not then a fine piece of policy which
you do plotte? or is it not a gross error to raise these dangers, and to
leave the defense to possibilities doubtful.

Go too, Sirs, go too, there is no christian country, which has not by your
devises ben wrapped in wars. You have set the empire on swim with blood: your
fires in France are not ye: extinguished: in Polonia and all those large
countries, extending from the north to the east, you have caused of late more
battles to be fought, then had been in 500 years before. Your practices have
heretofore prevailed against us: of late years you have busied your selves in
no one thing more, then how to set other christian princes on our necks;
stirring up such store of enemies against us, as, like the grasshoppers of
Egypt, Exodus 10.
might fill our houses, and cover our whole land, and make more doubt of room
then of resistance. Our own people also you have provoked to unnatural
attempts: you have exposed our country as a pray, to them that will either
invade or betray it; supposing belike that you play Christ's part well, when you
may say as Christ did, Math. 10.34.
think not that I came to send peace, I came not to send peace but a sword.
But when by the power and providence of God, all these attempts have rather
shown what good hearts you bear toward us, then done us any great harm;
when in all these practices you have missed the mark, now you do take another
^ime: now having no hope by extremity of arms, you endeavor to execute your
malice by giving dangerous advise: Now you go about to entangle us with
titles, which is the greatest misery that can ^all upon a state.

You pretend fair shows of liberty and of power, Sed timeo Danaos and done
ferentes: We cannot but suspect the courtesies of our enemies: the power which
you give us will pull us down; the liberty whereof you speak will fetter us
in bondage. When Themistocles came to the Persian court, Artab^nus captain of
the guard, knowing that he would use no ceremony to their king, kept him out
of presence, and said unto him: you Grecians esteem us barbarous, for
honoring our kings, but we Persians esteem it the greatest honor to us that
can be. The like answer will we frame unto you: you Jesuits account it a
bondage to be obedient unto kings; but we Christians account it the greatest
means for our continuance both free and safe.

To the third Chapter, which is intitledOf the great reverence and respect due
to kings, and yet how diverse of them, have been lawfully chastised by their
common wealths for their misgouernment, and of the good and prosperous
success that God commonly has given to the same, and much more to the putting
back of an unworthy pretender.
THat princes may be chastised by their subjects, your proofs are two: one is
drawn from certain examples; the other from the good success and successors
which usually have followed. Surely it cannot be but that you stand in a
strong conceit, either of the authority of your word, or simplicity of our
judgment; otherwise you could not be persuaded, by these slender threads to
draw any man to your opinion. Of the force of examples I have spoken before;
there is no villainy so vile which wants example. And yet most of the
examples which you do bring, are either false, or else impertinent.

For there have been diverse states, wherein one has borne the name and title
of king, without power of Majesty. As the Romans in the time of their
consulate estate, had always a priest, whom they entitled king, whose office
consisted in certain ceremonies and sacrifices, which in former times could
not be performed but by their kings. Likewise the Lacedaemonians, after
Licurgus had formed their government retained two kings, who had no greater
stroke in matters of state, then a single voice as other Senators. Such were in
Caesar's time many petty kings of Gaul, who (as Ambiorix king of Liege
confessed) were subject to their Nobility, and iusticeable by them. Such are
now the Emperors of Almaine; because the puissance and Majesty of the empire
pertains to the states, who are sworn to the empire it self, and not to the
person of the Emperor. Such are also the Dukes of Venice, the soueraignetie of
which state is settled in the gentlemen. In these and such like governments,
the Prince is not sovereign, but subject to that part of the common wealth,
which retains the royalty and majesty of state, whether it be the
Nobility, or common people: and therefore your examples drawn from them is
nothing to our purpose.

Concerning success, it cannot be strange unto you, that by the secret, yet
just judgment of God, diverse, evil actions are carried with appearance of good
success The Prophet David said, Psalm. 73.
that his treadings had almost slipped, by seeing the wicked to flourish in
prosperity: the prophet Jeremiah Ca. 12 1.
seemed also to stagger upon this point and it has always ben a dangerous
stone in the way of the godly, whereat many have stumbled, and some fallen.

Besides, it ordinarily happens that good princes succeed tyrants; partly
because they are so indeed, as being instructed to a better manage of
government, both by the miserable life of their predecessors, and by the o^gly
infamy which remains after their death: partly because by means of the
comparison they both seem, and are reported to be far better then they are.
Heerevpon Lampridius says of Alexander Seuerus: in Alexand.
I may also say, that Alexander was a good Prince by fear* for that
Heltogab^lus his predecessor was both an evil prince, and also massacred and
slain. Seeing therefore the reason is so manifest, wherefore good princes
should succeed tyrants, is it not rashness? is it not impudency? is it not
impiety for us to wade with unclean feet into Gods secret counsels,
unknown to the Angels, and to justify upon this event the paricide of any
prince? For my part, I know not whether you show your self more presumptuous
in entering into this observation, or in pursuing it more idle and impure.

I will pass over your protestation of respect and obedience due unto Princes:
protest what you please, we will take you for no other then a vile ^inde of
vermin, which, if it be permitted to creep into the bowels of any state,
will gnaw the heart strings thereof in sunder. This you manifest by the course
comparison which presently you annexe, that as a natural body has authority,
to cure the head if it be out of tune, and reason to cut it off oftentimes, if
it were able to take another; so a body politic has power to cure or cut off
the head, if it be unsound. But what either will or power has any part of the
body in it self? what either sense for the one, or motion for the other, which
proceeds not altogether from the head? where is the reason seated which you
attribute to the body, both in judging and curing the infirmities of the head?
Certain it is, that in your cutting cure you deal like a foolish physician,
who finding a body half taken and benumbed with a palsy, cutteth off that
part to cure the other, and so make sure to destroy both. You suppose belike
that to enter into greater perils, is the only remedy of present dangers. I
omit to press many points of this comparison against you, because comparisons
do serve rather to illustrate then enforce: and I know not what assertion you
might not easily make good, if such senseless prating might go for proof.

I come now to your particular examples, whereof the first is of King Saul;
whom you affirm to be deprived and put to death for his disobedience. Saul
deprived and put to death? I never heard that any of his subjects did ever lift
up one thought against him. Dreamer, you will say, he was slain by the
Philistimes: good; but who deprived him; it was God (you say) who did deprive
him? You must pardon us if upon the sudden we do not conceive the mystery
of your meaning: your words of deprivation and putting to death, do rather
import a judicial proceeding against him, the^ that God delivered him to be
vanquished, by his enemies in the field. But what is this to dispossessing by
subjects? yes, you say, because what soever God has put in ure in his common
wealth, may be practiced by others. Why, but then also good princes may be
deposed by their subjects; because God delivered Josiah to be slain by the
Aegiptians.

You firebrands of strife, you trumpets of sedition, you red horses whose
sitters have taken peace from the earth, Apoc. 6.4.
how impudently do you abuse the scriptures? how do you defile them with
your filchie fingers? It is most certain that David knew, both because Samuel
told him, and because he had the spirit of prophecy, that God had rejected
Saul, and designed him to be king in his place: yet his doctrine was always,
not to touch the Lords anoin^ed psa. 105.1. reg 24.
, whereto his actions were also answerable. For when Saul did most violently
persecute him, he defended himself no otherwise then by flight. During this
pursuit, Saul fell twice in to his power; once he did not only spare but
protect him, and rebuke the pretorian soldiers for their negligent vvatch: the
other time his heart did smite him, for that he had cut away the lap of his
garment. Lastly, he caused the messenger to be slain, who upon request, and
for pity, had furthered (as he said) the death of that sacred King. We have
a precept of obedience, which is the mould wherein we ought to fashion our
actions. God only is superior to princes; who uses many instruments in the
execution of his justice, but his authority he has committed unto none.

Your second example is of king Amon, who was slain (as you wright) by his
own people; because he vvalked not in the vvayes of the Lord. This is somewhat
indeed if it be true; let us turn to the text. 4 reg. 21.
Amon was xxii. years old when he began to reign etc. and he did evil in
the sight of the Lord etc. and his servants conspired against him, and slew him
in his house, and the people smote all those who conspired against king Amon,
and made Josiah his son king in his stead. But this is very different from
that which you report. Amon was slain by his servants, and not by the people;
who were so far from working, that they severely revenged his death. And
although Amon was evil, yet the scripture lays not his evil for the motive
whereupon his servants slew him. The devil himself in alleging the scripture,
used more honesty and sincerity (if I may so term it) then you: for he cited
the very words, wresting them only to a crooked sense: but you change the
words of the Scripture; you counterfeit Gods coin, you corrupt the records
which he has left us. I will now shake of all respect of civility toward
you, and tell you in flat and open terms; that as one part of your assertion
is true, that good Kings succeeded Saul and Amon; so the other part, that
either they were, or in right could have been deprived and put to death by
their subjects, it is a sacrilegious, a logger-headed lie.

Of your example of Romulus I have spoken before. I have declared also how the
Romans, presently after the expelling of their kings, and for that cause, were
almost overwhelmed with the weight of war; being beaten home to the very
gates of their city. And had not Chocles by a miracle of manhood sustained the
shock of the enemies, whilst a bridge was broken behind him, the town had
been entered and their state ruined. And whereas you attribute the enlargement of
the empire, which happened many ages after, to this expelling of their kings,
you might as well have said, that the rebellion against king John was the
cause of the victories which we have since had in France. I have before
declared, that the state of the Romans under their consulls, was popular,
rather in show, then in deed: this show began also to end, when by the law
Valeria, L. Sylla was established dictator for four and twenty years. After
this, the empire did mightily increase, until the reign of Traian^; at which
time all authors agree that it was most large; and yet far short of your
wandering survey, not half fifteen thousand miles in compass.

In your example of Caesar, I never saw more untruths crowded together in
fewer words: you say he brake all laws, both humane and divine: that is one;
his greatest enemies did give of him a most honorable testimony. You say he
took all government into his hands alone: that is two; the people by the law
Seruia elected him perpetual dictator. You make his death to be an act of the
state: that is three; for they who slew him, were both declared and pursued by
decree of the state for public enemies; of whom, not any one, either died a
natural death, or lived three years after; it was further decreed, that the
court where he was slain should be stopped up, that the Ides of March should
be called parricidium; and that the Senate should never be assembled upon that
day. You say that Augustus was preferred in his place: that is four; and all
within the compass of six lines. Augustus was never chosen dictator;
Suetonius writes In Augusto, genu nixus dictaturam deprecatus est,
that he entreated the people upon his knee, not to charge him with that
office. But Augustus, Antonius and Lepidus did first knit in arms by the name
of Triumuiri, to revenge the death of Julius Caesar; whereupon a long cruel and
doubtful war was set up, which continued the space of xx. years; first,
between these three, and the murderers of Caesar; then, between Lepidus, and
the other two; lastly between Augustus and Antonius: and this was the sweet
success of the murder of Caesar.

Augustus, after his victory was made perpetual tribune, as Suetonius has
written In August.
Dio. says, (...). lib. 53.
that he was freed from the power of the laws; as Pompeie also had been before
him. Tacitus adds, in proam.
that the people having their hearts broken with broiles, permitted him to rise
into rule, and to draw by degrees the whole authority of the state into his
hands. And so it seems that the royal law was not yet established, Lex
regia.
by which the people gave over their power in government: whereupon some make
good the sentence which the Senate gave against Nere; because the sovereignty
was not then by any express act settled in the Emperor.

But where you bring the succession of Vespasian as a good success of this
sentence against Nero, it is a vvilde and witless untruth. Galba succeeded
next after Nero; who was slain in a sedition raised by Otho. Otho again was
overcome in field by Vitellius; whereupon he slew himself. Lastly, Vitellius
was overthrown and slain by the Captains of Vespasian; who was the fourth
Emperor after Nero. These intestine wars, these open battles fought to the
full, this slaughter of Emperors, which you term interludes, were the
immediate success after the death of Nero. You furies of hell, whose voices
are lightening and thunder, whose breathing is nothing but sword, fire, rages
and rebellions: the encountering of armies, the butcherie of millions of men,
the massacre of princes, you account enterludes: These are your pleasures;
these your recreations. I hope all christian common wealths will bear an
eye over your inclination, and keep out both your persons and persuasions,
from turning their state into an open stage for the acting of these enterludes.

You continue your base boldness in affirming, that the senate procured the
death of Domitian; that they requested the soldiers to kill Heliogabalus; that
they invited Constantine to come and do justice upon Maxentius: this broken
kind of disguising is familiar unto you, to make such violencies as have often
prevailed against excellent princes, to seem to be the act of the whole
state. And vvheras you bring the succession of Alexander Seuerus for a good
success of the murder of Heliogabalus, being the rarest prince (you say) that
ever the Romans had; you might have alleged any author in proof thereof
better then Herodian, who vvriteth of him in this manner. lib. 6.
Alexander did bear the name and ensigns of the empire; but the
administration of affairs and government of the state did rest upon women. And
further he vvriteth that by his slacknesse and cowardice, the Roman Army was
defeated by the Persians; and finally, that for his want of courage, he was
slain by his own soldiers. By this we may see that you go blindfold; being
so far from caring, that many times you scarce know what you wright. Your
markable example (as you term it) of ye change o^ the empire, from the west to
the east; from Co^stantin the sixth, to Charles king of France, does mark out
nothing more unto us, then your fou^dred judgment. The question is not what
one foreign prince may do against another, but what subjects may do against
their soueraign: this is the point of controversy, heete you must cloase; and
not trauerse about in discourses impertinent.

The change of the kingdom of France from Childeric to Pepin, your own
author Girard lib. 1. de l'sta^e de France.
affirms to be, both an ambitious and fraudule^t usurpation, wherein Pepin used
the reverence of religion as a mantle to cover his impiety and rebellion. The
matters which he objected against Childeric were two; first, his
insufficie^cie, the ordinary pretense of most rebellions; but Girard, Ibidem.
says, that the ancient custom of the French was, to love and honor their
kings, whether sufficient or unable, worthy or weak; and that the name of
king was esteemed sacred, by whomsoever it was borne. Secondly he objected,
that his subjects were condicionally sworn unto him; and this also Girard
writes to be a forced and cautelous interpretation, violently streining the
words of their oath to his advantage: and in deed, if the oath of the people
had been conditional, what needed they to procure a dispensation for the same?
This was the first act (says he) whereby the popes took occasion to set in
their foot of authority, for transporting of kingdoms from one race to
another: which growing to strength, has filled all christian countries with
confusion and tumult.

Likewise the change of that kingdom from the line of Pepin to the line of
Capet, was a mere violence and intrusion, and so was it acknowledged by
Eudes earl of Paris, the first of that family who did vsurp Girard. fo 52.
: and for that cause he was constreined after two years reign, to quit the
crown, and to give place unto Charles the lawful heir. And when Robert,
brother unto Eudes, did enter into arms to recover that which his brother
once held, he was beaten down and slain by the faithful subjects of king
Charles. Hugh, the son of Robert nourished this ambition: But Hugh Capet his
son with better both opportunity and success, but no better right, did
accomplish the enterprise. For Girard For 58. de l'state.
calls him an usurper, and Charles duke of Lorrane the true heir to the
crown. Between these two (as in all usurpations it is usual) war was
raised; but by the unsearchable judgment of God the duke of Lorraine was cast
to the ground. And there is little doubt, but, if he had prevailed, Lorraine
had been at this day a member of the crown of France.

The like answer may be given to your example of Suintilla: and this beside;
that the kingdom of the Goths in Spain, was not then settled in succession,
and chiefly during the reign of Victeric, Gundemir, Sisebuth, Suintilla,
Sicenand, Cinthilla, and Tulca.

The history of Alphonso, another of your examples, stands thus. Alphonso
had a son called Ferdinand, who died during the life of his father, and left
two young sons behind him. After the death of Ferdinand, his younger brother
Sancho practiced with D. Lope Diaz de Haro Lord of Biscay, to procure him to be
advanced to the succession of the kingdom, before his nephews. D. Lope
undertook the devise; and drawing some other of the nobility to the party,
they so wrought with the king, that in an assembly of the states at Segouia,
Sancho was declared successor, and the children of Ferdinand appointed to be
kept in prison. But Sancho, either impatie^t to linger in expectation, or
suspicious that his father grew inclinable toward his nephews, made league
with Mahomed Mir, king of Granado, a Moore; by whose aid, and by the nobility
of his faction, he caused him self to be declared king. Heerevpon, Alphonso
was enforced to crave assistance of Jacob Aben Joseph king of Maroco, who
before had been an enemy to Alpho^so: but upon detestatio^ of this unnatural
rebellion, he sent forces to him, protesting notwithstanding that so soon as
the war should be ended, he would become his enemy again. So Alphonso by help,
partly of the Marocco Moors, and partly of his subjects which remained loyal,
maintained against his son both his title and state during his life, but not
without extremity of bloodshed; and opportunity for the Moors, being
assista^t to both parties, to make themselves more strong within the countries
of Spain. For this cause Alphonso disinherited his son by his testament, and
cast a cruel curse upon him and his posterity: and afterward it was
ordained in an assembly of the states holden at Tero, that the children of the
elder brother deceased, should be preferred before their uncle.

How then will you verify your two points by this history? First, that
Alphonso was deprived by a public act of parliament: secondly, that it turned
to the great commodity of the state. It is not a millio^ of Masses that are
sufficient to satisfy for all your deceitful and malicious untruths. I
marvel how the rebellion of Absolon, against king David his father escaped
you: Oh; it wanted success; and you could not so easily disguise the report.

You write that the common wealth of Spain, resolving to depose D. Pedro the
cruel, sent for his brother Henry out of france, and required him to bring a
strength of frenchmen with him: but hereby you make it plain, that the common
wealth was not fully agreed. The truth is, that this was a dangerous deuisio^
of the state, between two concurrents; some holding for Henry, and some for
Pedro. Henry obtained foreign asistance by the french, Pedro by the english. In
the mean time, whilst Peter was thrown out of state by the forces of france,
and after that Henry by the arms of england; and again Peter dejected both
from dignity and life by his brother Henry; the poor country became a
spectacle for one of your enterludes.

Your example of Don Sancho Capello king of Portugal, contains many
intolerable untruths. For neither was he deprived of his dignity, neither
did the Pope and counsel of Lions give either authority or consent that he
should be deprived; neither was he driven out of his realm into Castilla;
neither died he in banishment; neither was Alphonso his brother king during his
life. These five untruths you huddle into one heap. The counsel of Lions
wholly opposed against the deposing of Don Sancho, notwithstanding many
disabilities were objected against him: in regard whereof they gave direction,
that Alphonso his brother should be regent of the realm; as in that case it is
both usual and fit. But Sancho taking this to dislike, did seek aid of the
king of Castile; and in that pursuit ended his life without issue: whereby the
right of succession deuolued to Alphonso.

To your examples of greek Emperors, I will answer by your words; which are;
cap. 5 pa. 8^
that for the most part they came not orderly to the crown, but many times the
means thereof were tribulent and seditious.

The deposing of Henry king of Polonia, I acknowledge to be both true and just;
I have nothing to except against it. When the crown of France did descend unto
him, he forsook Polonia, and refused to return again to that swaggering
government, whereupon they did depose him. Give us the like case, and you shall
be allowed the like proceeding; but you esteem your examples by tale and not
by touch: being not much unlike a certain mad fellow in Athens, who imagined
every ship which was brought into the haven to be his: for whatsoever you
find of a king deposed, you lay claim unto it, as both lawfully done, and
pertaining to your purpose, whereas one of these does always fail.

Concerning your two examples, one of Sueden, and the other of Denmark, I
shall have occasion to speak hereaf^er. The nobility of those countries
pretend, that their kings are not sovereign, but that the power in highest
matters of state pertains unto them. If it be thus, the examples are not
appliable to the question, if it be otherwise, then the princes had wrong.

We are come now to our domestical examples; the first whereof is that of
king John, who was deposed by the Pope, you say, at the suite of his own
people. All this people was the Archbishop of Cant. the bish. of London, and
the bish. of Ely; at whose complaint, the Pope did write to Phillip king of
France, that he should expel king John out of his realm. If not conscience,
if not ordinary honesty, pure shame should have drawn you to another form
of writing. He was also deprived (you say) afterward by his Barons. Heavy
beast; call you this a deprivation? The commons were never called to consent;
the Clergy were so opposite to those that stood in arms against king John,
that they procured excommunication against them: first generally; then by name;
lastly, Jews the French kings son was also included: of the Nobility, which
is only the third state of the realm, I make no doubt but some reserved
themselves to be guided by success; others, and namely the Earls of Warren,
Arundell, Chester, Penbrooke, Ferrers, Salisburie, and diverse Barons did openly
adhere unto king John; you may as well call any other rebellion a deprivation,
as affirm that the rest either did or might deprive him. And whereas you bring
in king Henry the third, as a most worthy successor after this deprivation; I
will derogate nothing from his worthiness: but there was never king in
England, who without concurrent in the title of the crown, did draw more blood
out of the sides of his subjects.

Your second example is of king Edward the second, whom many of our histories
report to be of a good and courteous nature and not unlearned; imputing his
defectes rather to Fortune, then either to counsel or carriage of his
affairs. His deposition was a violent fury, led by a wife, both cruel and
unchaste; and can with no better countenance of right be justified, then may his
lamentable both indignities and death, which thereupon did ensue. And although
the nobility, by submitting themselves to the government of his son, did
break those occasions of wars which do usually rise upon such disorders, yet
did not the hand of God forget to pursue revenge. For albeit king Edward his
son enjoyed both a long and prosperous reign, yet his next successor king
Richard the second, was in the like violent manner imprisoned deprived and put
to death. I will prosecute the successiue revenge which hereof also ensued,
being a strange matter, and worthy to be rung into the ears of all ages. King
Henry the fourth, by whom king Richard was deposed, did exercise the chiefest
acts of his reign, in executing those who conspired with him against king
Richard. His son had his virtue well seconded by felicity; during whose reign
by means of the wars in France, the humor against him was otherwise employed
and spent: but his next successor king Henry the sixth was in the very like
manner deprived, and together with his young son Edward imprisoned and put to
death by king Edward the fourth. This Edward died not without suspicio^ of
poison; and after his death, his two sons were in like manner disinherited,
imprisoned and murdered by their cruel uncle, the duke of Gloucester: who
being both a tyrant and usurper, was justly encountered and slain, by king
Henry the seventh, in the field. So infallible is the law of justice in
revenging cruelties and wrongs, not always observing the presence of times
wherein they are done, but often calling them into reckoning; when the
offenders retain least memory of them.

Likewise the deposition of king Richard the second was a tempestuous rage,
neither led nor restrained by any rules of reason or of state; not suddenly
raised and at once, but by very cunning and artificial degrees. But examine
his actions without distempred judgment, and you will not condemn him to be
exceeding either insufficient or evil weigh the imputations that were objected
against him, and you shall find nothing either of any truth or of great moment.

Hollingshead writes in Richard, 2.
, that he was most unthankfully used by his subjects; for although, through the
frailty of his youth, he demeaned himself more dissolutely, then was
agreeable to the royalty of his estate, yet in no kings days, the commons
were in greater wealth, the Nobility more honored, and the Clergy less
wronged: who notwithstanding in the evil guided strength of their will took
head against him, to their own headlong destruction afterward: partly during
the reign of king Henry, his next successor, whose greatest atchiuements were
against his own people; but more especially in succeeding times, when upon
occasion of this disorder, more english blood was spent, the^ was in all the
foreign wars which had been since the conquest. Three causes are commonly
insinuated by you, for which a king may be deposed; tyranny, insufficiency,
and impiety: but what prince could hold his state, what people their quiet
assured, if this your doctrine should take place? how many good princes does
envy brand with one of these marks? what action of state can be so ordered,
that either blind ignorance or set malice will not easily strain to one of
these heads? every execution of justice, every demand of tribute or supply
shall be claimed tyranny: every unfortunate event shall be exclaimed
insufficiency: every kind of religion shall by them of another sect, be
proclaimed impiety. So dangerous it is to permit this high power to a
heedlesse and headless multitude, who measure things, not by reason and
justice, but either by opinion, which commonly is partial; or else by report,
which usually is full of uncertainties and errors: the most part doing because
others do; all easy to become slavish to any man's ambitious attempt. So
dangerous it is to open our ears to every foolish Phaeto^, who undertaking to
guide the chariot of the Sun will soon cast the whole earth into combustion.

You proceed that king Henry the sixth was also deposed for defectes in
government. Let us yield a little to you, that you may be deceived; a little
that you may be carried by your affections; how can you excuse these open
untruths, wherein it cannot be but the devil has a finger? you cannot be
ignorant, that the only cause which drevv the family of York into arms
against king Henry, was the title which they had unto the crown: by virtue
whereof, it was first enacted, that Richard duke of York should succeed king
Henry, after his death: but for that he made unseasonable attempts, he was
declared by parliament incapable of succession, and afterward slain at the
battle of wakefield.

Then Edward his son, prosecuting the enterprise, and having vanquished king
Henry at the battle of S. Albons, obtained possession of the state, caused
king Henrye to be deposed, and himself to be proclaimed and crowned king.
Afterward he was chased out of the realm, and by act of parliament both
deprived and disabled from the crown. Lastly he returned again, and deprived
king Henrye both from government and from life. It is true, that some defects
were objected against king Henry; but this was to estra^ge the hearts of the
people from him. The main cause of the war did proceed, from the right of the
one party, and possession of the other: The contrariety of the acts of
parliament was caused, by the alternatiue victories of them both.

Your last example is of king Richard the third, of whom you wright; First,
that although he sinned in murdering his Nephews, yet after their death he
was lawful king: Secondly, that he was deposed by the common wealth, who
called out of France Henry earl of Richmond, to put him down, Philosophers
say that dreams do commonly arise, by a reflection of the fantasy upon some
subject, whereof we have meditated the day before. It may be y^ your drowsy
conceit was here cast into a dream, of that whereon it had dozed in all this
chapter: Or at the best, that you are like unto those, who have so often told
a lie, that they persuade themselves it is true. King Edward the fourth left
other children besides those that were murdered; the duke of Clarence also,
who was elder brother to king Richard, lest issue in life; all which had
precedence of right before him. And as for the second point, tell me I pray
you, by what parliament was king Richard deposed? vvher did the states
assemble? when did they send for the earl of Richmond to put him down? by
what decree? by what messengers? There is no answer to be made, but one; and
that is, to confess ingenuously, that you say untrue; and that it is your
usual manner of deceiving, to impute the act of a few unto all; and to make
every event of arms, to be a judicial proceeding of the common wealth. For it
is manifest, that the earl of Richmond had his first strength from the king of
France; and that after his descent into England, more by half, both of the
nobility and common people did stand for king Richard, then stir against
him. You adioyne for a special consideration, that most excellent princes
succeeded these whom you affirm to be deposed. I will nor extenuate the
excellency of any Prince; but I hold it more vvorthie to be considered, that
these disorders spent England a sea of blood.

In the end you conclude, that all these deprivations of Princes were
lawful. Nay; by your favor; if you sweat out your brains, you shall never
euince, that a fact is lawful because it is done. Yes (you say) for
otherwise two great inconveniences would follow; one, that the acts of those
that were put in their place, should be void and unjust: the other, that none
who now pretend to these Crowns, could have any title, ^or that they descend
from them, who succeeded those that were deprived.

You deserve now to be basted with words well stiped in vinegar and salt: but
I will be more charitable unto you, and leave bad speeches to black mouths.
For the first, the possession of the crown purges all defects, and makes
good the acts of him that is in authority, although he wants both
capacity and right. And this does Vlpian expressly determine In ^ Barbarius.
D. de offic. praesid.
upon respect (as he says) to the common good. For the other point, the
successors of an usurper, by course and compass of time, may prescribe a
right; if they who have received wrong, discontinue both pursuit and claim.
P^normitane says: In ^. cu^a pastoralis de ^u^epation.
Successor in dignitate potest praescribere, non abstante vitio sui
praedecessor is: A successor in dignity may prescribe, notwithstanding the
fault of his predecessor: otherwise, causes of war should be immortal, and
titles perpetually remain uncertain.

Now then for summarie collection of all that you have said* your
protestations are good; your proofs light and loose; your conclusions both
dangerous and false. The first does savor of God; the second of man; the third
of the devil.

To the fourth Chapter which bears title.Wherein consists principally the
lawfulness of proceeding against Princes, which in the former Chapter is
mentioned, What interest Princes have in their subjects goods or lives; How
oaths do bind or may be broken, of subjects toward their Princes; and
finally the difference between a good king and a tyrant.
Here you cloase with Billaye upon two points; first, whether a king is
subject to any law; Secondly, whether all temporalities are in propriety the
Kings: but because these questions do little perteine to our principal
controversy, I will not make any stay upon them; it suffiseth that we may
say with Seneca De benefic. lib. 7. c ^.5.
Omnia rex imperio possidet, singuli domino: The king has empire, every man
his particular propriety in all things.

After this, you proceed further to make good, that the Princes before
mentioned were lawfully deposed; and that by all law; both divine and humane,
natural, national and positive. Your cause is so badd, that you have need to
set a bold countenance upon it. But what divine laws do you allege? You
have largely before declared (you say) that GOD does approve the form of
government which every common wealth does choose, as also the conditions and
statutes which it does appoint unto her prince. I must now take you for a
natural liar, when you will not forbear to belly your self: you never proved
any such matter; and the contrary is evident, that sometimes entire
governments; often, customs and statutes of state; and very commonly
accidental actions, are so unnatural and unjust, that (otherwise then for a
punishment and curse) we cannot say that God does approve the^. We have often
heard that the Church cannot err in matters of Faith; but that in matter of
government a common wealth cannot err, it was never (I assure my self)
published before.

But let us suppose (supposall is free) that God allows that form of
government which every common wealth does choose: does it therefore follow that
by all divine laws princes may be deposed by their subjects? these broken
pieces will never be squared to form strong argument. But wherefore do not
you produce the divine canons of scripture? surely, they abhor to speak one
word in your behalf: yea, they do give express sentence against you, as I
have showed before.

Well let this pass among your least escapes, in making God either the author
or aider of rebellion: you allege no other humane law, but that princes are
subject unto law and order. I will not deny but there is a duty for princes to
perform: but how prove you that their subjects have power to depose them if
they fail? In this manner. As the common wealth gave them their authority
for the common good, so it may also take the same away, if they abbuse it. But
I have manifested before Cap. 1.
, both that the people may so grant away their authority that they cannot
resume^t; and also that few princes in y^ world hold their state by grant of
the people. I will never hereafter esteem a man's valor by his voice: Your
brave boast of all laws, divine, humane, natural, national and positive, is
disolued into smoke: you busy your self as the Poets wright of Morpheus, in
presenting shadows to men a sleep.

But the chiefest reason (you say) the very ground and foundation of all. Soft:
what reason? what ground? if you have already made proof by all laws, humane
and divine, natural, national and positive, what better reason? what surer
ground will you bring? Tush: these interruptions. The chiefest reason (you say)
the very ground and foundation of all is, that the common wealth is superior
to the prince; and that the authority which the prince has, is not absolute,
but by the way of mandate and commission from the common wealth.

This is that which I expected all this time: you have hitherto approached by
stealing steps, you are now come cloase to the wall, do but mount into credit
and the fort is your own. You affirmed at the first, that princes might be
deposed for disabilitie; then, for misgouernmen^; now, upon pleasure and at
will. For they who have given authority by commission, do always retain
more then they grant; c. dudum. de praeb. lib 6.
and are not excluded either from commanding or judging, by way of prevention,
concurrence, or evocation; even in those cases which they have given in charge
l. iudicium soluitur. D. de iudic.
: The reason is declared by Vlpian l. solet. de iurisd.
. because he to whom jurisdiction is committed represents his person who
gave commission, and not his own. Hereupon Alexander in l. vlt. de iurisd.
, Panormitane in c. pastoral^s de off. ord.
, Innocentius, and Felinus in c. cum ecclesiarum. co.
do affirm, that they may cast their commissioners out of power when they
please, because as Paulus says in d. l. iudicium.
; a man can judge no longer, when he forbids who gave authority.

Further, all states take denomination from that part wherein the supreme power
is settled; as if it be in one prince, it is called a monarchy; if in many of
highest rank, then it is an aristocracie; if in the people, then a democracie.
Whereupon it follows; if the people are superior to the prince, if the prince
has no power but by commission from them, that then all estates are populare:
for we are not so much to respect who does execute this high power of state, as
from who^ immediately it is derived. Hereto let us ad that which you have said
in another place cap ^2.
; that in populare governments there is nothing but sedition, trouble, tumults,
outragies and iniustices upon every light occasion; and the^ we shall perceive;
first, that you want the art of a wise deceiuer, not to be entangled in your
tale; secondly, that this is mere poison, which the devil has dropped out of
your pen, to infect christian countries with disobedience and disorder. In a
word, to the contrary of this your impudent untruth, our laws do acknowledge
supreme authority in the prince within the realm and dominions of england 1.
El. 1.
, neither can subjects bear themselves either superior or equal to their
sovereign; or attempt violence either against his person or estate, but as
well the civil law l. j. d. ad. l. Iul. may.
, as the particulare laws and customs of all countries do adiudge it high and
heinous treason. I will speak now without passion; what reason have we, to
accept your idle talk for a kind of authority, against the judgment and laws
of most nations in the world?

You proceed that the power of a prince is given to him by the common wealth,
with such conditions and exceptions, as if the same be not kept, the people
stand free. That the prince receives his power under plain conditions, you go
about to prove afterward: now you hold on, that in all mutual contracts, if one
side recede from promise, the other remains not obliged* and this you prove
by two rules of the law. The first is Frustra sidem sibi quis postulat seruari
ab eo, cui side^ a se praestitam seruare recusat.
; he does in vain require promise to be kept of another man, to whom he
refuses to perform that which he promised: the other is non obstringitur quis
ad implendum quod iurauit si ab alia part non inpletur, cuius respectu
praebuit iuramentum.
a man is not bound to perform his oath, if on the other part, that be not
performed, in respect whereof he did swear.

Poor fellow, had you ben as conversant in the light of law, and clear course
of justice, as you are in the smoke and dust of some corner of a college, you
would never have concluded so generally so confide^tly upon any of the rules of
law, which are subject, for the most part, unto many exceptions. Alexander in
l. cum proponas. c. de pact.
and Felinus in c. peruenit 2 de iureiur.
do assign five fallencies unto these rules: Socinus in tract fallen reg 199.
gives the cootrarie rule: to him that breaks his faith or oath, faith ought
to be kept; and the^ restrains it with seaue^ limitations. But all affirm,
that in those offices which are mutual between any persons, by the law of
nature or of God; as between the father and the child, the husband and the
wife, the master and the servant, the prince and the subject; although the same
be further assured by promise or by oath, the breach of duty in the one, is no
discharge unto the other.

And therefore if the father performs not his duty toward his children, they
are not thereby acquitted both of the obedience and care, which God and nature
exacteth of them; howsoever Solon in his laws discharged children from
nourishing their parents, if they did not train them in some trade, whereby
they might acquire their living. Much less are subjects exempted from
obedience, if the prince either err or be defective in government: because the
like respect is not due unto parents as unto Princes (as I have somewhat
touched before) insomuch as a son that bears authority, has right both to
commau^d and compel the father. l. ille a quo and ^. seq. ad Treb.


This was declared among the Romans, by that which Plutarch in apopht.
, Liuie lib. 24.
, Valerius lib. 2. ca. 1.
, and Gellius lib. 2 ca. 2.
, do report of Q. Fabius: to whom, being consul, when Fabius Maximus his
father, who had been consul the year before, did approach sitting upon his
horse, the son commanded him by a sergeant to allight: the father not only
obeyed, but highly commended both the courage and judgment of his son, in
maintaining the majesty which he did bear, and in preferring a public both
duty and authority before private. Upon those examples Paulus the lawier did
wright, l. postliminium. filius D. da capit, et postlim.
that public discipline was in higher estimation among the Roman parents,
then the love of children.

After an impertine^t discourse, that upon diverse considerations an oath ought
not to be performed; you annex another cause wherefore subjects may withdraw
their alleagea^ce; and that is, when it should turn to the notable damage of
the common wealth and both these you affirm to be touched, in the deprivation
of Childeric king of France. But I regard not what was touched in the
deprivation of Childeric; I have answered to that in the chapter next before; I
require either arguments or authority of more tough temper. Well then let us
turn back the leaf, and there we shall find a rule of the law (because by
rules only you will beat down rule) c. In mali^. d^ reg. iur. in 6.
In evil promises it is not expedient to keep faith: Which is also confirmed
by a sentence of Isidorus: 22. q. 4.4. c. 5
In evil promises, break your word; in a dishonest oath change your purpose.

Well fare your wits, good soul; do you account the promise of obedience
evil? not so (I suppose you will say) but it turns to be evil when it
turns to the notable detrime^t of the common wealth. It is one of your
peculiar gifts, the further you go, the more impious you declare your self.
For if you take the word evil in noe higher sense then for detriment and
damage, it would follow upon your rule, that a man were no further tied to his
promise, then the performance thereof were aduantageable unto him. You would
enforce also, that if the father does dissipate his patrimoniall estate, and
run a course to ruin his family, the children and the wife may thereupon
disauow their duties.

But if we take a true touch of this point, we shall find, that the vices of
any Prince are not sufficient of themselves to overthrow a state, except
thereupon rebellions be raised, which will draw all things into confusion.
For there is no Prince, which either has lived, or can almost be imagined to
live, in so little sense of humanity, but generally he both favors and
maintains some order of justice; only against particular persons, some of
them have violently been carried by the tempest of their passion, whereby
notwithstanding the inordinate desires of one man, can not possibly reach to
the ruin of all.

So says Suetonius, In domit.
that under Domitian the provinces were well governed, only certain private
men at Rome, felt the evil of his cruelty and other vices. But when the
people do break into tumult, then all course of justice is stopped; then is
either assistance made, or resistance weakened for foreign invasion; then is
every one raised into hope who cannot fly but with other men's feathers;
then, as when a fierce horse has cast his rider, the reins are loosed to
those insolences, which a dissolute people, nothing restrained either by
honesty or fear do usually commit. For as it is the nature of men, when
they come out of one extremity vvherin they have been houlden by force, to
run with a swift course into another, without staying in the midst; so
the people breaking out of tyranny, if they be not held back, will run
headlong into unbridled liberty; and the harder they were kept under
before, the more insolently will they then insult.

I observe that Saint Paul alleges two reasons wherefore we should be
obedient even to wicked and cruel Princes: one is for conscience sake,
Because they are the ministers of God Romans 13.
, and in their royalty do bear his Image: Another, for the safety, and
tranquillity of our selves; that we may lead under them a quiet and peaceable
life 1. Tim. 2.2.
. Whereupon the prophet Jeremiah Ierem. 29.7
also exhorted the Jews, to ^eeke the peace of the city whether they should
be transported, because in the peace thereof their quiet should consist: For by
obedience, a few particulars remain in danger; by rebellion, all; by
obedience, we can be under the tyranny but of one; by rebellion, we are
exposed to the rapine and cruelty of many; by the one nothing, by the other
all things are permitted. Upon this ground Saint Augustine said; Generale
quippe pactum est humanae succietatis, regibus obedi^e. confess. lib. 2.
It is a general covenant of humane society to obey Kings; And likewise Saint
Ambrose Magnum est et speciale documentu^ etc. ad Auxentium
It is a great and special point of doctrine whereby Christians are taught to
be subject unto higher powers.

Three ways a cruel Prince may work violence against his subjects; upon
their goods; upon their persons; and upon their consciences, by commanding
them to commit that which is evil. Of the first, Saint Ambrose says: Ad
Auxentiu^
If the Emperor demands tribute, we do not deny him; If he desires
fields, let him take them if he please: I do not give them to the Emperor;
but therewith also I do not deny them. Of the second, Tertullian vvrighteth
Apol.
as I have alleged him before: For what war are we unserviceable or unfit,
although unequal in number, who do so willingly suffer death: yea, he was
so far from iudgeing it lawful to resist, that he thought it scarce
allowable to fly. In the third case, not your rule of law, but the rule of the
Apostles takes place, It is better to obey GOD then man: Act. 4.
whereby the subject is not bound to yield obedience.

But how? he is not bound to obey by doing, but by suffering he is: he is
not bound to obey in doing that only which is evil; but he is not thereby
freed from doing any other thing which is lawfully commanded. S. Augustine
says in Psalm.
: Julian was an infidel Emperor, an Apostata; an Idolater; christian soldiers
did serve this infidel Emperor; when he would have them worship Idols, and
offer Frankencense unto them, they preferred God before him: but when he
said; bring forth the army, march against such a nation; they did presently
obey. All this seems to be confirmed by God himself, who after he had
forevvarned the people of Israel by the mouth of Samuel, 1. Sam. S.
what heavy, what open injustice they should endure under some of their kings,
he concludes in these words: and ye shall cry out in that day because of
your king, and the Lord will not hear you. As if he had said: you shall
grudge at this burden, you shall groan under it; but you shall not have power,
either to shrink from it, or to shake it off.

Surely, if you had been advised, you would privily have blown your
blasphemies into the ears of those idiots, who adore you for the great
penitentiaries of the sea of Rome, and esteem your idle imaginations as the
articles of their faith: and not so publicly have poured forth your self into
these paradoxes, both impious and absurd; not so boisterously have stepped,
like Hercules Furens, upon the open stage of the world, to denou^ce deprivation
against all princes. You would not thus confidently have opposed your hot
headed assertion against all the ancient fathers of the church. You would not
thus ignorantly have troubled the waters of true humane wisdom, by corrupting
the sense of the ciuell laws: you would not thus profanely have abused the
scriptures in maintaining rebellion, as coniurers do in inuocating the devil.
For first, you are thereby discovered to be, neither religious, modest, nor
wise: secondly, you have run your self into the compass of a Canon, in the
council of Chalcedon. C. coniurationu^ xj q j.
Wherein it is thus decreed against you: If Clerks shall be found to be
contriuers of conspiracies, or raisers of factions, let them be degraded.

After this you declare, who is a tyrant; and that is a king, (you say) if once
he does decline from his duty: which is a large description, and fit to set
all christian countries on floate with blood. Comines says, that he is to be
esteemed a good king, whose virtues are not ouerballanced by vice.

I omit your thick error in putting no difference between a magistrate and a
king, with many other of like quality, and do come now to a principal point
of your strength: that Christian princes at this day are admitted upon
conditions, and likewise with protestations, that if they do not perform the
same, their subjects are free from all allegiance. This you will prove by the
particular oaths of all Princes, if the ouerrunning of your tongue may have
the full course without encounter.

To the fifth Chapter, which is entitled:Of the coronation of Princes, and
manner of admitting to their authority, and the oaths which they do make in
the same unto the common wealth, for their good government.
FIrst I will preface; that no Prince is sovereign, who acknowledges himself
either subject or accomptable to any but to God; even as Marcus Aurelius said:
That Magistrates were judges of private men, and the Prince of Magistrates, and
God of the Prince. In regard of this immediate subjection, Princes are most
especially obliged to the laws of God and of Nature: for In l. 2. D. de
seruit. and aqua
Baldus, cons. 216.
Alexander, De legib.
Speculator, In l. vlt. c. si contra ins.
all interpreters, c. sunt quidam. 25. q. 1.
the law it self, do affirm, that Princes are more strictly bound to these
laws, nunc.
then any of their subjects. Whereof Plutarch. in Problem. Graec.
Dionysius the Tyrant had some sense, when he said unto his mother: That he was
able to dispense with the laws of Syracusa, but against the laws of Nature he
had no power. If therefore a Prince does profess, that he will bear himself
regardfull o^ the accomplishment of these laws, he does not condition or
restrain himself, but makes an honorable promise of endeavor, to discharge
his duty; being tied thereby to no s^anter scope then he was before. The
reason hereof is: L. iij. D. de leg. j. Dec. in reg. 77. n. 10.
Quia expressio eius quod tacit inest, nihil operatur: The expressing of that
which is secretly understood, works nothing.

Again, when the promise is not annexed to the authority, but voluntarily and
freely made by the Prince, his estate is not thereby made conditional. For the
interpreters of the Civil law do consent in this rule: In l. iurisgentium.
Pacta conuenta quae contractibus non insunt, non formant actionem: Covenants
which are not inherent in contracts, do not form an action. quinimo.
And therefore although by all laws, both of conscience and state, a Prince is
bound to perform his promise; because (as the Master of sentences says) God
himself will stand obliged to his word: yet is not the authority, but the
person of the Prince hereby affected; the person is both tied and touched in
honor, the authority ceasseth not, if performances do fail.

Of this sort was that which you report of Traian, who in delivering the sword
to his governors, would say: If I reign justly, then use it for me; if
otherwise, then use it against me: but where you add, that these are the very
same words in effect, which Princes do use at their coronations, (pardon me,
for it is fit I should be moved) you will find it to be a very base (...)
lie. Of this nature was that also which the same Traian did, (to encourage his
subjects to do the like) in taking an oath to observe the laws: which Pliny
the younger did account so strange, as the like before had not been seen. But
afterward, Theodoric did follow that fact; whereupon Cassiodorus says: Ecce,
Traiani nostri clarum seculis reparamus exemplum; jurat vobis per quem iuratis:
We repair the famous example of Traian; he swears to you by whom you
swear. So when king Henry the fifth was accepted for successor to the crown
of France, he made promise, to maintain the Parliament in the liberties
thereof. And likewise diverse Princes do give their faith, to mainetaine the
privileges of the Church, and not to change the laws of the Realm: which
oath is interpreted by In l. claris l. de fideis.
Baldus, In c. pro^llor^i de praebend.
Panormitane, and Cons. 220. lib. 6. and cons. 122. and 125. lib. 4.
Alexander, to extend no further then when the laws shall be both profitable
and just: because Justice and the common benefit of subjects, is the principal
point, both of the oath and duty of a Prince, whereto all other clauses must
be referred. And now to your examples.

First, because in all the rank of the Hebrew kings, you cannot find either
condition or oath; not: in the ancient Empires and kingdoms of the world; not
usually in the ^lourishing time of the Roman state, both under heathen and
christian Emperors; because these times are too pure for your purpose, you
fumble forth a dull conjecture: That for so much as the first kings were elected
by the people, it is like that they did it upon conditions and assurances for
themselves. That the first kings received not their authority from the people,
I have manifested before In cap. 1.
: and yet your inference hereupon is no other, then if you should sue in some
Court for a legacy, alleging nothing for your intent, but that it is like
the Testator should leave you something; in which case it is like (I suppose)
that your plea would be answered with a silent scorn.

After a few loose speeches, which no man would stoop to gather together, you
bring in the example of Anastasius the first Emperor of Constantinople; of
whom the Patriarch Euphemius required before his coronation, a confession of
the faith in writing, wherein he should promise to innouate nothing. And
further, he promised to take away certain oppressions, and to give offices
without money. Let us take things as they are, and not speak upon idle
imagination, but agreeable to sense: what either condition or restraint do you
find in these words? Condition they do not form, because in case of failance
they do not make the authority void: neither do they make restraint, because
they contain no point, whereunto the law of God did not restrain him. All
this he was bound to perform without an oath; and if he were a thousand times
sworn, he was no more but bound to perform it: eue^ as if a father should give
his word to cloth and feed his child; or the husband to love his wife; or any
man to discharge that duty, which God and Nature does require. It is true,
that Anastasius was both a wicked man, and justly punished by God for the
breach of his faith; but his subjects did never challenge to be free therefore
from their allegiance.

The same answer may be given to the promise, which Michael the first gave to
Nicephorus the Patriarch: That he would not violate the Ordinances of the
Church, nor embrue his hands with innocent blood; especially if you take the
word Ordinances for matters necessary to be believed: but if you take it in a
larger sense, then have I also declared in the beginning of this chapter, how
far the promise does extend.

Your next example is of the Empire of Almaine; from whence all that you
object, does fall within this circle. After the death of Charles the Great, the
empire was held by right of succession, until his line was determined in
Conrade the first. After whose death it became came elective: first in Henry
duke of Saxony, then in Otho his son; and afterward in the rest: from whom
notwithstanding no other promise was wrested, but the discharge of that duty,
which they were informed, or rather threatened, that God would severely exact at
their hands. But (as in all elective States it usually happens) at every new
change and choice, the Emperor was deplumed of some of his feathers, until in
the end he was made naked of authority, the Princes having drawn all power to
themselves.

So by degrees the Empire was changed from a Monarchy to a pure aristocracie;
the Emperor bearing the title thereof, but the majesty and puissance
remaining in the States. During which weakness of the Emperor, some points
were added to his oath, which seemed to derogate from the sovereignty of his
estate. But what is this to those Princes, who have retained their dignity,
without any diminution, either of authority, or of honor.

The like may be said of Polonia, which not many hundred years since was
erected into a kingdom: and although the States did challenge therein a right
of election, yet did it always pass according to propinquitie of blood, and
was esteemed a sovereign Monarchy; until after the death of Casimire the
Great, when Lodonicus his Nephew King of Hungary, rather greedy then desirous
to be king also of Polonia, did much abase the Majesty thereof. Yet falling
a^terward into the line of Iagello, who married one of the daughters of
Lodowicke, it recovered the ancient both dignity and strength. But when that
line also failed in Sigismond Augustus, the last male of that Family, the
States elected Henry Duke of Anjowe for their King, with this clause irritant;
That if he did violate any point of his oath, the people should owe him no
allegiance. But whereas you report this as the usual oath of the Kings of
Polonia, you deserve to hear the plainest term of untruth.

In the kingdom of Spain you distinguish two times: one, before the conquest
thereof by the Moors; the other, after it was recovered again by the
Christians. I acknowledge a difference in these two times; for that in the one,
the right of the kingdom was elective; in the other, it has always remained
successiue: insomuch as In spec. tit. 14.
Peter Belluga, a diligent writer of the rights of Arragon, does affirm, that
the people have no power in election of the king, Veniamus n. 10.
except in case the line should fail.

Concerning the matter in controversy, you affirm, that the kings did swear
the same points in effect, which before have been mentioned. This we must take
upon your forfeited faith, for you allege no form of oath; only you write,
that the fourth national Council of An. 633. cap. 74.
Toledo, with all humility convenient did require, that the present king, and
all other that should follow, would be meek and moderate toward their
subjects, and govern them with justice, and not give sentence in causes
capital without assistance: declaring further, that if any of them should
exercise cruel and proud authority, (...) they were condemned by Christ,
with the sentence of Excommunication, and separated to everlasting judgment.

But what pang has possessed your dreaming brains, to term this by a
marginall note, Conditions of reigning in Spain? being no other then a
reverent and grave admonition of the duty of a king, with a fearful
declaration of the judgment of God against wicked Princes. And that which was
afterward decreed in the sixth Council of Toledo: That the king should swear,
not to suffer any man to break the Catholic faith, because it is a principal
point of his duty, his estate was not thereby made conditional.

The rest of this passage you fill up with froath of the antiquated law of
Don Pelayo, prescribing a form of inaugurating the Kings of Spain; whereof
there is not one point, either now in use, or pertaining to the purpose. So
miserable is your case, that you can write nothing therein, but that which is
either impertinent or untrue.

For France, your first example is taken from the coronation of Philip the
first: wherein you note, that king Henry his father requested the people to
swear obedience to his son; inferring thereby, that a coronation requires a
new consent, which includes a certain election of the subjects. But this is
so light, that the least breath is sufficient to disperse it. Philip was
crowned king during the life of his father: which action, as it was not
ordinary, so was it of such both difficulty and weight, that it could not be
effected without assembly and consent of the States. The oath which he made,
is in this form extant in the Library of Rheimes: I do promise before God and
his Saints, that I will conserve to every one committed unto me canonical
privilege, and due Law and Justice, and will defend the^, by the help of God,
so much as shall lie in my power, as a king by right ought to do within his
Realm, to every Bishop, and to the Church committed to him: and further, to
the people committed to my charge, I will grant by my authority the dispensatio^
of laws according to right. Ad to this a more ancient form of the oath of those
kings, which it seems you have not seen: I swear in the name of God
Almighty, and promise, to govern well and duly the subjects committed to my
charge, and to do with all my power, judgment, justice and mercy. Ad also the
oath which you allege of Philip the 2. surnamed Augustus: To maintain all
canonical privileges, law and Justice due to every man, to the uttermost of
his power; to defend his subjects as a good king is bound to do; to procure
that they be kept in the vnio^ of the Church; to defend the^ from al excess,
rapine, extortion and iniquity; to take order that Justice be kept with equity
and mercy; and to endeavor to expel heretics. What does all this rise unto, but
a princely promise to discharge honorably and truly those points of duty, which
the laws of God did lay upon the^? What other conditions or restraints are
imposed? what other contract is hereby made? where are the protestations which
in the end of the last chap. you promised to show, that if the Prince do fail
in his promise, the subjects are free from their allegea^ce? what clause do you
find sounding to that sense? But you little regard any thing that you say; you
easily remember to forget your word. Well the^, we must put these your vain
speeches into the reckning of money accounted, but not received: and seeing you
cannot show us, that the kings of France and of Spain are tied to any
condition, whereto the law of God does not bind the^, I will not vary from the
judgment of Ordradus Cons. 69.
in affirming the^ to be absolute kings.

(...) I have pressed this point the rather in this place, because you write,
that most neighbor nations have taken the form of anointing and crowning
their kings, from the ancient custom of France; although the substance be
deduced from the first kings of the Hebrews, as appears by the anointing of
king Saul: whereof David (you say) made great account, notwithstanding that
Saul had been rejected by God, and that himself had lawfully borne arms
against him.

Out Atheist; you would be dawbed with dung, and have the most vile filth of
your stews cast in your face. Did David bear arms against his anointed
king? did he ever lift up his eyelids against him? did he ever so much as
defend himself otherwise then by flight? It is certain that Shemei did not
half so cruelly either curse or revile this holy man, who did so much both by
speech and action detest this fact, that he would rather have endured ten
thousand deaths, then to have defiled his soul with so damnable a thought.
What then shall we say unto you, who to set up sedition and tumult, abuse all
divine and humane wrightings, in whatsoever you believe will advance your
purpose? who spend some speech of respect unto kings for allurement only, to
draw us more deep into your deceit? Shall we give any further ear to your
doctrine, both blasphemous and bloody? We will hear you to the end; and I
deceive my self, but your own tale shall, in any moderate judgment, condemn
the authority of your opinions for ever.

Let us come then to your last example (which is neither the last nor the least
whereat you level.) And that is of England, which of all other kingdoms (you
say) has most particularly taken this ceremony of Sacring and anointing from
France. Well, let the ceremony be taken from whence you please: if the oath be
no other then you do specify, To observe peace, honor and reverence, unto
Almighty God, to his Church and to the Ministers of the same, to administer Law
and Justice equally to all; to abrogate evil laws and customs, and maintain
good (which was the oath of king Richard the first; the like whereto was that
of king John, altered only in the first branch: To love and defend the
Catholic Church:) If the oath be no other I say, I do not see what other
answer you need to expect, but that it is only a free royal promise, to
discharge that duty which God does impose. And this is plainly declared by the
speech which you allege, of Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury, to king
Henry the fourth; Remember (says he) the oath which voluntarily you made:
voluntarily he said, and not necessarily: it was voluntary in oath, but
necessary in duty. That which you report also that Thomas Becket did write unto
king Henry the second, imports nothing else but an acknowledgement of duty:
Remember (said he) the confession which you made.

I cannot omit your description of the manner of the Coronation in England.
First (you say) the king i^ sworn; then the Archbishop declares to the people
what he has sworn, and demands if they be content to submit themselves
unto him under those conditions: whereunto they consenting, he puts on the
royal ornaments; and then adds the words of commission: Stand and hold thy
place, and keep thy oath. And thus you have hammered out a formal election,
supposing that you draw together the pieces of falsehood so close, that no man
can perceive the seame. The truth is, that king Henry the fourth being not the
nearest in blood to the inheritance of the crown, did countenance his violence
with the election of the people; not at his Coronation, but in a Parliament
that was holden before. And therefore you do impudently abuse us; First, in
joining them together as one act; Secondly, by falsifying diverse points in
both; Lastly, by insinuating that the same order was observed by other kings.

The points which you falsify are these: The interrogation of the Archbishop
to the people: the absurd straining of these words, Stand, hold thy place, to
be a Commission: the alleging also out of Stow, 1. That the Archbishop did
read unto the people, what the King was bound unto by oath; 2. That the Earl
of Northumberland did show a ring unto the people, that they might thereby see
the band whereby the king was bound unto them; 3. That the king did pray, that
he might observe his promise. In which composition of conceits, you show how
active you are in counterfaiting any thing, that may make to your purpose;
persuading your self, that it is no fraud unto God, to deceive the world in a
lie for advantage.

King Edward the fourth also (because his right was litigious, and another was
in possession of the crown) strengthened, or rather countenanced his title
with the approbation of the people. But where you write, that at the Coronation
of King Edward the sixth, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, the consent and
acceptance of the people was demanded: First, we have no cause to credit any
thing that you say; then, although it be true, yet not being done in
Parliament, it adds no right unto the Prince; but is only a formality, a
circumstance only of ceremony and order.

Hereupon you conclude, that a king has his authority, by agreement and
contract between him and the people: insinuating thereby that he loses the
same, if he either violate or neglect his word. The contrary opinion, that only
succession of blood makes a king, and that the consent of the people is
nothing necessary, you affirm to be absurd, base and impious, an unlearned,
fond and wicked assertion; in flattery of Princes, to the manifest ruin of
commonwealths, and perverting of all law, order and reason.

I did always foresee that your impostumed stomach would belch forth some
loathsome matter. But whosoever shall compare this confident conclusion with
the proofs that you have made, he will rather judge you mad then unwise. This
bold blast, upon grounds that are both foolish and false, bewrays rather want
then weakness of wits. I am ashamed I should offer any further speech in so
evident a truth: but since I have undertaken to combat an herisie, since the
matter is of so great consequence and import, I purpose once again to give you
a gorge.

Learn then, heauy-headed Cloisterer, unable to manage these mysteries of
State: Learn of me, I say; for I owe this duty to all Christians: the
Prophets, the Apostles, Christ himself has taught us, to be obedient to
Princes, though both tyrants and infidels. This ought to stand with us for a
thousand reasons to (...) submit our selves to such kings, as it pleases God
to send unto us; without either judging or examining their qualities.Their
hearts are in Gods hand; they do his service, sometimes in preserving,
sometimes in punishing us: they execute his judgment both ways, in the same
measure which he does prescribe. If they abuse any part of their power, we do
not excuse, we do not extenuate it; we do not exempt them from their
punishment: let them look unto it, let them assuredly expect, that God will
dart his vengeance against the^ with a most stiff and dreadful arm. In the
mean season, we must not oppose our selves, otherwise then by humble suits and
prayers: acknowledging, that those evils are always just for us to suffer,
which are many times unjust for them to do. If we do otherwise; if we break
into tumult and disorder, we resemble those Giants of whom the Poets write; who
making offer to scale the skies, and to pull Jupiter out of his throne, were
overwhelmed in a moment with the mountains which they had heaped together.
Believe it, Cloisterer; or ask any man who is both honest and wise, and he
will tell you: It is a rule in reason, a trial in experience, an authority
confirmed by the best, that rebellion produces more horrible effects, then
either the tyranny or insufficiency of any Prince.

To the sixth Chapter, whereof the title is:What is due to only succession by
birth; and what interest or right an Heir apparent has to the Crown, before
he is crowned or admitted by the commonwealth; and how justly he may be put
back, if he has not the parts requisite.
YOU begin (after your manner) with a carreir against Billay; but because both
I have not seen what he has written, and dare not credit what you report, I
will not set in foot between you.

In breaking from this, you prefer succession of Princes before free
election, as well for other respects, as for the preeminence of auncetrie in
birth, which is so much privileged in the Scripture: and yet not made so
inviolable (you say) but upon just causes it might be inuerted; as it appears
by the examples of Jacob, Judah and Solomon. And this liberty you hold to be
the principal remedy for such inconveniences as do ensue of the course of
succession; as if the next in birth be unable or pernicious to govern: in
which cases, if he be not capable of directions and counsels, you affirm that
the remedy is to remove him. And so you make succession and election, the one
to be a preservative to the other; supposing, that the difficulculties of both
are taken away: First, if ordinarily (...) succession takes place; then, if
upon occasion we give allowance to election.

For the prerogative of birth, as also for the special choice which God has
often made of the youngest, I will remit my self to that which I have written
before Cap. 1.
. At once: in those particular actions which God has either done, or by
express Oracle commanded, contrary to the general laws which he has given
us; as in the robbery of the Egyptians, the extirpation of the Amalekites,
the insurrection of Iehu, and such like; we are bound to the law, and not to
the example. God has given us a natural law, to prefer the first borne; he
has often made choice of the youngest, because he commonly works greatest
effects, by means not only weak, but extraordinary; as it appears by the
birth of Isaak. But that these special elections of God are not proposed for
imitation to us, hereby it is evident; because they have been for the most
part, without defect in the one, or demerite in the other. And especially in
this example of Jacob and Esau; Saint Paul says Romans 9.13.
that it was not grounded upon their works, but upon the will and pleasure of
God; for before they had done good or evil, before they were borne, God said:
Gen 25.23.
The eldest shall serve the youngest. Which if we might imitate, the privilege
of birth were given in vain.

For your device in joining election to succession, whereby one of them should
remedy the difficulties of the other, it is a mere vtopicall conceit: what
else shall I term it? an imposture of state, a dream, an illusion, fit only
to surprise the judgment of the weak and ignorant multitude. These toys are
always hatched by the discoursiue sort of men, rather then the active; being
matters more in imagination then in use: and herein two respects do principally
oppose against you.

The first is, for that in most nations of the world, the people have lost all
power of election; and succession is firmly settled in one descent, as before I
have declared Cap. j.


The second is, for that more fiery factions are hereby kindled, then where
succession or election are mere without mixture. For where one claims the
Crown by succession, and another possesses it by title of election; there,
not a disunion only of the people, not a division in arms, but a cruel
throat-cutting, a most immortal and merciless butcherie does usually ensue.
It is somewhat inconvenient (I grant) to be governed by a Prince either impotent
or evil; but it is a greater inconvenience, by making a breach into this high
point of state, to open a way to all manner of ambitions, periuries, cruelties
and spoil: whereto the nature of the common people would give a great
furtherance, who being weak in wisdom, violent in will; soon weary of
quiet, always desirous of change, and most especially in matters of state,
are easily made serviceable to any man's aspiring desires. This I have
manifested before Cap. 3.
, by the examples of king Edward and king Richard, both surnamed the Second:
who were not insupportable either in nature or in rule; and yet the people more
upon wantonness then for any want, did take an unbridled course against them.
And thus is your high policy nothing else but a deep deceit; thus whilst
you strive with the wings of your wit to mount above the clouds of other men's
conceit, you sink into a sea of absurdities and errors.

After this, you determine two questions; the first is, What respect is to be
attributed to propinquitie of blood only. Whereto you answer, that it is the
principal circumstance which leads us to the next succession of the Crown,
if other circumstances and conditions do concur, which were appointed at the
same time, when the law of succession was established. Assuredly you can never
show either when, or by whom, this law of succession was first instituted,
except perhaps by some Nimrod, when he had brought the neck of a people
under his sword: at which time, what conditions he would set down to be
required from his successor, any ordinary judgment may conjecture at ease.
Well, since you set us to seek for proof of this, to that which you have
written before, I will also send you back to the same place Cap j.
for your answer.

The second question is, What interest a Prince has to his kingdom, before he
be crowned. This you resolve by certain comparisons; and first you write, that
it is the same which the German Emperor has before his coronation. But that
is so large, that some Emperors have never been crowned; others have deferred
it for many years; among which Metrop. l. 3. cap. 20.
Crantzius writes, that Otho the first received the Crown of the Empire, in
the eight and twentieth year of his reign. And yet is not this comparison
full to the question propounded; because in elective states there is not held
one perpetual continuance of royalty, as is in those that are successiue. And
In Prooem. decret.
Panormitane says, That an argument a similibus is not good, if any difference
can be assigned. Much more unfitly do you affirm, that it is no greater then
a Mayor of London has in his office, before he has taken his oath: for it is
odiously absurd, to compare the authority of an absolute Prince by succession,
to the authority of an Officer, both elective and also subject.

But it is the example of marriage (you say) whereby this matter is made more
plain: for as in this contract there is an espousall, by promise of a future
act, and a perfect marriage by yielding present consent; the first is, when both
parties do mutually promise that they will; the second, that they do take one
the other for husband and wife: so an heir apparent, by propinquitie of blood
is espoused only to the Commonwealth, and married afterward at his coronation,
by oaths of either party, and by putting on the ring, and other wedding
garments. But how were Kings married in former ages? how are they now married in
those countries, where they have neither ring, nor wedding garment, nor also
any oath? What? is every office and degree which is taken with ceremony, to be
esteemed likewise a marriage? Or if you will have coronation only to be a
marriage, what else can it resemble, but the public celebration of matrimony
between man and woman? which adds nothing to the substance of contract, but
only manifests it to the world.

These pitiful proofs, naked of authority, empty of sense, deserve rather
to be excused then answered: I will help therefore in some sort to excuse
them. They are the best that your starued both cause and conceit can possibly
afford: and you have also some fellows in your folly. Heliogabalus did
solemnly join the statues of the Sun and of the Moon in marriage together.
Nero was married to a man, and took also a man to his wife. The Venetians do
yearly upon Ascension day, by a ring and other ceremonies, contract marriage
with the sea.

But now in earnest; men do dye whenever it pleases God to call them: but it
is a Maxim in the common law of England: Rex nunquam moritur; The king is
always actually in life. In France also the same custom has been observed;
and for more assurance it was expressly enacted under About the year, ^375.
Charles the fifth: That after the death of any king, his eldest son should
incontinently succeed. For which cause the Parliament court of Paris does
accompany the funeral obsequies of those that have been their kings, not in
mourning attire, but in scarlet; the true ensign of the neuer-dying Majesty
of the Crown.

In regard of this certain and incontinent succession, the In c. v^t. 24 q. 1.
Glossographer upon the Decrees notes: That the son of a king, may be called
King during the life of his father, as wanting nothing but administration:
wherein he is followed with great applause by In l quesita^. D. de leg. j.
Baldus, In c^ tanta qui fill suat legit.
Panormitane, Con^. 1^2. l. 2
Jason, Cons ^ 2. li. 1
Carol. Ruinus, In c. 1 tit. quis dicat. dux.
Andreas Iserna, Martinus, Card. Alexander, Ind. pa^^^. c. de re^^cad.
Albericus, In rep ^ab. de ca. po and prop.
Fed. Barbatius, Cons. 262.
Philip Decius, In tra^t de po. and excel. reg. ^ 25
Ant. Corsetta, In tra^t de privil (...). par. 1. ca. 109.
Fra. Luca, In tract. (...).
Matthe, Afflict. And the same also does Sernius note out of Amend. 9.
Virgil, where he says of Ascanius: Regemque requirunt, his father Aeneas
being yet alive.

But so soon as the king departs out of life, the royalty is presently
transferred to the next successor, according to the laws and customs of our
Realm. All Writs go forth in his name; all course of justice is exercised,
all Offices are held by his authority; all states, all persons, are bound to
bear to him allegiance: not under supposall of approbation when he shall be
crowned, according to your dull and drowsy conjecture, but as being the true
Sovereign king of the Realm.

He that knows not this, may (in regard of the affairs of our state) join
himself to S. Anthony, in glorying in his ignorance, and professing that he
knows nothing. Queen Mary reigned three mon^ths before she was crowned, in
which space the Duke of Northumberland and others were condemned and executed
for treason: for treason I say, which they had committed, before she was
proclaimed Queen.

King Edward the first was in Palestina, when his father dyed; in which his
absence, the Nobility and Prelates of the Realm assembled at London, and did
acknowledge him for their king. In his return homeward, he did homage to the
French king, for the lands which he held of him in France. He also repressed
certain rebels of Gascoine; amongst whom, Gasco of Bierne, appealed to the
court of the king of France: where king Edward had judgment, that Gasco had
committed treason Walsingh. in E. 1.
; and thereupon he was delivered to the pleasure of king Edward. And this happened
before his coronation, which was a year and nine mon^ths after he began to
reign.

King Henry the sixth was crowned in the eighth year of his reign; and in the
mean space, not only his subjects did both profess and bear allegiance,
but the King of Scotts also did swear homage unto him.

What need I give any more either instance or argument, in that which is the
clear law, the vncontroulled custom of the Realm? Against which
notwithstanding your weather-beate^ forehead does not blush to oppose a blind
opinion, that heirs apparent are not true kings, although their titles be
just, and their predecessors dead. This you labor to prove by a few dry
conjectures, but especially and above all others (you say) because the Realm
is asked three times at every coronation, whether they will have such a man to
be their king or no. First, we have good reason to require better proof of
this question then your bare word: secondly, although we admit it to be true,
yet seeing the answer is not made by the estates of the Realm assembled in
parliament, but by a confused concurse (necessary Officers excepted) of all
sorts both of age and sex, it is for ceremony only, and not of force, either
to give or to increase any right.

Another of your arguments is, for that the Prince does first swear to govern
well and justly, before the subjects take their oath of allegiance; which
argues, that before they were not bound. And further you affirm, that it
happened only to king Henry the fifth, among his predecessors, to have fealty
done unto him, before he was crowned, and had taken his oath. I confess
indeed, that Polydore and St^w have written so; but you might easily have found
that they write not true; the one of them being a mere stranger in our state;
the other a man more to be commended for endeavor then for art. King John being
in Normandy when his brother dyed, sent into England Hubert Archbishop of
Canterbury, William Marshall Earl of Strigvile, and Geoffrie Fitzpeter Lord
chief justice, who assembled the States of the Realm at Northhampton, and
took of them an oath of obedience to the new king. Also king Anno reg. 23.
Henry the third caused the Citizens of London, the Guardians of the
Cinque Ports, and diverse others, to swear fealty to Prince Edward his son;
who being in Palestina when his father died, the Nobility and Prelates of the
Realm assembled in the new temple at London, and did acknowledge him for their
king. And in like manner, king Edward the third took an oath of all the
Nobility of the Realm, of faith after his death to Richard Prince of Wales:
and so did king Henry the first, for his daughter Mawde, and her young son
Henry.

After the death of king Henry the fifth, that subjects did often swear
allegiance, before the coronation and oath of the king, you had neither
countenance nor conscience to deny: but it was neither of these two which did
restrain you; it proceeded only from the force of truth, which will manifest
it self whatsoever art we use to disguise it. For otherwise, what countenance,
what conscience had you to affirm, that it is expressly noted by our English
Historiographers: That no allegiance is due unto kings, before they be
crowned? Who are these Historiographers? where do they so write? you that
search every dustie corner of your brains, for a few ragged reasons to uphold
your heresy, should not either have mentioned, or omitted such pregnant
proofs: for in that you affirm, and do not express them, you condemn your
self by your own silence.

If you mean that which you allege out of Polydore and Stowe: That an oath
of fealty was never made before coronation, until the time of king Henry the
fifth; it is neither true, nor to any such sense. If you mean that of Polydore
in tearming Henry the fifth, Prince and not King, before he was crowned; in
writing also, that the States did consult in Parliament, De nouo rege creando
more maiorum.
of creating a new king after the custom of their ancestors: it is a sleepie
jest, to strain every word in such an author to propriety of speech. You
might better have cited, what certain cities in France not long since
alleged for themselves: That because they had not reputed Henry the fourth for
their king, because they had not professed allegiance unto him, they were not
to be adjudged rebels: whereupon notwithstanding the chiefest Lawyers of our
age did resolve, that forasmuch as they were original subjects, even subjects
by birth; they were rebels in bearing arms against their king, although they
had never professed allegiance. And this is so evidently the law of the
Realm, that it is presumption in us both; in you, to assay by your shallow
Sophistry to obscure or impugn; in me, to endeavor by authorities and
arguments to manifest or defend the same.

But the admission of the people (you say) has often prevailed against right
of succession. So have pirates against merchants; so have murderers and
thieves against true meaning travelers. And this disloyalty of the people has
moved diverse kings to cause their sons to be crowned during their own
lives; because the unsettled state of succeeding kings does give opportunity to
bouldest attempts; and not as you dream, because admission is of more
importance then succession.

I will examine your examples in the Chapters following. In the mean time
where you write, that king Henry and king Edward, both called the Fourth, had
no better way to appease their minds at the time of their death, but by
founding their title upon consent of the people; the Authors Sir Tho. Moore,
and Stow.
which you cite do plainly charge you with vnexcuseable untruth. King Edward
never made question of his right: king Henry did, as some other Authors report
Holingshead.
; but applied no such deceiptfull comfort: this false skin would not then
serve to cover his wound.

To the seventh Chapter, which bears title:How the next in succession by
propinquity of blood, have oftentimes bin put back by the commonwealth, and
others further off admitted in their places, even in those kingdoms where
succession prevails; with many examples of the kingdom of Israel and Spain.
HERE you present your self very pensive to your audience, as though you had
so ouer-strained your wits with store of examples of the next in succession not
admitted to the state, that you had cracked the creadite of them for ever. But
you are worthy of blame, either for endangering or troubling your self in
matters of so small advantage. I have showed before, that examples suffice not
to make any proof; and yet herein does consist the greatest show of your
strength. It is dangerous for men to be governed by examples though good,
except they can assure themselves of the same concurrence of reasons, not only
in general, but in particularities; of the same direction also and carriage in
counsel; and lastly, of the same favorable fortune: but in actions which are
evil, the imitation is commonly worse then the example. Your puffie discourse
then is a heap of words without any weight; you make mountains, not of
Mole-hils, but of moates; long harvest for a small deal, not of corn, but of
cockle; and (as one said at the shearing of hogs) great cry for a little,
and that not very fine wool.

Yea, but of necessity something you must say: yea, but this something is no
more then nothing. You suppose, that either your opinion will be accepted, more
for authority of your person, then weight of your proofs; or else that any
words will slide easily into the minds of those, who are lulled in the humor
of the same inclination; because partiality will not suffer men to discern
truth, being easily beguiled in things they desire. Besides, whatsoever
countenance you carry, that all your examples are free from exception, yet if
you had cast out those which are impertinent, or unjust, or else untrue, you
could not have been ouer-charged with the rest.

Your first example, that none of the children of Saul did succeed him in the
crown, is altogether impertinent: because by particular and express
appointment of God 2. Reg 15. and 16. 2 Reg. 2. and 5.
, the kingdom was broken from his posterity. We acknowledge that God is the
only superior Judge of supreme Kings, having absolute both right and power,
to dispose and transpose their estates as he please. Neither must we examine
his actions by any course of law, because his will is above all law. He has
enjoined the people to be obedient to their Kings; he has not made them equal
in authority to himself. And whereas out of this example you deduce, that the
fault of the father may preiudicate the sons right, although he had no part
in the fault; to speak moderately of you, your judgment is either deceitful
or weak. God in his high Justice, does punish indeed the sins of parents
upon their posterity Exodus 20.5.
: but for the ordinary course of humane justice, he has given a law, that the
son shall not bear the iniquity of the father Ezech. 18.20. Ierem. 31.29.
Deuteronomy. 24.16. 2. Chron. 25.2.
: the equity whereof is regularly followed, both by the Civil l. siquis sno.
legi^ C^de In o^f. test^ generali. D^^e rit. nup. l. silia^. D. de senator. l.
adoptiuum. D. de In ius voc.
and Canon Did. 56. per tot.
law; and by the interpretors of them both gl. et Dd^b. et in c. vel non est de
temp. ord.


Your second example is of King Solomon, who succeeded in the state of David
his father, notwithstanding he was his youngest son. But this example in many
respects falls not within the compass of your case. First, because he was
not appointed successor by the people: we speak not what the king and the
people may do to direct succession, but what the people may do alone. Secondly,
for that the kingdom was not then stablished in succession. Lastly, for that
the action was led by two Prophets, David and Nathan, according to the express
choice and direction of God 1 Chronicles. 22.8.9.
: whereby it is no rule for ordinary right.

Here many points do challenge you of indiscretion at the least. You write that
David made a promise to Bathsheba in his youth, that Solomon should succeed in
his estate: but if you had considered at what years Solomon began to reign,
you should have found, that David could not make any such promise, but he must
be a youth about threescore years of age. You write also, that David adored
his son Solomon from his bed: but the words wherewith David worshipped were
these 3. Reg. 2.48.
: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who has made one to sit on my throne this
day, even in my sight: whereby it is evident, that David adored God and not his
son. This I note rather for observation of the looseness of your judgment,
then for any thing it makes to the purpose. You are so accustomed to untruths,
that you fall into them, without either advantage or end.

The like answer may be given to your example of Rehoboam; because God declared
his sentence therein by two Prophets, Ahijah 3. Reg. 11.31.
and Shemaiah 3. Reg. 12.24.
. But for that the ten tribes revolted from Rehoboam, upon coffeehouse at
his rough answer, and with dispite against David and his house, and not in
obedience to Gods decree, we cannot excuse them from offense, for which it
turned to their destruction. For hereupon, first they were separated both from
the place and manner of the true worship of God; the^, there arose unappeasable
war, between them and the tribe of Judah; then, insolences following
disorders, they were never long time free from conspiracies, divisions and
tumults: by which means being drained both of wealth and inhabitants, and
reduced to a naked weakness, they were lastly carried captive into diverse
far countries, and strangers were sent to inhabit their cities.

I must here also observe a few of your interpretations, wherein your boldness
is not limited with any bounds. It is to be noted (you say) that before
Rehoboam went to Shechem to be admitted by the people, he was not accounted
true King. I desire therefore that you would satisfy us in these places
following. Before Rehoboam went to Shechem, the Scripture says, that Solomon
died, (...) and was buried, and Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead 3. Reg.
11.43.
. Again, after the defection of the ten tribes it is said, that in the cities
of Judah Rehoboam did reign still, 3. Reg. 12.17.
implying thereby, that in the other cities he reigned before. Again, they are
said to have rebelled against the house of David 3. Reg. 12.19.
. And lastly, Rehoboam raised all the strength of Judah and Benjamin, to bring
the kingdom again unto him 3. Reg. 12.21.
.

Further you write, that ten tribes refused to admit Rehoboam; but the
Scripture says that they rebelled 3. Reg. 12.19.
. What? did God only allow hereof after it was done? did he only permit the
people to do it? the Scripture testifies that it was his decree, that it was
his deed, and that he declared his will by Ahijah the Prophet 3. Reg. 11.31.
, during the life of Solomon, and for his sins. But these special warrants do
not constitute a law; they serve only to make good the particular actions for
which they are directed, and not to justify another the like. Lastly, S. Paul
says, that all things happened to the Jews in figure; upon which place
diverse expositors have noted, that the state of the Jews was a figure of the
Church of Christ: but that it was an example and pattern of all other states
that should ensue, it shall be ranged among your cast conceits.

I refer me now to the judgment of any man, who takes not pleasure to beguile
himself, whether you do not by art and trumpery manifestly abuse us; partly by
incapacitie, and partly by deceit, either corrupting or confounding whatsoever
you take in hand. Your humor both discontented and unquiet, has armed your
mind with bloody desires, which have edged you on to put fuel to those
slames, which you should endeavor to quench, though it were with your blood.

I will not stand upon the particular examples of Spain, as well for that the
matter is both tedious and to little purpose; as also for that we have small
conformity with the customs of that nation. Only thus much in general: We
acknowledge that in ancient times the kingdom of Spain was elective, and
therefore your examples drawn from thence are nothing pertinent. The examples
of later times, are both few and unjust, carried only by faction and by force;
as Garabay Pa. 414.
testifies of your example of Aurelio, and as by the example of D. Sancho el
Brauo I have declared before Cap. 3.
. But you account faction to be the Commonwealth, and violence Justice, when
it may make to the furtherance of your affairs.

The History of D. Berenguela I will briefly report, rather for the respect
which guided the Castilians, then that I allow it for right which they did.
Henry had two sisters, Donna Blanch the eldest, married to Jews the eight King
of France; and Berenguela the youngest, married to Alphonso king of Leon. Henry
dying without issue, the Castilians feared, if they should submit themselves
unto Blanch, that their state, being less then the state of France, would be
made a member thereof, and governed as a Province, and not as a kingdom. And
therefore they did rather choose to profess allegea^ce to the Lady Berenguela;
by which means, the kingdom of Leon was afterward annexed unto Castile, to
the great increase, both of dignity and assurance to them both. I have
followed herein your own Authors, not being ignorant that others of better
name do write, that Berenguela was the eldest sister, as I shall have occasion
hereafter to declare: but for the present let it be as you please; and let us
weigh our own wisdoms, not only in straining, but in forging titles, to
incur those mischiefs, which the Castilians rejected, a lawful title to
avoid.

And this was also one of the motives of the revolt of Portugale, which is your
last example; although it had also (as Garabay Lib. 34. pa 833.
writes) a concurrence of right. For Ferdinand king of Portugale, by his
procurators, the Bishop of Ebora and others, did both contract and solemnize
espousals with Elianor, daughter of Peter king of Aragon. But being entered into
war with Henry king of Castile, and finding himself at some disadua^tage, he
forsook the king of Arrago^s daughter, and co^tracted himself to Elianor,
daughter to the king of Castile, upon very beneficial conditions for his
state. Afterward, falling into fancy with one of his subjects, named Elianor
Tells de Meneses, wife to a noble man called Lorenzo Vasques de Acun^a, he
took her as his wife, and enforced her husband to avoid the Realm; and had by
her one only daughter, named Beatrix, who was joined in marriage to John king of
Castile. After the death of the king of Portugale her father, the king of
Castile in the right of his wife, laid claim to that realm, and was
accordingly acknowledged by the chief of the nobility and Prelates; and in
particular, by D. John master of Auis, her fathers base brother, who was then
the most forward man in her favor. But afterward falling into quarrel, and
having slain the Count de Oren, he stirred the people against the Queen, and
compelled her to quit the city. And after diverse outrages and murders,
committed upon the Bishop of Lisbone, an Abbess, and many others, he was
first made governor of Portugal; and then proceeding further, in an assembly
of his party gathered at Coimbra, he was made King. Garrabay writes, pa. 841.
that the chiefest objection against Beatrix was, because her mother was not
King Ferdinands lawful wife. And I believe you also, that they had a reflexe,
not to loose the dignity of their kingdom (as now they have done) and be made
subject to the cruel both avarice and ambition of a more potent state.

To the eighth Chapter, which is entitled,Of diverse other examples out of the
states of France and England, for proof, that the next in blood are sometimes
put back from succession, and how God has approved the same with good
success.
YOur examples of France (to which Nation we are more near both in situation
and laws) I will run over with a swift course. Of the change which twice
has happened in the whole race of the kings of France, I have spoken before:
Cap. ^.
you seem also either to threaten or presage the third change, from the king
who now reigns, and other Princes of the house of Burbon. It was your desire,
you applied your endeavor, with all the power and persuasions you could make.
You knit diverse of the Nobility in a treacherous league against him; you
incensed the people; you drew in foreign forces to their assistance: by which
means, the Realm fell daily into change of distress, the men of arms
making all things lawful to their lust. The good did fear, the evil expect;
no place was free, either from the rage or suspicion of tumult; few to be
trusted, none assured, all things in commixtion; the wisest too weak, the
strongest too simple, to avoid the storm which brake upon them: the people
joining to their miserable condition many complaints, that they had been abused
by you, in whose directions they found nothing but obstinacy and rashness,
two dangerous humors to lead a great enterprise. At the last, when
lamentable experience had made that known unto them, which they had no
capacity by reason to foresee, they expelled as well your company as counsel
out of the Realm; and so the firebrands which you had kindled, were broken
upon your own heads; having opportunity by your just banishment to enter into
conscience, both of the weakness and wrong of your advice.

The partition of the Realm of France between Charles the great, and Carlomon
his younger brother, and also the uniting thereof again in Charles, after the
death of Carloman, depended upon the disposition of Pepin their father, and not
upon the election of the people. Girard says, that Lib. 1. de l'estate. fol 43.
Pepin having disposed all things in his new Realm which he thought
necessary for the surety thereof, he disposed his estate; leaving the Realm
of Noion to his son Charles; and to Carloman his other son, that of
Soissons, and that by the death of Carloman, both his place and his power did
accrue unto Charles. In this manner, the first of a family, who has attained a
kingdom, has ordinarilye directed the succession thereof.

The contention between Lewis le debonaire and his sons, according to your
own Author Girard, De l'estate.
proceeded and succeeded after this manner. Certain Lords of France taking
coffeehouse at the immoderate favors, which the king showed toward Berard
his great Chamberlain, conspired against him; and for their greater both
countenance and strength, drew his own sons to be of their faction. But
Lewis brake this broile, more by foresight then by force; and doing execution
upon the principal offenders, pardoned his sons. Yet they, interpreting this
lenity to slacknes of courage, rebelled again, gathered a greater strength,
and drew Pope Gregory the fourth to be a complice of their unnatural
impiety: whereby it appears (says Girard) that they are either foolish or
mischievous, who will affirm, that every thing is good which the Popes have
done. Afterward they took their father, under color of good faith, and sent
him prisoner to Tortone, and then at Compeigne assembled a Parliament, composed
of their own confederates, wherein they made him a Monk, and brought his
estate into division and share. It is easy to conjecture (says the same
Girard) what miserable conditions the Realm then endured; all laws were
subverted, all things exposed to the rage of the sword, the whole realm in
combustion, and the people extremely discontented at this barbarous impiety.
In the end Jews, by the aid of his faithful servants was taken out of
prison, and restored to his kingdom; and his sons acknowledging their
fault, were received by him both to pardon and favor. His son Pepin being
dead, he divided his Realm among his other three sons, Charles, Jews, and
Lothaire; but Jews rebelled again, and was again received to mercy: lastly,
he stirred a great part of Germany to revolt, with grief whereof the good
old man his Father died. After his death, Jews and Lothaire, upon disdain at
the great portion which their Father had assigned to their brother Charles,
raised war against him. The battle was given, wherein Charles remained
victorious, reducing them both under such conditions, as he thought convenient
to impose. Lo here one of your plain and evident examples, which is so free
from all exception. But minds corruptly inclined, hold nothing unlawful,
nothing unreasonable, which agrees with their passion.

Loys le Begue, succeeded after Charles, not as you affirm, by authority of
the states, but (as in France at that time it was not unusual) by appointment
of his father. And whereas you write, that Loys at his first entrance had like
to have bin deprived by the states, but that calling a Parliament, he made the^
many fair promises to have their good will; it is a very idle untruth, as
appears by the Author who^ you avouch. At his death, he left his wife great
with child, who afterward was called Charles the simple. But before he had
accomplished the age of 12. years, there stepped up in his place, first Loys and
Carloman his bastard brothers; then Charles surnamed le Gros; and after him Odo
Earl of Paris. Then Charles the right heir attained the Crown; and then
again were raised against him, first Robert, Earl of Angiers; and afterward
Ralph king of Burgu^die. But where you attribute these mutations to the
authority of the states, Girard says, that they were by faction and
usurpation of such, who from the weakness of their Prince, did make advantage to
their own ambition; affirming plainly, that between the death of Loys le
Begue, and Charles the simple, not one of them who held the crown of the
Realm was lawful king Di l'estate. lib. 1. pa. 5^.
, noting further, that the first two races of Kings, were full of cruel
parricides and murders; and that in those times the Realm was often traveled
with tempests of sedition.

Of the usurpation of Hugh Capet I have spoken before: Girard writes, li. ^.
fol. 60. b.
that although he sought many shadows of right, yet his best title was by
force, which is the common right of first usurpers. And whereas you write, that
Henry the first was preferred to the crown of France before Robert his elder
brother: First, it was not by appointment of the states, but of their father;
Secondly, Girard makes the matter doubtful, affirming, Fol. 63. a
that some said he was the younger brother; Lastly, it set up a dangerous and
doubtful war between them.

Further, where you write, that William being a bastard, succeeded Robert his
Father in the Duchy of Normandy, notwithstanding the said Robert left two
brothers in life, it was at that time a custom in France, that bastards did
succeed, even as lawful children. Thierry bastard of Clouis, had for his
partage the kingdom of Austrasie, now called Lorraine. Sigisbert bastard of
king Dagobert the first, parted with Clouis the twelfth, his lawful brother.
Loys and Carloman bastards of king Loys le Begue, reigned after their Father.
But in the third race of the kings of France, a law was made, that bastards
should not succeed in the Crown; and yet other bastards of great houses were
still aduowed, the French being then of the same opinion with Peleus in
Euripides. In Andromache.


(...)
(...).
Oftentimes many bastardes excel those that are lawfully borne: which is
verified by Hercules, Alexander the great, Romulus, Timotheus, Themistocles,
Homer, Demosthenes, Brutus, Bion, Bartolus, Gratian, Peter Lombard, Peter
Comesior, Io. Andreas, and diverse other of most flourishing name.

Your examples of Jews the 6. and Jews the 11. are not worth a word in
answer. In the beginning of their reign, you affirm that they had like to
have been disinherited by the state, for the offenses of their Father. You
bear a mind charged with thoughts vain, busy and bold, without any
restreint either of honesty or of discretion. For how else could you here also
affirm, that King Henry the third of England, was condemned by his Barons to
be disinherited, for the fault of his Father? It is usual with you in all your
reports, either plainly to break beyond the bounds of all truth, or
grossly, (for I cannot now say artificially) to disguise it, with many false
and deceivable terms. But to conclude for the state of France, which is also
to exclude whatsoever you have said; under the reign of Charles the fifth, 1375.
for the better establishment of this right, and for cutting of those
calamities which accompany vsurpatio^, there was a law made, that after the
death of any King, the eldest son should incontinently succeed.

We are now come to our English examples, of which you might have omitted those
of the Saxon kings; as well for that there could be no settled form of
government in those tumultuous times, as also for that our Histories of that
age are very imperfect, not leading us in the circumstances, either of the
manner or occasion of particular actions: they declare in gross what things
were done, without further opening, either how or wherefore. But both these do
make for your advantage: for who sees not, that your examples are chiefly bred
in tempestuous times; and the obscurity of Histories will serve for a shadow
to darken your deceit.

Well, let us take both the times and Histories as they are. How will you
maintain that Egbert was not next successor to Briticus by propinquitie of
blood? Briticus left no children, and Egbert was descended of the blood royal,
as Polydore affirms, Lib 4. circa sin.
William Malmesbury De gest. Ang. lib. 1. ca. 2.
says, that he was the only man alive of the royal blood, being descended of
Inegild, the brother of King Ina. How then is it true which you say, that
Britricus was the last of the roial desce^t? and if it had been so indeed,
the right of election should then have been in the state. And thus you stumble
at every step, you entangle your self without truth or end. You snatch at the
words of Polydore, where he says; He is created king by consent of all: which
do imply no other sense, but that which a little after he says; That he was
saluted king by all. So we find also, that the like improper speech was used
at the coronatio^ of Philip the second, king of France, whereby the Archbishop
of Reimes did challenge power in the right of his Sea, to make election of the
king.

That Adelstane was illegitimate, you follow Polydore, a man of no great either
industry or judgment. William Malmesbury Lib. 2. ca. 5.
accounted Egwina the mother of Adelstane, to be the first wife of king Edward
his father: he terms her also a noble woman, contrary to that which Polydore
fableth. Henry Huntington, Roger Houeden and others, write no otherwise of him,
but as of one that was lawfully borne. And in that you english these words of
Polydore, Rex dicitur; Rex a populo salutatur; He was made king by the people:
In that you affirm also, that for the opinion of his valor he was preferred
before his brethren which were lawfully borne, whom you acknowledge to be men
of most excellent both expectation and proof; you do plainly show, that use
has made you too open in straining of truth.

Eldred did first take upon him but as Protector, because of the minority of
the sons of Edmund his elder brother; and afterward entered into full
possession of the Crown. But that his nephews were put back by the Realm,
it is your own idle invention; it was no more the act of the realm, then was
the usurpation of King Richard the third.

That Edwin was deposed from his estate, it is inexcusably untrue. Polydore
Lib. 6.
writes, that the Northumbrians and Mercians not fully settled in subjection,
made a revolt. Malmesburie Lib. 2 ca. 8.
says, that he was maimed of a great part of his kingdom, by the stroke of
which injury he ended his life. And whereas you write in commendation of King
Edgar his next successor, that he kept a Navy of 6600. ships for defense of
the Realm, you discover your defective judgment in embracing such reports for
true.

In that you say, that many good men of the Realm were of opinion, not to
admit the succession of Etheldred after the death of his brother, I dare
confidently affirm, that you do not only tell, but make an untruth; having no
author either to excuse or countenance the same. In that you write also, that
between the death of Edmund Ironside, and the reign of William Conqueror, it
did plainly appear what interest the Commonwealth has to alter titles of
succession; it does plainly appear, that both your reason and your conscience
is become slavish to your violent desire. For what either liberty or power had
the Commonwealth under the barbarous rage and oppression of the Danes? when
Canutus had spread the wings of his fortune over the whole Realm, none having
either heart or power to oppose against him, what choice was then left unto the
people? what room for right? what man not banished from sobriety of sense
would ever have said, that he was admitted king by the whole Parliament and
consent of the Realm? It is true, that after he had both violently and
unjustly obtained full possession of the Realm, slain the brother of Edmund
Ironside, and conveyed his children into Sueden, he assembled the Nobility,
and caused himself to be crowned king: but neither the form nor name of a
Parliament was then known in England; and if coronation were sufficient to
make a title, no king should be accounted to usurp.

Of Harold the first, the natural son of Canutus, our Histories do very
differently report. Saxo Grammaticus writes, that he was never king, but that
he died before his Father. Henry of Huntington reports, that he was appointed
but as Regent for his brother Hardicanutus. Others write, that apprehending the
opportunity of his brothers absence, he invaded Northumberland and Mercia, by
force of the Danes who were in England, whereupon the Realm was divided, one
part holding for Harolde, and another for Hardicanutus, who was in Denmark.
But because he delayed to come into England, they all fell, rather not to
deny then to acknowledge Harold for their king. Take now which of these
reports you please, for all do serve to your purpose alike.

Hardicanutus after the death of Harold, came out of Denmark into England:
and the people having their courages broken with bondage, were easy to
entertain the strongest pretender. But after his death, diverse of the
Nobility, especially Godwine Earl of Kent, rising into hope to shake off
their shoulders the importable yoke of the Danes, advanced Edward the son
of Etheldred to the Crown, as being the next of the race of the Saxon Kings,
though not in blood, yet at hand; for Edward the outlawe his elder brother, was
then in Hungary: and fear being the only knot that had fastened the people to
the Danish Kings, that once untied, they all scattered from them, like so many
birds whose cage had been broken. Edward being dead, Harold the son of
Godwine usurped the kingdom: for as Malmesburie says; Extoria a principibus
fide arripuit diadema.
By extorted faith from the nobility he fastened upon the Crown a forceable
gripe: Henry Huntington also, and out of him Polydore do write, that upon
confidence of his power he invaded the Crown Viribus and genere fretus regni
Diadema inuasit.
: which usurpation gave both encouragement and success to the enterprise of
the Normanes. This short passage of History you do defile with so many
untruths, that it seems you have as natural a gift to falsify, as to eat,
drink, or sleep.

But where you write that William the Conqueror formed any title by consent of
the realm, you grow into the degree of ridiculous. We find that he pretended
the institution of king Edward, which had neither probability norforce; and
that he was nearer to him in blood, then Harold the usurper: but that he ever
pretended the election of the people, it is your own clowted conceit. For when
he had rowted the English army in the field, when he had sacked their Towns,
harried their Villages, slain much people, and bent his sword against the
breasts of the rest, what free election could they then make? Your self
acknowlede also in another place, In part. 2. ca. 2. pa 12.
that he came to the Crown by dinte of sword; and at his death his own
conscience constrained him to confess, that he took it without right Lib.
vit Will. conq.
. And in that the Pope and the French King favored his enterprise, it is not
material, this was not the first injustice which they have assisted. Neither
was it the Popes hallowed banner (as you affirm) but the bow and the arrowe,
the only weapon of advantage long time after to this Nation, whereby he did
obtain the victory. One help he had also within the Realm, for that King
Edward had advanced diverse Normans, to high place both of dignity and charge;
who gave unto him much secret both encouragement and assistance in his attempt.

And thus in all these turbulent times, you are so far from finding five or
six, that you are short of any one, who was made King by free authority of
the people.

King William Rufus made no other title to the Crown, but the testament of his
Father: For often use has confirmed it for law, that a Victor may freely
dispose of the succession of that state, which he has obtained by the
purchase of his sword. Cin. and Bartol. in l. imperialis. C. de nupt.
The conqueror disinherited his eldest son Robert, for that, knitting with
Philip King of France, he invaded, wasted and spoiled Normandy, and joined in
open battle against his father, wherein the father was unhorsed and wounded,
and brought to a desperate distress of his life. Hereupon he cast forth a
cruel curse against his son, which he could never be entreated to revoke: in
so much as upon his deathbed he said of him Lib. Vitj. Will. conq.
, that it was a miserable country which should be subject to his dominion,
for that he was a proud and foolish knave, and to be long scourged with cruel
fortune. And whereas you write that at the time of his fathers death he was
absent in the war of Jerusalem, it is a very negligent untruth.

But it is an idle untruth that you write, that Henry the first had no other
title to the crown, but the election of the people. He never was elected by
the people; he never pretended any such title. Nubrigensis Lib. 1. cap 3.
and after him Polydore In Henr. 1. sol. 181.
do report, that he laid his title, because he was borne after his father was
king. Malmesburie In Henr. 1. lib. 5.
says; Henry, the youngest son of William the great, being an Infant,
according to the desires and wishes of all men was excellently brought up, Quod
solus omnium filiorum Willielminatus est regie, and ei regnum videretur
competere.
because he alone of all the sons of William, was princely borne, and the
kingdom seemed to appertain unto him. He was borne in England in the third
year after his father entered into it. And this was the like controversy to
that which Herodotus In polyhim^n
reports, to have happened between the sons of Darius, the son of
Hystaspis, king of Persia, when he prepared an expedition against the Grecians
and Egyptians: because by the laws of Persia, the king might not enter into
enterprise of arms, before he had declared his successor. Darius had three
children before he was king, by his first wife, the daughter of Gobris: and
after he attained the kingdom he had other four, by Atossa, the daughter of
Cyrus. Artabazanes was eldest of the first sort; Xerxes of the second.
Artabazanes alleged, that he was eldest of all the Kings children; and that it
was the custom amongst all men, that the eldest should enjoy the
principality. Xerxes alleged, that he was begotten of Atossa, the daughter of
that king, by whose puissance the Persians had gained, not only liberty, but
also power. Before Darius had given sentence, Demaratus the son of Aristo,
cast out of his kingdom of Sparta, came unto Xerxes, and advised him to
allege further, that he was the eldest son of Darius after he was king: and
that it was the custom of Sparta, that if any man had children in private
estate, and afterward an other son when he was king, this last son should
be his successor: upon which ground Darius pronounced in the behalf of Xerxes.
The same history is reported by Iustine Lib. 2.
, and touched also by Plutarch Lib. de fraacrna beneuolentia.
, although they differ, both from Herodotus, and one from the other in some
points of circumstance. Hereto also agrees that which Josephus writes Antiq.
lib. 16 cap 3.
, in reprehending king Herod, for excluding Alexander and Aristobulus his
sons, and appointing Antipater, borne to him in private estate, to succeed in
his kingdom.

Many great Lawiers have subscribed their opinions to this kind of title; and
namely Pet. Cynus, Baldus, Albericus, Raph. Fulgosius In l. imperialis. illud.
C de nupt.
, Rebuffus In l. si lenatus C. de dignit. lib. 12.
; and Anto. Corsetta In tract. de pot. and excel. reg. 16.
delivers it for a common opinion. But with this exception, if the kingdom
be acquired by any other title then by succession, according to proximitie in
blood: for in this case, because the dignity is inherent in the stock, the
eldest son shall succeed, although he were borne before his father was King
Pet. Iac. in arb. success. reg Franc. 10. Rai. in cap. praeterea. tit. de
prohis seud. ali and in tract. nobil quest. 10. Iac. a S. Georg. in tract.
seud. D. Benedic. in rep. c. Rainuitius. n. 200. de testam.
. And therefore Plutarch writes In Arraxerxe.
that after the kingdom of Persia was settled in succession, when Darius the
King had four sons, Artaxerxes the eldest, Cyrus the next, and two other;
Parysatis his wife having a desire that Cyrus should succeed in the kingdom,
pressed in his behalf the same reason wherewith Xerxes had prevailed before:
affirming, that she had brought forth Artaxerxes to Darius, when he was a
private man; but Cyrus, when he was a king. Yet Plutarch writes, that the
reason which she used was nothing probable; and that the eldest was designed
to be King.

Howsoever the right stood between Robert Duke of Normandy, and his younger
brothers, the fact did not stand either with the quiet or safety of the
Realm. For, during the reign of William Rufus, it was often infested upon
this quarrel, both with foreign arms and civil seditions; which possessed all
places with disorder, and many also with fire, rapine and blood, the principal
effects of a li^entious war.

These mischiefs not only continued but increased in the reign of King
Henry, until Robert the eldest brother was taken prisoner in the field, which
put a period to all his attempts. So dangerous it is upon any pretense to put
bye the next in succession to the crown.

This Henry the first left but one daughter, and by her a young son named
Henry, to whom he appointed the succession of the Realm: and took an oath of
all the Bishops, and likewise of the Nobility, to remain faithful unto them
after his decease. Yet you write, that because Stephen, son of Adela, sister
to King Henry, was thought by the states more fit to govern, he was by them
admitted to the Crown. In which assertion, you cannot be deceived, you do not
err; but your passion does pull you from your own knowledge and judgment.
Polydore writes, Lib. 12. in prin.
that he possessed the kingdom contrary to his oath, for which cause the
minds of all men were exceedingly moved: some did abhor and detest the
impiety; others, and those very few, unmindful of perjury, did more
boldly then honestly allow it, and followed his part. Further he says,
Ibidem.
that he was crowned at Westminster, in an assembly of those noble men who were
his friends. Nubrigensis affirms, that Sacramenti praeuaricator regnum in
vasit.
violating his oath he invaded the kingdom.

William Malmesburie, who lived in King Stephens time, says In hist. ^^uel
lib. 1. sol. 101. a.
; that he was the first of all lay men, next the King of Scots, who had made
oath to the Empress Mawde; and that he was crowned, Tribus episcopis
praesentibus, nullis abbatibus, paucissimis optimatibus.
three Bishops being present (of whom one was his brother) no Abbot, and a very
few of the Nobility. Henry Huntington, who lived also in the same time, says
lib. 8 pa 221. Vigore and impudentia ^retus.
; that by force and impudency tempting God, he invaded the Crown. Afterward
he reports Pa. 221.
, that being desirous to have his son Eustace crowned king with him, the
Bishops withstood it, upon commandment from the Pope: because he took upon
him the kingdom against his oath Quia regnum contra iusiu. randum p^aeripuisse
videbatur.
, Roger Houeden writes Pa. 275. quasi tempestas inuasit.
, that he invaded the Crown in manner of a tempest.

This is the report of those writers who came nearest, both to the time and
truth of this action: whom other Authors do likewise follow. Polydore In prine
li. 12
, and after him Hollingshead do write, that he took upon him the Crown, In
Steph.
partly upon confidence in the power of Theobald his brother, Earl of Blois;
and partly by the aid of Hen. his other brother Bishop of Winchester.
Walsinghame adds Hypodig. pa., 8.
, that Hugh Bigot, who had been King Henry's Steward, took an oath before the
Archbishop of Canterbury, that King Henry at his death appointed Stephen to
be his successor. Whereupon the Archbishop and a few others were ouer-lightly
led, like men blinded with security, and of little foresight: never
considering of dangers, until the means of remedy were past.

You write that they thought they might have d^ne this with a good conscience,
for the good of the Realm. But what good conscience could they have in
defiling their faith? such consciences you endeavor to frame in all men, to
break an oathe with as great facility, as a Squirrell can crack a Nut. What
good also did ensue unto the Realm? The Nobility were set into factions; the
common people into division and disorder: and as in wars where discipline is
at large, there insolences are infinite; so in this confusion of the state,
there was no action which tended not to the ruin thereof; the lives and goods
of men remaining in continual pillage. Polydore says Lib. 12. pa. 107.
: Matrons were violated, virgins ravished, Churches spoiled, Towns and
Villages rased, much cattle destroyed, innumerable men slain. Into this
miserable face of extremities the Realm did fall; and into the same again you
strive to reduce it.

But you say, that for the ending of these mischiefs, the States in a
Parliament at Wallingford made an agreement, that Stephen should be King during
his life, and that Henry and his offspring should succeed after his death. A
man would think you had a mint of fables; there is no history which you
handle, but you defile it with apish untruths. All our histories agree, that
king Stephen, unable to range things into better form, did adopt Henry to be
his successor. The second Huntington faith Pa 228.
, that this agreement was mediated, by the Archb. of Cant. and the Bishop of
Winchester, who repented him of the furtherance he gave to the advancement of
king Stephen, when he saw what miseries did thereupon ensue. The like does
Houeden report Fol. 281.2.
: and Holingshead Pa. 62.
sets down the form of the charter o^ agreement between them; whereby it
is evident, that it was a transaction between them two, and no compulsorie act
or authority of the State. I deny not but some Authors affirm, that the King
assembled the Nobility, but neither were they the States of the Realm,
neither were they assembled to any other end, but to swear fealty unto
Henry, saving the kings honor so long as he should live.

After the death of King Richard the first, you affirm that the succession was
again broken; for that John, brother to King Richard, was admitted by the
States, and Arthur Duke of Britain, son to Geoffrye, elder brother unto
John, was against the ordinary course of succession excluded. Well sir, I
arrest your word; remember this I pray you, for I will put you in mind
thereof in an other place. That which here you affirm to be against the
ordinary course of succession, you bring in an other place for proof, that
the Uncle has right before the Nephewe. You do wildely waver in variety of
opinion, speaking flat contraries, according as the ague of your passion is
either in fit or intermission.

The History of King John stands thus. King Richard the first dying without
issue, left behind him a brother named John, and a Nephewe called Arthur,
son of Geoffrye, who was elder brother unto John. This Arthur was appointed
by King Richard to succeed in his estate, as Polydore writes Lib. 15. in prin.
. Nubrigensis says, that he should have been established by consent of the
Nobility, if the Britains had not been so foolishly, either suspicious or
fond, that when King Richard sent for him, they refused to commit him into his
Uncles hands.

But after the death of king Richard, his brother John seized upon his treasure
in Normandy, came over into England, and in an assembly only of the
Nobility, was crowned king. Of these, many he won with such liberal
protestations and promises, as men careless of their word are wont to bestow:
others were abused by the persuasions of Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, and
a few others (says Polydore Lib. 15 pa. 262.
) not well advised.

Nic. Trivet says In prologo.
, that John pretended for his title, not the election of the people, but
propinquitie of blood Iure propinquitatis.
, and the testament of king Richard. The same also is affirmed by Walsingham
Hypodig. po. 50.
. And this is the question between the Uncle and the Nephewe, of which I shall
have occasion to speak hereafter. But Polydore says Lib. 15. pa. 263.
, that diverse noble men did account this to be a fraudulent injustice, and
thereupon did ominate those evils which afterward did ensue. And when the
Archbishop was charged, that under color of reason, partly subborned, and
partly weak, he had been the occasion of all those mischiefs. Polydore Pa,
269.
says, that he was both grieved and ashamed at nothing more; Rog. Wenden
affirms, that he excused himself, that he did it upon oracles, and by the
gift of prophecy.

King John having locked himself into the saddle of state, made one wrong
which he had done, to be the cause of a greater wrong; by murdering his
Nephew, Arthur, Duke of Britane, whose inheritance he did unjustly usurp. For
this fact the French king deprived him of all the lands which he held in fee
of the crown of France, and prosecuted the sentence to effect. After this, as
men are easily imboldened against an usurper, when once he declineth either in
reputation or in state, diverse of the Nobility, especially they of the North,
confederated against him: but being neither able to endure his war, nor
willing to repose trust in his peace, they co^tracted with Lewis the French
kings son, to take upon him to be their king. And so it often happens in
civil contentions, that they who are weakest, do run with a natural
rashness to call in a third.

Jews being arrived upon the coast of Kent, the Nobility of that faction
Walsing. hypodigm^. pa. 56.
, came and swear allegiance unto him. The Londoners also, many upon an
ordinary desire to have new kings, others for fear, and ^ome for company,
joined to the revolt. Hereof a lamentable presence of all miseries did arise,
whereby as well the liberty as the dignity of the Realm, were brought to a
near and narrow iumpe. The poor people, naked both of help and hope, stood
at the courtesy and pleasure of the men of arms; the liberty of war making
all things lawful to the fury of the strongest. The Nobility, feeling much,
and fearing more the insolency of the French Nation, who (as Vicount Melin a
noble man of France confessed at his death) had sworn the extirpation of all
the noble blood in the Realm, began to devise, how they might return into the
allegiance of king John: in so much as a little before his death, Letters were
b^ought unto him from certain of his Barons, to the number of forty, who
desired to be received again into his peace. But after his death, which
happily did happen within five months after the arrival of the French, both
their hatred and their fear being at an end, they were all as ready to cast
out Jews, as they had been rash to call him in.

This History you corrupt with very many odious untruths, which are more
harsh to a well tuned ear, then the crashing of teeth, or the grating of
copper. As namely in affirming, that Arthur was excluded, and John crowned King
by the states of the Realm; that God did more defend this act of the
Commonwealth, then the just title of Arthur; that by the same states, king
John was rejected, Prince Henry his son deprived, and Jews of France chosen
to be king; that the same states recalled their sentence against Prince Henry,
disanulling their oathe and allegiance made unto Jews. A shameless tongue,
governed by a deceitful mind, can easily call, faction, the Common wealth;
rebellion, a just and judicial proceeding; open an often perjury, an orderly
reuoking of a sentence; Gods secret judgment in permitting injustice to
prevail, a plain defense and allowance thereof.

Of the division of the houses of Lancastar and York, it is but little that
you write, whereto I have fully answered before: you do wisely to give a light
touch to this example, it is so hot that it will scalde your throat. King
Henry the fourth, more carried by cursed ambition, then either by necessity or
right, laid an unjust gripe upon the Realm, which afterward he did beautify
with the counterfeit titles of conquest and election. So violent are the
desires of Princes to embrace streined titles, by which they may disturb the
states of other; not remembering, that right may be troaden down, but not
troaden out; having her secret both means to support, and seasons to revive
her. For although the lawful successor did warily strike sail to the tempest,
because neither the time running, nor the opportunity present (which are the
guiders of actions) did consent as then to enter into enterprise. Yet so soon
as one hear of occasion was offered, his progeny did set up a most doubtful
war, wherein thirteen battles were executed by Englishmen only, and above
fourscore Princes of the royal blood slain.

Lo now the smiling success of these usurpations; lo what a dear purchase
of repentance they did cause! Were it not that passion does blind men, not only
in desire but in hope, they might suffice to make us advised, to keep rather
the known and beaten way with safety, then upon every giddie and brainlesse
warrant to engulphe our selves in those passages, wherein so many have perished
before us. It belongs to wise men to avoid mischies; and it is the reward of
fools to lament them.

Go too then, conclude if you please that the people are not bound to admit
him to the Crown, who is the next successor by propinquitie of blood; but
rather to weigh, whether it is like that he will perform his charge, or no.
Conclude this (I say) to be your opinion; and that it seems to you to be
conform to all reason, law, religion, piety, wisdom and policy, and to
the custom of all Common wealths in the world: and I will assuredly conclude
against you, that you prate without either warrant or weight.

To the ninth Chapter, which bears title,What are the principal points
which a Commonwealth ought to respect in admitting or excluding any Prince,
wherein is handled largely also, of the diversity of religions, and other such
causes.
IN this passage you handle what cause is sufficient, either to keep in, or to
cast the next in blood out of state. In which question you determine, that God
does allow for a just and sufficient cause, the will and judgment of the
people. Your reason is, for that they are the judge of the thing it self, and
therefore they are the judge also of the cause. Your antecedent you prove;
First, for that it is in their own affair; secondly, for that it is in a
matter that has his whole beginning, continuance and substance from them
alone. Your consequence you prove by a whole lump of law, in alleging the
entire body of the civil and Canon law, assisted also with great reason.

Diogenes said of a certain Tumbler, that he never saw man take more pains to
break his neck. In like sort we may say of you; It is hard to find a man
that has more busied his wits, to overthrow the opinion of his wisdom. For
the first proof of your antecede^t, is not only of no force for you, but
strong against you; because no man is a competent judge in his own cause; no
man can be both party and judge: whereto I will add, that no inferior has
jurisdiction over the superior, much less the subject against the Sovereign.

Your second proof, that all the power of a King has dependency upon the
people, I have sufficiently encountered before Ca. 1.
. And if your consequence were true, that whosoever is judge of a thing, is
judge also without controwlment of the cause; if this were as agreeable to all
laws as you make countenance, then were all judgments arbitrarie; then could
no appeal be enterposed, for giving sentence without just cause; then were it
false which Panormitane writes In e per tuas. Qui fill. sunt legit.
, that a false cause expressed in a sentence makes it void.

What shall I say? what do you think? do you think that these fat drops of a
greasy brain, can bring the tenure of a crown to the will of the people? what
are you who endeavor thus boldly to abuse both our judgment and conscience?
Are you religious? are you of civil either nature or education, who under the
name of Ciuilian do open the way to all manner of deceits, periuries, tumults
and treasons? What are you? For you show your self more profane then
Infidels; more barbarous then Caniballs, Tartarians, Moors and Mammelucks; who
though they bear themselves in nothing more then hatred and contempt, yet do
they both love and honor their kings. I see what you are, the very true
follower of the Anabaptists in Garmanie, who openly professed, that they must
ruinate the state of kings. And who can assure us (for your corrupt dealing
make all suspicions credible) that you do not also follow them both in desire
and hope, to embrace the Monarchy of the whole world. The difference between
you is this: they pretended revelation for their warrant: you work by
deceitful show of reason, by falsely either alleging, or wresting, or
corrupting both humane and divine authority.

In what miserable condition should Princes live, if their slate depended upon
the pleasure of the people, in whom company takes away shame, and every man
may lay the fault on his fellow? How could they command? who would obey? what
could they safely either do or omit? Who knows a people, that knows not,
that sudden opinion makes them hope, which if it be not presently answered,
they fall into hate? choosing and refusing, erecting and overthrowing, as every
wind of passion does puff. What staidness in their will or desire? which
having so many circles of imagination, can never be enclosed in one point.

And whereas you write, that God always approves the will and judgment of
the people, as being properly the judge of the whole business; and that every
particular man must simply submit himself thereunto, without further
inquisition, although at diverse times they determine contraries, (as they did
between the houses of Lancaster and York) because we must presume that they
were led by different respects. You seem not obscurely to erect thereby
another privileged power upon earth; which cannot err, which does not
deceive.

But it may be some honest minded man will say, that howsoever you write, your
meaning was otherwise; you write also afterward, that in two cases every
private man is bound to resist the judgment of the whole people, to the
uttermost extent of his ability. Well then, let us take you for a man, whose
sayings disagree, both from your meaning, and between themselves: let us
consider what are your two exceptions.

The first is when the matter is carried, not by way of orderly judgment, but
by particular faction of private men, who will make offer to determine the
cause, without authority of the Realm committed unto them. But this exception
is so large, that it deuoureth the whole rule: for in actions of this quality,
the original is always by faction* the accomplishment by force, or at least
by fear, howsoever they are sometimes countenanced with authority of the
state. So Sylla, having brought his legions within the walls of Rome, obtained
the law Valeria to be published, whereby he was created Dictator for 24.
years: by means of which force, Cicero affirms Lib. de legibus.
that it was no law. Likewise Lawrence Medices, having an army within
Florence, caused, or rather constrained the Citizens to elect him Duke. When
Henry the fourth was chosen king, ho held forty thousand men in Arms. And
this is most evident by your own example, of four contrary acts of
Parliament which at diverse times were made, during the contention between the
families of Lancastar and York, not upon different reasons, as with little
reason you affirm, but upon different success of either side.

In matters of this moment, the orderly course of proceeding is only by
Parliament. The Parliament must be summoned by the Kings writ, and no act
thereof has life, But by express consent of the King. If this form had
alvvayes been observed, neither our Kings should have been deposed, nor the
next successors excluded, nor the title of the crown entangled, to the
inestimable both weakening and waste of all the Realm.

Your second exception is, when such a man is preferred to the crown, by who^
God is manifestly offended, and the realm prejudiced or endangered: in which
case (you say) every man, with a free and vntrowled conscience, may resist what
he can.

It was even here I looked for you. Your broyling spirits do nothing else but
fling firebrands, and heap on wood, to set kingdoms in combustio^. What
rebellion, what revolt has ever bin made, but under some of these pretenses?
what Princes actions, either by malicious or ignorant interpretation, may not
easily be drawn to one of these heads? you are a nursery of war in the
commonwealth: a Seminary of schism and division in the church: In sum, all
your actions, all your thoughts are barbarous and bloody.

You write much of right and justice, but you measure the right and justice of
a cause, by the advantage of your own affairs. You speak as having a tender
touch of the glory of God; but you stretch out your throat with high words
of contradiction against him. You make show of care to pre^erue the state, but
you are like the Iuy, which ^eemeth outwardly both to embrace and adorn the
wall, whereinto inwardly it does both eat and undermine. For what means
either more ready or forceable to overthrow a state, then faction and
intestine quarrels? and what other milk do you yield? what are your opinions?
what your exhortations? but either to set, or to hold up sedition and
bloodshead? Saint Paul teaches us not to resist higher powers Romans 13.
, although both cruel and profane; you teach us to resist them what we can:
the Apostle is followed of all the ancient Fathers of the church; you are
followed of those only who follow the Anabaptists. For my part, I had rather
err with the Apostle in this opposition, then hold truth with you. But I will
speak more moderately in a subject of such nature; I will not say the^ that I
had rather err, but that I shall less fear to err in not resisting with ye
Apostle, the^ in resisting with you. New councels are always more plausible
then safe.

After you have plaide the Suffenus with your self, in setting the garland
upon your own head, and making your imaginary audience to applaude your
opinion, as worshipfully wise, you proceed to declare what ought chiefly ^o be
regarded, in furthering or hindering any Prince toward the Crown. Three
points (you say) are to be required in every Prince, religion, chivalry and
justice; and putting aside the two last, as both handled by others, and of
least importance, you assume only to treat of religion; wherein, either
error or want does bring inestimable damage to any state.

You draw along discourse, that the highest end of every Commonwealth, is the
service and worship of God; and consequently, that the care of religion is the
principal charge which pertains to a King. And therefore you conclude, that
whatsoever prince does not assist his subjects to attain this end, omitteth
the chief part of his charge, and commits high treason against his Lord, and
is not fit to hold that dignity, though he perform the other two parts
never so well. And that no cause can to justly clear the conscience, whether
of the people, or of particular men, in resisting the entrance of any Prince,
as if they judge him faulty in religion.

This is neither nothing, nor all which you say. In elective states, the people
ought not to admit any man for King, who is either cold or corrupt in
religion; but if they have admitted such a one with sovereign authority, they
have no power at pleasure to remove him. In successiue kingdoms wherein the
people have no right of election, it is not lawful for private men upon this
cause to offer to impeach, either the entrance or continuance of that king,
which the laws of the State do present unto them: not only because it is
forbidden of God (for that is the least part of your regard) but because
disorderly disturbance of a settled form in government, traineth after it more
both impieties and dangers, then has ever ensued the imperfections of a king.

I will come more close to the point in controversy, and dispell these foggie
reasons which stand between your eye and the truth. There are two principal
parts of the law of God; the one moral or natural, which contains three
points; sobriety in our selves, justice toward others, and generally also
reverence and piety toward God: the other is supernatural; which contains
the true faith of the mysteries of our salvation, and the special kind of
worship that God does require. The first, God has delivered by the ministry
of nature to all men; the second he does partly reveal, and partly enspire to
who^ he please: and therefore although most nations have in some sort observed
the one, yet have they not only erred, but failed in the other.

During the time of the law, this peculiar worship of God was appropriate only
to the people of Israel, in a corner kingdom of the world: the flourishing
Empires of the Assirians, Medes, Persians, Aegyptia^s, Graecians, Syrians and
Romans, either knew it not, or held it in contempt. The Israelites were almost
always in subjection under these both Heathen and tyrannical governments; and
yet God by his Prophets enjoined them obedience; affirming, that the hearts of
kings were in his hands; and that they were, the officers of his justice, the
executioners of his decrees.

In the time of grace, the true mysteries both of worship and belief, were
imparted also to other nations; but the ordinary means to propagate the same,
was neither by policy, nor by power. When S. Peter offered provident counsel
(as he thought) unto Christ, aduising him to have care of himself, and not to
go to Jerusalem, where the Jews sought to put him to death, Christ did
sharply reprove him for it Math. 16.25.
: when he did draw his sword, and therewith also drew blood in defense of
Christ, he heard this sentence; Math. 26.52.
They that take the sword shall perish with the sword. Christ armed his
Apostles only with fiery tongues Act. 2.3.
; by force whereof they maintained the field, against all the stratagems and
strength in the world. And when Princes did, not only reject but persecute
their doctrine; they taught their subjects obedience unto them Romans 13. 1. Pet.
2.
, they did both encounter and overcome them, not by resisting, but by
persisting and enduring.

This course seems strange to the discourse of of reason, to plant religion
under the obedience of kings, not only careless thereof, but cruel against it:
but when we consider that the Jews did commonly forsake God in prosperity,
and seek him in distress; that the Church of Christ was more pure, more
zealous, more entire, I might also say more populous, when she traveled with
the storm in her face, then when the wind was either prosperous or calm;
that as S. Augustine says Contra Petihanum.
, Want or weakness of faith is usually chastised with the scourges of
tribulatio^s; We may learn thereby no further to examine, but to admire and
embrace the unsearchable wisdom and will of God.

Seeing therefore that this is appointed the ordinary means, both to
establish and increase religion, may we adventure to exchange it with humane
devices? Is it the servants duty either to contradict or dispute the masters
commandment? is there any more ready way to prove an heretic, then in being
a curious questionist with God? is he bound to yield to any man a reason of
his will? It is more then presumption, it is plain rebellion to oppose our
reason against his order, against his decree.

It stands also upon common rules: That which is contrary to the nature of a
thing does not help to strengthen, but to destroy it: It is foolish to add
external stay, to that which is sufficient to support it self: It is
senseless to attempt that by force, which no force is able to effect: That
which has a proper rule, must not be directed by any other. And this was both
the profession and practice of the ancient Fathers of the Church, as I have
declared before Ca. ^.
; whereto I will here add that which S. Ambrose says Epist. 54.
: Let every man bear it patiently, if it be not extorted from the Emperor,
which he would be loath the Emperor should extort from him. And least they
might be interpreted not to mean obedience, as well to succession as to present
power, they allege that which the captive Jews of Babylon did wright, to the
tributarie Jews which were at Jerusalem Hierem. 29. Baruch. 1
; to pray for the life not only of Nabuchodonosor, the King of Babylon, but
also of Baltasar his son, the next successor to his estate.

But in latter times, Innocentius has taught, and is also seconded by
Castrensis in rep. l. 5 de just.
, that love is a just cause to move arms for matters of religion; under which
pretense, diverse men have pursued their own private purposes and end^s.
Guicciardine wrighteth lib. 12.
, that Firdinand who was called the catholic, did cover al his covetous and
ambitious desires, with the honest and holy veil of religion: the like does
Iouius report lib. 30.
of Charles the fifth Emperor. Paulus Aemilius Paul. Aem. 6.7.8
wrighteth thus of all: every man professes his war to be holy; every man
terms his enemies impious, sanctity and piety is in every man's mouth, but in
advise and in action nothing less. The contention is for worldly right, take
away that, and you shall find no cause of war. Now they pretend piety to every
mischief: the name of holy warrefare, (most miserable) is applied unto arms.

Hereupon such cru^ll calamities have ensued in most parts of Europe, and
^specially in Germany and France, with so little furtherance to that cause,
for whose supportance force was offered, that all the chief wrighters of our
age are now reduced to the former opinion; affirming with Arnobius Adu. ge. 3.4.
that religion is of power sufficient for it self: with Tertulian also Apolo.
Hactantius Inst. 20.21.
, Cassiodorus 2. Var. 27. et. lib. 10 epi. 26.
Josephus de Vi. su.
, S. Barnard cant. ser.
, and others, that it must be persuaded and not enforced. They of your society,
as they took their original from a soldier, so they are the only
Atheologians whose heads entertain no other object but the tumult of realms;
whose doctrine is nothing but confusion and bloodshed; whose persuasions were
never followed, but they have made way for all miseries and mischiefs to range
in, to come forward, to thrive, to prevail. You have always bin like a winter
sun, strong enough to raise vapors, but unable to dispell them. For most
cowardly companions may set up striefe; but it is maintained with the hazard,
and ended with the ruin, always of the worthiest, and sometimes of all.

The sum is this. So long as we express pure piety, both in our doctrine
and in our doings; all will go well; but when we make a mixture of divine and
humane both wisdom and power; when we preach policy: when we make a common
trade of treason; when we put no difference between conscience and conceit;
we must needs overthrow, either religion or our selves.

Now I will answer the reasons of your assertion. First you say, that if
Princes do not assist their subjects in the honor and service of God in this
life, God should draw no other fruit or commodity from humane societies, then
of an assembly of brutish creatures. But this reason is not only weak, as it
may appear by that which has been said, but also brutish, and (which is
worse) profane. For what fruit, what commodity does God draw from
societies of men? is not his glory perfect in it self? can we add any thing
to the excellency thereof? has he any need of our broken worship? God is an
absolute being, both comprehending, and exceeding all perfections: an infinite
being, and therefore his sufficiencies neither can be increased, neither do
depend upon any, but only of himself. He was from eternity without any world,
and a thousand worlds more cannot any deal increase his felicity and glory:
he did create the world, not to perticipate any thing thereof, but to
communicate from himself unto it. Hereupon Job says 22.5.
. What profit is it to God if thou be just? What advantage is it to him if thy
ways be clean? Surely we must be better informed of the soundness of your
judgment, before we dare depend upon the authority of your word.

You put us in mind that you compared an heir apparent to a spouse,
betroathed only and not married to the common wealth. I remember it well; but I
did not take you for such a widower of wit, that you could think it worthy to
be repeated. And yet that which hereupon you deduce out of S. Paul makes
altogether against you. S. Paul says 1. Cor. 7.
, that if a brother has an infidel to wife, if the consent to abide with him,
he may not put her away: and likewise if a woman has an infidel husband: but
if the infidel does depart, then the Christian is free. Now if you will
needs make a marriage between a King and his subjects, you might hereupon
conclude, that if an infidel King will houlde his state, the people may not
dispossess him.

And whereas you affirm, that all they who differ in any point of religion,
and stand wilfully in the same, are infidelles the one to the other, you show
both a violence and weakness of mind. For obstinate error in certain
articles of ^aith, and not in the whole state and substance thereof, does make
an heretic, but not an Infidel. And although the Canon law does in some
case dissolve marriage between a Christian and an Infidel c. iudaei. 28. q. 1.
c. quanto. de diuor.
; yet does it not permit the like between a true Christian and an heretic d.
c. qua^to c. gaudemus de diuort.
. And Panormitane Inc. ex part. 2. de conuer. coniug.
in his doubting manner denies, that the Church has power to authorize
divorce in case of heresy. So that allowing your compa^ison for good, yet in
case of infidelity, S. Paul; in case of heresy, the Cannon law is
altogether against you.

You add, that albeit the religion which a man professes be never so true,
yet whosoever has a contrary persuasion thereof, he shall sin damnably in
the sight of God, to prefer that man to a charge, wherein he may draw others
to his opinion. But I will omit this streine, and yet rather as impertinent
then true. For there are few nations in the world, wherein the people have
right to prefer any man to be king: and that which you allege out of S. Paul
Romans 14. 1. Cor. 8.
for your proof, is very different from the case which you do form. The
Apostle speaks when an action is of it self indifferent, but a weak
conscience judges it evil; being also evil by circumstance, in offending
others: you speak where an action is good in it self, but an erroneous
conscience judges it evil. I allow, that a good action contrary to
conscience is unprofitable; but that it is always a damnable sin I dare not
affirm. I dare not affirm that the Roman army did damnably sin, in
defering the Empire to Iouinian; who excusing himself, (as Zona^as wrighteth)
because being a Christian he could not command a Pagane army, they did
notwithstanding confirm him Emperor, by which means they did afterward
embrace the Christian faith. The like does Orosius report, that Valentinian,
being discharged by Julian from being Tribune, because he was a Christian, by
consent of the Soldiers was created Augustus. I rather take it to be a
damnable sin, which Zonaras to. 3.
wrighteth of the Bulgarians, in taking arms against their King, because he
was converted to Christian religion; albeit they did according to their
conscience. It were a deflowring of time to diue into the depth of this
question; because it appe^teineth to elective states, and not unto us. But
where you wright, without either authority or proof, that to assist, or not
to resist the advancement or government of any king, whom we judge faulty in
religion, is a most damnable sin, of what side soever the truth be; you
breath out most filthy and unsavory smoke; you lift up your voice into high
blasts of blasphemy, against the most high.

God has taught by the Apostle S. Paul Romans 15.
, that whosoever resist the higher powers (which at that time were Infidels)
receive unto themselves damnation; you teach, that whosoever does not in the
like case resist, does damnably offend. Were not the spirit of division,
otherwise called the devil seated in your soul, you would not thus openly
oppose the setlings of your rotten brain, against the express and direct
sentence of God. What? is it a damnable sin to do every man right? is it
damnable to give Caesar that which is his due Math. 22 17. Mar. 12.17. Luc.
20.25.
? to give tribute, honor, fear, to whom they appertain Romans 13 7
? The Apostle says, that Christians by resisting the power of Infidel rulers,
do acquire unto themselves damnation Romans 13.2
: and shall we yield credit unto you, that Turks, Moors, Infidels, should
damnablye sin, either in admitting or enduring the authority of a Christian
Prince? How vilie do you value the judgments of men? at how low rate do you
prize both your conscience and credit? I could rise into riot of words upon
you, were it not that I respect what is seemlye, rather for me to speak then
for you to hear.

Certainly, if we had received no such commandment from God, the regard of
the quiet of humane societies is sufficient to ouer-whelme your heretical
assertion: for seeing there are many different professions of religion, not
only in the world, but almost in every nation of the world: seeing also (as
Philo says De legate.
) every man, either by use or instruction judges his own religion best: what
surety could any Prince, what safety could any people enjoy, if your fiery
opinion should take place? what assurance can there be of life or of state,
where the sword bears swaye upon such occasions, and that guided by hands
both tumultuous and fierce. And seeing among many religions there can be but
one truth, if all men should be obstinately bent against the government of
any, who in their judgment is faulty in religion; what likelihood can we
either conceive or conjecture, but that many errors would soon prevail
against the only truth. And therefore it is far more moderate and safe, to
use the ordinary means both of maintaining and propagating the truth, and to
commit the success thereof unto God; and (as Josephus advises) not to offer
either contumely or violence against any religion, least we prouoake thereby
the professors thereof to do the like against our.

Your last reason is drawn from policy and consideration of state; because a
King will neither trust nor favor, much less advance him, that is not of the
same religion with himself: but to the contrary, he shall be subject to all
molestations, injuries and other auersions, which are incident to those who are
not current with the present course of affairs.

Oh sirre; this is the Helene for which you contend; you concur in opinion
with those Athenians of whom Alexander demanded divine honors; not so
obstinately to defend heaven, as to loose the benefit of the earth. This is the
mark whereat you aim, this is the Compass whereby you sail; as diverse
flowers do open and cloase, according to the motion of the same; so according
to the variation hereof, you extend or restrain your plyant conscience as you
please.

But the Apostle teaches us to be obedient to higher powers, for conscience
sake Romans 13.5
, and not for any private respect.

Besides, all Princes are not of that disposition whereof you speak. Suida
wrighteth of one, who changing religion to please his King, was therefore
adjudged to loose his head; one being appointed to cry at the time of his
execution; He that keeps not faith with God, what sound conscience can he
bear toward men? The Protestants in France are not altogether cast either out
of favor or out of charge: and many Roman Catholics in England, do
enjoy their full part, of all the plenty and pleasures that the realm can
afford.

Lastly, what have you to do with reasons of state? This is the Eagles feather
which consumes your devotion. Your office is to meditate, to pray, to instruct
me^ in pure devotion, to settle their souls in piety and in peace. But do you
contain yourselues within these limmits? nothing less. You take upon you the
policy of state; you ^end and deface the reputation of Kings; you make your
selves both judges and moderators of all their actions, allowing them to fly
no further then you give them wings. You dispose not only their affairs, but
their crowns at your pleasure; you hunt them, not to covert, but to death. You
contriue wa^s to compass your designs; you train up your followers in the
high mystery of treason; you cast into every realm the apple of striefe: your
doctrine is to no other use but as drums, Fifes, and trumpets to incense fury.

To these ends, you wrest scriptures, you corrupt histories, you counterfeit
reasons, you corrupt all truth (pardon my plainenes I pray you, I have not
atteined to your dexterity in disguising matters with smooth terms) you are
obstinate to hazard rather all dangers, then to be cut of from one point of
your purpose. You acknowledge no religion but your will, no law but your power:
all lies, treacheries and frauds do change their nature, and become both
lawful and laudable actions when they bear for the advantage of your affairs.

But this is directed to devotion, (you will say) and as you term it, ordine
ad deum, for a holy and religious end. Away then with your devotion, and so we
shall be rid of your dangerous deceit. Away I say with your devotion; or else
we will conclude of you as Liuie did of Anniball: nihil very, nihil sancti,
nullus deum metus nullum iusiuradum, nulla religio.

(...).

