An Expostulation or complaynte against the blasphemies of a frantic papyst
of Hamshyre. Co^piled by Johan Bale.

Matthew.xxiii Wvo be unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, that shut up
the kingdom of heaven before men. For neither go ye in your selves, neither
suffer you any other to enter.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum. Per septe^nium.

To the right high and myghtie Prince, Ioha^ Duke of Northumberlande, Lord
great Maistre of the Kings most honorable household, and Lord presydent of
his Maiestyes most honorable preuye Counsel, his most humble and faithful
servant Johan Bale wysheth the favor of god, increase of honor, long life,
and prosperouse health both of soul and body.
COnsyderyng in your noble grace (most Honorable Duke) the same mighty
fervent, and religiouse zele in Gods cause, Zele.
which I before time by reading the scriptures have dylygently marked in Moses
the servant of God, I have vrgently been moved under God and our king to seek
your earnest aid for the same. The rage at this present is horrible and
fearce, which the stought sturdy satellytes of Antichrist in diverse parts of
ye realm, chefely within Hamshire. Hamshire,
do blustre abroad in their mad furyes to blemyshe the Eua^gelycal veryte of
the Lord now reuelated. An intolerable grefe it is to their vncircumcysed
hearts, to behold the glytterynge toys of superstycyouse ydolatry and
hipocritycall papystrye removed from this earth of England, by the kings
wurthie majesty and his most honorable counsel, Relygyon.
and Gods true relygyon again restored. That our said second and most
valeau^t Josias, has thus pourged his Judah (his England I mean) from the
abhomynable buggeryes and ydolatries of the great Baal Peor of Rome, earnestly
seeking for the true God of David his forefather, ii. Paaral. xxxiiii.
to the most lively example of all other princes, their vngratyouse and
noughtie eyes are not a little offended. That his images, rellyckes, roodes,
torches, candels, copes, ashes, palms, wax, water, oil, cream, and holy
bread, that his bulls, bedes, belles, Toys.
bablinges, masses, purgatory, processions, confessyons, exorcysmes,
hallowynges, shauynges, gresynges, sensyngs, slauerynges, slumberynges, and a
great sort of Popysh toys more, are ba^nyshed hens, in conscience they are
dysquyeted.

Not all unlike to the gross wytted Gergesytes, they would gladly ye Christ
were sumwhat further of. Mat. viii.
Yea, they earnestly wyshe, that he would peaceably depart from their coasts,
least he went about it, to drown their swyne for ever, whom they all
contrary to gods ordinance, have so frankely in all beastlynesse maynteyned.
They can not away with the precyouse light of Christ's holy Gospel, their
eyes are so sore. Ihon. iii.
Neither may they broke it, to know their saluatyon alone to be reposed in
Christ Jesus, Colloss. iii.
so blind are their folyshe hearts. Neither may they abide it, that God is
only to be worshypped in sprete and veryte, so superstycyously minded are they.
Ihon. iiii.
But darkness they judge light, and the light very darkness. That is sweet,
Esaias. v.
they think sower, and that is good they deem evil. Such are now a days ye
perverse and froward judgments of men ungodly. The most christen reformacyon
of this church of England, Mockers.
which is to other natyons a most wurthie spectacle, so they very turkyshely
deryde and mock. At the daily suppressyons of their blasphemouse and beastly
papystryes, Nume. xxi
they create, they frown, they grynde their tethe, and for anger wexe wode.
With ye carnal Israelytes they hate and abhor the celestyall Manna of
Christ's Gospel, i. John. ii.
because it neither nurrysheth the lust of the flesh, neither fedeth the
concupyscence of the eyes, nor yet mainteyneth the pride of this life. Nume. xi.
To the greasy fatt pottes of Egipte, would they gladly return again, and
become subjects under the great Romish Pharao, so that they might be fed
with his old stynkynge cucumbers, melons, lekes, onyons, and garlyke, which
are his unprofitable tradycyons.

Malycyously and rebellyously do they now resyst the manifest truth of Gods
wurde, Rebels.
and will by no manner of means consent thereunto, although their own
conscyences both accuses and condemns them for it. And all is because they
will hear of no repentance, neither yet agree to amendeme^t of their most
wicked lives. Papystes,
They brag they boast, they dreme, they dote, they fume they face, they
grunte they grudge, they iangle they jest they mock they mow, they scoff
they scorn, they ruffle they rage, with daggerand with fyste, and all to
stop the sweet blastes of the scriptures, Apo. vii.
least they should clearly blow away their old Romysh sorceryes, as duste
from the face of this earth. Neither is it any great wo^dre unto us, Psalm* i.
to behold these terryble turmoylynges of the devils furyouse members, for
those Romysh Pharisees leven* Luke. xii.
considering he is that roarynge Lion which busyly seeks whom he may
devour. i. Peter. v. Genesi. iii. Job. ii. Exody. vii. Psa. lxxvii
He fraudole^tly deceived our first mother Eve Grievously he afflycted the
pacyent man Job. He made Pharaos sorcerers to withstand both Moses and Aaron.
David right sore complayneth of vexatyons by wicked angels. Who was a more
cruel adversary to Jesus Iosedech in reparynge the temple, Zach. iii.
than was Satan? And though he prevailed not in his.iii. temptatyons against
Christ our redemer, Math. iiii.
yet procured he his own dysciple Judas trayterouslye to betraye him, Ihon.
xviii
the clergy of the Jews malycyously to accuse him, and the Romish magistrates
most wrongefully to conde^pne him. Saint Paul gives us good warning, ii.
Cor. xi.
that Satan to deceive us, can transform him self into the Angel of light.
and tells us also, that we must always have sumwhat a do with ye minysters
of darkness. Ephesi. vi.


In the prymatyue church, Idolles*
when the wurshyppynge of Idolles ones ceased, at the prechynges of the
Apostles and other virtuous fathers. The prestes which had lived by those
Idolatryes, provoked both the princes and common people to persecute them to
death, Priests.
making them to believe, that it was never a merry world sens they were suffered
to preach This has both Eusebins in Ecclesiastica historia, and also
Tertulianus in Apologetico. Thus have the wholso^ wyndes of heavenly doctrine,
been always disturbed, Apoca. vii.
let and stopped, and their lively vapors oppressed. First by Satan ye
devil, then by the Iewysh and Popysh clergy, then by superstycyouse monks
and sophystycall scole doctors, and now last of all by unlearned loyterers
and desperate ruffyanes, as he of whom I have written this treatise following,
Braban.
is one. Of this latter sort, are some become farmers of benefyces, some blind
brokers in ye law, some scribes, some pharysees, some flatterers for fauer,
some lyngerers for lucre, some cloynars for advantage menpleasers, and make
shyftes. These give the preachers most vnco^ly reports to deface their godly
preachynges, ^aplers.
and most odyble names, to bring them in co^tempte of the people. Their crooked
counsels, persuasyons, illusyons, prouocacyons, and promyses of aid in
wythstandynge the mynysters, are such, for a welthie living in ydelnesse,
that the truth of the Lord can take no place* These are as were Elymas the
sorcerer, Hymeneus, Acts. xiii. i. Timo. i. ii. Timo. ii. ii* Tim. iiii
Philetus, and Alexander the copper smythe, enemies of all truth, withstanders
of all ryghtousnesse, and children of ye devil. Men of corrupt minds resysters
of the veryte, and lewd as concerning faith ii. Tim. iii. And al these are
set a wurke by the popes late masmo^gers, by old pilgrimage goers, Styngers.
by crafty Cathedralystes, mynster men, and collygeners, lokinge yet for a day
of mayntenaunce in their old sorceryes.

And as for our parts, we are not so ignorant of the rules of Christ's
relygyon, but we know that his flock of true beleuers, Beleuers.
has had always their wolves Math x. their blasphemers, persecuters, and
slaunderers, that they might bring fourth godly fruits in pacye^t sufferau^ce
For look what the threshynge flaile does Luke. viii.
to the corn (S. Gregory says) the fyery furnace to the gold, Gregorye.
and the polishinge fyle to the iron, the same does aduersyte to the ryghtouse
man, for it makes him perfyght. Wicked persons are in all places to be
tolerate of private men (I say not may) because there can be no Abel, Abel.
unless he be vexed of some maliciouse Cain. We ought therefore of congrue^ce very
patiently to suffer them, but yet not in all points to hold our peace. We are
not bound altogyther to bear them in their mischefes No, Christ.
Christ never ded so neither yet the Prophets before him, nor his Apostles
after him. But with stomach (as occasion gave it) they inueihed against them,
and mightily reproved the^ If any man hurt the witnesses of God (S. Johan
says) Johan.
he must be killed. Apo. xi. Either must he be consumed of the rite that comes
out of their mouths, Esaias. xi Heb. iiii*
or else by the.ii. edged swerd of the sprete, which both are the wurde of God.
For in their hands have they swerdes (says David) that are sharp on both
sides. Psa. Cxlix. manfully to stand up, for faith, for truth, for religion,
for obedience to kings, for just beleuers, and for the glory of the living
God, Sharp
against the manifest enemies of all godliness. And with ye double sharpness
of those swerdes, shall they either convert them or dampne the^. Care not
(says. S. Paul) for the hate of your adversaries, for unto them is it a token
of perdicion, and to you a most manifest sign of salvation. Phi. i. Doubt the^
not (says Esaye) neither fear them at all, Christ.
but praise the Lord of hosts, let him be your fear and dread, for he is the
stone yt they stomble at, and the rock that they fall upon. Esa. viii. for no
confusion can come upon them that put their full trust in God. Dan. iii.

Now is there nothing else behynd (most honorable Duke) but that your
excellent grace under god and our king Id ducem,
set to your favorable hand, with the rest of his most honorable counsel.
If Abbas Ioachim, Nicolas Lyra, Ioha^ Tylneye, and other of our latter
expositours has taken great Constantine the Emprour, Constantinus.
for that other angel in. S. Ioha^s reuelacion, which ascended from the
risynge of the sun for that age. Apoca. vii. Sebastianus Meyer and Conradus
Pellicanus not all dyssentynge from the same, because he had than brought the
christen church to a quietness, all foren tyrannies suppressed. What shall
let me to think as much of our present Constantine, king Edward the.vi. for
our time? Edward vi. King.
considering that the hand of God is not yet abbreuiated? Esa. lix. He
comes as well from the rysinge of the sun, as he ded. He has as well his
autoryte of God, and is now a christen Magistrate. as he was than. So well is
he king of this realm, and a Brytayn borne, A King.
as he was. As well is he given to good letters and cares for the christen
relygyon, as he ded. Godly.
As well has he set Christ's gospel at lyberte, from the danger of
tyrauntes, and by proclamacion commanded it freely to be preached, as he ded So
well has he made a general desturctio^ of supersticiouse Idolles and other
abominations, as ded he. As Constantynes face in all his coins of Gold and
silver was erected toward heaven, by report of Eusebius in vit a Constantini,
Libro. ii*
so is the vysage of his heart elevated un to God in all his daily studies and
princelye procedynges, if the good fruits may show what the tree is. Than
may our most virtuous and godly king Edward the.vi. Angel.
for this age so well resemble that good angel of God, as might our great
Constantyne for that age.

Considering therefore (right wurthie and excellent Duke) that he has by that
high office, Apoca. vii.
the seal of the living god and is declared a prince of power by his lively
wurde. Roma.xiii. to make all his subjects the true servants of God by the
Gospel, let the malyciouse rabble of Antichrists ruffyanes, by your myghtie
admynystracyon under him be forbidden any more to noye. Apo. vii. Restraynt.
Let the^ be restrained from doing such vyole^ce rauyne, and excess, as
they have done now of late to Christ's mynysters in Ha^shire. Let them be
inhybyted of dagger drawing, and of fyste lyftynge in the open streets, when
no man has ones offended the^. Let them leave their pullynges by the bearde
and bosom in the presence of people, Violence.
staring like wild oxen, wha^ no evil at all is meant to the^. Let the^ no
longer brag before the justices in the open sessyons, of castinge their glove
and of wagynge battle, uncorrected, when nothing is either done, ^agynge.
said, or yet thought against the^. Let them be well stayed from ragynge and
raylynge, oblocutynge and slaunderynge, without cause reasonable, for
vpholdyng the wicked tradycyons of Antichrist. Permyt them no longer to
counsel in corners, Council.
to have wicked persuasyons, and to draw people after them. Let them from
hensfourth be charged under pain of sore ponyshment, not lyce^cyously to do
all their lewd lykynges, as they have done hertofore, like men that are
lawles. Desire*
We desire not the evil of this froward sort, but their good. We couete not
their loss but their winning, not their utter destruction, as they do ours,
but their spedye amendment, if such angels of reprobacyon as they are may
amend, which I scarsely believe. Chefely our request is, Request*
to live in peace by them as in Esaye is promised, that the Lamb should dwell
with the Wolf, the Got lie by the Leopard, the Cow feed with the Bear, Peace.
the Bullock company with the Lion, the Child play with the Serpent, and yet
none of them should hurt the other. Esa. xi.

His angelical voice has been heard al ready by most earnest proclamacyons,
A voice.
ouerall his domynyons of England, Wales, and Irelande, as was the loud voice
of great Constantyne over Aegipt Greece, Persye, Asye, and Italy, by most
straight commandments, that Christ should be wurshypped, his holy Gospel
preached, the mynysters thereof both provided for and honored, and all Idol
worshyppynges to be utterly abolyshed. Let it now therefore be obeyed of all
subjects without contradyctyon, Obedience,
no wild wytted ruffyane permytted from hens fourth so stubbernely to
withstand it. Command this gentle west wind to have still his plesaunt
passage and frindely fre course without any restraynt or Apoca. vii.
cruel impedymente of those angels of darkness, that the earth, sea, and
trees may wholsomly be refreshed therewith. Gracyously suffer (as ye have done
hitherto) all sorts of people to have knowledge df the Gospel. Verytye
Let the veryte of God, so sound in the ears of all men, that they may be
marked with the sprete of Christ, and never deny him for any vexacyon. This
poor Expostulacyon, am I your poor orator, so much the boldar to dedycate
to your highness that I have always known the same a most mighty,
Experience.
zelouse, and ardente supporter, maynteyner, and defender of Gods lively
wurde. Right humbly besechynge your excellent grace, to accept the small
gift thereof, as the simple present of that poor servant of yours, which
has always borne both you and all yours a most faithful heart. The eternal
father of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose inuyncyble verite Verytye
your grace has hitherto most fervently favored, vouchsafe prosperously to
preserve the same, with my ladies grace your most faithful spouse, and all
your virtuous and godly children, in contynuall health and increase of honor,
to the glory of his holy name. Amen.

iii. Reg. xl. If Israel (says the Lord) shall hold upon other gods, and
worship them. I will cast him out of my sight, and he shall be a Proverb, and a
fable among the nations And they that pass by shall marvel thereof, and shall
hysse at him.
An Expostulation or complaint against the blasphemies of a frantyke papist of
Hamshire. Compiled by Johan Bale.
DAniel the man of desires, and Johan Boauerges or the son of tho^dre,
brings me to remembrance of a mouth that uttered blasphemies. A mouth.


This mouth (says Daniel) spoke presu^ptuouse things. And his horn (which
is ye power that maynteyneth him) made battle against the saints, yea, and
got the vyctory of them, till such time as they had the kyngedome in
possessyon. Dan. vii. To the Beast (says.S. Johan) Dani. vii.
was given a mouth, that spoke great things and blasphemies. And he opened
that mouth in blasphemye against God to blaspheme his name, and his
tabernacle, and the^ yt dwell in heaven. And power was given him to make war
with the saints, and to overcome them. Apoca. xiii. Apo. xiii.
Not only is this to be verifyed upon the Romysh Antichrist and his synneful
synagoge of spiritual calcars but also upon such pratlynge papystes as are his
daily maynteyners. For co^seque^tly it follows in the same reuelacyon of.
Apoca, xvi.
S Johan. And I saw (says he) three unclean spretes, like frogs come out of
ye mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the
mouth of the false prophet, and they are spretes of deuels. Apo. A Papyst.
xvi. Lo sir, the false prophet, which is the wicked papyst, is so well
touched here, as is either the Beast or the Dragon.

Now to this frantyck papyst tha^, which on the.xxix. day of Decembre last
past, Conuenticles.
in the house of a gentylman of his affynyte within Hamshire, being in the
full heat of his frenesye, brast out into this vnreuerent, blasphemouse* and
co^teptuouse talk of the Kings Majesty and of his most godly procedynges.
Blasphemy
Alas poor child (said he) unknown is it to him, what acts are made now a
days. But when he comes ones of age, he will se an other rule, and hang up
an hundred of such heretyke knaves. Meaning the preachers of our time, and
their maynteyners by like. For at the same season he had most spyghtfully
rayled of one of the^, being absent, A rayler*
which never in his life ded him dysple asure, nether in deed nor in wurd, that
he was able to burden him with. The first part of this blasphemouse clause
touches the kings hyghnes, the second his honorable Counsel, and the third,
Mark i^.
the true ministers of Gods wurde. By the first is Gods name blasphemed, by the
second is his tabernacle ill spoken of, and by the third are they that dwell in
heaven contempned. But this pernycyouse poison have this wicked papyst sucked
out of the ungracious pappes of his mother the synnefull synagoge of Rome,
whose deuylyshe nature has it always been, to despise those kings yt are
not her mainteyners, to co^de^pne those magistrates yt will not become her
slaves, Co^dicions
and to kill those preachers that impugn her Idolatryes.

Concerning the first. In that this frantycke papyst with poluted mouth, A
Child.
reports the kings majesty to be a poor Child, he blasphemeth the name of
God. For there is no power (S. Paul says) but it is of God. And who so ever
abuses the power, abuses the ordinance of God to his da^pnacion, Romans xiii.
Take heed
Bear no wicked heart to thy king (says Solomon) neither report any evil of
the governors in thy malycyouse anger. For if thou do, the birds of the air
will discover thy wickedness, Eccls. x Double is the blasphemye of this furiouse
papyst against the kings highness, in that he has disdainously called him both
poor and a Child, in contempt of his most christen procedynges. Poor is as
much to say as conte^ptuouse, Poor.
abject, wretched, forsaken miserable, or of such birth as is nothing esteemed.
And so is it taken in diverse places of the scriptures, which all are far
vnsemyng the majesty of a king. A king.
And well is it known to all the world, that neither nature for her part, nor
yet fortune for her part, has so left him, his hyghnes being the natural
son of so noble a king as his father was. Neither is he destitute, but on
every side most habundauntlye replenyshed with the most graciouse gifts of
god, Learned.
specially with all kinds of good learning far above all his progenytours,
kings of this imperial regyon.

Childishnes in a king, is reproved by ye mouth of God, and given many times of
him to ye people as a curse, Esaias. iii.
plage, or scourge for their unfaithful nes. I shall give you children (says
the Lord) to be your princes, and babes shall have rule over you. Esa. iii. That
is, ye shall have for your disobedience in neglecti^g my laws and
commandments, me^ to your governors, that are dyssolute, rash, wanton, and
careless, yea men inexpert and vnexercysed in pryncely affairs, Unwise.
and men which will not regard your co^me^ welthe but follow their own lusts.
Woe be to such a land (says Solomon) as has so chyldysh rulers, and whose
princes are early at their bankettes. Eccls. x, These be those rulars whose
lives are wanton, acts lycencyouse and judgments babyshe, whereby their
commen welthes in the end, Ruin,
are brought to confusyon. Yea, S. Hierome says, yt these are such worldly
governors, as neglecting Gods holy precepts, do set up the vain tradycyons
of men synnefull. And though all these chyldysh ways be detestable in a king
yet is not the chyldehode of youth in him to be reproved. For so might king
Josias have been reproved, Josias.
which began to reign in the.viii. year of his age iiii, Regum, xxii. and
king David discommended, David.
for being the youngest of his brethren i. Reg, xvii, whose praises are
nevertheless habundaunt in the scriptures, Ioas.
Ioas being but.vii. years old was a king also, and for the time of his youth
pleased God, what though in his age he ded otherwise. ii. Par. xxiii


In England here, king Henry the, vi, was but.viii. years old, king Henry the
third, ix, years old, and king Edward the third scarce, xv. years of age,
iii. Kings
when they were crowned kings, yet was there never chronycle writer, nor yet
honest, faithful, and obedient subject, that ever called them poor children.
But with reverence and honor, even from the first day of their reigns, took
them always for whole and persyght kings, like as the sacred Bible holds of
the before named kings, Josias.
Ioas and godly Josias, in the.vii. and.viii, years of their ages, iiii, Re.
xi, et. ii. Pa. xxxiiii. What should this franctyck papyst here mean than, so
blasphemously to report our most noble and wurthie king Edward ye.vi. in the,
xv. year of his age, and, v, year of his reign, without al honor and
reverence, but that he has done on ye unshamefast face of his whorysh mother,
Babylon,
the monstruouse madame of Rome which is full of the names of basphemye, Apo.
xvii. Him has our eternal God most graciously given unto us in the latter age
of his noble father, not without euydent miracle, and will preserve him, no
doubt, to his own glory and welthe of this realm, in spyght of all his
popysh enemies, if we be not vntha^kefull. Educacion.
His wurthie educacio^ in liberal letters and godly virtues, and his natural
aptenesse in retaynyug the same, ple^teously declares him to be no pore child,
but a manifest Salomo^ in princely wisdom. His sober admonicions, and open
examples of godliness, at this day shows him, mindfully to prefer yt wealth of
his co^me^s, as well gostly as bodyly, Relygyon,
above all fore^* matters. Mark what his majesty has done already in
religion, in abolishing the most shameful idolatries of Antichrist, besides his
other acts for publyque affairs, and ye shall find at this day, no christen
prince like to him.

Now follows the second part of the blasphemouse se^te^ce of this fra^tick
papist, which is, Blasphemy
yt the acts put fourth now a days, are unknown to the king, and yt he will
change them when he comes of age. This not only touches ye kings wurthie
majesty, which is gods high minister, in iudginge him chyldysh, mutable, and
inconstau^t, but also it pearceth his most honorable counsel, which are under
him, Joseph.
as was Joseph in Aegipt, ye stays of his people. Ecc.xlix. as co^sentinge to
ye same, So is Gods tabernacle by him blasphemed. For if yt tabernacle of God
be with mean men, as, S, Ioha^ says, it is. Apo, xxi. Much more with the
counsel of a christian king, which is gods high magestrate, and they his
assiste^tes. They yt despise yt rulers (says the Apostle Jude) and speak evil
of the^ which are in autoryte, Rulers.
shall suffer yt vengau^ce of eternal fire. When Michael yt archangell strove
against the devil, Satan.
and disputed about the body of Moses, he durst give no railing sentence, but
said. The Lord rebuke the, But such (as is here this pratlynge papyst) speak
evil of those things which they know not. And what things they know
naturally, as beasts which are without reason they corrupt in the^ selves. Woe be
unto the^, for they have followed ye way of Cain, Cain.
and are utterly given to ye error of Balaa^ for lucres sake, and shall perish
in the treason of Core. Jude.i,


If Christ be in the mids, when.ii. or, iii. pryuate men be collected in his
name, as he says, he is, Mat. xviii. much more among ye faithful counsel of
so virtuous and Christen a king, Council.
Who ca^ tha^ deny them to be the tabernacle of God? specially wha^ they with
all endeuer possible, have sought and yet daily seeks, clerly to ba^nysh out
of this christen realm, the manyfolde abhomynacyons of Antichrist, or
idolatryes without nombre. Which he by his smoky locustes, Locustes,
ye monks and shaven prestes, has craftily planted here, contynually from
time to time, ever sens the days of that wicked Emproure Phocas. Phocas,
Who can deny them (I say yet ones again) to be yt said tabernacle or chosen
ma^syon of God, either that co^gregacio^ among whom he dwells by promise.
Luke, x, et. Joan. xiiii, When they so earnestly labor, to place here in
England, the true relygyo^ again, and to set up his true worshippinges, as in
the primative church of the faithful Bryttayues, Brytans.
first planted by them ihat were hither sent by Christ's Apostles, Asia.
and fashyoned after the perfight rules of the.vii. churches in Asia, the
filthy corrupcions of those Romysh Idolatours, in the power of his wurde taken
from us. If God doothe not dwell with them, that thus daily seeks his glory,
with whom does he dwell? Than has this arrogaunt papyst with poluted mouth,
Blasphemy
blasphemed the tabernacle of God, iu reportyng them, now to make acts
without the kings knowledge, concerning relygyon, or else at this day to
build that hereafter they will break. And this that enemy has done to bring
them in hate of the commen people, as though not regarding his Majesty, they
now went about not to establysh the^, but deceive them in the same. A Beast,
Such is the mad frenesy of so brutysh a beast.

But unworthy are such reprobate vessels of so godly Magistrates. Of this are
we certain and sure, The Council.
so many as have Gods knowledge, roar those ragynge raylers what them lusts
to the contrary, with lies after their leude lykynges, that had it not been in
the fear of God and their kings true obedyence against the wicked Antichrist,
they could never have propounded so godly laws. And having God presently
assistent unto the^, as all they have which seeks his only glory, Gods honor.
they can not be so far to his heavenly will contrariouse, as their vile report
is, in the quarrel of that horrible monster. No, they are no such wauerynge
reeds, as for a Christen commen welthe, are this year of one mind, and the
next year will be of an other. No truly, it stands not so with the
unchangeable wisdom of Christ's sprete, Constaun^
wherein they have earnestly wrought, for time of the prosperouse raygne of our
present Josias. Their fou^dacio^ have they set upon so sure a rock, even upon
Gods wurd, that neither wind nor water, stormy tempest, nor wether, can
overthrow it, Math. vii, Strong.
Neither shall the great gates of hell, nor yet the strong power of Satan,
ever prevail against it. Math, xvi, Neither yet the deuyls unholy vycar at
Rome, with all his curssynges and cuniurynges, calkynges and coblynges,
brawlynges and bablinges, massinges and mutterynges, Images and Idolles,
pardons and purgatory, with the devil and all of his other sorceryes, Sorceries,
which these graceles papists co^tynually gapeth for yet ones again, as the
hongry hownde for the carreine, and the full fed sow for her puddel. But as
Baldad the Suhyte said unto pacyent Job. The hypocrites hope shall come to
naught, His confydence shall be destroyed for he trusts in a spyders web.
Baldad.
Job. viii The sober abiding of the ryghtouse (says Salomou) shall turn him to
much gladness, but ye hope of yt ungodly shall perysh. pro, x.

The third or last part of that most wicked sentence, which this malygnaunt
papyst with blasphemouse mouth has uttered, Blasphemi
is this, that when the king comes to age, he will hang up an hundred of such
here tyke knaves, meaning the true preachers of our time. As well in reproach
of men godly, observing the Gospel, as in contempt of ye true ministers of
Gods wurd, Poison.
have this furyouse enemy and son of Beli aloute vometed that poison, which
has long time lain boylynge in his papystycall stomach. Neither has he
abashed in ye heat of that frenesye and forgetfulness of reason, to abuse the
christen modesty of our godly and innocent king, in iudgyng him acompanyon
herafter, with the most cruel tyrauntes of the world, Antiochus, Herod,
Caiphas, Nero, Tirauntes
Domycyane, Traiane, and his bloudthurstie father of Rome, which in their
wicked times, malycyously murdered up the true witnesses of God And thus are
they which dwell in heaven, most spightfully of this brutish babbler blasphemed,
as is towched in the text of.S. Johan. A babbler.
Apoca. xiii. In many places of the holy scripture, is the congregatyon of the
faithful called heaven, or the kyngedome of heaven, chefely in the prophecyes
and ye parables of Christ, for so much as God is inuysybly the inhabytour,
ouersear, Heaven.
and governor thereof, Math. xiii. et. xxv. Who then can deny the true
preachers, which are the dystributers of Gods mysteryes, to be dwellers in the
same.

Saint Paul is not all behind, in boasting him self to be one of them, which
also was a preacher, Our co^uersacio^ (says he) where so ever we remain, A
preacher
is in heaven, from whens we look for ye savior. Phil. iii, If ye be risen
again with Christ, seek the things which are above, where he sytteth on ye
right hand of god, Set your affectyo^ on things yt are in heaven, and not on
tryfles which are here on ye earth. Col, iii. These are they, which in the
household of god, what he is
are ye profitable buylders the fyshers of men, the feaders of the flock, the
salt of the earth, the light of the world, the clouds full of moisture, the
stars, lanternes, and candelstyckes, yt stewardes, searchers, and releuers,
the kepers of the vyneyearde, planters, tyllers, sowers, and repers of the
Lords harvest, Helpers.
yea the helpers of Christ, and vpholders of his church. All these names and
offices do the holy ghost give them, and a great sort more in the scriptures,
reportynge them also wurthie of double honor, when they labor in the wurde i.
Timoth.v. In sprete and veryte teach they our heavenly father to be wurshipped.
Shadows.
Ioh iiii. and not in the beggerlye shadows of men's tradycyons. They have
the holy angels for their fellow servants and brethreue, for having the
noble testimonye of Jesus in their mouths. Apoc. xix. These are no heretyke
knaves than, neither yet wurthie to be hanged, as this Popysh scismatyck do
both judge them and wish them, A Papyst.
in the hasty sprete of his whote stomacked mother. So has he them blasphemed
yt dwell in heaven, which is the co^gregacio^ of god.

If they were hanged for teaching the truth of God and impugnyng falfe
relygyon, Hanging
they should have the same reward for well doing that their maistre Jesus
Christ had before them, For he for that verytees sake, was most spyghtfully,
shamefully, and contemptuously hanged up betwyn, ii, thieves, in the common
place of their executyons, as though he had been a great malefactor, so whote
was the malice of the holy clergy than against him, Diverse of his Apostles
for maynteynyuge his doctrine, Apostles
come to the same high promocyon of hanging, specially Peter, Andrew,
Bartylmew, Philyp, and Simon, as the historyanes of them has written, because
they should seem no better then was Christ their master. Among their
disciples the nombre so excedeth of them that were hanged for ye testimony of
Jesus, that it would axe to much time to rehearce them. Disciples.
And this vile kind of hanging, was no dishonor to them. How should it now
then become a dishonor to these, in the same just quarrel? As the cause made
that conte^ptuouse death in the^ gloryouse, so should it also do now in these
men, in the sight of the Lord and his electes, Psalm. Cxv, But this syghte is
not given to such reprobate vessels, Sight.
as is this furiouse papist, whose malice has vtterli made him blind. Sap. ii.
Yea, so frantyckly and beastly blyude, that he shameth not to attrybute unto
our most godly and virtuous king, that kind of tyranny, which is of al other
the most wicked and blasphemouse. But far other is the gentle nature of our
religiouse Josias* Josias,
which has already overthrown the hill aulters, broken in pieces the Idolles,
destroyed the relygyouse buggery, restored the book of the Lord, set up his
true wurshppyynges, and kept such a passover to yt Lord as never was before,
iiii. Reg. xxiii, et ii. Appointed.
Paral, xxxiiii. Of God is he appointed to turn ye people again, and to take
away all the abhominacio^s of the ungodly. Ec. xlix.

Breuely to conclude the matter. These iii. blasphemies, which this malycyouse
papyst in one wicked sentence here uttered are those.iii. iii. Spretes
unclean spretes, ye like frogs came out of the monthe of ye false Prophet,
Apoca, xvi. And they are not all unlike to the wild fire, smoke, and
brymstone, which the terryble horses, or fat pampered up locustes of Antichrist
e^^me^ed, Apo. ix, for fearce, Locustes.
noyfull, and stynkynge are they, yea furyouse, erronyouse, and full of
infamye, according to the sygnifycatyons of wild fire, smoke, and brymstone.
Not only has it spronge of the doctrine of deuyls, so blasphemously to abuse
the majesty and power of a king, Abuse,
the estate of his honorable counsel, and the godly office of his preachers,
in judging them chyldyshe, inconstaunte, and heretycall, but also it has
risen of error in the hipocresie of yt Romysh Bishop When the just man Simeon
both beheld and wurshypped the majesty of Gods son in ye little babe Jesus,
Simeon.
he called not him a poor child, but the sauer of the world, ye sight of the
ge^tyles, and the glory of Israel, Luc, ii, A faithful true subject will
reuere^tly respect in a king, not what he is of nature, A king.
but rather what he is of gods election and ordinance. Rom, xiii, Neither is
he for his tender youth to be conte^pned, having gods knowledge, as he has
in wo^drefull habundau^ce. Christ Jesus gave thanks to his heavenly father,
because he had hydden godly wisdom from the wise and prudent, and given it
unto babes. Wisdom
Math. xi. when Prophecye (says Solomon) is in the lyppes of a king, his
mouth shall not go wrong in judgment. Prouer. xvi.

He is proved a Papist.
THat it may apere to ye reader, yt this maliciouse fellow is not here called
a papyst without just cause, I will declare what a Papyst is, and by what
fruits he is chefelye known. A Papyst.
A Papyst is he that in life and doctrine maynteyneth the Romyshe Popes
dyuelish tradycyo^s, contempnynge the pure testamente and Gospel of Jesus
Christ. As we say in the university, that he is a Platonyst, Ciceronyst,
Scotyst, or Thomyst, that defends the doctrine of Plato, Doctrine.
Cicero, Scotus, or Thomas against them that holds not the same. This
frantyck fellow is of the same kind of doing Ergo he is a wicked and an
obstynate papyst. Wicked, for so much as he dishonors god, and obstynate,
because he dysobeyeth his king. Fruits.
The Minor, which is the second part of this argument, is proved true by his
cursed fruits. For a false Prophet, or popysh hypocryte whether ye will is
always known by his wicked fruits Christ says. Math, vii, et Luce. vi. In,
ii. special points shall ye know a rank papyst, which he has first of his
father the great Antichrist of Rome, and than of his mother his malignaunt
synagoge. For the natural child follows father and mother. And these are
they breuely, as before is touched, ii. Points
He blasphemeth God, and contempneth the christen magistrates. Of this are
euydent examples, in the Chronicles of our christen nacyons, yea, innumerable,
specially of this realm of England.

Daniel ones prophesied of that vnsha^fast faced usurper, The Pope
that he arrogantly should stand up against the Prince of Princes, (which is
God in his Christ) and yet in ye end should be destroyed without hand, Dan,
viii, Saint Paul calls him Gods great adversary, the wicked one, the man of
sin, and the son of perdycyon, reportynge of him, that he should exalte his
fylthie seat here iu earth above god, and his dongyshe decrees above Gods set
ordinance, to the utter dampnacyon of thousands, for not beleuynge the truth,
ii. These ii. Saint Johan in his reuelatyon, These. ii.
calls the church of that aduersarye, great Babylon the mother of all
whoredom and abhomynacyons done upon the earth, yea such a fylthie whore, as
has both subdued to her obedyence the kings of the earth, and also made them
drunk with the wine of her fornycacyon, Apo, xvii.
Apo, xvii. If yefynde in this frantyck fellow, these natural condicyo^s,
naturally planted, what else ca^ ye judge him but a natural child of that
father and mother, and so an obstynate papyst? The propyrtie which he has of
that unhappy father and mother, is to blaspheme God, and in that he has
showed himself plenteouse First by a chaplayne which popyshly mynystred in his
hired benefyce. Three knaueryes.
Secondly by conueyaunce of certain images in hope of a change; And thirdlye in
iudgyng it a foul heresye to write any thing in reproach of the Bishop of
Rome.

Concerning the first, Upon the, xx, day of September last past, I was (as he
well knows) at service there, A Priest.
to behold the workemanly conueyaunce of him and that popysh chaplayn of his,
and to know what wholesome fruits I should find after that time, of their.ii.
plantinges. Such an other ape of Antichriste as that pressed was, never saw. I
before in my life, for he could not read a Psalm, neither yet speak
English, being an allyen, an Armoricall or french Britayne. Co^uaiau^ce
And to excuse his most beastly ignorance, his own self was co^pel led, I
being there present, to slauer out ye.ii. lesso^s of ye Bible, with no small
stutting and sta^beryng, turnyng his arse to the people after the old popysh
manner, to help forward the kings most godly procedynges. More apysh toys and
gawdysh feats, Feats.
could never a dysarde in England have played (I think) than that apysh pressed
showed there at the co^munyon. He turned and tossed, lurked and lowted, snored
and smirted, gaped and gasped, kneled and knocked, looked and lycked, with both
his thombes at his ears and other tryckes more, that he made me, xx, times to
remember will Somer, Will Summer.
Yet of them both, that pressed seemed yt more fool a great deal And to amend
the matter, he had than a new shaven crown, which I rebuked him for, By this I
prove his maistre, iii, virtues
a mocker of God, a deceyuer of the people, and a contempner of the kings just
procedynges.

Concerning the second, which is ye crafty conueyaunce of certain images in
hope of a change. Images.
In that point has he also notable followed both father and mother, to be
proved a natural papyst. For God has he blasphemed in seeking to uphold
ydolatry, and the king has he contempned in so derydyng his most godly
ordinance. The king has commanded, and that by act of his parliament, that
all yma es should, An Act
not only be removed out of the churches of England and Irelande, but also
that they should be defaced, mangled, and utterly de destroyed for their
abhomynacyons. How is this wurthie commauudement obeyed, when they are so
subtylly conuayed, and so craftily retained aloft in the belfreye or steple,
and neither deformed nor yet altered? Parauenture he will say, that he was
never of counsel in that propre point of conueyaunce. Subtle fox
Wherein he does lie most falsely For who is more of counsel in a noughtie
matter, tha^ he that knows it, and yet wynketh at the doing thereof? The
abolyshyng of ydolles, is a church matter, and chefely perteyneth to religyon.
If it had touched either offeringes or tithes, I doubt it not, but he would
have stand fourth for the chief head of the parryshe, and no man so hardy to
have meddled before him therein. Chefehead
Why was he not then of counsel in this reckenynge. He remained as maistre and
head of that church, by the space of more tha^, ii. years after. Would not
his sight serve him to se so foul a blot, in so long time space? Well sir,
when this matter came ones to a trial before the justices at wynchestre
sessyons, a man that had been dead more tha^, ii, years before, was able to
discharge him of that horrible contempt of Gods wurd, Co^ueiau^ce
and his kings procedinges. So workemanly does one hounde of yt race lycke an
other in this age.

Concerning the third, that it is a great heresy, Heresy.
to write ought in reporche of the Bishopp of Rome, In the weke before Christmas
last past, as he chanced to be in ye house of the forseyd gentylmau af his
own affynyte, where he might always be bold to do his lewd feats, his
accustomed frenzy came suddenly upon him. In yt heat whereof, he most
shamefully reuyled a servant of that house calling him heretyke and knave,
because he had begone to study a part in such a Comedy, A Comedy
as myghtely rebuked the abhomynacyons and foul fylthie occupienges of the
Bishopp of Rome, Moreover he required him, in his own stought name to do a
lewd massage, which was to call the compiler of that Comedy, both heretic
and knave, concludynge that it was a book of most perniciouse heresy, That
book was imprynted about.vi. years a go, and has been abroad ever sens,
Abroad.
to be both seane and judged of men, what it co^tayneth. And this is the name
thereof. A Comedy concerning. iii. laws, of nature, Moses, and Christ. etc,
Therein is it largely declared, how yt faith less Antichrist of Rome with his
clergy, has been a blemysher, darkener, confounder, and poysener, Laws.
of all wholesome laws. And that with ydolatricall Sodometrie he has defiled
nature, by ambytyouse Avarice he has made Gods commaundeme^ts of non effect,
and with hypocrytycall doctrine perverted Christ's most holy Gospel. This is
well known to al men. How comes than an heresye, thus to report or write? By
like this fond fellaw, has learned of Lanfrancus and fryre Walden,
La^lfra^cus. Walden,
that he is only an heretyke, which in doctrine dyssenteth from the synagoge of
Rome, Guido,
Or else of fryre Guido in his book De heresibus, that he is a most perniciouse
heretyke, which says, that the Romysh pope is not head of the christen
church, neither may make laws for the christyanyte, But he never yet marked
the wurdes of Athanasius, athanasius
that they are the most wicked sort of heretykes, which persecuteth Christ's
true servants.

Other arguments are there else, to prove this wicked fellawe, a natural child
of that father and mother, and so a most spyghtfull Papyst. In the time that
stought Steven Gardyner was Bishop of Wynchestre, Steven. Gardener.
and made havoc of Christ's poor stock, no man was so mad as this mad
fellawe, to search and to seek, to accuse, to reuyle to shame, and to bring
men in danger of death, for their Christen beleues sake. A Sawle.
No where was any sessyons within Hamshire, but he was always there against
them, conducted by yt prestes, pratynge and scolding, stuttinge and stam
berynge, with frothe yssuynge out on both sides of his mouth for anger. The
supersticyouse Nonnes of Wynchestre, Nonnes.
dysobeyenge both the Bishop and his chaunceller concerning their apparel,
and utterly contempning the preachinges that are now had their daily resortes
to him, and became as flickering culuers about his house. The preachers of Gods
wurde there, were nothing else with him, as he fat on the ale be^ches, but
heretykes and knaves, vagabou^des, traiters, apostataes, and runnegates, A
blood*
with blood and soul, that he would lay his dagger on their faces. No man
knows this to be more true then I do, upon whom he not only bestowed these
uncomely names, and that a great sort of times, but also in yt open streate at
Wynchestre, coming suddenly out of an house of purpose upon me, A Ruffyan
he set his one hand upon my Bearde and bosom, and his other hand sometime
on his Dagger and sometime bent it over my head, as though he would have
buffetted me on the face, with such mad exclamacions as I never heard of
man of Bedlem, besides the unreasonable spoil that he had made before that of
my house, A spoil,
Yet never in my life ded I offend him, to my knowledge, neither in my deed
nor my wurde.

Not thus yet satled in all this ragynge furye, A beast.
he procured the clarke of my parrish of bishops Stoke a man yt knows not his
A. B. C. and.ii. more as unlearned and popish as he was, to indyghte me at
Wynchestre sessions, for not hallowing the funte at the baptyme of a Child,
with candel light, salt, oil, cream, and wax droppinges, as in the popysh
time, notwythstandyng the kings inhybycion concerning all such papystycall
beggeryes. He caused them to report there, to the rediculouse Rydiculus
wonderme^t of all men learned, that I should have said than, that the wurd of
God was hallowed enough already, But that Gods wurd at any time should be
profane and need hallowyng, or else that it has been hallowed, it is their
blasphemouse and beastly opynion, and not mine. Foolysh,
I think a more folysh and unlearned a sentence, was never uttered of any man.
Se how depely the Lord has permytted these papystes to spew fourth their own
rydyculouse shame. Yet was it not so doltish and brutish, but it took place
there, and was well allowed. They that could do nothing in matters of truth
for the king at the sessyons before, Sessions.
could in the popes secret quarrel at that sessions, for falshehode find me
wurthy an indightment, and wurkmanly made it out. And it wanted no
circu^staunce that might be devised to aggrauat the matter. For there was I
called an obstynate person, a sedycyouse fellow, a trobler of this whole
realm, a prophaner of of the sacraments, Slanders
a deprauer of the kings book, a slaunderer of his procedinges, an abominable
example gyuer, and a conte^pner of the king and his crown. All the papystes of
England, had never at that bench so much laid against the^, And all for
pretermyttynge yt one point of old papistrie If this conueyaunce Co^uaiau^ce
be not su^what wurth I report me. Well, he has made his boast, that for
doing of such feats, he can lack no living. Twenty prestes within
Ha^shire, (he says) will rather give me up their personages and profyghtes,
upon a small pensyon, than I should be without a dwellinge house. And he yt
shall seek him at this day shall find him tabernacled in one of their
personages, Found out
what though he has protested by oath, that he will be no longer a papyst.

Thus have I set out this frantyck papyst A Papyst.
in his own lively colors, agreynge to his most maliciouse fruits, to make
him known to others, and to cause his other companyons to be a shamed of his
lewd lunitick ways. If he be not a papist, which with poluted mouth, in
defense of papistrie blasphemeth the kings Majesty, his honorable counsel,
and the preachers of gods wurd, signified by Gods name, Gods tabernacle, and
the^ that dwell in heaven, who is a wicked papist? If he be not a false
prophet, that euometeth such.iii. filthy frogs at ones, as this busy babbler
has done here in one blasphemouse sentence, who is a false prophet? If he be
not a malignaunt member of Antichrist, that so malicyously and madlye defends
his noughtye quarrel, with pratlynges and scoldynges, stuttynges and
stamberynges, Antichrist.
supporting supersticiouse Noo^nes and other Idolaters in their open
Idolatries, conteptuouslye reuylynge the preachers with dagger in hand or fyst
on their faces, besides indightmentes, I would feign know who were a member of
Antichist? Thau shall it be no slaundre to this fra^tyck fellow, to be called a
papyst, a false prophet, and a malycyouse lymme of Antichrist, iii. Persons
but a most manifest truth, considering he has played al those frantic
parts at times so stoutlye. None other is the tree that brings sour
crabbes, than a crabbe tree, neither yet the ill manne that wurketh
wickedness, but a wicked fellawe. The eternal God change the hateful hearts
of such papystycall enemies, God grant
as this is one, and send them more gentle minds in obeying his heavenly
truth, that they may at the latter become of so headye and malycyouse Saules,
most gentle and pacient Paul's, to the glory of his most holy name, Amen.

Thus ends the Expostulacion or complaynt against the blasphemies of a
frantic papist of Ha^shyre, Compiled by Ioha^ Bale Finis.
The.xxiii. Psalm of David. called: Dixit insipiens.
Fools that true faith yet never hod,
Says in their hearts, there is no God
Fylthie they are, in their practyse.
Of them not one, is godly wise.
From heaven the Lord on man did look,
To know what ways, he undertook*
All they were vain, and weut astraye,
Not one he found, in the right way.
In heart and tunge, have they deceyte,
Their lips throw forth, a poisened bait
their minds ar mad, their mouths ar wod
And swyft they be, in sheddyng blood,
So blind they are, no truth they know,
No fear of God, in them will grow,
How can that cruel sort be good?
Of gods dear flock, which suck yt blood
On him ryghtly, shall they not call,
Despair will so, their hearts appall,
At all times God, is with the just,
Because they put, in him their trust,
Who shall therefore, from Syon give,
That health which ha^geth, in our believe
When God shall take from his the sma^
Than will Jacob, rejoice in heart.
Praise to God.
The.Cxxx. Psalm of David, called. De profundis.
To God thus faithful David song, His deep and daily cates among.
FRom faith of soul and hearts rejoice,
I call to the, Lord hear my voice.
Thine ears (good Lord) enclyned be,
Unto the poor complaynt of me.
If thou should way our wickedness,
Who can abide thy ryghtousuesse?
Because I find all help in the,
I doubt no fearce extremyte.
In my Lord God is al my trust,
To walk as his wurde has dyscust,
The church for her contynuaunce.
Hops in the Lords good governance.
For in the Lord great mercy is,
And full redemptyon after this,
He will redeem all Israel,
From devil and death, from sin and hell.
Praise to God.
Imprynted at London by Ihon Day, dwelling over Aldersgate beneth Saint
Martyns, and are to be soulde at the shope by the little Condite in Chepesyde.


