A DEVOVT EXPOSITION OF THE HOLY MASS. WITH An ample Declaration of all the
rites and CEREMONIES belonging to the same

Composed BY JOHN HEIGHAM

The more to move all godly people, to the greater Veneration of so sublime a
Sacrament

AT DOVAY With license 1614.

THE PREFACE TO THE CATHOLIC READER.
FOUR causes there were (right courteous Reader) which first moved me to
explicate unto thee (according to my small capacity) the mysteries and
Ceremonies of the holy Mass. The first was, the incomparable dignity, and
most excellent sublimitie, of this divine and dreadful sacrifice: which
although it be such, that neither the tongue of man nor Angel, can worthylie
magnify as it deserves, yet the very excellency of the thing it self
inuiteth every one, with what praises he can, to set forth, extol, and
celebrate the same. The second was, the most singular honor, respect, and
reverence, which the devout and Catholic people, of all places, of all ages,
and of all callinges, the greatest Doctors themselves, and most learned deuines
of all the world, Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Commons, have ever borne and
carried to this Sacrifice: whose example it behooves every good and godly man
to follow The third was, the deep, mortal, and canckred malice of wicked
heretics, their most execrable blasphemies, together with many most
fearful, vilde, and damnable facts, done and committed by them, in hatred and
contempt of this divine sacrifice: and what good Christian is there alive, that
will not, to the uttermost of his power, defend a treasure so inestimable,
from the savage assaults of such wicked miscreants? The fourth was, the great
and long want of a full and perfect exposition, of this so divine a mystery in
our English tongue, by reason that none of our nation have purposelie written of
the same (for ought that ever I saw) these forty years: which four motyues,
seemed unto me, matter more then sufficient, to explicate unto thee, this
vnexplicated secrett, and to unfold unto thee, a mystery of such majesty.

2. Of the supereminent dignity, as also of the great and singular respect,
which Catholics do bear to this ineffable mystery, I have amply treated,
and discoursed unto thee, in the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth chapters of
this ensuing Treatise. I beseech the infinite mercy and goodness of God, that
thou may receive, abundant consolation, and edification, for thy pains in
perusing them. But touching the deadly hatred and malice of our adversaries,
or of their blasphemies, and other abuses of this blessed sacrament, I have no
where, as hitherto, made any mention of them: and would to God there were no
cause at all, ever to defile our paper, with their execrable, enormous, and
fylthie facts. For against this most singular Sacrament, pearl of inestimable
price, adamant of Angels, rose of our religion, only life, only laurel,
only tryumphe, only treasure, only glory, only beauty, and only crown
of all Christianity, the heretics of our age, do bear so rabide a rage, so
mischeuous a mind, and so spiteful a spleen, joined with such audacious
attempts, barbarous abuses, and insolent outrages, as never the like, were
heard of before our days, yea, and in a manner is incredible, could ever enter
into the heart of a Christian. For some rushing violently into the church,
where the Priest was celebrating this vnbloodlie Sacrifice, stamping under
their filthy feet the sacred host, and spilling upon the ground the blessed
blood, used the consecrated challice instead of a pissepot: and having
compelled the Priest to drinck off the piss, next presently hung him up on
high, fastened and bound with cords, unto an image of Christ crucified, and
then with many shotts of their gunns and pistolls, peirced quite through, both
the Priest and the picture witnessed by Lawnay in his Replique Christien. lib.
2. cap. 16. Another seeing the Priest at Mass, to hold up the sacred host to
be adored of the people, took up a dog by the legs, and held him over his
head, showing him unto the people, in mockage and contempt, of the Priest and
his sacrifice. Fox Act. and Mon. page. 1033. Another (as witnesses the same
Fox) finding a Priest administering the blessed Sacrament to the people with
great devotion, offended to see them so devoutly and reverently upon their
knees, presently pulled out a whyniard or wood knife which he wore about him,
and very greuouslie wounded the Priest in diverse places, both of his head,
arm, and hand, where with he held the challice, full of consecrated hosts,
which were besprinckled with the blood of the Priest: nor would have lest him
till he had killed him out right, if he had not bin prevented by the people
present.

3. But least thou (gentle Reader) may think, that God who is the just
revenger of all such villanyes, has permitted these men to escape unpunished,
let this example next ensuing satisfy thee, and serve for a warning to all the
adversaries and malicious enemies of the Mass. After that the holy Mass,
was by public proclamation of the late Queen, commanded to surcease in all
places of England, by Midsomer day immediately following, four men of Dover in
the county of Ke^t (besides others which asisted at the same actio^) went into
the church of the same town, and took forth the Copes, Vestments, and other
Priestlie Ornaments belonging thereto, giving forth and boastinge abroad, that
they would go fetch the Pope from Canterbury. And the very next day after
Midsomer day; these companyons came to Canterbury; put on the said Copes and
other Ornaments upon their backs, and in a Pix (made to reserve the blessed
Sacrament of the body of our Savior Jesus) they put a dogs turd; and then
beginning at S. Georges gate, road in form of procession quite thorough the
City, till they came to westgate: which done, the very same night they posted
back again to Dover. One of these four, was Captain Roberts, who presently
after, carried all the Copes, Vestments, and other ornaments, over the seas to
Dunkirk where he sold them. His miserable and wretched end was, that there
leaping out of one small boat into another, to get to his Shipp, the boat he
was in slipping away, he stepped short of the other, and so falling into the
water, pitched his unhappy head upon an An(...)here he beat out his brains.
The secon^ortlie after running mad, cast him self off from Dover Peer into the
sea, and so was drowned. The third, dyed of John Caluins disease, that is to
say, he was eaten up with lice, being yet alive. The fourth (who afterward
became Minister of Maidstone) falling greuouslie sick endured Gods terrible
judgments: for he stunck so abominably, that none (no not his own wife)
could endure to come near him, so that when they gave him meat to eat, they
were forced to put it upon the end of a pole, and so to reach it unto him
thorough a window. For confirmation whereof, there are right credible and
worshipful persons yet alive, who can testify the same.

4. These are some few though not the thousand part, of the malicious dealings
of heretics against the Mass, and of the most remarkable judgments of
Almighty God against them, for their horrible abuses of the same. O immortal
God, what is there in all this divine and dreadful mystery, which may move
any reasonable man to such height of malice fury, mischief and manifest
madness; Does the sacred Psalms of thy servant David, (for from them the
Mass does take his beginning) the humble acknowledgment of humane frayltie,
the asking of mercy for our daily offenses, the song of Angels pronounced at
thy Nativity, petitions unto thee for obtayninge of graces, the lecture of thy
Prophets, the Ghospells of thy Evangelists, the Creed of thy Apostles, the
Sanctus of thy Seraphins, supplications for all sorts of persons the
Commemoration of thy Passion, the prayer of all prayers, both made by thy self,
and taught by thy self to thy Disciples, and which is more to be lamented then
all the rest, does thy precious body and blood reallie present in this holy
sacrifice, deserve to be dealt withal in so sauadge a sort? Surely no, for
such demeanors as these, are rather sathannicall then sayntlie, rather
Mohammedan then modest, nor so much as beseeming any Christians in the world,
save only Caluinists. Thou therefore o Lord, who art the sole protector of
that which thou thy self have instituted, pro^ thy self in this blessed
sacrifice against thy persecutors. Thou Lord of hosts, defend thy self in this
holy Host, against thine enemies. Permit not, I beseech thee, thy precious
body and blood, any longer to be so barbarously abused. Reestablish the
same in our Island, mauger the malice of all thine enemies. And grant that
after forty years, wherein thou have been greiued with this wicked generation,
at the last this noble sacrifice may be publicly cellebrated by us, to thine
everlasting and perpetual praise.

5. And you (religious Fathers and reverend Priests) to whom is committed the
care of this our deuasted vyniarde, and who are unto us in this our distress,
the sole dispensers of this divine sacrament, venture still I beseech you, as
hitherto you have done, the loss of your lives, to distribute unto us this
divine food, and to break unto us this celestial bread. For in your hands
only it is, to give unto men, this heavenly Manna. In your hands only it
is, in this time of death, to preserve the lives of your brethren, least they
perish by famine. And we again (my Catholic brethren) let us as boldie
adventure our lives to give the^ harbor and entertaynment. Imitating herein
our noble Patron and Protomartyr of England, blessed S. Alban, who presented
himself, yea and gave his own life, to preserve the life of his Priest
Amphibalus Imitating also (in some sort herein) the glorious virgin S. Catherin
of Sienna, who beating and afflicting her body so severely that she drew
the blood, the Devil appearing unto her, and persuading her that it was both
foolish and needless devotion, she made him answer, that her Lord and Savior
had given his blood for her, and that she would requite and repay him again,
with blood for blood. Even so, when either foolish heretics, or timourous
friends, shall condemn you of folly, for loosing your goods, or exposing your
lives, for to harbor Priests, consider with your selves, that you harbor him,
who brings unto you, the body and blood of Jesus Christ: and that if you
shed your blood, to receive him who consecrateth in your houses the blood of
Christ, what else do you, but render blood for blood, and spend your bloods
for the blood of Christ. Comfort your selves likewise with this consideration,
that when our Lord and Savior instituted his last supper, and consecrated this
mystery in the house of a friend, even a few days before, did the traitor
Judas, betray and sell the same most innocent blood for thirty pence. You
therefore, the right Honorable and Worshipful of our english nation which have
bought the holy sacrifice at a hundred marks: and such as were poorer, with
the utter depriuance of all the poor little they had in the world: and further,
such as have not had so much money, as heretics have asked for the price of
this sacrifice, nor no wordlie goods at all to give them, and instead of money,
have laid to pawn their very carcasses, into sundry prisons, Iayles, and
loathsome dungeons, o with what great and unspeakable reward, will our Lord
and Savior one day repay and requite your charity! Verelie never was their
any act in the world so vile and abominable, as that of Judas, to sell to
the Jews for money the blood of his master: nor never can there be amongst
Christians any act more honorable, the^ to buy with such so^mes of money, with
such loss of lands and lyuinges, the blood of Christ. That cursed creature
sold the blood of his master, but only for thirty pence, and yet how hateful
is he to all the world, as also to heaven? you pay for the same above threscore
pounds, o how grateful shall you be, both to God and his Angels! Surely
this sacrifice cannot be estimated by you that love it at any low price, since
those that hate it, do value it unto you at so high a rate: for that thing
most needs be precious, which both the Merchant does set so high, and the
Chapman is contented to buy so dear. In a word, all the sufferances, all all
the ignomynies, all the iniuryes, all the damages, and all the detriments
which you shall endure for the defense of this sacrifice, will minister matter
to all ensueing posterity of your most noble, and heroical acts: which
though you dye, will ever live to future memory, resound to your own
immortal glory, and to the everlasting renown of our english nation.

6. Finally, for as much as I may have just occasyon to fear, least I have
offended, for offering to touch, or support with my pen, this sacred Arc, I
therefore here from the bottom of my heart, right humbly crave pardon of the
blessed Trinity, the maker and worker of this ineffable mystery, of Jesus
Christ reallie present in this mystery, of all the blessed Angels which
assist at this mystery, of all Catholic Priests the consecrators of this
mystery, and of all Catholic people the true worshippers of this ineffable
mystery. And in further satisfaction for this my presumption, I am, and ever
will be ready so long as I live, to cast my self under the feet of the meanest
Priest in the world, and to serve him as his foot stole whilst he celebrateth
this sacrifice. And lastly if peradventure there be any thing contained in
this Treatise, which in the judgment of the Catholic Church (the only
elected Spouse of Jesus Christ) shall seem contrary either to the faith, or
good manners of the same Church, I utterly abjure, damn, condemn, and detest
the same, protesting my self to be the man that with the same hands wherewith I
writ it, with the self same hands, to be the first that shall throw the same
into the fire.

Thy hearty well willer and most affectionat contryman JOHN HEIGHAM.

A WORD OR TWO CONCERNING CEREMONIES.
1. THOSE which make profession of learning, commo^lie and with very great
reason do complain, that arts and sciences, have no other enemy them the
ignorant man. Even so, we likewise at this day, may justly complain and say
the same, that touching the affairs of Religion, we find no greater enemies
and mocquers thereof, and principally of the religious rites and Ceremonies
belonging to the same, then those who are most of all ignorant of their sense
and meaning. And whereas we see in this our cursed and execrable age, a great
number of Christians so easily contemn, and so impudentlie mock at such
godly Ceremonies; so if they rightly understood the reason of them, they
would certainly receive them with singular devotion.

2. Thou therefore, gentle Reader, I pray thee understand, that amongst all the
five senses of nature which God has given us, two especially (to wit, our
Ears, and our Eyes) are principally called. Sensus doctrinae, aut
disciplinae. Senses of doctrine, or discipline: that is to say, whereby we are
made capable, to receive instructions and discipline; For without these two, it
is impossible ever to learn any thing, and by the means of these two
principal senses, we come to understand and learn, all manner of sciences. All
the Ceremonies therefore of the Mass, are instituted by the Church principally
to instruct the people by the sense of seeing. And even as they who would take
away preaching out of the Church, do as much as if they should stop up the
peoples ears: even so they who would take away the Ceremonies out of the
Church, do as much as in them lies, to hide, or clean put out, the peoples
eyes.

3. What then may we think or say, of the pernicious practices of the
Arch-heretiques of our age? Yea, and how just occasion have those which are of
their own religion (as well as we) to cry out against them? For first these
malicious Masters, have quite cassierd a great number of godly Ceremonies,
from amongst the Christian people, in all cities and countries whersoeuer they
have lived. And next, even of those few which still they retain, they as
utterly deprive them of their sense and meaning, as if there were not so much
as any one used, in all their religion.

4. But what suppose you to be, the drift and legierdemain of these deceivers?
Forsooth, because knowing full well, that in our Catholic Ceremonies, there
are comprehended and lie hid, so many notable mysteries, they plainly
foresee, that if they should truly explicat and manifest unto the people, the
sense and meaning of some of their own, they should presently give the^ a
light, and inflame their hearts with the love of ours. For which cause (as by a
subtle and crafty devise) they for the most part, either conceal them from
them, or speak in contempt and hatred of them.

5. To make this point the more apparent; Of how many thousands of them may
you ask these questions, before you shall meet with one that can make you
answer? For example, ask them. Why, to the accomplishment of their common
service, the Clark and Minister must be clad in white, rather then in black,
blew, or yeallow, or in a coat, or garment of any other color? Ask them, why
in saying the same service, the lesson, is read out of the old testament, and
and not out of the new? and why not all scripture out of the old, or al out of
the new? Ask them why the old testament is read before the new: and why not
the new before the old, seeing it is of far greater dignity as them selves
do freely confess? Ask them, why they kneel at the saying of the Lords
prayer, and rise up at the Creed; rather then rise up at the Lords prayer,
and kneel down at the Creed? Ask them, why they set the Font near the
Church door, and the Communion table within the Chancel: and why not as well
the Communion table at the Church door, and the Font within the Chancell? Ask
them why they command me^ to communicate often, and to be Baptized but once; and
why not to be Baptized often and to Comunicat but once; especially if (as
sectaries say) they be but seals? I omit for brevity sake, the churching of
women. The marrying with a ringe. God fathers and God mothers in the Sacrament
of Baptism. The confirming of children. etc. Al which, with a hundred more
which I might name, the Protestant Clergy do still retain, whereof the people
no more understand the meaning, then the man in the Moon.

6. Now therefore, for as much as all Ceremonies (used for the better, and more
solemn settinge forth of the divine service) are of one of these two sorts,
that is to say, either Commodiratiue, or Significatiue, it follows, that to
wear a white Surplesse, rather then a black; or to read for the first
Lesson, rather part of the old Testament the^ of the new: or to set the Fo^t
at the Church door, rather then within the Chancell (or in the bottom of the
belfrie) are nothing, Commoditatiue, nether to the Priest, nor yet to the
people; ergo they are Significatiue, that is to say, signifying some special
mystery, wherein the Christian people ought to be instructed.

7. The holy Ceremonies therefore of our Religion, if they were explicated unto
thee, gentle Reader (if thou be a Protestant) as they are unto Catholics,
they would assuredly yeald thee, most singular comfort; wherein I will report
me to thine own experience, after thou shall have first perused, the
explication only of these which appertain to the Mass (whereof thou have here
set down, every word, sentence, and syllable that is in the same.) Nothing
douting, but that in the end, thou thy self wilt freely confess, that the
hearers and behoulders of the holy Mass, enjoy, and receive, a most
incredible comfort, by occasion of the Ceremonies, which are handled therein:
which thou being a Protestant, can never enjoy, by assisting or being
present, at thy morning prayer. Try, and then trust, and so farewell.

An Advertisement.
FOR as much as some very godly persons, addicted and enured to devout
meditation, do take great delight, to dilate them selves, in meditating upon
the mysteries of the holy Mass, thou may (gentle Reader) make thy
particular profit of this Treatise, by distributing (according to their
example) the the mysteries of the Mass into seven parts, according to the
seaue^ days of the week, and so every day at Mass, to meditate one part,
until in this manner, with singular profit and devotion, thou have gone over
and ended the whole. The parts whereof may be thus divided. 1. From the
Introibo, to the Introit. 2. From the Introit, to the Epistle. 3. From the
Epistle, to the Offertorie. 4. From the Offertorie, to the Preface. 5. From the
Preface to the Canon. 6. From the Canon, to thee Communion. And 7 from the
Communion, to the end of the Mass.

OF THE Etymology, Deriuation, and Signification, of the word MISS A, Mass:
and from what tongue the same was first derived. CHAP. 1.
TO proceed orderly, in the exposition of the holy Sacrifice of the Mass: it
is convenient that we begin with the Etimology, or signification of the word.

First therefore it is very probable, that the word Missa, Mass: is neither
Greek nor Latin, but Hebrew, the Apostles who were of the Hebrew Nation, having
promulgated the same in that language, and named it Missah, drawn and taken of
this Hebrew word, Mas, which signifies Oblation, Tax, or Tribute; as is
manifestly to be gathered, out of Deuteronomy. 16. and 20. and 3 Reg. 8. and Esaias 13.
And in many places of holy Scripture, it signifies the Sacrifices, and
Oblations, of the old Law, as of Lambs, Oxen, Tuttles, Pigeons and the like,
Number. 6. Judge. 6. Ezech. 45. etc. For which cause the Catholic Church, does
most willingly retain this name, as finding none other more convenient and
proper, to signify this most excellent Oblation and Sacrifice, which
represents that other, which was the Tax or Tribute, paid by Jesus Christ,
unto God his Father, for the price and ransom of our Redemption.

2. Others will have it to be of the Latin word, Missa, sent, because in the
Mass, principally we send up our prayers and oblatio^s to almighty God. Hugo
Vict. l. 2. de Sacram. p. 9. cap. 14. which some explicat in this manner: that
this Host was first sent by God the Father, when he sent us his only Son, to
be in carnate, and to take flesh in the womb of the B. Virgin Marie, and
afterward to offer up that bloody Sacrifice upon the Altar of the Cross, for
our Redemption; in remembrance whereof this Sacrifice is celebrated, and is by
us again sent and presented to the eternal Father, for as much as we daily
offer it up to his divine. Majesty. Innocen. 3. lib. 3. de Sacrificio missae
cap 12. et Bon: op. de misterio Missae.

3. Again, others think it to be so called of dismissinge the people; and so
to signify the the same that Missio, which signifies, a sending away, or
dismissio^ as Bellar, lib. 1. de Missa. But howsoever this be, and whether the
word be Hebrew, Greek, or Latin, or whether it be contained in the new
Testament, or in the old: it is sufficient for us, that in the Scripture is
expressed, that which this word most truly signifies. As in the like case and
difficulty, S. Aug. told the Arrian heretic Pascentius ep. 194. that he was
not to ground his disputation, upon the bare word Homousion, which the
Catholics only used, thereby to give to understand, that God the Son was
consubstantiall, with God the Father, but that he should argue against that
which it signified. And the like may be said of many other names still used by
Catholics, as Trinity, Humanity, Parson, Incarnation, Transubstantiation, and
the like.

Of the diverse parts of the Mass: and by whom the holy Mass was first
ordained. CHAP. 2.
THE holy and dreadful Sacrifice of the Mass, has two essential or
principal parts^ The one is, Consecration: the other is, the Receiving of the
Priest. Touching these two principal and essential parts of the holy Mass,
it is most certain, by the Evangelists themselves, Mat. 16 Marc. 14. Luc. 22.
and likewise by S. Paull, 1. Cor. 11. that they were instituted by Jesus Christ
him self, and by no other, neither man nor Angel: our Savior contenting
himself, to institute so much as was of the nature, necessity, and essence of
the thing, leaving other cerimonyes and rites requisite to celebrate the same,
to the judgment and prudence of his Apostles, and of their successors, to whom
he committed the care of his Church, and of all his faithful and Christian
flock. In which respect, he said unto his disciples: Yet many things I have to
say to you, but you can not bear them now: but when he, the Spirit of truth
comes, he shall teach you all truth: and the things that are to come, he
shall show you. Ioh. 16.12.

2. We see the like also performed in other points of our Religion, as when our
Lord ordained that we should fast, he, co^te^ted himself to institute only so
much as was of the essence of the thing saying, Ieiunate, Fast ye: Mat. 17
prescribing nether how, when, nor how often, his holy pleasure was to have it
performed: but-left al those circu^sta^ces to be ordered and acco^modated,
according to the care and discretion of his disciples. The like he did and
performed concerning prayer, willing and ordayning that men should pray,
saying: Orate. Pray ye. Marc. 13. and Luc. 18. and added thereto, this word,
semper. ever: but that ever, I fear me by many, would be turned into never, if
his spouse the Catholic Church, had not decreed, and straightly commanded and
prescribed the time, the place, the ceremonies, and the manner how the same
should be accomplished.

3. Hence therefore it is, that we affirm and say with very good reason, the
holy Mass to have bin instituted and ordained by our Lord himself, for as
much as he instituted and ordained the most essential and principal parts
thereof, to wit, Consecration and Receiving, referring the ceremonies and other
circumstances, to the care and discretion of his Apostles and their successors:
who in this behalf have taken such order, as might best reduce his death and
passion into our memories, according to that which he commanded, that so often as
they should do it, they should do it in remembrance of him; But of all this, we
shall speak hereafter more at large.

4. Now, in a word I may say, that these ceremonies or additions, may be
reduced to these heads, to wit to giving of Thanks, Confession of sins,
Prayer, Doctrine, Profession of faith, and such other parts of our devotion:
which albeit they be no essential parts of this holy Sacrifice, yet are they
very requisite and convenient to induce us, the more to reverence and
contemplate, the Majesty and excellency of so great a mystery, to stir up
and move our hearts being present at the same, and to prepare and dispose our
selves, before we come to receive so great a Sacrament. For which cause, we
ought to hold for very laudable, these other parts of the holy Mass annexed
to the former, all tending to the greater ornament, reverence, and majesty of
so ineffable a mystery.

Of the excellency and dignity of the holy Mass: And of the great worthiness of
the things, that are handled therein. CHAP. 3.
AMongst all the things that give testimony of the sweetness, benignity, and
love of God toward man, one of the chief and principal, is, this most
divine, and most excellent Sacrament of all Sacraments The which because of the
great and superaboundant grace which it contains, is therefore woorthelie
called Eucharist, or good grace. For this most sacred and holy action, is of it
self, and by it self, both a Sacrament, and Sacrifice; and that the most
noble, divine, and most worthy that ever was offered, nor can there possibly
be a greater, it being no other then the only, true, and eternal Son of God
himself.

2. To prefigure unto us the dignity of this Sacrifice, our Lord in the old
Testament, would, that the Priest entering into the Sanctuary, should be
attired with most rich and precious ornaments: and those most costly and
artificially wrought: to the end, that the people seeing him to enter so
venerablie, should know the greatness of God, to whom he went to speak, and to
render due honor.

3. In like manner, the riches and diverse ornaments, the magnificent Churches,
the Altars so sumptuously adorned, the great number of lights, and all other
ceremonies which the Catholic church does now use in celebrating this
Sacrifice, were ordained to this end, to declare the greatness, sanctity, and
virtue of this mystery. For even as he who entering into a great Palace, seeing
the walls of the chambers hung with Arras, or Tapestry, comes to know the
greatness, the noblenes, and the riches of the Personage that dwells therein
(for as much as poor folks or people of mean estate, can have no such costly
furniture:) even so, and no otherwise happens it unto him, who enters into the
church, and sees Mass to be celebrated with such curious and precious
ornaments: for as much as wise and virtuous men would never be at so great
expenses, nor ever labor so much for the due performance thereof, if they knew
not fulwell, this work to be the greatest, that possibly a man can practice in
world.

4. And one other thing also, which does most singularly demonstrate unto us
the dignity of this Sacrifice, is, that it is a perfect Epitome, or abridgment,
of all the works of Almighty God, and of the whole old and new Testament,
comprising briefly and summarily, all that which is contained therein, The
Trinity, Unity, Eternity, Omnipotency, Glory, Majesty, Infinity, and
Excellency, of Almighty God. The creation of Heaven, earth, Angels, men, and of
all creatures. The Incarnation, Nativity, preaching, miracles, life, death,
Passion, Resurrection, and Assention of our Savior Jesus: and consequently,
our Redemption, Vocation, Justification, Sanctification, and glorification,
together with whatsoever else concerns the glory of God, or salvation of man,

Of the great worthiness of Priests: who offer this Holy Sacrifice. CHAP. 4.
THIS Sacrifice being so excellent a thing, as has before bin showed, it was
convenient that the duine Majesty of almighty God, should ordain in his
Church, an order of men, which should be above others, who should both
consecrate, and offer the same: which thing he performed in his last supper,
instituting the order of Priest hood, unto which he gave power and authority to
consecrate, receive, and distribute to others, his most precious Body and
Blood, hidden under the forms of bread and wine.

2. By which, it is most manifest, that the Mass, is a work, the most great,
the most worthy, and most excellent, that possibly a man can undertake or
enterprise, seeing the Priest who says it, excels in dignity all the Kings,
Emperors, and Priests, either of the written law or of the law, of nature: and
furthermore he surpasses in this power, the Patriarks, the Prophets, yea and
the Angels themselves, who neither can consecrate, receive, nor distribute to
others, the Body of our Blessed Savior: whereas the Priest having
consecrated it, houldeth it in his hands, receaueth it, keeps it, and
imparteth it to others.

3. Rightly therefore do we say, that this noble dignity of Priesthood, can
with no pomp, eloquencie, or ornament of words, be sufficiently extolled. For
it surmounteth and surpasses the tongues of the most subtle Philosophers, yea
the top and height of all excellency of every creature. If you compare it to
the glory of Kings, or to the splendor of Princes diadeams, theie are as far
ininferiour thereto, as if we should compare the basest lead, to the purest and
finest gould.

3. But what need I stand upon earthly co^parisons, when the caelestiall
citizens, the Angels themselves dare not aspire to Priestlie authority. For
to which of the Angels has God at any time said? whose sins you shall
forgive, they are forgiven them: and whose you shall retain, they are retained,
Io. 20. yea which is much more: Do this for the commemoration of me. Cor.
11.24. In a word, theie admire, and tremble to behold, that which the Priest
may boldly touch, handle, and divide in pieces, as being warranted by Christ
himself.

4. But to pass yet farther from the Hierarchies of Angels, and to come to the
Lady of Angels, and Queen of all the world, even she I say, albeit she
far surpassed all creatures in the plenitude and abundance of heavenly
grace, yet even she her self, also gives place to the orders and Hierarchies
of the militant Church. For having all other honor, given unto her by her Son
in the highest degree, yet she atained not to this dignity of consecrating or
offering this dreadful Sacrifice. True it is that she in pronouncing eight
humble words; Ecce ancilla. etc. once only, corporally conceived the Son of
God, the Savior and redeemer of all the world. But Priests as his instruments,
are daily the cause that the self same Son of God, and of the Virgin, is
truly and reallie present in the Blessed Sacrament.

5. The high King of Heaven, being incarnate in our Blessed Lady, she brought
forth to the world, a Savior, mortal and passible: the Priests offer to God,
and give to men, the very same Savior, now impassible and most glorious. She
gave suck to the newborn Babe, with her virginal breasts, handled him with
her hands, bare him in her arms, and performed such other serviceable offices
to Christ's little members: these Priests receive him with their mouths, carry
him, and give him in meat to others; who is the bread and food of Angels. O
venerable sanctity of holy hands! O high and happy dignity! O great and
only wonder of the world!

6. Nor are any of these comparisons either arrogant, or hyperbolical, but
true and justifiable, in all propriety and rigor of speech. For as in all
rigor of speech, it must of necessity be confessed, that God is far above his
creatures, the soul much more noble then the body, and spiritual things more
excellent then temporal: so in all rigor of speech, it must needs be granted,
Priestlie dignity to be the highest dignity, and degree of this life, for as
much as it is immediately excercised about the honor of God, and
administration of divine and spiritual affairs: whereas the dignity of Princes
(though in their rank, most to be respected) yet their functions and
affairs, are chiefly touching temporal things.

Of the end for the which Mass is to be said or heard. And of the great
devotion and attention, wherewith the Priest is to celebrate the same. CHAP. 5.
THE end for which Mass is to be said or heard, is most high and excellent:
yea so high, that a higher or greater cannot possibly be invented or imagined.
The chief and principal end, is only one: the other are diverse. The first is
the honor of God, who being the last and final end af all things, of good
right wills and ordains, that all things, be done and referred, to his
honor.

2. The beter to understand this point, it is to be noted, that Sacrifice is,
an act of worship, adoration, or honor, the which is due only to God, with
pain of death to all those who shall attribute the same to any other.
Sacrificans Dijs eradicabitur, nisi Domino soli. Exodus 22. He that shall
sacrifice to Gods but only to our Lord, shall be rooted out. The Mass therefore
is, and ought to be both said and heard, chiefly to honor God, by, and with
so divine a Sacrifice.

3. The other ends, are diverse, for the which the same may either be said, or
heard. As for the preservation of the universal church: the propagation of the
Catholic Religion: for the Popes holiness: for Bishops Pastors, and religious
Persons: for peace, and concord amongst Christian Princes, for our parents:
friends, and benefactors: for thanksgiving to God for all his benefits: for the
preservation of the fruits of the earth, and for our te^porall substance, and
generally for all manner of necessities, either of soul or body.

4. In saying of Mass, there is required of the Priests part, a singular
attention and devotion: be it either in regard of the thing that is offered,
or in regard of him to whom the same is offered, which is almighty God
himself, who is. Rex egum, and Do minus Do minantium. King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords. Before whose presence, even the highest powers of Heaven do shake and
tremble.

5. This S. Chrisostom seriously pondering and wheighing with himself, says.
He who is a legate to treat for a whole City, what speak I of a City? yea
for the whole world, and is an intercessor to almighty God, that he may become
propitious unto al men, not only to the living, but also to the dead, what
manner of man I pray you ought he to be? Truly I cannot think the confidence
of Moses or Elias, to be sufficient to dispatch such an embassage, or
supplication. li. ^. de Sacerdotio. And again in the same place, he further
says: what hands ought they to be, that do administer it? what the tongue that
pronou^ceth such divine words? How pure and clean, ought that soul to be,
that does receive so worthy a Lord? Thus S. Chrisost.

6. For further proof and confirmation hereof, the holy Scripture recounteth a
fearful example, of the two children of Helie the Priest, who were punished
by death, for that they did not perform the office of Priesthood, duly as they
ought: what then may we think, shall be the punishment of such Priests, as
should now approach unworthily to the Altar of our Lord?

7. It is written of S. Mark the Evangelist, that he had so great a reverence
of this holy Sacrifice, and so greatly feared his own insufficiency, that he
cut off his own tho^be, to the end he might be incapable, and unfit to be made
a Priest, which yet was afterward restored unto him again by miracle, as is to
be read. Canon si quis a med. did. 55.

8. And it is testified of the glorious Father S. Francis, that being only a
deacon, and purposing to be made Priest, one appeared unto him, houlding in his
hand a violl of water of most admirable clearnes, and said unto him. Faancis,
see thou this water? And the blessed father having answered, that he did. He
further added. He that will be a Priest, must be like unto this in purity:
which words struck into the holy man such a deep impression, and such a fear
and respect, of that sacred function, that he never afterward, would permit
himself to be made a Priest.

Of the attention and devotion of the asisttants. And how the same may be
obtained by hearing of Mass. CHAP. 5.
FOR as much as upon all festival days, a man must either say Mass, or at
the least hear Mass, by the express commandment of the Church, it is great
reason, that this work, should be well and orderly performed, according as is
convenient, and as the weight and importance of the thing it self requires.

First then we must procure to have an ardent and inflamed desire to hear the
same with fruit, and with the greatest attention, that possibly we may: which
desire ought to be accompanied, with a lively faith, of the presence of Jesus
Christ our Savior, who with such exceeding love, vouchsafes to come to visit
us.

2. Secondly, it will help very much, to think upon the wonderful greatness
and dignity of this most holy Sacrifice, whereof I have spoken a little before.

3. Thirdly, to remember our own vileness and abiectnes, reputing our selves
most unworthy, to be present at so excellent and divine a mystery, in the
presence whereof, the very Angels do humble and bow down themselves with most
divine reverence: wherefore, with far greater reason ought a wretched sinner to
do the same, and after the example of the publica^, holding down his head for
shame to knock his breast saying: Deus propitius esto mihi peccatori. God be
merciful to me a sinner.

4. Fourthly, it is also requisite, that a man go to Mass out of mortal
sin, for as much as this greatly hinders, both devotion and due attention,
as also the fruit which he might otherwise draw from the same. Yet if a man be
fallen into any great sin, he ought not therefore to leave to hear Mass:
for albeit it serve him not then to merit eternal life, yet it serves him
nevertheless, to satisfy the commandment of the Church, which is to hear
mass on the festival days: which if he perfome not, he does ad another
mortal sin to his former.

5. Fifthly, that our end, or intention be right: which is, that we purpose to
do that which our holy mother the Church does, who in the Sacrifice of the
Mass, makes an offering and present to the eternal Father, of his only Son,
of his most holy Passion, and of his merits, in satisfaction of the sins of
hi^ children. Whereupon we ought to accompany and join our desires with those
of the Priest, and to beseech the divine Majesty* that it would please him to
hear us, and that he would mercifully pardon both our own offenses, and those
of our neighbors, and that he would graciously assist us in all our
necessities, and that in the virtue of this most holy Sacrifice.

6. Sixtlie, to endeavor to conceive within our selves, a holy fear, and a
wonderful reverence, considering that we are present in a place that is holy,
and specially dedicated to the service of God: remembering how God commanded
Moses to put off his shoes, for reverence of the place whereon he stood Deuteronomy.

7. Seauenthlie, besides the sanctity and holiness of the place, we ought to
consider the presence of our Lord, and Savior himself who at that time,
causes his blessings and graces to rain down in great plenty and abounda^ce
upon all those, who are there present with pure, unfeigned, and profou^d
devotion.

8. Eighthly, when we see the Priest coming toward the Altar, we ought to lift
up our eyes, (especially those of our understanding) to heaven, and to imagine,
that we see descend as by Jacobs ladder, a multitude of Angels, who come to
present themselves at this most holy Sacrifice, and with their presence to
honor it, in such wise, that all the Church is filled with Angels, which busy
themselves here and there amongst the people, inciting them all to modesty,
devotion, and reverent behavior in the presence of this most holy and
dreadful Sacrament

9. Ninthlie, the great and longing desire, that our Savior himself has to
come unto us, and therefore to lift up a new our eyes to Heaven, and with a
lively faith, to behold the Son of God, sitting at the right hand of his
Father, being ready and prepared, to be present (so soon as the words of
consecration shall be pronounced) in the hands of the priest in the sacred Host,
and with a longing desire, waiting and attending (in some sort) the time and
opportunity to come unto us.

10. Tenthlie, consider the cause, and end of our Saviors coming, and so
contemplate, the greatness of him that comes, who is infinite. The end for
which he comes, which is to be offered up for us to his heavenly Father.
Whether he comes, into earth (the place and habitation of beasts). The manner
wherein he comes, hidden under the forms of bread and wine.

Finally, to maintain the honor of this holy Sacrifice against all enemies,
and to use the same aright as we ought to do, we must every day assist
thereat, without distraction of spirit, in silence and decent composition, and
be persuaded this to be the principal and cheifest of all our actions, and
which deserves that we dedicate unto it the best and most convenient hour of
the morning. And in so doing, our merciful Lord will doutlesly se^d down his
blessing upon us in great abou^da^ce, and the better prosper all our affairs
and business all the day following.

Of the fruit and profit which comes, and is reaped, by hearing of Mass.
CHAP. 6.
THE fruits which a man may gather by hearing of Mass are great, and many in
number.

1. The first is, that a man is admitted unto the inward familiarity of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and to be near to his person, as his secretary, or
chamberlain, where he both hears and sees, so many divine secrets: which
places and rooms in the courts of earthly Princes, are so much sought after,
even by the greatest Lords and Nobles of this world, and are so highly
esteemed, that oftentimes theie are content to serve their whole life for them,
without any recompense at all in the end whereas our Lord Jesus Christ, the
King of Heaven and earth, does never (unless he be forsaken) forsake him who
has done him service, nor leaves him without reward and recompense.

2. Secondly, he who is present at Mass, does participate so much the more of
this divine Sacrifice, forasmuch as in the same, more particular prayer is made
for him, then for the absent, the Priest saying. Er pro omnibus
circumstantibus. And for all that are standing about. He Profits also more by
the attention and devotion, caused by the real presence of our Lord Jesus
Christ: eue^ as the sun does more heat the cuntries near unto it, then
those that are further from it: and the fire does more warm those that
approach unto it, then those that stand a far off from it. And hence it was,
that the Apostles received so many graces and privileges, because they were
continually in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ. S. Chrysostom also
says, that grace is infused into sundry persons, in the presence of the body
of Jesus Christ.

3. Thirdly, in hearing of Mass devoutly, we receive pardon of our venial
sins, and obtain remission (at the least in Part) of the temporal pain,
which remains after the fault or guilt of our sins is forgiven us, and for
the which a man is to endure, either in this life, or in purgatory: which is
truly a most wonderful benefit, saying that the very least pain in
Purgatory, is greater then all the pains, of this world together. Insomuch
that S. Anselme, doubts not to affirm, that one Mass, heard by us with
devotion in this life, is of greater value, then a thousand said for us by
others, after our departure.

4. Fourthly, in hearing of Mass devoutly, a man disposes himself, to
receive, pardon of his mortal sins: for as much as he has occasion by the
memory, of the Passion of Jesus Christ, and of his great love and benefits,
and of this sacrifice, offered up for our sins, and with the real presence
of Jesus Christ, to have repentance, and to be moved to contrition for them.

5. Fifthlie, it does bring us increase of grace, to resist all our evil
passions, and to vanquish all sorts of temptations: wherefore well is he that
may hear it daily. S. Hiero. li. 1. in Joan. S. Aug. cont. Petli. 4. cap. 10.

6. Sixtlie, it is a strong, and assured buckler against all evil spirits,
and a singular means, to obtain of God, safeguard against all dangers, together
with many blessings, even corporal, as health, and such other like: it makes
us more capable, of the visitation and protection, of our good Angel, yea, and
more ready for death, how soon soever it shall assaill us. Clemens. can.
Apost. li. 8. Cyril. Cath. 3 Chrisost. hom. 13. ad Heb.

7. Seauenthly, it is a singular remedy againstt all superstition: and a most
peculiar and effectual means, to conserve all faithful Christians, in
perfect love, charity, peace, and concord, as being particulerlie instituted
to that intent. S. Aug l. 22. de ciuit. Dei. cap. 10. Sozo. hist. Eccles. li.
9. chap. 8.1. cor. 10.

8. Eightlie, by hearing of Mass, comes an other special fruit, (to wit) the
fruit of instruction, which is had and obtained, in the doctrine which a man
hears, and learneth, by being present at the same. Wherein he is taught at
the Confiteor, to ask pardon of his offenses. At the Misereatur, to pardon the
faults of his neighbor. At the Introite, to laud God. At the Kyrie eleison,
to ask mercy of God. At the Gloria in excelsis, to magnify God. At Dominus
vobiscum, to be united with his neighbor. At the Collects, to present his
prayers. At the Epistle, to think of the contempt of the world. At the
Gospel, to follow Jesus Christ. At the Credo, to profess that, which he
ought to believe. At the Preface, attention. At the Canon, devotion. At the
first Memento, to pray for the living. At the second Memento, to pray for the
departed. At the Elevation, to adore Jesus Christ. And at the Communion, to
communicate spiritually.

Of the faults and abuses, which may be committed im hearing of Mass. CHAP. 6.
FIRST it were an intolerable abuse, if any (which God forbid) should go to
Mass to content their eyes with wanton and dishonest sight, making the Church
a shop of their disordinate appetites, not having any respect, either to the
presence of God, or of his Angels, nor to his divine service, nor to the time,
in which is represented the greatest benefit that our Lord has done for man.

2. The second abuse were to hear Mass only for fashion, and much more to
spend the time in idle talk: without any atention or devotion, for this were
not only to depart without fruit, but to loose much by that, they might gain
exceedingly. For even as you pay not, but those who labor in your vineyard
(not those who go thither to see and behold it) even so our Lord does not
give his hyre, but to those who are attentive to the work of his divine
service. yea especially upon holy and festival days, such persons should
sin most grieuiouslie.

3. The third abuse, were to be present with such distraction, and vagation of
spirit, that in steed of thinking upon the holy mysteries of the Mass, one
should call to mind his worldly business, bethinking him self of the means
wherewith he should have prosecuted some negotiations, which therefore came not
to so good effect and issue, as he desired: and discoursing of the
circumspection which he must use for the time to come in some other business
which he has yet to do, and so as we may say, build castles in the air.
Surely the spindle, or wheel of a mill, does not turn so much as does the
spirit of such a man, being present at Mass, suffering him self to be carried
without bridle, whether soever his wandering fancy shall please to move, or to
transport him. And of these I say as of the former, that they should offend in
the same degree, and loose the fruit and merit, which they might reap by
hearing of Mass devoutly.

4. The Fourth abuse were, to seek for the shortest Masses, and to think the
time long that we are present at this divine sacrifice. For surely this
shows, that our minds are more set upon earthly, then heavenly things,
since that we find no such irksomeness in corporal bankets, plays, or other
vayn sights. But we should rather consider, how our B. Savior thought not the
time of three hours long to hang upon the cross for our sakes: in which
respect their devotion is very commendable* who use to hear more masses then
one every day, according as their other necessary business will permit
them. Yea if the fire of the love of God were perfectly enkindled in our
hearts, all the while that the Mass should last, would surely seem unto us
very short and little: like as the Scripture says of Jacob, that he served the
space of 14. years to have Rachael in marriage, and that he esteemed all those
years but as a few days, in respect of the love he bare unto her.

5. The Fifthe abuse were, to be over curious in adorning our selves, when we
go to Church, and in this women, especially of young years and good calling,
must be more wary, because they may otherwise, not only hinder their own
devotion, but that of others also. It is strange what caueats S. Paul and the
holy fathers give them in this kind. And surely when they go to Church, they
should rather seek to please God then men. Neither can they easily excuse
themselves, if they do otherwise. To conclude, when we repair to the temple
of God to pray, we ought to lay away all toys and vanities, which any way
may hinder our devotions, and carefully recollect our spirits, and drive away
all distractions, that we may without any perturbation, freely lift up our
hearts to God, and devoutly employ the time, in holy, pious, and wholesome
meditations, according as shall hereafter be declared. And now to speak of the
Altar it self.

Of the Altar, Whereon the sacrifice of the Mass is celebrated, and of the
furniture and ornaments belonging to the same. CHAPTER 8.
How the Altar (made of stone) represents Christ.
1. FIRST, the Altar, whereon this most divine Sacrifice is celebrated, is made
of stone: to signify unto us, that Jesus Christ is the head corner stone of
the Church, as witnesses the Apostle S. Pet. 1. cap. 2.7.

How unity of faith.
2. And the same altar compacted and made of many stones cleaving together:
does represent the Church of God, gathered together of diverse nations, all
coupled and linked in one faith, in one profession, and exercise of Religion.

How Charity.
3. Both in the old law, and now also in the new, some Altars were made of
beaten gould: to signify the inestimable and pure love wherewith our Lord loved
us, and the great and sincere love, wherewith we ought to love him again.

How our Lords table.
4. This altar also, represents unto us, the table whereon our Lord
instituted and celebrated his last supper, with his disciples. Mat. 26.26.

How the mount of Caluarie.
5. Also the mount of Caluarie, whereon he suffered his death and passion, for
the salvation and redemption of all the world.

How the altar stone rep: the grave.
To the adorning of this Altar, diverse mysterious ornaments are belonging.
First there is placed thereon an Altar stone: which represents the grave or
monument, wherein the body of our Lord was buried or entombed. And there was
nigh the cross a new monumet. John. 19.

How the linen clothes, rep: the sindon.
The white linen clothes where with the Altar and Altar stone are covered: do
betoken the white sindon, wherein Joseph of Arimathia did wrappe and enfould
the body of our Savior. Et inuoluit sindone: And he put it in a clean
sindon. Luc. 23.

How the Cross, represents the history of the Passion.
There is a Cross set upon the Altar: to signify, that the history of our
Saviors Passion, is there to be handled. Again to signify, that the
Sacrifice of the Altar, is the same in substance, which our Lord accomplished
upon the Altar of the Cross.

How the Chalice rep. the Cup.
The Chalice: represent the Cup, wherein he consecrated his most precious
Blood. And he took the Chalice, saying: This is my Blood. Mat. 26.

How mortification and martyrdom.
Likewise by the Chalice, is betokened mortification, and a mind always
ready to suffer martyrdom for the love of Christ. Can you drink the chalice
whith I am to drink. (to wit, suffer death for my sake:) and they answered, we
can. Mat. 20.

How the paten represents the stone.
The paten laid upon the Chalice: represents the stone which was rolled
against the door of our Saviors sepulcher. And he rouled a stone to the door
of the sepulcher. Mar. 15.46.

How the shining of the corporalle, rep. Christ's resurrection, and
immortallitie.
The corporal (the which is most white and shining:) signifies, that Christ
by manifould passions, was brought to the brightness of his resurrection: who as
the Apostle says, entered not into glory, before he had sustained the
ignominy of the Cross.

How purity and chastity.
Again the brightness and shining of the same corporalle: admonishes, that to
receive the body of Jesus Christ, a man ought to shine with all angelical
purity and chastity, both of body and soul. And that as it shines with
brightness; so the intention of the offerer ought to shine with simplicity,
before our Lord.

The signification of the candles.
1. Candles are lighted and set upon the Altar. For by candles is signified,
sometimes the Law: sometimes the Church: and sometimes Christian conversation. Let
your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works and glorify
your father which is in heaven. Mat. 5.17.

How Candles sig. the light of faith.
2. Again by the two Candles (for at least there ought to be so many) is
signified, the light of faith revealed to two several people, the Jews, and
the Gentiles. Or the two testaments, where with mankind is illuminated: Or the
two witnesses of the resurrection, Moses, and Elias.

How they are a sign of joy.
3. Also Candles are lighted in sign of joy, as testifies Alcuinus: and in
respect of our B. Saviors presence, whose divinity is likewise signified by
the same. As also to signify the gifts of grace, and the light proceedinge
from the holy Ghost, wherewith the Church is illuminated.

How the fire of Charity.
4. And not unaptly, are there fiery lights, placed upon the Altar to burn:
because he is there, who came to send fire into the world, and desirethe
nothing more, then that it burn and be inkindled, in the hearts of all his
faithful. Luc. 12.

Of the Curtains.
Lastly, for the better adorning both of the Church, and Altar, there are rich
Hangings, and Curtains, of diverse and sundry colors, answearable to the
diversity of Feasts throughout the year.

Of the signification of the Red.
Upon the Feasts of the holy Cross, whereon Christ shed his precious Blood for
us: and upon the Apostles, and Martirs, Red is used: to signify the bloody
Martirdomes, which they endured for the love of Christ: for they are those
which are come out of great tribulations, and have washed their Stoles in the
blood of the Lamb. Apoc. 7.

Of the white.
Upon the Feasts of Angels, Confessors, and Virgins, we use White: to
signify their holiness, chastity, and purity. As also upon the Dedication of
the Church, which is called by the name of a Virgin. For I have despoused you
to one Man, to present you a chaste virgin unto Christ 2. Cor. 11.2.

Again by the White, which is of excellent pureness, and cleanes: may be
signified, the splendour and integrity, of good name and fame, especially
requisite in an Ecclesiastical Magistrate. That a Bishop have a good
testimony, according to the Apostle, both of those, which are within, and of
those which are without. 1. Tim. 3.

The signification of the Black.
Upon the days of prayer, for the souls departed, is used Black: to signify
the dolorous and mournful estate of their souls. Of whom it is said, they
shall be saved, yet so as by fire. 1. Cor. 3.15.

The sig: of the green.
Upon other common days, green is used: for green is a color in the midst,
betwixt white and black and signifies the Church militant, still living in
this world, which is sometimes in joy, and sometimes in sorrow: and as it were
but yet in herba, that is green growing and not ripened, for the harvest of the
church, is in the world to come.

The sig: of the purple.
Sometimes in some churches, is used purple: to signify the spiritual power
and dignity, which resideth in the chief bishop, and other Pastors of the
Catholic Church, who ought to behave and comport themselves in their places,
like kings, not to decline to the right hand, nor to the left: not to bind the
worthy, nor to pardon, or unbind the guilty.

The sig: of the scarlet.
Sometimes scarlet is used, which is of the color of fire: by which is
signified, pontifical, or Priestlie doctrine, which like unto fire, ought both
to shine, and to burn. To shine, by giving light to others. To burn, by
reprehensions, excommunication, and other censures. Every tree, that yeildeth
not good fruit shall be cut down, and shall be cast into fire Mat. 7.19.

The sig: of the hyacinth.
Sometimes hyacinth, or sky color is used: by which may be understood the
serenitie of conscience, which a Bishop or Priest ought always to have, both
in things prosperous, and things adverse. According to the same Apostle: For
our glory is this, the testimony of our Conscience. 2. Cor. 12. As also that
his thoughts ought not to be on earthly, but on heavenly things, according
to the same Apostle saying: Conuersatio nostra in Caelis est. Our conversation
is in heaven.

To conclude, touching the ornaments of the Church and Altar, Sozomon l. 6.
cap. 16. and Nicephorus l. 11. cap. 18. recount, how the Arrian Emperor
Valens, a great persecutor of Catholics, once upon a Christmas day, entered
into the Church of S. Basil, whilst he was at the Altar celebrating Mass,
assisted by all his clergy, and the people round about, with such devotion and
reverence, as the quality of the Feast and place required. And that he
contemplating the goodly order, which was in every thing, was so astonished
with admiration, that he well nigh fell down in ecstasy. Loc here the proper
words of Nicephorus, as they were translated out of Greek into Latin. Quod ibi
omnia miro ordine gererentur, ad stuporem delapsus, et totus mutatus in solum
concidisset, nisi quidam ex primoribus tunica correpta, imperatorem iam ruentem
retinuisset. Astonished in admiration, and altogether altered or changed, for
that he saw all things governed by so admirable an order, he had fallen
down, unless one of his Princes taking him by the Robe, had held him up, being
now ready to fall to the grownd. Thus he.

But in this point so bare and naked, are the churches of Heretics, and so
utterly destitute of all hangings, and other costly ornaments, yea so empty
and quite disfurnished, that to enter into them, is much like as to enter into
some empty grange or barn, after all the corn, hay, and straw, is carried
out of it. Which is the cause, why some Heretics, coming over the seas, an^
contemplating the ornaments, riches, and beautiful ceremonies of the Catholic
Church, do so greatly wonder and admire thereat, that when they do depart,
they find themselves so marvelously delighted and comforted thereby, as if
they had bin for the time, in some earthly Paradise. Yea, to some this has
bin a chief motive of their change and conversion to the Catholic Faith. Much
more might be said concerning this matter, but I will leave it to the Readers
better consideration, and proceed to that which is to follow.

Of the ornaments belonging to the Priest. And first of the Amice. CHAP. 9.
Having discoursed unto you of the ornaments belonging to the Altar, and
explicated the meaning and representatio^ of the^, to proceed orderly, we must
next speak of the Priest himself, who is the Sacrificer, and dispencer of
this dreadful Mystery, to whom in like manner appertain many ornaments,
wherewith his own person is to be adorned, all full of many notable, moral,
and divine mysteries.

Innocentius the third, speaking of these ornaments, says, that the Vestments
of the Evangelical Priest, do signify one thing in the head, that is our
Savior, and figure another thing in us, who are his members.

And for as much as both head and members, are understood in the person of the
Priest, therefore these ornaments have sometimes relation to the head, and
sometimes reference to the members.

How by the Amice, is signified the cloth that hid and covered our Sa: eyes.
According hereunto, the Priest puttinge the Amice before his face:
represents unto us, the mockeries, which the Son of God sustained, when his
sacred eyes were blindfoulded, and the perfideous Jews, buffeted him on the
face, saying. Prophecy unto us o Christ, who is he that struck thee? Mat.
26.68.

How the crown of Thorns.
2. The putting the same afterward upon his head: represents unto us, the
crown of Thorns, which those most wicked ministers, planted upon the head of
our Blessed Savior, kneeling before him in scorn, saying: Hail King of the
Jews. Mat. 68.30.

How recollection and attention.
3. Morallie the Amice admonishes, that as the Priest covers his head and
face therewith, so ought we to be very vigilant (during the time of this divine
Mystery:) that nether our eyes nor understanding, be carried away, or busied,
about any vain cogitations.

How fortitude of good works.
4. The spreading of the same abroad, upon the Priests shoulders: does
signify, the fortitude of good works. For as the shoulders are made strong,
to perform hard works: so a man, especially a Priest, ought nether to be
idle, nor faint in working, but to insist and labor painfully, in well doing,
according to that of the Apostle. Labor thou as a good soldier of Jesus
Christ. 2. Tim. 2.3.

How the custody of the Voice.
5. The same bound about the Priests neck, through which the voice passes:
admonishes, and signifies, the custody of out tongue and voice, according to
that of the Psalm. Pone Domine custodiam ori meo: Put o Lord a watch before my
mouth.

How faith.
6. Lastly, the Priest putting on this ornament, prays, saying: Impone
Domine. etc. Put o Lord, the Helmet of salvation upon my head, that I may
overcome all diabolical incursions. So that by the Amice, is also signified
Faith: which is indeed, the first and chiefest thing, that a Christian ought to
bring, coming to present himself at so great a Sacrament. For as the Apostle
says: Accendentem ad Deum, opportet credere. He that comes unto God, must
first believe.

Of the Albe. And how by the same is signified the most pure humanity, of our
B. Savior. CHAP. 10.
THIS garment is called the Albe, of this Latin word Albedo, whitenes: whereby
the precious Humanity of our Savior is signified unto us, the which was
formed by the holy Ghost, of the most pure substance of the virgin Marie, which
was most pure, (that is to say) without all spot of sin, either original,
or actual.

How the Incarnation.
2. The putting on of the Albe over the head of the Priest (wherewith he is all
covered) may put us in mind of the Incarnation of our Savior, in the womb of
the blessed Virgin, according to the words of the Angel, spoken unto her. The
holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most highest shall over
shadow thee. Luc. 1.35.

How the garment of Innocence.
3. Next this garment may signify unto us, the garment of Innocence, given
unto us by Christ in the Sacrament of Baptism. And may put us in mind, of our
promise made therein, to lead continually, a pure, holy, and innocent life.
Lay away the old man, and put on the new man, which according to God, is
created in justice. Ephesians. 4.23.24.

How the garment of Mockery.
4. It likewise represents, the White garment, which Herod put upon our B.
Savior, reputing him for a fool, and so mocking, and deriding him, sent him
back to Pilate. Luc. 23.12.

5. It also signifies, the White garment of glory, wherewith we shall be
gloriously clothed in the Kingdom of Heaven, where we shall shine more
bright, then the beams of the son as says S. John. I saw a great multitude,
clothed in white robes. Apoc. 7.9.

How Penance and Mortification.
6. Again this garment admonishes us, that even as silk, or fine cloth,
gets that whitenes, by often beatinge, or knocking, which it has not by
nature: even so a man, especially a Priest, should by works of penance, and
corporal castigations, attain to that sanctity by grace, which he has not by
nature.

How spiritual purity.
7. The Priest in putting on this garment, prays saying, D^alba me Domine
etc. Make me white, o Lord, and cleanse my heart, that I being whitened in the
Blood of the Lamb, may enjoye eternal gladness. So that the Albe also by his
whitenes, represents spiritual purity, and cleanes of soul, which is most
requisite in him, that is to administer before our Lord.

Of the Girdle. And how by the same is signified, the inissoluble bond, betwixt
Christ's divinity, and his humanity. CHAP. 11.
BY the Girdle, where with the Albe is straightly bound, and girded together,
is signified the indissoluble bond, betwixt the divinity of Christ, and his
humanity, which (after his Incarnation). were never separated, neither
according to his body, not according to his soul, notwithstanding that his
soul descended into hell, and his body remained in the sepulcher.

How his undertaking our human frailty.
2. The Girdle bringing together, the amplenes of the Albe, does signify, that
Christ as it were straightned his high and divine conversation (after our
manner of understanding) by taking upon him our human frailty. And even as
the Albe, is not made less by the straightnes of the Girdle, but only
enfoulded within the same: even so the immensitie of Christ, remained most
entire and perfect in him, although for our example, he seemed to streighten,
and narrow the same.

How the virtue of Chastity.
3. This Girdle has three properties: to girt, to bind, and to mortify:
betokening the care and circumspection belonging to a Priest, lest the virtue
of chastity, which the white garment represents in him, be remisly and
negligentlie guarded. And that therefore as he girteth the raines of his body,
so should he girt and restrain, the raines of his mind, which are his
thoughts and desires: to which virtue our Savior himself exorteth saying.
Sint lumbs vestri pracincti etc. Let your loins be girted. Luc. 12.35.

How fasting and prayer.
4. The two ends of the girdle, that are turned in, the one under the right
side, the other under the left: do signify, the two means requisite to
conserve the virtue of chastity, to wit fasting, and prayer: the one to
debilitate and subdue the flesh: the other to strengthen and eleuate the
spirit. Pray least ye enter into temptation. Luc. 22.40.

How the cords, wherewith our Lord was bound to the pillar.
5. The Priest in taking the Girdle, puts both his hands behind him at his
back whilst he that serves, gives the same into them: representing hereby,
how the most innocent Son of God for our offenses, had his blessed hands fast
bound behind him, whilst he was most lamentably whiped and scourged at the
pillar.

The Prayer.
6. In putting on the Girdle, he prays saying. Praecinge ^e Domine etc. Girte
me o Lord with the girdle of purity, and quench in my loins the humor of
lust, that there may remain in me, the virtue of continency and chastity.

Of the Maniple. And how by the same is sig. persecution for the faith of
Christ. CHAP. 12.
1. THE Priest putting the Manuple upon his left arm, does kiss the same: to
put us in mind of the redines of heart, wherewith we ought willingly and
gladly to suffer persecution for the faith of Christ: because, Blessed are they
that suffer persecution for justice, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Mat.
5.10.

How the contempt of earthly things.
2. By the putting thereof upon the left arm, we are admonished, that we ought
to be strickt and sparing, in seeking after earthly things, but free and
discharged in seking after Heavenly. According to the council of our Savior
saying. Seek first the kingdom of God, and the justice of him, and all these
things shall be given you besides. Mat. 6.33.

How Christ's immunitie from sin.
3. Martinus Esengreuius affirms, that the Manuple wherewith the left hand is
bound, insinuates Christ's immunitie from sin, saying, that as in Christ our
Lord, there was both his omnipotent divinity, (signified by the right hand)
and his infirm humanity (understood by the left hand?) so he, by his divine
power, did bind and restrain his left hand (to wit, his humanity) that it
never swarued, or inclined to iniquity.

How Christ's Humility, combat for justice, and tender affection toward us.
4. According to some others, the Manuple put upon the left arm, signifies
the humility of Christ in this life. As also his continual combat for
justice, according to S. Bonauenture And because the left arm is the nearest
to the heart, it may likewise signify the great love and tender affection which
our B. Lord and Savior carried toward us.

How sorrow and contrition for sin.
5. The putting of the Manuple upon the left arm, may likewise put us in mind
of sorrow and contrition for our defectes. For as sins are committed by
sinister actions, so may they be signified, by the left arm. And even as in
the soul of a sinner, there ought to be continual sorrow and grief for his
offenses, committed against the majesty of almighty God: so is it also good
reason, that on his left arm, the Priest (who needs) daily to offer
Sacrifice, not only for his own, but also for the sins of the people)
should carry some external sign, of the internal sorrow, which both he and
they, ought to have for this occasion: imitating herein S. Peter, whose
abundance of tears which issued from his eyes in the bewailing of his
offenses, was so great, that he had marks of them, like little gutters in his
cheeks: and for this cause continually carried in his hand or bosom, some
napkin where with to wipe them away.

How the cords where with our Lord was violently bound.
6. The same being applied to the instruments of our Lords most holy Passion,
most properly representeh, the hard, rough, and boisterous cords, wherewith he
was rudely and cruelly bound, when he was led from place to place, and from one
Judge to another. Luc. 21.3.

The Prayer.
7. The Priest in putting on this Manuplpraieth saying: Merear Domine portare
etc. Le me merit o Lord, to bear the Maniple of weeping and sorrow, that I
may receive the recompense of my labor with exultation.

Of the Stole, And how by the same is sig: the yoke of obedience. CHAP. 13.
1. BY the Stole, is signified the yoke of obedience, where unto our meek Lord
submitted him self for our salvation. Take up my yoke upon you. Mat. 11.19.
Which thing the priest shows him self ready to perform by kissing the
same, both when he puts it on, and when he puts it off: expressing by
this ceremony, the desire and resignation where with he willingly submits
him self, under the yoke of our Savior Christ.

How Meekenes and humility.
2. In that it extends or reaches to the knees (whose office is to bend and
bow) it admonishes us of meeknes and humility. Discite a me quia mitis sum
and humilis cord. Learn of me, because I am meek and humble of heart. Mat.
11.29.

How Perseverance.
3. The stole by the length thereof, does put us in mind of the virtue of
perseverance: For he that perseuereth unto the end shall be saved. Mat. 10.

How Prudence in prosperity, and patience in adversity.
4. It is folded before the breast in form of a Cross, from the right side to
the left: to admonish us, that we must use prudence in prosperity, and
patience in adversity; and that we be nether puffed up by the one, nor
dejected by the other.

How the carrying of the Cross.
5. The resting thereof upon the shoulders: may put us in mind of the Cross,
which, with other instruments of the passion, our Lord was forced to carry to
the place of execution, upon his soar, and weary shoulders. Or the rope or
cord, where with they hastily drew and haled him forwards, to the mount of
Caluarie.

The Prayer.
The priest in putting on the same prays, saying. Read mihi Domine stolam
immortalitatis etc. Render unto me o Lord, the Stole of immortality, which I
have lost in the preuarication of our first parent: and although I approach
unworthily to thy holy mystery, I may nevertheless deserve to attain
everlasting joy and felicity.

Of the vestment, or Casula. And how by the same is sig: and represented the
virtue of Charity. CHAP. 14.
1. THis vestment, covers both the body and all the other habits, and in
latin is called Casula, of this word Casa, a house, because it covers the
whole man, like unto another little house: by which is understood the virtue of
Charity, which, as the Apostle says, covers the multitude of sins.

How charity toward God, and our neighbors.
2. This garment being divided into two parts: does put us in mind of a
double, or two fould charity. The one toward God, to love him above all
things. The other to our neighbor, to love him as our selves, Thou shall love
the Lord thy God, from thy whole heart, and with thy whole soul. and thy
neighbor as thy self. Deuteronomy. 6.5. and Leuit. 19.18.

How charity to our friends, and to our enemies.
3. This garment is large, ample, and open, neither tied nor girded, as the
other ornaments are: to give us to understand, that charity extends it self
far off, not only in doing good to our friends, but also to our very
enemies, never ceasing to do well to all persons, whenever time and occasion
is offered. If you love them, who love you, what reward shall you have, do not
also the Publicans this? Mat. 5.46.

How the Church before and after Christ.
4. Likewise the forepart (which is the lesser) represents the Church, before
Christ's Passion, and the hinder part (which is the larger and bigger, and has
the Cross on it:) signifies the increase of Christ's Church since his Passion.

How the uniting, of the Jews and Gentills.
5. The uniting thereof above, sig: the uniting of the two people, (the Jews
and the Gentiles) in the confession of one faith, as it was foretold, saying:
And there shall be one Pastor, and one flock.

How the Vestment of sundry virtues exercised in the Catholic Church.
6. This garment is commonly rich, and curiously wrought with gould:
insinuating that which the royal Prophet says, in the Psalm: Astitit Regina
a dextris tuis. The queen (to wit, the Church) stood upon thy right hand, in a
goulden Vestment, compassed about with variety. Ps 44.

How the purple Vestment.
7. It likewise represents the purple Vestment, wherewith the Jews clothed
our Lord in scorn, and diverse and sundry ways, abused his holy person. Mat.
27.30.

How unity, against scisme and herisie.
8. This garment of our Lord, the Souldiars would not divide, because it was
without seame: to foreshew, how great an offense it should be in those, who
should presume to rent or divide, the unity of Christ's Church, by scisme or
heresy. Joan. 19.23.

The Prayer.
The Priest in putting on the same, prays, saying: Domine qui dixisti etc.
Lord who have said, my yoke is sweet, and my burden is light: grant that I
may so bear the same, that I may obtain thy grace.

How by the two Crosses upon the Stole, and Maniple: is sig. the Crosses of the
two Thieves. And by that upon the Vestment, the Cross of Christ.
And note, that upon three of these ornaments belonging to the Priest, there
is commonly made the sign of the Cross. Upon the Stole, and the Maniple,
there is made two little Crosses; and the third upon the Vestment, more larger
then the rest: whereby is signified unto us, a double mystery.

First, by the two lesser Crosses, upon the Stole and Maniple, is understood
the crosses of the two thieves, who were crucified, one on the left side, and
the other on the right side of our B. Savior, and he himself in the midst,
signified by the Cross made upon the Vestment, which is greater then the
other, as his Cross was greater then theirs.

How more perfection in the Priest, then other men.
Secondly, by these three Crosses, is given to understand, that the Priest
ought to be of much more perfection, then other men; and that he should not
only bear the Cross of Christ, signified by the Cross on the vestment: nor
his own Cross, signified by the Cross upon the Stole: but also his
neighbors Cross, signified by the Cross on the Maniple, which he bears on
his left arm.

Of the coming of the priest out of the Vestrie, attyred and reuested with his
holy Ornaments. CHAP. 15.
How the Priest represents our blessed Savior.
BBy the Priest, as the Doctors say, is understood our blessed Savior. By the
people: the world. And by the Altar: the mount of Caluarie whereon he was
crucified for our redemption.

How his coming out of the vestrie, rep: our Saviors coming heaven.
The Priest coming forth of the sacristy, thus reuested with his holy
habits: signifies our Savior, coming forth of the bosom of his heavenly
Father, and entringe into, the world to take our nature upon him.

How his hands joined upon his breast rep: the affection wherewith our Savior
prayed for us.
He proceeds with his hands reverently joined before his breast: to
represent unto us the great devotion and fervent affection, wher^with our
Savior always prayed unto his heavenly Father for us. Exauditus est enim pro
reuerentia sua. For he was heard for his reverence. Heb. 5.8.

How his holy vestments, represent our Saviors holy virtues.
His holy vestmentes and ornaments: do signify, the holy virtues, graces,
and other perfections, which most gloriously shined in our Savior. Of whom it
is written saying. And the word was made flesh, and dwelt in us (and we saw the
glory of him, the glory as it were of the only begotten Son of the Father)
full of grace and verity. John 1.14.

The diversity of ornaments, do not only signify, the diversity of
virtues and perfections, which were contained in our Savior Christ, but also
the diversity of pains and torments, which he sustained for us: as has
already been declared.

How honor and reverence, in those that receive and handle the body of Christ.
And for as much as almighty God, gave express commandment, to the Priests
of the ancient law, that they should not aproach to his Altar to offer unto
him, but first to be washed and invested, not with their profane, but with
their holy ornaments. Is it not then most convenient, that the priests of
the new law should be peculiarly adorned, and thereby dispose themselves with
much more reverence, to handle and touch, the most precious body of our
redeemer and Savior Jesus, then the old priests and prophets did, the flesh
of sheep and oxen, or the body of a bruit beast?

Our priests therefore, going to the Altar thus apparreled, do set before our
eyes our Savior Jesus, as he was at his passion, and consequently those that
scoff at the priest, thus representing Christ unto us, do nothing else, then
with the wicked Jews, scoff and deride at Christ him self. And even as those
Jews, put all these ornaments upon our Savior, for despite, and the more to
dishonor him, yet Christ's holy mother, and his blessed Apostles, did both love
him, and reverence him so much the more entyrelie, for enduring such reproaches
and shames for our sakes: so these men now a days, whose minds are wholly set
against the Catholic church, will mock perhaps at the priest, standing at the
Altar in such apparel; but contrary wise, the true christian and Catholic
people, do esteem and honor him so much the more, who is by the ordonance of
God, exalted so high a dignity, as to represent unto us so great a mystery.

To conclude, priestly habits, (so much offensive to the heretics of our age)
were so highly respected by Alexander the great, (although a Panim and
Idolater) going to Jerusalem, with deliberation to ruin it, that with
houlden, by the only sight of the Pontifical vestments of the high priest,
and touched instantly with the fear of God, did cast him self from his
horse, upon the ground, as it were to crave pardon for his sinister designs,
and granted to the city and country of Iewrie, all the priueledges,
franchises, and immunities, that possibly they could desire: at witnesses
Josephus. lib. 11. cap. 8.

Of carrying the book before the priest. And how thereby is represented the
Annunciation of the Angel, before the Incarnation. CHAP. 16.
THe priest proceeding in reverent wise toward the Altar, has one to go
before him to bear the book, which contains the glad tydinges of our
salvation: signifying by this ceremony: that Christ entering into this world,
sent first an Angel before him, to announce the joyful news of his
incarnation. Let him therefore who supplyeth this place, consider well, whose
person he represents, and let him see, that his carriage be conform to so
high a calling.

How the same rep: The dignity and verity of the gospel of Christ.
Also the book of the gospel is therefore carried before: to signify, the
dignity and infallible verity of the gospel of Christ, which is such, that if
an Angel should come from heaven and teach unto us other the^ this, we ought
in no wise to believe him.

How a life conform to the gospel of Christ.
Again, the gospel carried before, and the priest following after, is to
admonish: that every Christian, (especially a priest) ought to conform his
life and conversation, to the gospel of Christ.

How the Church built upon a rock.
The book brought and laid upon the Altar, which is of stone: signifies, that
the foundation of the church of Christ, is built upon a rock, against which the
gates of hell shall never prevail. Luc. 16.

How the faith first preached to the people of the Jews:
And it is therefore first carried to the right end of the Altar: to signify
that our Savior came first to the people of the Jews: according to that of
the Apostle. To you it behooved us first to speak the word of God: but because
you repel it, and judge your selves unworthy of eternallife, behold we turn
to the Gentiles. Acts. 13.46.

Why the book is laid upon the Altar shut. 1. Reason.
And it is laid upon the Altar shut, until the priest come to open the same:
to signify, that all things were closed under shadows and figures, until
the coming of Christ our Savior.

2. Second reason.
Also to signify, that Christ was he, who first revealed the mysteries of
holy scripture to his Apostles, saying. To you it is given, to know the
mystery of the kingdom of God. Mat. 8.9. And that after his resurrection, he
opened their understanding, that they might understand the scriptures. Luc.
24.45.

The reason why the priest has one to help him at mass.
Lastly, the priest has ever, one, or more, to asist him at Mass: and this
for two reasons. The first is, for that he may have great need of help and
aid. He may fall into some inconvenience or sickness, or some heretic or
enemy may take the host out of his hand, as it happened to S. Matthew, who was
killed at the Altar. In which case, all good Catholics, ought to succor and
defend him, even to the shedding of their blood; which danger was ordinary in
the primitive church under the heathen persequtors: and therefore the bishops
saying mass, were always guarded with deacons.

The 2. reason.
The second is, in respect of the great majesty and reverence due to this
holy sacrifice, which is such, that the greatest personage in the world, can
think it no disgrace, to wait and attend upon a priest at mass; and further,
to ad thereunto, all the humble and respective service he is able.

An example to be noted by such as assist at Mass.
And to the end that each one may assist with the greater reverence, I will
briefly recite a history recounted by S. Ambrose: how a child, which attended
upon Alexander the great, when he was about to sacrifice to his Idols, houlding
fire unto him by, chance let fall a coal upon his own arm, which he suffered
to pierce thorough his garments, even to his very flesh, rather then he would
make any noise, or give occasion by his cry, either to distract the Emperor
in his sacrifice, or disturb the people in their devotions. With what attenion
and reverence then, ought a Christian, to asist at this dreadful and most holy
sacrifice? and that offered to noe false idol, but to the only, true, and
everliving God him self. S. Ambros. li. 3. de Virg.

Of the priests descending from the Altar. And how thereby is represented the
expulsion of Adam out of Paradise. CHAP. 17.
THE priest having placed the chalice upon the Altar, presently descends and
stands below at the foot of the same: representing hereby, the little space
of time wherein Adam remained in the state of innocence and original justice,
and how for his transgression he was presently thrust, and expelled out of
Paradise.

How his wretched estate after his fall.
2. Again, by his standing below at the foot of the Altar (humbly bowing his
body toward the earth, or falling on his knee) is signified, the wretched
estate of man after his fall, and the heavy displeasure of God, conceived
against him for his greueous sin.

How the time before the Incarnation.
3. Mystically also it signifies the time before the Incarnation of the Son
of God: who for a long season, and for the self same occasion of sin,
stood a far off as it were from all mankind, and would not for some
thousands of years, approach unto him, to take his nature and substance upon
him, or to open the gates of heaven unto him.

How a soul in mortal sin.
4. Also that God stands a far off, and is greatly alienated and estranged,
from every soul in mortal sin.

How the devout publican, and S. Peter.
5. It also represents the devout Publican: who entering in to the temple to
pray, stood a far off, saying* God be merciful to me a sinner. And that of S.
Peter. Go from me o Lord, for I am sinful man. Luc. 18.13. ib. 5.8.

Why the asistants kneel below.
6. Lastly the people likewise kneel below: to declare the great honor and
reverence which they bear to this holy Sacrifice. For God him self is
present, to hear the supplications of his church. Christ is present, who is
the spouse of the church. And also many Angelical spirits are present, most
earnestly desyreing, that our petitions may be heard, and with all, the full
and entyre remission of our sins obtained.

Of the sign of the holy Cross, made at, In nomine Patris. And of the most
excellent virtues and most divine mysteries, contained in the same.
AS the glory of a fair and sumptuous building, is viewed and perceived by
the fore front thereof: And as the honor of a well ordered army, is discovered
in the comely disposition of the foreward of the battle: even so, gentle
reader, may thou easily conjecture the excellency of this spiritual
building, by the only beauty which thou behouldest in the fore front of the
same.

2. And what else may be expected in this venerable representation, of the
death and passion of our Savior Jesus, but that our holy mother the
Catholic church, should first plant in the forefront of this excellent
Sacrifice, the triumphant banner, and most victorious standard of the Cross,
the badge and liuerie of her celestial spouse, the ensign of heaven, the
consolation of earth, the confusion of hell, and the royal arms and
cognizance of our redemption?

3. For this holy sign, is the tree of life, planted in the midest of
paradise. It is the wood of the Arc, which saved Noe and his family, from
drowning. It is the ba^ner, which Abraham bore, when he went to deliver his
brother Loath, from the captivity of his enemies. It is the wood, which Isaac
his son, carried upon his shoulders to the place of sacrifice. It is the
ladder, whereon Jacob saw the Angels descend, and ascend, up to heaven. It is
the key of paradise, which opens and no man shuteth, and shuteth and no man
opens. It is the brazen serpent, which healethe those that are strooken, with
the venomous sting of the devil. It is the rod of Moses, where with he caused
the stony rock, to yield forth streams of refreshing waters. It is the
wood, which being cast by our true Elizeus, into the waters that were bitter,
made them most sweet and pleasant of taste. It is the stone, where with David
struck Golias on the forehead and presently slew him. And it is the letter
Thau, marked on the foreheades of all the faithful, which keeps and
preserves them from all kind of danger.

4. In a word, no mortal tongue is able sufficiently to express the
wonderful virtues of this sign. For it is the staff of the lame, the guide of
the blind, the way of them that err, the philosophy of the unlearned, the
physician of the sick, and the resurrection of the dead. It is the comfort of
the poor, the hope in despair, the harbor in danger, the blessinge of
families, the father of orphans, the defense of widows, the judge of
innocents, the keeper of little ones, the guard of virginity, the cuncellor of
the just, the liberty of servants, the bread of the hungry, and the drink of
the thirsty. It is the song of the Prophets, the preaching of the Apostles,
the glory of Martyrs, the consolation of Confessors, the joy of Priests, and
the sheilde of Princes. It is the foundation of the Church, the benediction of
Sacraments, the subversion of Idolatry, the death of heresy, the destruction
of the proud, the bridle of the rich, the punishment of the wicked, the torment
of the damned, and the glory of the saved.

No marvel then, that the Catholic church, has so highly honored this
heavenly sign, as to plant it, and seat it, in the forefront and first place
of this holy sacrifice, and to adorn and beautify there with, this heaue^lie
building: using (as I may call it) no other key, but that which once opened
unto us so high a mystery, to open unto us now again, the highest mystery
both of heaven and earth.

Of In nomine Patris etc. How In nomine Patris, is a brief Theological
protestation against Idolatry.
FIrst it is to be noted, that the highest, and most supereminent honor, which
any man can possibly yeald unto almighty God in this life, is principally
included in this holy sacrifice. And as in the commandementes which were given
by God him self, he first before all things, put a difference and exception,
betwixt his own honor, and the honor, of Idols, and of all other false gods
whatsoever: even so the Church in this place, be, giving in the name of her
sole and only God, does evidently give to understand, that she utterly
renounceth all Idolatry: and that nether Idol, nor any false god whatsoever,
nether man nor Angel, nor any other creature, either in heaven or earth, ought
to be served with this honor of sacrifice, save only God him self.

In nomine.
In the name. In pronouncing these words, we say. In the name, not in the
names: to signify, and to give to understand thereby, that we beleeeue, one to
be the name, and nature, one to be the virtue and power, one to be the
divinity, and majesty, of all the three persons of the blessed Trinity.

Patris.
Of the Father. For even as little children in the time either of need or
danger, do presently break forth into no other cry, but to call for the
help of father or mother; which cry of theirs, is no sooner heard, but it
forth with brings them succor and assistance: even so is it to be
understood of this voice and invocation, which is so well known, and so
willingly heard of our heavenly Father, that no sooner is it uttered by us
his children, but he does presently acknowledge it, and speedily hastneth to
our help and succor.

Et Filij.
And of the Son. After the name of the Father, we say, and of the Son.
First, because he as willingly, both hears us, and helps us, as does the
Father. Secondly to declare, that albeit this be properly the sacrifice of
the Son, yet that he is equal in glory, coeternall in majesty, and
consubstantiall in essence, both to the Father and the holy Ghost.

Et spiritus Sancti.
And of the holy Ghost. Here likewise do we inuoke and call for the help,
aid, and asistance of the Holy Ghost: to signify, that he also prooceedinge
from them both, and being equal to them both in power, essence, and glory,
does concur with them to the effectinge of this heavenly and divine sacrifice.

Amen.
And this Amen, is as it were, a confident and firm assent of our soul, by
which we acknowledge the persons named, to be our one, and only God, and that
in trust of his aid, we mean to proceed in offering up this sacrifice, to his
eternal glory.

Where you see, that this petition, being taken according to his most common
and usual sense, does signify, the invocation of the aid, grace, and
sanctification, of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, to
be infused from heaven, into the hearts and minds of all the asistants.

Of the psalm; Introibo. And how by the same is signified the desires of the
Fathers for the coming of Christ.
1. IN the words and mysteries of the holy Mass, two manner of senses are
usually understood: the one litterall, the other mystical. According here
unto, the priest always begins with certain verses taken out of the
Prophets: to signify unto us mystically, the unspeakable sighs, and fervent
desires, of the holy Fathers for the coming of Christ, long time promised
unto them, and long time expected of them.

How the desires of all the world.
2. These verses are not rehearced of one alone, but of all the quyre together:
to signify, the desire of the Church universal; and that not only the holy
Fathers, then detained in Limbo, but that all the world was exiled for sin,
and stood in need, of the grace and mercy of our Savior Jesus.

How the excitation of their minds who are present at Mass.
3. According to some of our Doctors, this psalm is said of all the quyre
together, that the spirits and minds of all that are present, may be awakened
thereby, and that hearing the noise and sound of the voices, they may
understand when the Priest first enters in, to the Altar of God: like as in
the oulde testament, the noise and sound of the Belles, made known the entry
of the high Priest, into the sanctuary of our Lord. And now to explicate the
words them selves.

Introibo.
I will enter in. Amongst the manifoulde secrets and mysteries of this one
sacred word, first behold how aptly it agrees, with the former ceremony of
the Priests descending, the which was, a little before, applied to the fall of
man, and to the expulsion, both of him, and of all his posterity, out of
paradise.

To make the same more manifest unto you, take an example of some great and
noble person, who for some heinous fact, having justly incurred the displeasure
of his Prince, is deprived of his honors, banished his court, excluded from his
presence, and from the company and society of all his Nobles, how would not
such an one deplore his fall, and labor to be restored into his princes
favor? Now to apply the same to our present purpose; This Prince is almighty
God: the Noble person who has offended, is man: the offense, was, the breach
and transgression of his creators commandment: the honor he was deprived of,
was the state of innocence: the court he was banished from, was the kingdom
of heaven: and the company of nobles, was the society of Angels. Now then,
even as the banished man, desires nothing more, then to enter in to the gates
and ports of his Prince, from which he is exiled: so likewise we, lamenting
nothing more the^ the daily memory of this our exile, often express our
fervent desires in these words of the holy prophet, saying. Introibo. I will
enter in, to wit in to the ports and court of my God, from which I am exiled
because of my sin.

Ad Altar.
To the Altar. After the time that man had transgressed the law of God, the
first means that was practiced to appease his wrath, was to errect Altars unto
him, and to offer thereon, sacrifice for sin. And God him self did
afterward ordain, that a man having deserved to die for inuoluntarie
murder, fliyng to an altar, and layinge houlde thereon, his life should be
safe. And since we all daily sin, and consequently deserve to die, therefore
do we daily fly to this altar, to crave pardon of God, and to recover the
life of grace, which we have lost by our sin.

And it is caled Altar. ab Alta ara, that is to say, height, or Altitude:
signifing, that a man coming to present him self at the same, ought wholly to
fix his mind, upon high, divine, and heavenly things.

Dei.
Of God. He says of God, not of Gods, to exclude all plurality of Gods. And
further to show, that as God him self is only one: so the religion and
worship where with he is to be served, ought to be but one.

Secondly, it is called the altar of God, because the Son of God, ever since
the beginning of the world, has bin offered up in sacrifice unto his Father
upon the same. In the old law, figuratiuelie: upon the cross, corporally,
and in the new law, incruentallie.

Ad Deum.
To God. Truly wonderful is the mystery, which seems to me, to lie hid in
this word. A little before the holy prophet said, that he would enter in to the
Altar of God, but here he says, that he will enter in, unto God himself:
clearelie as it were foreshewing by the spirit of prophecy, the assured and
undoubted presence of Jesus Christ upon the Altar of Christians. Which thing is
truly verified, in the daily sacrifice of every priest, who first entering in
to the Altar of God, does forth with enter, even to God him self: seeinge
Christ, by virtue of Consecration, is truly and reallie present in this
sacrifice.

Qui laetificat iuuentutem meam.
Who makes joyful my youth. After the former consideration of sorrow for man's
fall, mention is forthwith made of mirthe and joy. By joyfulness therefore in
this place may be understood, the wonderful joy of our distressed parents, in
that merciful promise of almighty God, promising (even then, when with
trembling and fear, they attended none other, but the dreadful sentence of
everlasting damnation (that the seed of the woman, should bruise the head of
the serpent: then which, never could any words bring greater joy to the
heart of man.

Iudica me Deus
Judge me o God. This should seem at the fiirst, to be a very fearful
demand, and full of danger, to ask that God should judge us: but S. Aug.
clears the difficulty, saying. I fear not his judgments, because I know
his mercy. And this our present prophet, being put to his choice, whether for
the punishment of his sin, he would fall into the hands of God, or of men,
chose rather to fall into the hands of God: knowinge that Gods judgments are
always mingled with mercy, where as man's judgments, are often executed,
without any manner of pity or mercy.

Et discern.
And discern. That is, put a difference, betwixt him who believes in thee,
and betwixt him who believes not in thee, as Saint Aug. expounds it. Betwixt
him, who offers no other sacrifice to honor thee, but the very same which
was ordained by thee, and him who offers a strange sacrifice, both forbiden,
by thee, and to others besides thee.

Causam meam.
My cause. And rightly is this Sacrifice called our cause, First because we
only honor, profess, and defend it, against all sorts of enemies that do
impugn it. Secondly because it contains him, who has undertaken our cause.
As the same Prophet testifies saying. Dominus meus, in causam meam. Psalm.
34.26. Thirdly because it contains him, who is the chief and only cause of
all our good, of all our hope, and of all our health, as infinite places of
holy Scripture, do clearlie testify.

De gente non sancta.
From a people not holy. From three sorts of people the prophet prays to be
discerned and delivered. First from all Infidels, or unbelievers because they
are destitut of holy Faith, of holy Sacrifice, of holy Sacraments, yea and of
all holy things, and holiness, and conseque^tlie, both deny God, and are
denied of God: which people, the prophet describing, says. The fool has said
in his heart, there is no God. Sed der debit eos Deus. But God shall make fools
of them.

Ab homine iniquo.
From the wicked man. Secondly, from the wicked man. By the wicked man, may be
understood, the evil or wicked Christian, who is not destitute of the light of
faith, as the Infidel is: but of the light of good life, and other virtues,
which ought to shine in a true believer: where as this sort of men, confess
God in words, but deny him in works. Finally, being wicked in cogitation
wicked in conversation, and whose only glory, is in wickedness.

Et doloso erue me.
And deceitful, deliver me. Thirdly from the deceitful man. By the deceitful
man, may be understood, all false teachers and seducers of souls, wolves in
sheep clothing, who lead men from truth, to falsehood, and from the Catholic
verity, to error and heresy. From al which euels, we ought with the holy
Prophet, daily to pray to be delivered.

Quia tu es Deus.
Because thou art God. And I will believe in thee: thou art God and I will
serve thee: thou art God, and I will fear thee: thou arr God, and I will fly
unto thee: thou art God, and I will worship thee: thou only art God, and there
is none else but thee.

Fortitudo mea.
My fortitude. Who helpest all those that put their trust in thee, and of whom
(as the Apostle says 2. Cor. 3.) is all our sufficiency: to wit; to stay us
from falling, to strenghten us standing, to raise us being fallen, to restore
us being sick, to heal us being wounded, and to revive us being dead.

Quare me repulisti?
Why have thou repelled me? These words may be applied to the longing desires
of the holy fathers for the coming of Christ; For as much as the prophet in
this place speaks in the person of the Fathers detayned in limbo, making
their piteous and mournful complaint to almighty God; why they are so long
time repelled, and the promise of their redemption, so long delayed.

Et quare tristis incedo?
And why wa^ke I heavily? In the prison of hell, in the dungeon of darkness,
and in the shadow of death. As also in another psalm. Tota die contristatus
ingredicbar. All the day I walked heauille, to wit, because of the long delay
and absence of my Savior.

Dum affligit me inimicus.
Whilst the enemy does afflict me. To wit, the sworn and mortal enemy of
all mankind, with scornful and opprobrious words, vpbraiding me and saying.
Vbi est Deus tuus? Where is thy God?

Emitte lucem tuam.
Send forth thy light, Lo here the cause of the former complaint, the ground
of the former grief, and the reason of all the former heaviness and affliction!
Send forth thy light, to wit, thy Son our Savior, who is the light of the
world. John. 1. The light of those that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of
death. Luc. 1. The true light, that lightneth every man who comes into this
world. John. 1. The light of our countenance, and our Christ.

Et veritatem tuam.
And thy truth. Therefore with great reason does the Prophet desire, the sending
forth of this light and this verity, misticallie insinuating, the original
cause of our damnation. For the devil, who first seduced and deceived man, is
in the holy Scripture, called by two names, to wit, prince of darkness, and
father of lyinge. Wherefore as the first author of our damnation, was darkness
and falsitie: so was it expedient that the first author of our redemption,
should be light and verity, that so the later remedy, might be answerable to
the former ruin.

Ipsa me deduxerunt and adduxerunt.
They (to wit, thy light and thy truth) haueled me from, and brought me to.
which words do most clearlie insinuate, the assured hope of those holy
fathers for their delivery forth of limbo, that by means of the light, and
the truth which they expected, they should be, led from, hell; and be brought
to, heaven. For this Lord it is, who diversely leads and brings those that
are his: he leads them from trouble, and brings them to tranquillity: he
leads them from sorrow, and brings them to joy: he leads even from hell,
and brings back to heaven. 1. Reg. 2. and Tob. 13. And therefore it presently
follows.

In montem sanctum tuum.
Into thy holy mount. Morallie according to S. Aug. in psalm. 50. by this
mount, is understood, the Catholic Church, into which we all ought to desire
to be led and brought. Now, says he, we are in this mountain; whosoever
prays, being out of this mountain, let him not hope to be heard to eternal
life. For many are heard in many things, whereof they have no cause to
rejoice, as the devils, who were heard, that they might be admitted to enter
into the heard of swine: thus he. Signifing hereby, that no prayers are
gratefully heard of almighty God, which are made out of the mountain of the
Catholic Church.

Et in tabernacula tua.
And into thy tabernacles, The same holy Father expounding this place, says.
When thou hear mention of a Tabernacle, understand says he, a place of
war, an habitation of pilgrims, and wayfaring men. To wit, such as are out
of their native country, and far off from their desiered home. From this
Tabernacle, did our Savior Jesus by his cominge, lead those holy fathers,
into a more excellent Tabernacle of eternal rest.

Et Introibo.
And I will enter in. This second repetition of the Introibo, serves to very
good purpose, to give to understand, that both the one and the other, to wit,
the priest and the people, have put them selves in readiness and disposition, to
enter in, to the Altar of God. For as it was expedient, that the priest
intending to offer sacrifice for the people, should first premonish them of his
entrance to the Altar; so is it meet, that the people likewise, do give the
priest to understand, that they are also ready to enter with him, and
devoutly to asist him with their prayers.

Ad Altar Dei.
To the Altar of God. Where note that the Altar on earth, wherinto we say we
will enter, has his making and proportion in form of a table. And because
that Christ our Lord (who is the head of his church) is now above in heaven,
and the body of the same head, still here beloue in earth (which can not live
unless it be fed with proportionable food:) therefore have we daily recourse to
this Altar of God, as to a most divine and celestial table, for the daily
refection of our souls.

Ad Deum.
To God. As there is a visible Altar be neathe in earth, so there is another
invisible Altar above in heaven: and because that none can be made partaker of
the one, who has not first participated of the other, therefore from the Altar
of the Church of God in earth, we ascend to the sublime Altar of God in heaven:
that is, from the Altar of God, to God him self.

Qui letificat iuuentutem meam.
Who makes joyful my youth. For upon this sublime Altar, God will in such wise
rejoice his elect, with spiritual and ineffable delight, that he will be, a
bright mirror to their sight, music to their ears, honey to their taste,
balm to their smelling, and a flower to their touching: from whose aspect
will issue forth such unspeakable cause of joy, that if it were permitted to
behold the same, but for the space of an hour, it were alone sufficient, to
make innumerable days of this life, to be despised and contemned.

Confiteor tibi.
I will confess unto thee. Where note, that this word Confess, has in holy
Scripture sundry significations; Sometimes it is taken for an humble
acknowledging of a man's offenses before the majesty of almighty God, as in
Mat. 11. Luc. 1. Sometimes for invocation of his holy name, as Psalm. 144.
Sometimes for thanksgeuing for his benefits, as psl. 74. and 29. And in this
place it is taken for the lauds and praises, which we desire to offer up and
render unto him, as also it is in the, psalm. 66. and many others places.
Worthelie therefore, after the contemplation of that former joy, follows next,
I will confess unto thee. As if the soul should say, that she much desires
and longs to be there personally, to praise and rejoice in that ineffable
beauty, which now she does contemplat a far off.

In cithara Deus, Deus meus.
Upon the harp o God, my God. Rightly in this place is mention made of the
prophets harp, for that as David with this instrument, did conjure the evil
spirits of his father in-law Saul: 1. Reg 16. even so this heavenly harp of
the Catholic church (which is this holy Sacrifice) does specially terrify
and put to flight, all malignant and infernal spirits.

Quare tristis es anima mea?
Why art thou sad, o my soul? This rhetorical apostrophe, the prophet makes
to his own soul, the part inferior, to the part superour. For because in
this life, the body can not be free from temptation, the spirit, (though
fighting against the flesh) remains heavy: And all such so fighting, our
Lord vouchsafed to represent in him self, when he said. My soul is heavy
unto death. Mat. 26.

Et quare conturbas me?
And why do thou trouble me? This is the difference and disparitie betwixt
the good and the bad. For the souls of the good, do afflict and trouble their
bodies, to wit, by prayer, fasting, and other austerities: and contrary wise,
the bodies of the wicked, do trouble their souls, to wit, by unlawful
desires, sinful concupiscence, and infinite other disordinat appetits.

Spera in Deo.
Trust in God. Why art thou sad, o my soul and why do thou trouble me? Is
it for the greatness and multitude of thy sins? Trust in God, abissus abissum
inuocat: one bottomless depth caleth up another, the botomles depth of thy
misery, upon the bottomless depth of Gods infinite mercy. Is it because thou
can not shun all sin whatsoever? Trust in God, who knows thy weakness
better then thy self, and to thy comfort has said, that the just man faleth
seven times a day. Pro. 24.

Quoniam adhuc confitebor illi.
Because I will yet confess unto him. Yet, that is, until I come to perfect
salvation, and to that perfect glorificatio^, where the just shall shine like
the sun, in the kingdom of their Father. Yea, as holy Job says,
although he should kill me, yet will I hope in him.

Salutare vultus mei.
The saving health of my countenance. And why the health of my countenance?
Because the heart being wounded with sin, makes the countenance sad and
mornefull: but he healing my heart from the wounds, both of sin and sorrow,
shall make mirth and gladness, to shine in my face: and therefore I will call him
the health of my countenance.

Et Deus meus.
And my God. In which words he shows the reason of his former confidence and
hope in him, to wit, because he is our God. For naturally every woorkman does
love his woork, and therefore there can be no dout, but that the creator does
love his creature, and especially almighty God Man, whom he has made to his
own likeness.

Gloria Patri, and Filio, and Spiritui sancto. Sicut erat etc.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost. As it was
etc. Upon the former consideration of many secret mysteries of our creation,
salvation, and redemption, and of many other especial benefits received from
the bountiful hand of almighty God, we do here pronounce a short, but most
singular Canticle, in the honor and homage of all the blessed Trinity: in
which the high majesty of all the three parsons, the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost, is uniformly lauded, praised glorified, and adored.

Introibo ad Altar Dei.
I will enter in, to the Altar of God. These three repetitions of the Introibo,
may signify the fervent desires of three sorts of people, for the coming and
entrance of Christ into the world. First of those in the law of nature.
Secondly, of those in the law written. And thirdly, of those in the beginning
or entrance, of the law of grace, as of holy Simeon, who received an answer,
that he should not dye, til first he had seen the Savior of the world.

Ad Deum quiletificat iuuentutem meam.
To God who makes joyful my youth. Likewise, the threefould repetition of this
letificat, may signify unto us, three wonderful joys, concerning the coming
of our Lord into the world. The 1. the joy of his Anuntiation, which the
Angel of God, announced before hand to the virgin Marie The 2 the joy of his
Incarnation, when he him self (her consent first given thereto) forthwith
entered into her womb. The 3. joy, the joy of his Nativity when issuing out of
his mothers womb, he was corporally borne into the world. Which joy was so
surpassing great, that it resounded at once, in to heaven, earth, and Limbo
patrum, or part of hell. In heaven, it rejoiced the holy Angels: in earth, it
rejoiced all sorrowful sinners: and in Limbo, it wonderfully rejoiced the
holy fathers.

Adiutoriu^ nostrum, in nomine Domini.
Our help, is in the name of our Lord. The priest undertaking this holy
mystery, and no way confiding in his own forces, but in the help and
asistance. of almighty God, says. Our help is in the name of our Lord. For
without his help, though he had the help, both of men and Angels, never were
he able to bring to pass, this unspeakable work.

Qui fecit coelum et terram:
Who made heaven and earth. The people also understanding the greatness of
this work, which the priest undertakes, far surmounting all human reason,
to imprint in them selves, a steadfast belief of so sublime a mystery, confirm
their faithes herein, by an other most miraculous work of almighty God, to
wit, the creation of heaven and earth, meerelie of nothing, by his only
omnipote^t, and almighty power: as the psalmist testifies saying. Ipse dixit
and facta sunt. Psalm. 148. He spoke the word, and they were made.

To conclude, Pope Celestinus (according to some authors) was the first, who
instituted the singing of this psalm in Antieme wise as now we recite it,
before the beginning of the Mass.

Of the Confiteor. And how the same is a protestation, that we are all sinners.
THis Confiteor, is a protestation which we make before God, that we are all
sinners, and that before the priest either say Mass, or the people hear Mass,
(to receive true fruit to our selves thereby,) we ought first, humbly to
demand pardon and forgiveness of all our offenses, which we have committed
against his divine majesty.

Why this Confiteor is called General. The 1. Reason.
1. And this Confiteor is called general, and that for diverse reasons. First,
for that it was chiefly instituted for venial sins, which are general and
common to all, for as much as no man living is so holy or just, who offends
not God, at the least veniallie. For as the scripture says. The just man
falls seven times a day. Pro. 24.

The 2. Reason.
2. Again it is called general, for that it is a declaration which we make in
general, without specifying any thing in particular: it being impossible for
any man, to declare in particular all his venial sins, which moved the
holy prophet to say. Delicta quis intellig^? etc. What man knows his
offenses? From my secret sins, o Lord, make me clean Psalm. 18.

The 3. Reason.
3. Also it is called general, for that it may be made generally before all
persons, and generally in all places: in the fields, in the house, within,
and without the church whersoeuer.

How the Priest in this Confession represents the person of Jesus Christ.
4. The Priest in this place, in the person of Jesus Christ (the Lamb without
spot) confesses unto his Father, the sins of all the people, for the which
he asks forgiveness of him: taking them all upon him self, with desire to
satisfy the justice of his Father for them, by his death.

How his bowing or inclination, rep: our Saviors humiliation.
5. And his bowing or inclination of him self in saying the Confiteor:
signifies, how Jesus Christ, humbled him self, taking upon him the form of a
servant, that we who were made the servants and bondslaues of the devil, by
reason of our sins, might be made the free men of God our heavenly Father,
through the merits of Christ, his only Son.

How both shame and humility.
6. His enclining, or bowing his face in saing the same, is also to insinuate
unto us, shame, and humility: and that we ought to blush, and be apaled, to
do that in the presence of God, which we would be loath to do or commit, in
the sight of men.

How a conscience clean, even from venial sin.
7. And lastly, this Confession, teaches with how great sanctity and purity,
this most pure, and most holy Sacrifice, ought to be handled, and received of
us: in so much that, if it were possible, we should keep our selves clean,
even from venial sins. And now to explicate the words them selves.

Confiteor.
I confess. Beginning this Confiteor, we say, I confess. Because, as the
scripture says. The just man in the beginning, is the accuser of him self. and
this we do, for diverse reasons. 1. First, because this word, I confess
admonishes us of Humility, and that there is no person, of what estate soever
he be, whether King, or Emperor, but settinge aside all prerogatives of his
greatness, ought no less humbly to confess his sins, then the poorest, of
meanest creature in the world.

2. Secondly, of Verity, that we should not cloak, nor dissemble our sins,
before the face of almighty God: because as it is not lawful, to sin any
where, but there where God sees not: (which is no where) so nether is it
lawful, to conceal any thing in Confession, but that which God knows not:
which can be nothing.

3. Thirdly, of Charity, that we are not to declare or manifest any other
man's sin, save only our own, for such an one should rather say, I accuse,
then I confess: for as much also, as the Apostle says, that Charity covers
the multitude of (other men's) sins.

Deo.
Unto God. And well do we confess to have sinned against God, because sin
is defined to be; Something said, done, or desired, contrary to the law of
almighty God. This Confession therefore, is some satisfaction and ame^des,
principally made unto almighty God, because it is he, whom principally we
have offended: which caused the holy Prophet to say. Tibi soli peccaui and
malum coram te feci. Against thee only have I sinned, and done evil before
thee. Psalm. 50.

Omnipotenti.
Almighty. Or omnipotent, which only word, ministers unto us, sufficient
matter, both of fear, and of hope. For as he is omnipotent, he is able to
punish the proud and impenitent, and able to pardon the humble and penitent. As
he is omnipotent, he is able to remit, more then we can commit: and to forgive,
more then we can offended.

Beatae Mariae semper Virgini.
To B. Marie always a Virgin. Next after almighty God, ar recited the names
of 5. of his especial Saints, for five special perogatiues, wherein these
five far surpassed and excelled all others: First to our blessed lady the
virgin, because she it is, who next after God, is the first in glory. 2. She
it is, who above all other saints, is the great and general patroness, of all
such sinners, as sorrowfully fly unto her for succor. 3. She it is, whose
only merits, God esteems above the merits, of all men or Angels. 4. She it
is, whom he especially loves above all the persons that ever he created. 5.
She it is, who only among all the children of men, never had, nor committed,
any manner of sin.

Beato Michaeli Archangelo.
To B. Michael the Archangell. Secondly, to such as have had great conquest*
and victory over sin, and satan: and this was S. Michael the Archangel, who
fought against Lucifer, for his sin of pride, conquered him, and lastly cast
him out of heaven. And aptly does the priest confess unto S. Michael: because
the priest is a minister of that Church, whereof S. Michaell is both prince and
protector.

Beato Iohanni Baptistae.
To B. John Baptist, Thirdly, to such as did both preach, and do, great
penance for sin: and this was S. John Baptist, the first preacher of penance,
in the entry of the new law, The precursor of Christ: a prophet, yea more
then a prophet: of whom Truth it self did testify, that a greater was not
borne, amongst the sons of women. Who above all other prophets, merited to
demonstrate, the Messiah with his fingar: to lay his hand upon his venerable
head: and in the river of Jordan, to baptize him.

Sanctis Apostolis Petro.
To the holy Apostles Peter. Fourthly, to such as had chief power and
authority, in the militant church: and this was S. Peter, whom our Lord
ordained, chief pastor over the same: and to whom for this purpose, he
principally gave, and committed in charge, the powrfull keys, of the kingdom
of heaven, that is, power to remit, or retain sin: as testifies the
Evangelist Mat. 16.

Et Paulo.
And Paul. Fifthly, to such as greatly labored, to convert souls unto our
Lord: and this was the B. Apostle S. Paul, who in the office of preaching,
labored more then they all, to convert the heathen and unbelievers, to the
faith and knowledge of our Savior Christ. In which five prerogatives, these
five were most notable patterns. far surpassing all other Saints.

Why we jointly confess unto S. Peter, and S. Paul.
And therefore do we always jointly confess, unto these two Saints
together. 1. Because these two, with their bloodes, first founded that
inuinciple rock, the Church of Rome. 2. Because that these two princes of the
Church, as in their lives they loved on another most entirely, even so in
their deaths they were not separated.

Omnibus Sanctis.
To all Saints. Next, we confess to all Saints in general, because it is
impossible for us to displease God, but that we must also displease his Saints
by reason of the perfect union that is betwixt them. And further, because God
does use to pardon sins, at the intercession, and for the merits of his holy
Saints, as witnesses Job. cap. 5.

Et vobis fratres.
And to you brethren. Then to our brethren. For this we do, according to
the counsel of our Savior him self, saying. If thou offer thy gift at the
Altar, and there thou remember that they brother has ought against thee, leave
there thy offering before the Altar, and go first to be reconciled to thy
brother. Mat. 5.24.

Quia peccaui nimis, cogitatione, verbo, and opere.
Because I have sinned very much, in thought, word, and deed. First in this
place, we accuse our selves, of our evil thoughts: because of them, proceed
evil words. 2. Of our evil words, because evil words, corrupt good
manners. 3. Of our evil works, because it is written. Depart from me all that
work iniquity. Psalm 6.

And therefore we say, in thought, word, and deed, not in thoughts, words,
and deeds: to admonish us hereby, that when we chance by frailty, to fall
into any one mortal sin, (either by thought, word, or deed) we should
forthwith, be sorry for the same, and have recourse unto God by humble
Confession, before we commit or multiply more.

Mea culpa, mea culpa, mea maxima culpa.
My default, my default, my most greueous default. In bewayling our sins, we
knock our breasts three several times, at these three words, mea culpa.
Wherein three things may aptly be observed: the stroke, the sound, and the
feeling: to signify three things, very requisite unto perfect penance: to
wit, Contrition of heart, signified by the stroke: Confession of mouth,
signified by the sound: and satisfaction of work, signified by the hurt, or
feeling.

2. We knock, or smite our breasts: to show thereby, that we are truly and
inwardly sorry, and that we could find in our hearts, to be revenged of our
selves for our offenses. 3. Thereby to make our hard and stony hearts more
soft, by often beating and knocking. 4. Therefore we now strike them in our
selves, that God may not strike them in us hereafter 5. And Lastly, we knock
our breasts, after the example of the devout Publican, who knocked his breast,
saying, God be merciful to me a sinner, that so we may depart justified to our
own houses. Luc. 18, 13.

Ideo precor B. Mariam semper virginem.
Therefore I pray B. Marie allwaies a virgin, The great and general patrones,
of all perplexed, and poor sinners.

Beatum Michaelem Archangelum.
The B. Michaell Archangell. The victorious conqueror, over sin and satan.

Beatum Iohannem Baptistam.
The blessed John Baptist. The first preacher of penance, and, of corporal
austerity.

Sanctos Apostolos. Petrum.
The holy Apostles, Peter. The pastor, (both of the lambs and sheep) over the
whole flock of our Savior Christ.

Et Paulum.
And Paul. The zealous reclaimer, of misled and deceived souls.

Omnes Sanctos.
All Saints. To wit, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs,
Confessors, Virgins etc.

Et vos fratres.
And you brethren. And this likewise we do, according to the counsel of the
Apostle, saying: Confess your sins one to another, and pray one for another,
that you may be saved. James. 5.16.

Orare pro me ad Dominum Deum nostrum.
To pray unto our Lord God for me Where it is to be noted, that both the priest
and the people concluding the Confiteor, pray unto all the Saints, not that
they should forgive them their sins, but that they should pray unto God for
remission for them.

Thus the priest confesses himself to God, to the Saints, and to the
asistants, desiring both the Saints and them, to pray for him. And the
asistants again confess them selves to God, to the Saints and to the priest,
desiring both them, and him, to pray for them. Which latter part because it
differs little or nothing in words from the former, I shall not need any
further to expound the same.

This only I will ad for a conclusion to this discourse, that the practice of
Confession before Mass, is, and ever has been very ancient in the Catholic
Church, as appears out of Micrologus, who plainly testifies, that
Confession was always made at Mass; And the Mass of S. James the Apostle,
begins from Confession. Azor. li. 10. Instit. moral. page 1634.

Of the prayer which follows, beginning with Misereatur.
THe priest having humbly acknowledged him self, before the whole
congregation, to have offended almighty God, and to be a wretched sinner, the
people, the more to move the mercy of our Lord toward him, heartily pray unto
God for him, that he would favorably extend his mercy toward him, whom they
have chosen, at that this present with joint consent, to speak unto his
majesty in their behalfes, saying.

Misereatur tui.
This short petition, begins with this consolatorie word, of the mercy of
God, whereof the prophet says. Miserationes eius super omnia opera eius. His
mercies are above all his works psl. 144. whereof S. Chrisostom hom. de S.
Phylogenio also says. That even as the woman in travel, desires to be
delivered of her infant: even such great desire has our almighty Lord to shed
forth his mercy upon us.

Omnipotens and misericors Dominus.
Our omnipotent and merciful Lord have mercy upon thee. Which two words,
omnipotent and merciful are here joined together, for our unspeakable comfort:
to declare unto us, that God is fully as great in mercy, as he is in might:
as ready to forgive, as he is able to pardon: Who also by his infinite power
can forgive more then we can offend: and through his infinite mercy, will give
much more unto us, then either we can desire or deserve at his hands.

Et dimissis peccatis tuis.
And forgiueing thee thy sins. Past, or present; great, or small, against
God, or man; by frailty, or ignorance, by committing, or omitting; in thought,
in word, or in deed.

Perducat te ad vitam aeternam.
Bring thee to life everlasting. The inticer, or seducer to sin, seeks to
bring the sinner to everlasting death: but contrary wise, the Savior of all
sinners, seeks to bring them to everlasting life: and from temporal pain,
to eternal joy and perpetual happiness.

This done, the people likewise do humbly recite the aforesaid Confiteor;
after which, the Priest prays for the^, in the same manner that they had
before prayed for him: and then he pronounces the absolution following, which
being devoutly received of them, is not a little availeable unto them.

Of the prayer following the Confiteor, commonly called, the Absolution.
THis absolution was instituted to show, that the priest is specially ordained
of God, to make intercession for the sins of the people. And as the
Confession going before was called general: so this absolution following, is
also general. Which the priest gives only by way of prayer, and not as in a
Sacrament, as that of, Ego te absoluo, and extends it self no further, but
to the taking away of venial sins.

Why the sign of the Cross is joined with the Absolution.
The sign of the Cross is joined with this Absolution: which being made from
the head to the heart, and from the left shoulder to the right: may signify
the three ways, how we offend almighty God, to wit, by thought, word, and
work but does chiefly show, that all forgiveness of sin, proceeds from the
passion of our B. Savior.

Indulgentiam, absolutionem, and remissionem.
Pardon, absolution, and remission. Pardon of our evil thoughts: absolution of
our evil words; and remission of our evil deeds. Pardon of our sins of
frailty: absolution of our sins of malice: and remission of our sins of
ignorance.

Omnium peccatorum nostrorum.
Of all our sins. Against God, against our neighbor, or against our selves.
Of all our sins, against the divine, or eternal law, against the law of
nature, or the law of spiritual, and temporal superiors. Finally, of all our
sins whatsoever, past, present, or to come.

Tribuat nobis omnipotens and misericors Dominus.
Our omnipotent and merciful Lord give unto us. To us that humbly acknowledge
our sins before him. To us that heartily call upon him. To us that steadfastly
trust in him. To us present, and to all his faithful people, where soever
absent.

Deus tu conuersus.
O God thou being converted. That is pacified, or reconciled, from anger, to
pity: from indignation, to compassion: from justice, to mercy: from
punishment, to pardon. Or converted, to wit, to man, from whom thou have being
justly auerted.

Viuificabis nos.
Shall quicken us. That is, shall revive and give life, to that nature and
substance of ours, which is dead by sin: which of it self, cannot revive it
self, unless he, who did first give it life, when it had none, do now again
restore it being lost.

Et plebs tua laetabitur in te.
And thy people shall rejoice in thee. This converting, this viuifying, o what
wonderful joy will it bring to all thy people? What canticles and songs of
praises will it cause to all thy servants? Thy blessed mother will singe
Magnificat, Zacharias Benedictus, the Angels Gloria in excelsis, old Simeon
Nunc dimittis, and all thy people. Laudate Dominum omnes gentes. And therefore.

Ostende nobis, Domine, misericordiam tuam.
Show, o Lord, thy mercy unto us. As if he should say, thou have showed us thy
almighty power, in creating all things of nothing. Thou have showed us thy
wisdom, in marvelously governing the things created. Thou have showed us thy
justice, in the punishment of sin, both of men and Angels. Show now therefore
unto us thy mercy, by the Incarnation of thy Son for our salvation.

Et salutare tuum da nobis.
And give thy saving health unto us. For bestowing this singular pledge of thy
love upon us, what is it, that thou may, either keep from us, or can deny
us?

Domine exaudi orationem meam.
O Lord hear my prayer. To wit, to show this thy mercy, and to give this thy
saving health unto us, which is thy Son our Savior, this is the prayer which
I make unto thee, this is the prayer which I desire thou will receive of me.

Et clamor meus ad te veniat.
And let my cry come unto thee. To wit, (...) a (...) prayer, which I make
unto thee, with acclamations, clamors, and cries of my soul, the fervor of my
affection, breaking forth into cries, unto thy majesty.

Dominus vobiscum.
Our Lord be with you. Where note, that this salutation, is seven sundry
times, rehearced in the holy Mass. 1. Before the first Oremus, (which is
this) 2. Before the first Collects 3. Before the reading of the gospel. 4.
After the Creed (or if the Creed be omitted, before the offertorie.) 5.
Before the Preface. 6. Before the kissing of the Pax. 7. Before the last
Collects: to signify, as some of our devout interpreters say, the seauen-fould
gift of the holy Ghost. Which very words, with those which follow, S.
Paul himself used to Timothy saying. Dominus Jesus Christus sit cum spiritu
tuo. Our Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit. 2. Tim. vlt.

How the words. Dominus vobiscum, are words of admonition.
And they may here be likewise understood, as words of admonition, used by
the Priest to the people: As if he should say. See that our Lord be with you.

How they are words of consolation.
They may also be taken, for words of consolation: as if he should say unto
them. Our Lord dwells in you, giving effect to your demandes, that with the
help of his grace, and by perseverance in the same, you may attain at the
last, to the happy reward of everlasting life.

Et cum spiritu tuo.
And with thy spirit. It stands with great reason, that the people should
likewise pray for him, and wish that our Lord be with his spirit, who is their
speaker and ambassador, in so important, and weighty affair: which embassage
they know he cannot rightly, perform, if his mind be otherwise distracted,
and be not specially asisted by the grace of God. And for this cause do they
often pray, that our Lord may be and remain with his spirit.

Oremus.
Let us pray. Not without great reason is it, that before the priest ascend to
the Altar, he admonishes the people to pray, saying. Oremus. Let us pray: to
signify unto us, that the prayers which he is to offer unto God in our
behalfes, will be little available unto us, unless we conioyne both our hearts
and our prayers together with his. And that as he ascends in body to the
Altar: so we do likewise ascend with him in mind to the same.

And therefore he says it, before he ascend: to declare that before we pray,
we ought first to prepare and dispose our minds there unto, as the holy
scripture admonishes us saying. Coming to prayer prepare thy self and be not
as one that tempts God.

Of the priests ascending to the Altar.
AS before we said, that by the descending of the priest from the Altar, was
understood the fall of man, and the loss of Gods favor, for his
transgression: even so by his ascending at this present, may be understood, the
accomplishment of the promise of our Lord, for his restoring and salvation,
according to that of the Apostle saying. When the fulness of time came, God sent
his Son. etc. Gal. 4.

Aufer a nobis quaesumus Domine, iniquitates nostras.
Take from us o Lord we beseech thee, our iniquities. Having said. Oremus, Let
us pray, he presently beseeches our Lord, to take away from us our
iniquities: for in vain does he offer up his prayers, to almighty God, who
remains in sin. Quia Deus peccatores non audit. Because God does not hear
sinners: namely such sinners, as willfullie remain in their iniquities.

Vt ad sancta sanctorum.
The priests of the old law, might not enter into the holy sanctuary of the
temple, unless they first were washed corporally: to signify, that we ought
not to enter into this holy sanctuary of the new law, unless we first be washed
spirituallie, that is purified and cleansed from all affection of sin, lest
our Lord should say unto such an one. Friend how came thou in hither, not
having a wedding garment? Mat. 22.12.

Puris mentibus mereamur introire.
That we may be worthy to enter in to the holy of holies, with clean and
pure minds. In which words, he requires, that our Lord would therefore
vouchsafe to visit and cleanse, both his own conscience, and those of the
asistants, that so they may worthelie approach to his holy Altar (...).

Per Christum Dominum nostrum.
Thorough Christ our Lord. To obtain of God, that which we desire, we do here
ask it to be given us, in the name of Christ: because as S. Aug. says. The
prayer which is not made by Christ, not only cannot blot out sin, but also
is it self, made in sin. in psl. 108. And this also we do according to the
commandment of the son him self Ioh. 16.23. and 24. saying. Until now you
have not asked any thing in my name. Amen, amen I say to you, if you ask the
Father any thing in my name, he will give it you.

Of kissing the Altar, and of sundry reasons rendered for the same.
The 1. Reason.
1. THE priest having finished the prayer aforesaid, approaching to the Altar
kisseth the same: which he does in sign of honor and reverence, and in respect
the thing it self is holy, as being sanctified by the word of God and
prayer. 1. Tim. 4.

The 2. Reason.
2. In respect of the precious body of our Lord and Savior Jesus, which does
greatly sanctify whatsoever it touches.

The 3. Reason.
3. In respect of the Saints relics which repose under the same, for never is
there altar consecrated without some relics of Saints, which are put
underneath the great stone of the Altar, with in some little vessel; which for
this cause is called the sepulcher. Council. Carthag. 5. cap. 15.

The 4. Reason.
4. Also by this kiss, is signified, how Christ by his coming, has espoused
holy church unto him, according to that of the Ca^ticles. Cant. 1. And that of
the Ephesians, 5. So Christ loved his Church, that he gave him self for her.
For as a kiss joins mouth to mouth: so in Christ, the humanity was not
only united to the diunitie, but also the spouse, the church, was coupled to
her spouse, Christ.

The 5. Reason.
5. This kiss also does signify peace: according to that of the Apostle.
Salute one another with a holy kiss. And the God of peace be with you all.

The 6. Reason.
6. S. Augustine says, that to kiss the Altar; is a sign of Catholic
communion and unity.

The 7. Reason.
7. Lastly, it admonishes, that at this present we are to kill all hatred and
malice in us toward all persons, be in charity with them, and especially to
pray for them. For whosoever is not in perfect charity, is not fit to be
present at this holy sacrifice.

By all which sufficiently appears, how ancient this ceremony is, and what
causes and reasons there are, both for the institution and practice of the
same. Now besides the performance of this pious Ceremony, he jointly with the
same, recites the prayer and petition which ensues, saying.

Oramus te Domine, per merita sanctorum tuorum.
We beseech thee o Lord, by the merits of thy Saints. Graces and favors, are
many times conferred, not only at the request of one-frend to another, but many
times at the request of a friend to a very enemy. Man therefore being become
the enemy of God thorough his sin, interposeth the best beloved friends of
our Lord for his intercessors and mediators.

Quorum reliquiae hic sunt, and omnium sanctorum.
Whose relics are here, and of al saints. He desiereth therefore to obtain
the mercy of almighty God, by the merits and intercession of all the Saints,
but especially of those, whose holy relics are there reserved, because they
are with very great reason, presupposed to be, the especial patrons, and
protectors, both of that place, and of the devout people which are assembled in
the same.

Vt indulgere digneris omnia peccata mea. Amen.
That thou would vouchsafe to pardon all my sins. Amen. This is that,
which he principally desiereth, to be applied unto him, by the merits of
Christ, and of his Saints, the entire remission of all his sins: which point,
the aforesaid ceremony, conjoined, to this present prayer, I dout not but that
it has made, more plain and manifest.

Of the Introit of the Mass. And of sundry pious mysteries to be considered
in the same.
THE Priest having recommended the people to God by his prayers, and the people
the Priest, he goes up to the midst of the Altar (as we said before) kisseth
the same, then turns him to the right hand of the Altar, where the Missall is
laid and then begineth the Introit of the Mass.

How the right end of the Altar sig: the state of innocence.
The right end of the Altar, whereunto the Priest addresseth himself,
signifies the life and state of innocence, which our first father Adam, lost
by his sin: and consequently, all we his children thorough his transgression.

How the going first thereto, our Saviors first going to the Jews.
The going of the Priest, first to the right hand, or end of the Altar,
signifies that Christ, who was promised from the beginning, coming into the
world, went first to the people of the Jews, before the Gentiles. For the
Jews, by reason of the Law, were then on the right hand: and the Gentiles, by
reason of their Idolatry, on the left.

Of the signification of the word Introit.
The word Introit, is borrowed of the Latins, as those that are but meanly
learned, can not but know, and signifies with us. Agoing in, an entrance,
beginning or proemium. And for as much as all those who treat of these
mysteries, do commonly appoint the Sacrifice of the Mass, to begin at this
place, and for that at this time, the priest makes his first entrance unto the
Altar, and not before: therefore, for the proper affinity of the word, with the
action of the Priest, it is aptly called, by the name of Introit. In which
sense, both Rabanus, and Conradus, li. 1. Ceremoniarum, and others expound the
same.

How the Introit sig: mystically the earnest desire for the coming of Christ.
This Introit mystically signifies the earnest desire of the people of all
ages for the coming of Christ, which desire he him self afterward witnessed
saying. Abraham your father rejoiced that he might see my day, and he saw, and
was glad. John. 8.56.

How the double repetition sig: the greatness of the necessity, and the feruor
of the disre.
The double repetition thereof: signifies the greatness of the necessity, and
the fervor of the desire: together with the great joy and exultation which was
in the world, when he afterward came him self in person.

The Gloria Patri, an humble thanksgiving.
The Gloria patri which is annexed unto the same Introit, is as a most humble,
and hearty thanksgeuing unto the blessed Trinity, for so singular a benefit
bestowed upon us.

The Introit of the Mass confirmed by miracle.
Almaricus bishop of Treues, testifies of a miracle, which almighty God
showed in approbation of this part of the Mass. Who writes, that he heard
sunge by the holy Angels for the Introit of the Mass upon the feast of the
Epiphanie, in the church of S. Sophie at Constantinople, the 94. Psl. Venite
exultemus. etc. Fortunat de ord. Antiph. cap. 21.

Of Kyrie eleison, and of sundry mysteries to be considered in the same.
Three sorts of languages used in the Mass: and what is sig: by the same.
IN the holy Mass, have long time been used, three sorts of languages,
sanctified on the Cross of our Savior Jesus, to wit, Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin. Of Hebrew, these words following, Amen, Alleluia, Cherubin, Seraphin,
Osanna, Sabbath. Of Greek, kyrie eleison, Christ eleison. Of Latin, all the
residue of the Mass, as being the most universal tongue in the west Church.
Which three languages, represent the title which was fastened on the cross of
our Savior, written in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin.

Kyrie eleison, Christ eleison.
Kyrie eleison, are two Greek words, which signify in latin, Domine miserere,
Lord have mercy: and Christ eleison, Christ have mercy.

Why kyrie eleison, is nine times repeated. The first Reason.
These devout petitions, are nine times repeated, to put us in mind, of nine
sorts of sins, wherewith we offend almighty God. The first three, by
original, mortal, and venial. The second three, by thoughts, words, and
deeds. The third three, by frailty, ignorance, and malice, and particularly
in these last three. Wherefore, for our sins of frailty, we address our
prayer to the Father, saying. Kyrie eleison. For our sins of ignorance, to
the Son saying. Christ eleison. And for our sins of malice, to the holy
Ghost, saying. Kyrie eleison.

The second Reason.
Again these words are nine times rehearced, to signify the fervent desires
of all mankind for the coming of Christ, by whose coming he sold be asociated
to the nine orders of Angels. Which our Lord him self does describe by the
nintie and nine sheep, which he left, to seek out the one lost sheep, which
was man, to restore him unto his nintie and nine, that is, to the nine orders
of Angels.

Why we say kyrie eleison both to the Father and the Holy Ghost, and not to
the Son.
To the Father and the holy Ghost, we say Kyrie eleison, and to the Son,
Christ eleison, for the which Innocentius the 3. gives this reason. If you
will ask me why we say not to the Son Kyrie eleison, as well as to the
Father, and the holy Ghost, is to signify, that in the Father, and the holy
Ghost, there is but one, and the self same nature, that is to say, only
divine: but in the Son, there is a double nature, to wit both divine, and
human; for that he is both perfect God, and perfect man, and so is nether the
Father, nor the holy Ghost. libro secundo de myster. mis. cap. 19.

Kyrie eleison confirmed by miracle.
I cannot here let pass to speak of the great and wonderful virtue of these
words. Saint Basil by the pronunciation of these words, caused the doors of a
church which were shut against him, to open of their own accord. And S.
Gemianus at the cry of these words put five kings to flight.

S. Basil, taking unto him a man, which had given him self to the devil, by a
writing under his own hand, (which the devil would in nowise restore)
commanded a number of devout people, and religious parsons present, to lift up
their hands to heaven with him, and to cry without ceasing, Kyrie eleison,
Christ eleison, Kyrie eleison, which the people performing with many devout
tears, in the sight of all that were present, the devil perforce, let fall the
self same writing out of the air, into the hands of the holy bishop. In
vita S. Basilij.

And these holy words, have always been used, and highly esteemed, amongst
devout christians, as words of singular force and virtue to chase away the
devil, and all other malignant spirits that would annoy them.

To conclude, this sacred Canticle is very ancient, as the Liturgies of
blessed S. James the Apostle, S. Basil, and S. Chrisostom do make manifest
mention. And by the Council of Vase, was brought in the custom, to singe the
same, at Mass, Mattins, and Euensong: which Council was houlden, above 250.
years before S. Gregory the first.

Of the canticle called, Gloria in excelsis.
Three hymns in the Mass first invented by the Angels.
THis Canticle is commonly called hymnus Angelicus, the Angelical hymn (as
also Alleluia, and Sanctus:) because the first invention came from the Angels,
who have given us example, to laud and praise our Lord in this manner.
Whereunto accords Rupertus, saying: This hymn, the church has taken from the
mouth of Angels. But this is more manifest by the scripture it self, for we
read in S. Luke, that an Angel, with a great light, appeared to the
shepherds, as they were feeding their flocks, and brought unto them tidinges,
that the Savior of the world was newly borne, saying. Behold I euangelize
unto you great joy, that shall be unto all people, because this day is borne to
you a Savior. And suddenly there was with the Angel; a multitude of the
heavenly army, praising God, and saying. Gloria in excelsis Deo. etc. Luc.
2.11.

Gloria in excelsis etc. partly composed by men and partly by Angels.
This spiritual hymn consists of two parts, the first whereof, as before is
said, was composed by the Angels, unto these words laudamus te etc. Which
other words, with the verses subsequent, are said by some to be the words of
S. Hillarie bishop of Poictiers. Some report that he brought them with him at
the return of his exile out of Greece. As namly Alcuinus li. de diuinis
officijs. cap. de celeb. Miss. Others, that it was receued into the church by
the institution of the Apostles. Durand. lib. 4. cap. 13. number. 4.

Why this hymn is omitted upon the feast of Innocents.
This hymn, as also Alleluia, is ommitted upon the feast of Innocents: to
represent the sorrowful mourning for the murder and barbarous cruelty of
king Herod, thinking in killing the infants, to have destroyed and slaughtered,
our Lord and Savior.

Why in Septuagesima, and Lent.
In Septuagesima likewise, and until Easter, this canticle is omitted: because
then is represented in the church, the time of penance, to wit, this life,
wherein we can not participat of the joys of Angels, but are to lament and
deplore, the miserable estare of our ruin and fall.

Why in the Masses for the dead.
Likewise it is ommitted in all Masses for the dead, because, as Almaricus
fortunatus very well notes, all canticles of joy, ought to cease in this
office, which is an office, of tears and lamentations. li. 3. de eccles.
offic. cap. 44.

Why this canticle was first composed and placed in the Mass.
This joyful Canticle, (wherein is set forth the ample praises of Jesus
Christ,) the holy Fathers of the church first placed in the Mass, to the end
to refute and confound the wicked Arrians, who had composed sundry ballets and
songs to diminishe the glory of our blessed Savior. For which cause the
aforesaid Fathers, by a holy zeal, were incited to compose a contrary
canticle, wherein should evidently be set forth, the honorable titles, and
excellencies, of the same Savior: by the which, publicly in the Mass,
those Arrian heretics might be confounded.

Why the Priest stands before the midst of the Altar in rehearcing this
hymn.
THE priest in rehearcing this hymn, stands before the midst of the Altar:
to signify thereby, that Christ is the mediator betwixt God and man. As also
to declare, that it was first pronounced in the honor of him, who is as it
were, in the midst of the Trinity.

Of the lifting up of the hands of the priest to heaven.
Standing in the midst of the Altar, together with the pronounciation of the
words of this canticle, he devoutly lifts up both his hands to heaven, and
then drawing them reverently down, with cheerful voice pursues on the rest
of this Angelical hymn: signifying hereby the ineffable joy which came from
above unto men, by the birth and nativity of our blessed Savior. Thus much in
general. And now to explicate the words them selves.

Gloria in excelsis Deo.
Glory in the highest to God. Beginning, he says, Glory to God. Which first
makes against those Arria^s who sought by all means to impair and diminish
the glory of our Lord. And next he adds, in the highest, that is to say, in
heaven: because albeit the glory of God, does clearlie shine in all places,
yet most especially in heaven, where the dwelling of his Saints and Angels is.

Et in terra pax.
And in earth peace. Before the birth of our Savior Christ, there were three
enmities. The first was, between God, and man: The second, between Angels, and
man. And the third, between man, and man. But our peace being come, (who took
away our sin) he reconciled man to God; Angels, to men; and men among
themselves. And this caused the Angels joyfully to sing forth, and promulgate
this peace to all the world. This peace the prophet likewise foretold saying,
that at this time, me^ should turn their swords into plough-shares, and their
lances into sithes, Esaias. 2. Because at this time, all oppressions, wars, and
inhuman cruelties, should generally cease thoroughout the world.

Hominibus bonae voluntatis.
To me^ of good will. Peace is proclaimed to me^, yet not to all whosoever, but
only to those who be of good will, that is to say, to those who with good will
receive Christ: but not to those who persecute Christ. Whose superaboundant
mercy nevertheless is such, that he suffers his sun to shine, and his rain
to fall, both upon the just and iniust, thereby to provoke them to repentance
and amendment of life. Mat. 5.

Laudamus te.
We praise thee. Greatly truly, ought we here, to multiply the praises of
almighty God, for that he has done such marvelous things, in the
incarnation, and nativity, of his Son Jesus Christ: who being by his
divinity, before the beginning of the world, was in the fulness of time made
man, and was borne of a virgin, above the order of nature, to raise us up from
the fall of Adam. Gal. 4.

Benedicimus te.
We bless thee. Albeit that God be the fountain of all benediction, yet we
pray, that his holy name may be blessed by us, and in us, singing melodiously
his praises, without forgetfulness of his retributions. Psalm. 102. And thus he
that blesses all his creatures, is blessed of his creatures.

Adoramus te.
We adore thee. In utter detestation of all idolatry, we here adore our Lord
Jesus Christ, rendering unto him all sovereign honor, service, and homage: and
to declare hereby, that unto Idols, we must not give any honor or homage, nor
attribute unto them, any title or propriety, belonging to God.

Why the Priest boweth at the word, Adoramus.
And hence it is, that in pronouncing these words, he boweth him self with a
certain veneration, toward the Altar: for what else is the Altar, but the
admirable, and dreadful seat, of the presence and majesty of almighty God?

Glorificamus te.
We glorify thee: to wit, for the greatness of thy bounty, of thy goodness, of
thy benignity, of thy mercy, of thy beauty, of thy sweetness, of thy meeknes,
of thy liberallitie of thy noblenes, and for all the other unspeakable
perfections which are inherent in thee.

Gratias agimus tibi.
We thank thee. For it is not enough, to praise and magnify his goodness, but
we must give him thanks also for his benefits: and in particular, for this
singular benifit, of our Saviors Nativity, announced unto us, by this
evangelical hymn.

Propter magnam gloriam tuam.
For thy great glory. First, for the glory that is in him, whereof the
creature ought as greatly to rejoice, as if the same were in him self.
Secondly, for the glory which he has revealed unto us, in his church
militant. And thirdly, for the glory which he will reveal unto us, in his
church triumphanr.

Domine Deus.
Lord God. First God the Father is here called upon, in terms common to all
the blessed Trinity, and this to confirm us in the belief of the unity of
the divine essence: for the Father is Lord God: the Son is Lord God: and the
holy Ghost is Lord God: and yet nor three Lords, nor three Gods, but one only
Lord, and one only God.

Rex celestis.
Heavenly king. He is called heavenly king because at his simple, and only
word, he created of nothing the highest heaven, and does govern it at his
pleasure, by his incomparable power: and consequently all other things here
in earth, of what sort or condition soever they be.

Deus Pater.
God the Father: In this unity of essence, and Trinity of persons, the Father
is the first; and is so called, for that he, who is the beginning without
beginning, has ineffablie begotten the same his dearly beloved Son, before
all worlds, of his own, true, and natural substance.

Omnipotens.
Omnipotent. This Father is said to be omnipotent, to the end that with all
reverence, we may honor his majesty, whereof his omnipotency, is the chief
and sovereign attribute, whereby he does and works, whatsoever he will, and
is meet and decent for him to do. Genesis 17. Psl. 113.

Domine Fili.
Lord the Son. Upon the confession of this article, is laid the foundation
of our Christian faith, and salvation, for as S. John says. Whosoever shall
confess, that Jesus is the Son of God, God abides in him, and he in God. 1.
John. 4.15. And S. Peter for this confession that Christ was the Son of God,
was by our Saviors own mouth, pronounced blessed. Mat. 16.

Vnigenite.
Only begotten: He is said to be the only begotten of God the Father, for
that he only is engendered eternally of the Father, and of the self same
nature, substance, wisdom, and almighty power that the Father is.

Jesus Christ.
Jesus- Christ. These two names were impoed upon our blessed Savior, not by
chance, but by divine ordinance: to express the two natures contained in him,
to wit, divine, and human; For the name Jesus, signifying a Savior, has
relation to his divinity: and the name Christ, signifying anointed, is to be
referred to his humanity. Marc. 2. Psl. 44.

Domine Deus.
Lord God. As before the Father was called Lord God, so now the Son is
likewise called Lord God, and this justly; First as well by right of creation,
as of redemption. Secondly, because all lordship and power, was absolutely
given him by his Father, in particular at the day of his resurrection: Since
which time, he has always had us under his dominion, as his peculiar
inheritance, bought and purchased with his precious blood.

Agnus Dei.
Lamb of God. This Lord, and almighty God, is here called by the name of a
Lamb, to express more plainly unto us, his humanity, in the which, he was
led to the slaughter, as an innocent Lamb, and in the same, was sacrificed for
the sins of all the world. Esaias. 53.

Filius Patris.
Son of the Father. And here again, we attribut unto him a new, this title
of Son of the Father: to express his divinity, which allway remained united
to his humanity, even in his passion and death it self.

Qui tollis peccata mundi.
Who take away the sins of the world. For the more manifest explication of
his divine nature, as well as of his human, it is here said, who take away
the sins of the world: for this power, being only proper to God him self,
is nevertheless attributed to our Savior Christ, to declare his divinity and
godhead thereby. Marc. 2.

Miserere nobis.
Have mercy on us. Because he is God, and has the self same power with his
heavenly Father, we humbly beseech him to have mercy on us, he being he, who
is called the God of mercy, and who houldeth his loving arms always open, to
receue all such as fly unto him.

Qui tollis peccata mundi, suscipe deprecationem nostram.
Who take away the sins of the world, receive our prayer. These words,
are twice repeated by the priest, upon the undoubted hope of his goodness and
mercy aforesaid. And in particular, he humbly beseeches him, to receive his
prayers, with those of the asistants, that he may the better consecrate and
offer, this dreadful sacrifice.

Qui seeds ad dextram patris.
Who sit at the right hand of the Father. By which words is evidently
expressed, both his power, and his majesty: which is far exalted above all
Highness, Virtues, Throanes, Dominations, Powers, Principallities, Cherubins,
and Seraphins: and in which he shall judge, both men and Angels. Colos. 1. Heb.
1.

Miserere nobis.
Have mercy on us. Here anew we beseech him, of mercy and pardon for our
offenses, to the end that we may be comforted of him at our deaths, and
withal, avoid the rigor of his dreadful judgments, after the time of our
departure.

Quoniam tu solus sanctus.
Because thou only art holy. He is called, only holy, for that this
holiness, whereof we speak, is from all eternity, absolute, proper, and
essential in him: which holiness, nether Angels nor men, can have of them
selves, but only by grace: like as the air, and the water, do borrowe their
brightness and clearnes from the sun, which only of it self, is clear and
bright.

Tu solus Dominus.
Thou only art Lord. And justly do we affirm him, to be only Lord, because
he only created us, he only redeemed us, he only sanctifies us, and he
only will glorify us. Again he only is Lord, because he only was mediator
in that noble work of our salvation: For albeit there be more mediators of
intercession, yet (as says S. Aug.) there is but one of redemption.

Tu solus altissimus.
Thou only art highest. And he is not only called Lord, but also highest, yea
even in his humanity, because he has lifted up man's nature, to the highest
degree of honor, that can be desired. And this we ought firmlie to believe, and
in believing, to honor.

Jesus Christ.
Jesus Christ. And here note, that albeit this name of Jesus, was first
manifested to us by an Angel, yet it was long before imposed by God him self
from all eternity, and therefore is called. Nomen super omne nomen. Act. 4. A
name above all names, because of the giver and imposer of the same. And
therefore, says Origin, it was brought from heaven, and named by an Angel,
because it was not decent, that it should first be named by men, nor by them be
first brought into the world, but of some more excellent, and noble nature.

Cum sancto Spiritu.
With the holy Spirit. This holy Spirit, is the third parson, equal in all
perfections, with the Father, and the Son. This holy Spirit is he, of whom
the prophet David spoke, when he prayed, saying. Take not thy holy Spirit from
me. Psl. 50. This holy Spirit is he, by whose operation, was wrought the
wonderful mystery of the Incarnation, in the sacred womb of the virgin.
Marie. Luc. 1. Finally, this holy Spirit is he, without whose divine
inspiration, we can do nothing, worthy of eternal life.

In gloria Dei Patris.
In the glory of God the Father. These words, the church has prudentlie
adjoined, to the two last clauses, and sentences of this sacred hymn, to take
away a dout, which otherwise might be moved, upon the words aforegoing, in
which our Savior, is said to be only Lord, only holy, and only highest:
and therefore to show, that the Father, and the holy Ghost, are not excluded,
there is added, with the holy Ghost, in the glory of God the Father.

Amen.
1. This word Amen, is an Hebrew word, wherewith the people make answer at
every prayer, and benediction of the priest, and is as much to say, as
verelie, faithfully, or so be it. See Rabanus de institutione. cler. l. 1. c.
33.

2. Nether is it the custom of the Greeks, or Latins, to translate this word
into their vulgar tongue, no more then Alleluia, and other words, which for
their holy authority, and the antiquity of the proper tongue, have been
religiously observed, by the Apostles them selves.

3. And so sacred is this word, that S. John reports, to have seen and
heard the same in heaven, Apoc. 19. Therefore let us not attempt to say it
otherwise in earth, then it is said in heaven, for that were not only, to
correct the church in earth in her doings, but to correct those in heaven also
in theirs.

Of the kiss of the Altar, after Gloria in excelsis.
At the end of this Angellicall hymn, the priest boweth him down, and kisseth
the Altar, which he does in the celebration of the Mass, nine several times,
and that not without a special mystery. For this kiss is a sign of peace,
the which in this holy hymn, was first announced by the embassage of Angels.
The priest therefore, in using the same nine several times, insinuates hereby,
that he desires to be joined and united, to the nine orders of Angels; As
also, that they would asist him to present his prayers and oblations to
almighty God.

Finally, most authors do both agree and confess, that the antiquity of
this part of the Mass, is deduced, at the least, from Telesphorus Pope, who
lived well nigh 1500. years agone. See Walfridus in li. de reb. eccles. cap.
22. Rupertus, Amalaricus, Rabanus, Berno, and Innocentius tertius.

Of the turning of the priest to the people, at Dominus vobiscum, and of
sundry mysteries contained therein.
THe priest turns him on his right hand to salute the people, and on the
same, returns again unto the Altar: all which is not void, of singular
mystery and signification.

How the Priests turning on the right hand sig: an upright intention:
1. First, therefore it may signify, that the priest is to have, a stright and
upright intention to heaven, both for him self, and for the people: which is
aptly understood by the right hand.

2. Secondly, we also who are present, are hereby premonished, to lift up our
hearts to him, who sits on the right hand of his Father: according as we
confess, in the article of our Creed.

Dominus vobiscum.
Our Lord be with you. Having turned him self to the people, he saluteth them
saying. Dominus vobiscum. Our Lord be with you: which he says, that he may
conioyne and link, the minds of the people to almighty God, and to make them
more attent, to his divine service.

What is meant by extending his arms.
And note, that together with the prolation of the words, he spreads, and
opens abroad his arms: to signify thereby, how Christ has his arms always
open, and ready to receive those, that are truly penitent, and do fly unto
him.

Et cum spiritu tuo.
And with thy spirit. In which words, the people pray, that with the spirit of
man, the spirit of God may be present, to teach, and direct him: without whose
asistance, we can do nothing acceptable to him, as him self has witnessed,
by his Apostle, saying. Without me you can do nothing. So that the answer of
the people, is wholly to be referred, to the action of the priest, to wit, to
the oblation which he purposes to make in their behalfes.

Why after this, the Priest returns him again, to the right hand of the
Altar.
After this, the people having answered, Et cum spiritu tuo, the priest,
returns him again to the right hand of the Altar: expressing thereby, how our
Savior did not immediately forsake the Jews for their obstinacy, but often
turned to them, to have turned them to him. As also that we his children,
should do the like to our brethren, when at any time they offend, or trespass
against us.

The use of this salutation is very ancient in the holy Mass, as plainly
appears by the council of Vase, and the Liturgies of S. James, S. Basil, and
S. Chrisostom.

Of Oremus, and of the sundry mysteries contained in the same.
How Oremus sig: distrust in our selves. Oremus.
LEt us pray. The priest, distrusting as it were, in his own strenght,
gathers unto him the prayers of all the people, saying Oremus, as if he
should say. Asist me with your prayers. For certain it is, that our merciful
Lord, will not deny to a multitude their petitions, who has promised to hear
the prayers of two or three, that are gathered together in his name. Mat.

How that our Savior both prayed him self, and exhorted others also to pray.
He pronounces this word Oremus with a high voice: to stir up, and provoke
others to pray, and prays him self also: for so our Savior both exhorted
his disciples to pray, and likewise prayed him self also.

How elevation of heart in the time of prayer.
In saying Oremus, he lifts up his hands: to put us in mind, that our
hearts should be elevated in the time of prayer. For as we read in 16. of
Exodus, whilst Israel fought with Amalech, Moises ascended upon a mountain,
and when he lifted up his hands, Israel overcame, but if he slacked, or
withdrew them, Amalech overcame. Wherein the priest ought to imitate that holy
Moises, to obtain the victory, against those invisible Amalechites, which are
the devils.

How it represents the manner and form of our Saviors prayinge.
Together with the pronounciation of the word, he further has his hands,
lifted up and joined together: in which sort, our Savior him self prayed in
the garden, as is most credibly supposed.

Of the first Collects. And of sundry mysteries and reasons rendered, for the
same.
The 1. Reason.
THE First prayers, which the priest offers up to God in the Mass, are
commonly called by the name of Collects, which is a word borrowed of the
Latins, as the learned do very well know, and signifies, a gathering, or
collection: which as it may be made of diverse and sundry things, so has it
sundry significations.

1. Sometimes it signifies a collection which is made, of tributes and duties,
to be paid to the Prince: whereof it comes, that the gatherers thereof, are
called Collectors.

2. Sometimes it is taken for the collection, which is wont to be made in the
church for the poor, as 1. Cor. 16. De collectis autem quae fiunt in Sanctis:
And as touching the collections, which are made for the Saints. And again
presently after. Ne cum venero tunc collectae fia^t. Lest when I come, then
collections be made.

3. Both the holy Scripture, and the ancient Fathers, do use this word
Collect, to signify an assembly of the people of God, and yet not every
manner of assembly, but only of such, as are great and solemn, as Leuit. 23.
Dies enim coetus est atque collectae. For it is a day of meetinge and
assembly. And in Deuteronomy. 16. Quia collecta est Domini Dei tui. Because it is the
assembly of thy Lord God. And in the 2. of Paralipemenon. 7. Fecitque Solomon
die octauo collectam. And Solomon made a collection upon the eight day.

4. So that by this which has been alredie said, it is not hard to
understand, why the first prayers in the Mass, are called Collects: the which
Durandus in his fourth book and 15. cap. explicateth saying. Collects
properly are prayers, which are so called, for that they are said upon the
people assembled.

The 2. Reason.
Again, they may be called Collects: by reason that they are certain brief
collections, of all the prayers, requests, and supplications of the people of
our Lord, which the priest (who is the speaker for the people) does collect and
gather in one, to present and offer them up to God in their behalf.

The 3. Reason.
And again, they are called Collects: to signify, that it is not enough for
those who intend to offer up prayers, acceptable to God, to be assembled in the
self same place bodily, but that they ought principally, to have their
hearts united together, by perfect love and charity, and to be recollected
spiritually. For nothing is more contrary to perfect prayer, then is
division, or distraction of spirit.

The 4. Reason.
As touching the institution of the Collects, it is principally for these
purposes, to wit. Either in respect of the time, wherein they are recited. Or for
the necessities of the persons, for whom they are recited. Such for example are
those, for the most part, of Aduent, wherein is desired of God, that the coming
of Christ our Savior into the world, may be to our salvation. And likewise
those in Lent, wherein we pray, that our fasting and abstinence, may be
profitable unto us, and meritorious for the satisfaction of our sins. Also
sometimes they are made, for certain persons in particular, as for the Pope,
for the Bishop, for the Prince etc.

The 5. Reason.
The matter it self, and subject of the Collectes, is commonly taken out of
the holy Scriptures. As for example, that of the three children, the which is
recited very often, and namely in the Masses of all the Saturdaies, of the
four times of the year, and is taken out of the 3. chapter of the prophet
Daniel; which Collect, begins as follows. Deus qui tribus pueris etc. O
God, which to the three children, did mitigate the flames of fire: grant
mercifully, that we thy servants, be not burned with the flames of our vices
etc. Where you see, that this Collect is founded, upon that wonderful miracle,
which our Lord wrought, in assawaging the flames of the fiery furnace, in the
favor and conservation, of those his faithful servants, by occasion whereof,
we beseech our Lord, to assawage in us, the flames of our vices, and sinful
concupiscences.

Likewise that of Sexagesima Sunday, is in a manner the same: wherein the
Church, takes occasion to pray unto God, that he would deliver us from all
adversity, by the help and protection, of blessed Saint Paul, whom he
graciously preserved, from so many perilles, saying. Deus qui conspicis etc. O
God who see, that we do in no wise, put our trust in our own actions:
grant mercifully, that by the protection of the doctor of the Gentiles, we may
be defended against all adversities. Amen.

Sometimes they are taken, out of the lives and examples of the holy Saints,
whose feasts are celebrated. As that on the feast of blessed S. Laurence,
saying. Da nobis quaesumus etc. Grant us we beseech thee, o almighty God, to
quench in us, the flames of our vices, who grantedst to S. Laurence, to
overcome the flames of his torments. And in the self same manner of diverse
others.

The 6. Reason.
Concerning the different number of Collects, the Church practices two, or
three several things. The first is, that she ordinarily uses, disparitie of
number, either of one alone, or of three, or of five, or else of seaue^ at the
most. not for superstition, as heretics do suppose, but for signification
and instruction, as shall further appear.

How One, to sig: one God, and one faith.
She uses one alone, propter sacramentum vnitatis, for the sacrament of
unity, as says Innocentius 3. to signify thereby, the unity of God, in
whom we believe: as also the unity of faith, which we profess: according to
that of the Apostle Ephesians. 4. One God, one faith, one baptism.

How Three, for the mystery of the Trinity.
She uses three, to signify the mystery of the blessed Trinity: and in the
honor of the three persons. And after the exsample of our Savior, who prayed
three times in the garden.

How Five, in honor of the five wounds.
She uses five, in honor and memory, of the five wounds of our Savior
Jesus: which is a mystery, that the Christians ought always, to have in
singular recommendation.

How Seven, in honor of the seven gifts of the holy Ghost.
And she uses seven, to represent unto us, the seven gifts of the holy
Ghost. And to conform her proceedinges herein, to our blessed Saviors, who
teaching his disciples how to pray, comprised all things necessary, in seven
petitions.

Lastly, these Collects ought to be short, and to comprehend briefly, that
which we may lawfully desire, hope, and demand at the merciful hands of
almighty God. They ought also, to be pronounced with such humility,
attention, reverence, modesty of countenance, and comportment of body, that
the asistants, may both be edified, and made attentive thereby: For he that
should pray otherwise, looselie, and swiftly, with the only motion of his
lips, should make his prayer barraine, and unfruitful before almighty God.

Of the conclusion of the Collects, and of sundry mysteries, to be considered
in the same.
FIrst, all the prayers in the Mass, are commonly begun, in the name of the
Father, and concluded in the name of the Son: the church having conformed her
self in this point, to the doctrine of our Savior him self, saying.
Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you. Ioh. 4.

Per Dominum nostrum.
Thorough our Lord. The priest as we have said, concluding the Collects,
demands all things to be given, of our heavenly Father, in the name, and
for the love, of Jesus Christ, his Son, our Lord: because it is he, in whom
the Father is well pleased, and to whom he can deny nothing, for as much as he
always accomplisheth his will and pleasure. Marc. 11.

Iesum Christum.
Jesus Christ. At which words the priest boweth or inclines himself: where it
is to be noted, that although there be many other honorable names and titles
belonging to our Lord, yet at none of these do we bow our selves: the reason
whereof is, because those names, show what he is in him self: but this name of
Jesus, specially declares, what he is made unto us, to wit, our Savior: for
what else is Jesus, as S. Bernard says, but a Savior?

Filium tuum.
Thy Son. Thine indeed, nether by grace, nor election of creature, but by
propriety of kind, and verity of substance. Thine truly, not by adoption,
like unto other, but truly natural, like unto none other.

Qui tecum viuit and regnat, in vnitate Spiritus Sancte Deus etc.
Who lives and reigns with thee, in the unity of the Holy Ghost, God etc.
In which words, the Priest admonishes the people, to believe, that the Son
of God lives and reigns for ever, without beginning or ending, and is of the
same substance, and equal power, together with the Father, and the Holy Ghost.

Of the word Amen, and of sundry things to be considered in the same.
THis word, Amen, is very commonly to be read and seen in sundry places of
holy Scripture, as Deuteronomy. 27. Cursed is he which abides not in the words of
this law, nor does them in work, and all the people shall say, Amen. Also in
Tobias, when Gabelus had said the benediction, all answered, Amen.

How Amen sig: truth or verity.
Sometimes it signifies the truth or verity of a thing: so Christ answering
in the gospel said, Amen Amen. that is, veritatem dico vobis, I say the truth
unto you. Wherefore when the priest concludes the Collects, saying. Who lives
and reigns with thee, God world without end, the people, to declare, that
they do truly and firmlie believe the same, answer Amen. As if they should
say, we do truly, steadfastly, and verily believe, even as thou say of
the Son of God.

What is usually sig: by Amen.
But the most common, and usual signification thereof, in all the petitions of
the Mass is, that what the priest, has faithfully demanded of almighty God,
we hope undoubtedly, shall be given unto us, and be truly accomplished in effect.

Why Amen, is rehearced by the people.
And since in those things which appertain to God, the people have the Priest,
as their ambassador or speaker, therefore in the end of all his prayers, they
give their consent to his demandes, saying; Amen. And for this cause it is,
that all the prayers, which are made by the Priest, although sometimes, some of
them be recited in private and silence, yet are they concluded openly, and in
the hearing of all the assistants.

Amen, one of the names of almighty God.
Finally, for the greater honor of this most holy and sacred word, S. John
affirms, that it is one of the names of almighty God, saying. Thus says
Amen, the faithful and true witness. Apoc 3. 14. And so highlye does S. Aug
honor the same, that he says it is not lawful, to translate it, into any
other language. Tract 41. in Joan.

Of the Epistle. And first of the etymology, and signification of the word.
First, the word Epistle, is a word, borrowed of the Greek word, Epistellin,
which signifies, to send betwixt, as epistles, or letters, which are a speech
of one present, to one that is absent. Such was the epistle of S. Paul 1. These.
5 27. Wherein he says, I adjure you by our Lord, that this Epistle be read to
all the holy brethren.

The reading of the Epistle: represents the reading of our Savior in the
sinagogue.
He which reads the Epistle, standing upright, pronounces the same, the
book being open. Because according to the Evangelist, S. Luc. 4.16. Jesus came
to Nazareth where he was brought up, and he entered according to his custom, on
the Saboth day into the sinagogue, and he rose up to read, and the book of
Esaias the prophet, was delivered unto him. And as he unfolded the book, he
found the place, where it was written. The spirit of our Lord upon me, for
which he anointed me: to euangelise unto the poor, he sent me etc. Esaias 61.
And when he had foulded the book, he rendered it to the minister.

Why the Epistle is read, next after the Collect or prayer.
The Epistle is presently read, after the Collect, of prayer. To give us to
understand, that without humble prayer, first made unto almighty God, never
can we read any thing to the profit or benifit of our souls.

Why only the Scripture is read, in the time of Mass.
Never has the Church permitted, that the lives of any Saints, nor the
tractes of any Doctors, how learned or holy soever they were, be read in the
office of the Mass, but only the most holy Scriptures them selves, either of
the Law, of the Prophets, of the Euangelsts, or of the writings, or Epistles,
of the B. Apostles: to signify, that this holy Sacrifice does represent unto
us, the life of the Saint of all Saints, our sole redeemer and Savior Jesus.

Why none of the old Testament is read upon Sundays.
Never also upon Sundays, is read in the Mass, any part of the old
Testament, but only of the new: to signify, that we are now under the law of
grace, the which after the resurrection of our Lord (mystically represented
by the Sunday) was publicly preached, thoroughout the world. As also to
condemn hereby, the error of the Jews, who maintain, that the law of
Moses, should remain for ever.

Why the Epistle, is always read on the right hand of the Altar.
The Epistle is always read, on the right side of the Altar: to signify (as
often has already bin said) that our Savior came first to the people of the
Jews, who were said to be on the right hand. According to that of the Apostle,
saying. To you it behooved first to preach the gospel of the kingdom. Acts
13.46.

Why the Epistle is read before the Gospel.
And it is read before the Gospel, to declare. that all the predictions of the
Prophets, did only tend to this, to guide and lead men, to the true light and
understanding, of the gospel of Christ. As also to signify, the office of S.
John Baptist, who went before the face of our Lord, to prepare his ways, as
himself testifies, saying. I am the voice of a criar in the wilderness, prepare
the way of our Lord. Mat. 3. And the Apostles likewise were sent before our
Savior, into every town and city, where him self was to go.

Why the people sit at the reading of the Epistle.
All the people are permitted to sit, at the reading of the Epistle, to
signify the imperfection of the old law, and the great difference betwixt
it, and the dignity of the new. And further to declare, that we reserve our
greatest, and chiefest reverence, for the reading of the gospel.

The different voices, used in pronouncing the old and new testament.
But this is much more lively expressed in a high Mass, by the difference of
voices which is used in pronouncing the oulde and new Testament: for the one is
pronounced, with a heavy and low voice, but the other, with a cheerful and
high voice. Which is done, to signify the different estate of the Church,
under the two Testaments. For under the oulde, she was in servitude and
bondage, understood by the low and heavy voice,: but under the new, in
freedom and liberty, understood by the cheerful and high voice.

Why the Subdeacon kisseth the Priests hand.
After the Epistle is read (if it be in a high Mass) the Subdeacon,
presents the book to the Priest closed, who puts his hand thereon, and
then the Subdeacon kisseth the same: to signify, that only Christ (according to
S. John) was the Lamb, who could open the seals of that book, wherein both
Christ him self, and his sacred mysteries were enclosed.

Deo gratias.
Lastly, the Epistle being read, answer is made, saing. Deo gratias, Thanks
be to God By which few words are fully signified, the consent, gratitude, and
thanksgiving, of all the people.

The reading of the Epistle in the holy Mass, has no less antiquity, then
from the Apostles them selves, as appears out of Clemens, Justinius,
Tertullianus, and Dionisius Areopagita, all whom Durantus. l. 2. de Rit, ecles.
Cath. c. 18. and Ozorius Instit. Moral. l. 10. p. 1636. do produce for proof
of this point.

Of the Graduall or Responce, and of sundry mysteries and reasons concerning
the same.
The 1. Reason.
COncerning the Graduall, it is first to be noted, that the very word it
self, is not without some special mystery: signifying, steps, or degrees,
to wit of perfection, according to the doctrine of our Savior saying. Be ye
perfect as your Father which is in heaven is perfect As also to signify, that
the end of the doctrine of the Apostles, or prophets, whereunto we have hearkened
a little before, is to lead us, by little and little to perfection, that we
ascending from virtue to virtue as the kingly prophet says psl. 38. May see
thee God of gods in Sion.

The 2. Reason.
This Graduall, does yet further signify, many other notable mysteries. As
for example, in a high Mass, it is always song, with a grave, and heavy
voice: to signify the great pain and difficulty there is, in ascending from
virtue to virtue, and in advancing our selves in a spiritual life; according to
the saying of our B. Savior. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.
Mat. 26 41.

The 3. Reason.
Mystically also, the Graduall may be referred to the vocation of the
Apostles: whom our Savior calling, and saying. Venite post me. Come after me.
They forsaking all that they had, did forth with follow, and walk after their
Lord: the disciples after their master: the children after their most loving
Father, as says Innoc. 3.

This Graduall did S. John Baptist first sing, when standing with two of his
disciples, and seeing Jesus walking he said. Ecce agnus Dei, ecce qui tollit
peccata mundi. John. 1. This Graduall did S. Andrew sing, when finding his
brother Simon, he said. Inuenimus Messiam etc. We have found the Messiah,
which is interpreted Christ, and he brought him unto Jesus. Ioh. This Gradual
did S. Phillip sing, when he found Nathaniell, and said unto him. Quem Moses
etc. Whom Moises wrote of in the law and the prophets, we have found, Jesus the
Son of Joseph, of Nazareth, come and see.

The 4. Reason.
This Gradual is also called by the name of a Responce, because that it has
correspondence to the Epistle: As for example, if the Epistle contain matter
of joy, the Responce or Graduall, does likewise signify joy. If matter of
sorrow, it also is conformable, according to that of the Apostle Romans 12.
Gaudete cum gaudentibus, flete cum flentibus. Rejoice with them that be merry,
and weep with them that weep. Rom 12.

The 5. Reason.
Innocentius 3. and some others, do call the Responce Lamentum penitentiae,
the song of penance, or lamentation. Adding further, that it should be song,
with a doleful and lamentable voice, to signify the effect of the preaching
of S. John. For even as by the Epistle, is represented the preaching and
doctrine, of S. John Baptist: even so this song of lamentation signifies, that
S. John preached no other thing then penance, saying. Penitentiam agite. etc.
Do penance, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Mat. 3.

The 6. Reason.
To conclude, this Graduall or Responce, is nothing else, but a brief
spiritual song, composed of two or three verses at the most, commonly taken
out of the psalms of David. As for example, that of the 17. Sunday after
Trinity sunday, is composed of two little verses, taken out of the 32 psalm.
Beata est gens cutus est dominus Deus eorum etc. Blessed is the people, who
have our Lord for their God: and blessed is the people whom our Lord has
chosen for his inheritance. The heavens have been established by the word of
our Lord: and all the power of them, by the breath of his mouth. Psalm. 32.

Of the Graduall, Prose, Tract etc. Walfridus l. de reb. eccl. c. 22. Rupertus.
l. 1. de divine offic. c. 34. Radulphus de Can. obser. prop. 12. Rabanus l. 2.
de instit. Cler. c. 15. Isid. l 6. Ety. c. 19. and l. 1. de ecles. offic. c.
18. and others, do make both ample and evident testimony.

Of the Alleluia, and of the sundry mysteries and reasons concerning the same.
The 1. Reason.
THe Alleluia is imediately song after the Gradual, to wit, the sounge of joy
and of mirthe, after the song of penance and mourning: to express thereby,
the great consolation, which is laid up for those, which lament and mourn in
this life; According to the saying of our Savior, Blessed are they that
mourn, for they shall be comforted. Mat. 5.

The 2. Reason.
This word Alleluia has a double signification, the one litteral, and common
to all: the other mystical, and proper to deuines. First therefore, to
understand what it signifies literallie, we must know, that Alleluia is
composed of two Hebrew words, Allelu, which signifies in Latin Laudate, in
English praise ye, and of Iah, which is one of the ten Hebrew names belonging
to God, and signifies in Latin Dominum, Lord. So, that the whole word, is as
much to say as, praise ye our Lord.

The 3. Reason.
The mystical, or spiritual sense thereof, is diverse; According to some,
Alleluia sounds as much, as spiritual, or endless joy: and so in this sense,
is as much, as if the priest should cry unto the people, with these words,
spiritual joy, spiritual joy. Or if we apply it to the latter word, to wit,
Endless, or perpetual, then it signifies as much, as if he should encourage
them, with these words. Endless joy, perpetual joy.

The 4. Reason.
According to some others, it may be referred, to the joy of those, which
rejoiced in the glorious miracles, of Christ our Lord: for then did all the
people, in joyful wise, singe forth this Alleluya, when seeing these
miracles, they all gave glory to almighty God, and rejoiced in those things,
which were most gloriously, and most miraculouslie done by him, saying. Quia
vidimus mirabilia hodie Luc. 5.26. For we have seen marvelous things to day.
As also when the seauentie two returned with joy saying. Lord the devils also,
are subject to us in thy name. Luc. 10.17.

The 5. Reason.
That this Alleluia, is sometimes twice repeated, is to signify a double joy
of the blessed Saints; one of their spirit, another of their flesh: one of
their souls, another of their bodies. Of the first joy the royal prophet David
says. Exultabunt sancti etc. The saints shall rejoice in glory, psl. 140. Of
the second. Fulgebunt iusti, tanquam sol in regno Patris. The just shall shine
like the sun, in the kingdom of their Father. Mat.

The 6. Reason.
The use, and custom of this word, first came from the Angels, and from
certain holy Prophets. And S. John in his Apocalips, recites, that he heard
the voice, of the heavenly army, as the voice of many waters, and of great
thunders, saying Amen, and Alleluia: four times Alleluia, and once Amen.
Wherefore the church has thought good, to retain these words in earth; and to
pronounce them in the Mass, by the mouth of the priest, as they are pronounced
in heaven, by the holy Angels.

The 7. Reason.
And therefore is it left in an unknown language, to denote, that we may rather
signify obscurelie, then any way perfectly express, the greatness of the
joys, which our Lord has promised, to all that love him.

The 8. Reason.
Another reason, why the Church retains this, and other like words,
vninterpreted unto us, is. because of the great difficulty that there is,
well and truly to translate them, being of such virtue and energie, that other
languages, want proper words, sufficiently to express them: and for this
cause it is much better, to leave them as they are, then to extenuat their
force, by a strange interpretation. And S. Aug. in his book, De doctrina
Christiana. cap. 11. gives this reason saying, that in holy writings, many
Hebrew words, are left without interpretation, because of a certain
sanctity that is comprehended, under the very words them selves.

Alleluia, confirmed by miracle.
Finally, this Alleluia, our Apostle S. Aug. used, when he first entered into
our country, to convert the same, as witnesses S. Bid li. 1. cap. 25. whose
prayer was in this wise. We beseech thee o Lord, for thy great mercy sake,
that thy fury and thine anger, may be taken from this city (to wit,
Canterbury in Kent) and from thy holy house, because we have sinned, Alleluia.

The same Alleluia also, used S. German, bishop of Auxerre in France, who being
sent by the Popes holiness into our country, to confute the error of the
Pelagians, gave commandment unto certain soldiears, whom he had placed in a
valley (thorough which their enemies resolved to pass) that so soon as they
perceived them coming, they should all forthwith cry out, as they heard him
cry. The blessed Bishop, suddenly issuing out before the enemy, cried out
three several times Alleluia, and all the rest of the soldiears, cried out
aloud, the same with him. Wherewith the enemies were so affrighted, and amazed,
that they thought, not only the hills, but also heaven it self, to cry out
and fight against them. Whereupon they fled with great fear, and many of them
were drowned in the river, which they were to pass. And so the soldiears that
were with the B. Bishop, obtained the victory without any battle, only by the
terror which God struck into the^, by the sound and echo of Allelu. Bed. li
1, c. 20.

Of the Prose. And of sundry reasons concerning the same.
The 1. Reason.
THe Prose is commonly taken, for an ecclesiastical prayer, containing the
praises of almighty God, of the B. Virgin, and of the glorious Saints: and
follows betwixt the Epistle, and and the Gospel.

The 2. Reason.
The first invention thereof, is attributed to Nocherus, Abbot of S. Gaul in
Swisse, afterward elected bishop of Liege. Durandus li. 4. cap. 22. de ritibus
Ecclesiae. And Pope Nicolas the first of that name, greatly moved with the
devotion of this holy man, as also with the rithme, sound, and pleasant melody
of the song, permitted the use thereof. But amongst many, composed also by
others, the Church of Rome, has especially retained in the holy Mass, four
for their excellency.

The 3. Reason.
1. The first is. Victimae Paschalis laudis. The which is said upon Easter
day, in testimony of the joyful resurrection of Jesus Christ, and thanksgiving
for the redemption of mankind, wrought by his blessed and holy death. The
author is somewhat uncertain, but undoubtedly, a man endued with notable piety
and devotion.

The 4. Reason.
2. The second is; Venisancte Spiritus. And is sung upon Whitsunday, to crave
of the holy Ghost, to send from above, the beams of his celestial brightness,
to illuminate the minds of those, which are covered with darkness. Robert King
of France, surnamed. The great Cleark, composed it: the Church having since
approved it, and sung it universally thoroughout all the parts of
christendom. As witnesses Paulus Aemilius writing of his life.

The 5. Reason.
The third is, Lauda Sion Saluatorem. Composed in praise of the most B.
Sacrament, by S. Thomas of Aquin, admirable for his learning to the whole
world, which was rather diuinly infused into him, then either attained unto by
nature, travail, or labor of study. Who treated so sublimely of the holy
Eucharist, as never any since did more set forth, and illustrate the same: so
that God seems purposely, to have chosen this great and learned Doctor, for a
convenient remedy against the heretics of our time,

The 6. Reason.
4. The fourth is, Dies illa, dies irae. And this is said in the holy Mass,
for the souls departed. The Canticle is very lamentable, and the discourse
full of Christian contemplatio^, touching the apprehension and fear, of the day
of general judgment: and was composed by a noble, famous, and religious
Cardinal.

Of the Tract. And of the sundry mysteries and reasons, rendered for the same.
The 1. Reasons.
THe Tract, is so called, of this Latin word Tractus, a trahendo, because
(says Durandus, li. 4. cap. 41. number. 1.) it is sung tractim, and as with a
trayling of the voice: as those may easily discern, who understand
playne-song.

The 2. Reason.
This Tract, is a spiritual song composed of sundry verses, usually taken
out of the plalmes of David, and sometimes out of certain other places, of the
holy Scripture; as that upon the feast of S. Peeters chair. Tu es Petrus and
supra hanc Petram, edificabo ecclesiam meam. Mat. 16. And sometimes also,
composed by the Church, conformable to the holy Scripture. as Gaude Maria
Virgo, cunctas hereses sola interemisti in vniuerso mundo. Off: B. Virg.

The 3. Reason.
Next it is to be noted, that this Tract, is always soung, either after the
Alleluia, or sometimes only in the steed thereof. And farther, from
Septuagesima till Easter, the Alleluia, which is a song of iubilation,
alltogeather cease, both in the Mass, and also in the Canonical hours; the
reason whereof is, for that by the time of Septuagesima, the Church would
represent unto us, the miserable estate of man's nature, living in this wretched
world, and therefore cease to sing the song of joy, and only sings the
song of sadness and sorrow. Also to signify, the difference betwixt our
estate, and the estate of the blessed souls in heaven, who sing perpetually,
without ceasing or intermission; this joyful song of Alleluia: whereas we, who
live in this vale of misery, must whilst we remain here, always intermixe
our joy, with penance and mourning.

The 4. Reason.
It likewise signifies, the tears and groans of Christ's Church, for her
sins, for the prolonging of her felicity, and for the pains and
afflictions, which she endures, whilst she lives in this world: which
causes the holy Prophett, in her person to say, Hei mihi, quia incolatus meus
prolongatus est, multum incola fuit anima mea. Psalm. 219. And for this reason,
she is often compared in holy Scripture, to a Turtle, as Cant. the 2.
Whereupon S. Bernard homil. 59. in Cant. says, that the Turtle, is a bird
very solitary, who having once lost her companion, will never after take any
other, but evermore abide solitary, and often mourning upon the top of a
dry tree. To apply the same to our present purpose; this Turtle, is the
church of God: her solitude, of place of mourning, is in the desert of this
world. Her companion and spouse which he has lost, is our blessed Lord and
Savior Jesus, whom the Jews have killed and putt to death: Who being risen
again, is ascended into heaven, the Church often sighing and mourning for his
departure. And still desiring to see him again, and to be there on high in
company with him: and the dry tree, upon the which she often sits, so
mournefully groaning and lamenting, is the holy Cross, whereon her dearly
beloved spouse, was put to death.

To conclude, the first placing of the Prose in the holy Mass, is attributed,
to Telesphorus, the 9. Pope after S. Peter. As testifies Durandus, li. 4. cap.
4. number. 1.

Of the holy Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, And of sundry worthy
Ceremonies which are used, both before and after, the reading thereof.
IF I were to explicate unto you all the mysteries of a solemn Mass, I should
make mention of many most worthy ceremonies, which here of purpose, I do
omit. Only I will give you by the way, a little taste of some of them, because
they are so exceedinge mysterious, and so contenting and pleasing, to every
devout and pious person, that loath I am, wholly to pretermit them.

The 1. Ceremony, and his signification.
The Epistle therefore being read, by the Subdeacon, the Deacon disposing him
self to pronounce the Gospel, ascends to the Altar, where the book
remains. The book remaining always upon the Altar: signifies, that the
Sacrifice instituted by our B. Savior, is always joined with the testament,
which is the Gospel, and that the one, shall never be without the other: for so
long as the Sacrifice shall endure, the Gospel shall be preached, and when the
sacrifice shall be abolished, the Gospel shall cease to be anounced: as we see it
is at this day in Turkey, where, as there is no Sacrifice offered, so is there
no Gospel preached.

The 2. Ceremony, and his signification.
And therefore the Deacon being to pronounce the Gospel, ascends and takes
the book from the Altar: to signify, that the place ordained of God to keep
the holy scripture, is the Catholic Church: as also to signify, that all
true and wholesome interpretation of holy scripture, ought to be taken from the
warrant and authority, of the same Church.

The 3. Ceremony and his signification.
Having taken the book from the Altar before he go to read the Gospel, he
reverently prostrateth him self on his knee before the Priest, demanding his
benediction: to show that none ought to intrude him self, nor to take upon
him, the office or charge of preaching, unless he be first be lawfulie called,
and sent thereto Heb. 5. Romans 10.

The 4. Ceremony, and his signification.
At the taking of the book, the Deacon kiseth the right hand of the Priest,
and this for two causes. First, to signify, that he preaches not his own,
but the doctrine of Christ (whom in this place the Priest represents.) And
next, that although he preach the word never so truly, or with never so great
zeal, yet that the gift of converting souls, does wholly proceed from the
grace of God.

The 5. Ceremony, and his signification.
At the reading of the Gospel two Accolytes go before the deacon, with two
burning lights: to signify, that the assistants, ought specially then, to
have their hearts enflamed, in the desire and meditation, of those heavenly
things, which are contained in the gospel of Christ. The coustume of lights,
is most ancient by the testimony of S. Hierome aduers. Vigil: and the causes
are plainly deduced, out of S. Isodore cap. Cleros. acolith, did: 22.

The 6. Ceremony, and his signification.
By this that the two Acolites do go before (the Deacon, who is to read the
gospel carrying wax lights and incense:) is signified. that Christ sent before
him his Disciples, by two and two, into every city where he was to go,
carrying with them, the shining light of miracles, and the sweet odor of
virtues, Luc. 10.

The 7. Ceremony, and his signification.
The Deacon lifts up his voice on high, in readinge and anouncinge the
gospel of Christ, according to that of the prophet. Ascend thou upon a high
mountain, who do eua^gelise to Sio^, lift up thy voice in fortitude etc.
Esaias l. 40. And our Lord says in the gospel, That which I say to you in the
dark, tell ye in the light: and that which you hear in the ear, preach ye
upon the tops of the houses. Mat. 10.

These worthy pious, and sacred Ceremonies, are seen and performed, when
high Mass is celebrated, but because my purpose is, to treat but briefly of
those ceremonies, which are usually to be seen in every low and daily
Mass, I will therefore return to speak of them.

The 8. Ceremony, and his signification.
The Alleluia therefore, or Tract being read, the Priest passes to the midst of
the Altar, where inclining him self, and joining together his hands, he
secretly repeateth the prayer following. Munda cor meum and labia mea
omnipotens Deus etc Cleanse my heart and my lips, o omnipotent God, who
cleansedst the lips of the prophet Esaias with fire: and so by thy free grace
vouchsafe to cleanse me, that I may worthily anounce thy holy gospel.
thorough Christ our Lord, Amen.

The 9. Ceremony, and his signification.
In the mean time, the Clarke or Minister, remoueth the book, to the left
hand of the Altar; signifying thereby, that the Gospel, which was first
preached to the Jews (who were on the right hand) was for their incredulity,
transferred from them to the people of the Gentiles: a mystery sundry times
represented in the holy Mass, as has before been mentioned.

The 10. Ceremony, and his signification.
This done, the priest tourneth him to the book, and all the people rise up:
whereby two several things are signified. The one the corruptnes of our
nature, lyinge on the ground, like unto bruit beasts, and wallowing in the
uncleanness and ordure of our sins: The other, the virtue of the gospel of
Jesus Christ, which raises us up to newnes of life, if we receive the same
with fruit, and worthelie express it in our lives.

Again, the rising up of the people at the reading of the Gospel, does
signify: that they show them selves ready, for the faith of Christ, and
profession of his Gospel, to give their lives, and to fight even unto the
death, in defense of the same: remembering the words which our Lord him self
spoke, saying. Qui non habet (...). etc. He that has not a sword, let him sell
his coat and buy it.

The 11. Ceremony, and his signification.
Before the beginning of the Gospel, he saluteth all the assistants, praying
that our Lord may be with them: which he does, to render the^ more attentive,
to harken to the word of almighty God. For even as to the stomach, which
receaueth corporal food, nothing is profitable, if it be ill disposed: so
likewise, unless the hearts of the assistants, be well disposed and prepared,
to receive the word of almighty God (which is the food of the soul) little
will it avail them, though it be anounced unto them.

Dominus vobiscum.
Our Lord be with you. The words of this salutation are. Our Lord be with you.
As if he should say, I beseech our Lord, to send his grace into your hearts,
that you may be made attentive, and worthy hearers of his sacred word, which,
as the Apostle witnesses, is able to save their souls.

Et cum spiritu tuo.
And with thy spirit. Then the asistants make answer, praying that our Lord
may be with his spirit, that is, that with the spirit of man, the spirit of God
may be present, to direct and guide him, to the end, that he may both
faithfully recite the sacred gospel, to the health and salvation, of all that
are assembled to hear the same: and also him self express in in true holiness
of life, that which he preaches unto others.

Sequentia sancti Euangelij.
The sequence of the holy Gospel. This done, the priest says. Sequentia
sancti Euangelij etc. Thus follows the holy gospel, of such or such an
Evangelist. As touching the word Euangil, or Gospel, it is a word which we
retain of the Greeks, as many others, and properly signifies, good and
joyful tidings, for what bitter tidinges can there be then these: Do penance,
for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Mat. 3. and, All power is given me both
in heaven and earth. Mat. 28.14. With diverse other things, which are read in
the gospel, of the Divinity, and Nativity, of the Son of God: of his
miracles, preaching, passion resurrection, ascension, and of the salvation and
glorification, of his elect.

Where also note, that the name of the Evangelist is always expressed, to the
end, that the people may give the more credit, as unto the gospel, penned and
written, by one of the secretaries of our Savior Jesus, and received in the
Church, to the which appartayneth, the authority and perogatiue, to discern
the canonical Scriptures, and their sense, if by any adversary, they should
be called in question.

Gloria tibi Domine.
Glory be unto thee o Lord. When he has thus taught them, out of what place
of scripture, the gospel for the day is taken, presently all the people,
hearing the name of the gospel, and making reverence toward the Altar, with
joyful acclamation, do answer, saying. Gloria tibi Domine. Glory be unto thee
o Lord. Giuinge thanks unto God, who has made them worthy partakers of the
gospel of Christ. As it is written in the Acts of the Apostles, that all the
people glorified our Lord, for that he had sent unto them, the word of
salvation, saying. God then to the Gentiles also has given repentance unto
life. Acts 11.18.

The 11. Ceremony, and his signification.
In pronouncing the words aforesaid, the Priest makes the sign of the
Cross, upon the book, and upon him self. Upon the book, to signify, that
it contains the mysteries of our redemption. Upon him self, to signify,
that he is an instrument of Christ Jesus, and of him crucified, and that this
sacrifice, does represent unto us, his death and passion.

The 12. Ceremony, and his signification.
The people likewise, do make the sign of the Cross, in three places. Upon
their foreheades, upon their mouths, and upon their breasts. Upon their
foreheades (which is the most conspicuous place of all the body:) to show that
they are not ashamed of the gospel of Christ. Upon their lips, to show that
they are always ready, resolutly and constantly, to confess their faith,
(if at any time God shall please to call them thereunto. Upon their breasts, to
declare that they do steadfastly believe in heart, that which they confess with
their mouths.

The 13. Ceremony, and his signification.
The Priest after the reading of the gospel, says. Per euangelica dicta, etc.
By the evangelical sayings, let our sins be forgiven us. And then he
kisseth the book, not closed, but open: to signify, that the means to come
to the understanding of Gods word, is cleerelie manifested to the Pastors of
the Church. And further to signifye, that it is the book of Christ crucified,
whom the Apostle affirms to be our reconciliation, and the maker of our peace
and atonement, which is aptlye signified by the kiss. As also to show, that
he preaches the gospel, of true love and Charity for the gayning of souls,
and not for respect of lucre, and temporal profitt.

Laus tibi Christ.
Praise be to thee o Christ. The gospel ended, all the people make answer
saying. Praise be to thee o Christ, making the sign of the Cross as before,
on their forehead, mouth, and breast, to the end, that the wicked serpent,
should by no means, hinder their confidence and confession, or dare to break
open the seal of their hearts, wherein the word of God is sown. Also, to arm
them selves against his malice, who would not that they should reap any
profit, by the word of God. As is plainly expressed in the parable of the
seed, where it is said, that the fowls of the air, came and devoured one
part of the seed which was sown; by which fowls are understood, the foul
and unclean spirits.

Miracles wrought by our Catholic Church-bookes.
To conclude, such has always been the authority of the holy gospel, that
not only the sacred words, but also the very books or papers, have wrought
sundry strange and notable miracles. Gregorius Turone^sisin vitis patrum cap.
6. declares, that the city of Auerna being on fire, S. Gallus going into the
Church, prayed a long time before the Altar of our Lord, and then rising up,
taking the book of the gospel, and opening it, offered himself to go against
the fire, and sodainlye the flames were extinguished, in such sort, that there
did not so much, as the very sparkles remain.

Saint Macian, when the flames of fire approached near unto the Church of S.
Anastatius, taking into his hands the holy gospel, he got in through the
tiles, and by his prayers and tears, preserved it from burning. Zonaras also
testifies, that the Russians in a great fire, finding the book of the gospel
safe, and preserved from burning, by the only motive of this miracle, receued
and embraced the faith of Christ.

Finally the reading of the gospel in the holy Mass, all Liturgies do
testify to be very ancient. Also concilium Laodicenum. cap. 16. Carthaginense
4. can. 48. Valentimum. cap. 2. Clemens l. 2. constit. Apost. cap. 16.
Anastasius writing to the bishops of Germany and Burgundy, and infinite
others, whom here for brevity sake, I do omit.

Of the Symbol or Creed, and of sundry mysteries contained in the same.
THe Symbol or Creed, imediatlie pronounced after the Gospel, signifies,
the fruict which presently ensued, after the preaching of our Lord and his
Apostles. And therefore also is it presently, pronounced after the gospel,
that by the Gospel, we may believe with the heart unto righteousness, and by
the Creed, we may confess with our mouths unto salvation, as it is written.
Cord creditur ad iustitiam, ore autem fit confessio ad salutem. With the heart
we believe unto justice, but with the mouth, confession is made to salvation.
Romans 10. cap. 10.

Of the etymology of the word Simbole.
And first to understand the Etymology, and meaning of this word Symbol, we
must note, that it is a greek word, and signifies diverse things. Sometimes
it is taken for a mark or seal wherewith a thing is marked or sealed.
Sometimes again, it is taken for a watchword; which a Captain gives to his
soldiers, whereby they may know one an other and the better preserve them
selves, from being surprised by their enimyes, so that if they should chance
to meet any one of whom they doubted, being asked the Symbol or watchword,
he should be bewrayed whether he were their friend or foe.

In this present place, it is taken for a brief form, or rule of christian
faith, composed of diverse and surdry sentences, called Articles, much like
unto so many sinews or joints, binding and tying together, all the parts
of the body; Wherefore very fittlie may this summarye of the Christian faith,
be called by this name of Simbole, according to al these significations: For
first in very deed, it is a true mark, or seal, whereby to know and
distinguish, a catholic, from an Heretic: for never was there Heretic,
which did not deny some part or other of the Creed, Secondly, it may well
be taken for a watchword, given to the faithful, whereby to know one an other,
and so to keep them selves, from the incursion of their enemies. And thirdly,
as in this place, for a brief form, or rule, of our Christian faith, because
it comprehends in so short, and compendious a manner, the sum of all that,
which were are to believe. Durand. l. 4. c. 25.

Three simboles, or Creedes, in the Catholic Church.
In the Catholic Church, we have three Symbolls or Creeds. The first is, that
of the Apostles, which all good Christians ought to learn by heart, and to say
it, both morning and evening, for it chaseth away the devils, who lie in
wait, both day and night, to devour us. The second is, that of the council
of Nice, which is usually said in the Mass, after the gospel. And the third
is, that of S. Athanasius, which is sung at Prime upon all Sundays. Both which
latter, are no additions to the former, but expositions, or more plain
declarations thereof. The reason why the Church admitted these two Creedes,
besides that of the Apostles, was, for that the Heretics, receiving the first
according to the words, or letter, did not receive it according to the sense,
and meaning of the Catholic Church, And for that also the Arrians, and other
Heretics, construed the same so confusedly, that it was hard to discern
the Catholics, from the Heretics any way by the same. In which case, the
Church was constrained to putt to her helping hand, adding the two latter as an
exposition, or playner declaration of the former, and has ever since, served
to singular good purpose, for the conviction of several heresies and
heretics, which have sprung up in sundry times, and upon sundry occasions.

The Symbol of the concel of Nice, was composed under Pope Siluester. Plat? in
vita Siluestri, in the presence of the great and most religious Emperor
Constantine, by 318. Bishops assembled from all parts of the world, and kept
at his expenses: whereof many had their right eyes put out, and their right
hands cut of for the defense of the faith, and Christian religion, in the
precedent persecutions, as testifies Nicephorus lib. 8. cap. 1. He honored
them with presents condign to their estates, and royally feasted them at his
table, causing the principal of them, to set close unto himself, before he
would license them to depart to their Churches: kissing also their wounds, when
he dismissed them. Naucler, vol: 2. gener: 11.

This Symbol was made, expresslye to condemn the blasphemy of Arrius,
mayntayning against the doctrine of the Church, the inequality of the three
divine persons of the holy Trinity Socrat. lib. 4 Eccles hist. cap 31. By the
order of Pope Mark successor of S. Syluester the clergy and people, began
to sing it with high voice in the church, for that then the Emperors of the
world, assisted and constantly defended the Catholic faith: It was also
approved in the first council of Constantinople but 56. years after that of
Nice. by 150. Bishops, assembled under the Emperors Gracian, and Theodosius,
the elder. See Plat, in vita Marci.

The Simbole of the holy Father Athanasius, was composed by him against the
aforesaid Arrians, when by their audacious pursuit, they exiiled him to
Treuers, where he labored by all means, to conserve the faith in his former
purity, Nauclar: vol. 2. gener. 13.

The Creed of the Nicene counsel, and which is usually sung in the holy
Mass, conteyneth, like as that of the Apostles, to the number of 12. Articles:
which are these that follow.

Credo.
I believe. The first article of this Creed is, to believe (to wit) in God:
and is to be opposed against the ignorance of all Atheists, and of all such, as
foolishlie say in their hearts, there is no God. Psalm. 13.

In.
In. And here note, that there is a difference in belief. For to believe God,
is to believe only that God is, but to beeleue in God, is, in belief to love
him, to worshipp him, and to serve him as God: and this is perfectly to
believe in God.

Vnum Deum.
One God. For as much as many heathen poeple, do adore and worshipp, diverse
vain things, in steed of God, calling them their Gods, therefore to condemn
this error, and to exclude all plurality of Gods, the Creed of the Mass,
has adjoined this word Vnum, One, the more playnelie to explicate the former,
which is as much as to say. I believe in one only God, and not in more.

Patrem omnipotentem.
The Father almighty. Which words, ought to be of most singular comfort unto
us: for as he is a Father, he must needs wish al good things unto his
children. And in that he is almighty, he is likewise able to help them in all
things.

Factorem Coeli.
Maker of heaven; By heaven, which is the work of his hands, is understood,
all heavenly creatures, as Angels, sun moon, stars, and other elements.

Et terrae.
And of earth. By earth, is understood, the whole globe thereof, incrediblie
enriched, with all that is requisite, for the ornament and use, of all his
earthly and mortal creatures.

Visibilium omnium and inuisibilium.
And of all things visible and invisible. To this first Article of the Creed,
the Church has also adjoined these words, against the impiety, and heresy
of the Maniches, who peruerslie defended, that God only created things
invisible, and that the Devil, procreated the things which are visible, as
witnesses Niceph. l. 6. eccles. hist. c. 31. and 32. Wherefore to exclude this
error, we acknowledge in the Mass, that God is the maker of all things, both
visible an invisible.

Et in vnum.
And in one. For as much, as many took upon them, to be called Christ, and
would needs be so named of the people, as Antichrist likewise shall when he
comes, therefore to exclude this error, and to show, that there is no true
Christ but one, the Church has likewise here added this word Vnum, One; For
as the Scripture foretells us, many shall say, Lo here Christ, lo there,
but expressilie commands us, not to believe them.

Dominum.
Lord. And he therefore is called Lord, to beat down the impiety of those,
who do hold him less then his Father, in power, and authority, yea and do
make him, even a servant and subject unto him, according to his divinity as
Calluin, l. 2. Inst. c. 17. n. 1. and before him other Heretics.

Iesum Christum.
Jesus Christ. With the name of Jesus, which signifies a Savior, there is also
imposed upon him, the surname of Christ, which name is a title of honor, common
to diverse estates and dignityes, to wit, to Priests, Prophetts, and kings.
The office of priests, is, to offer prayers and sacrifices to God, for the
sins of the people. Of prophetts, to foretell things to come, to their
singular comfort. Of kings, to reign in soueranitye, and puissance of
government: All which titles do wonderful well agree to our B. Savior. For
he was ordained a Priest, by God his Father for ever, after the order of
Melchisedech; Psalm. 109. He was also a Prophett, for he foretold the secret
counsels of his Father unto us, concerning our salvation. He is also a king,
forasmuch as by his providence, he does accomplish the wonderful endeavors and
office of a king, in the behalf of his Church, whose king and gouerner he shall
be, to the end of the world.

Filium Dei.
The son of God. Which words do evidently declare, that he is very God.
For as a man and woman, can begett no child, but man, or woman, of the same
substance, even so the Son of God, must needs be God, and of the self same
substance with God.

Vnigenitum.
Only begotten. Where note, that although God has granted, unto those that
believe in him, to be his children and sons, yet this is to be understood, by
grace, and spiritual adoption. But Jesus Christ, is his only natural Son,
engendered of his own substance, as S. John the Evangelist, does cleerlie
testify, John 1.

Ex patre natum.
Borne of the Father. For as much as this holy council of Nice, was
principally gathered, to repress the heresy of the Arrians, deniyng that
Christ was borne, and begotten of the substance of God his Father, and equal
unto him, As witnesses 5. Aug. l. 1. de Trinit. c. 7. they were therefore
condemned by these very words, and the contrary was there expresselie
concluded against them.

Ante omnia saecula.
Before all worlds. And for the more manifest declaration, that he is
coeternall with God his Father, there is added in this Creed, that he was borne
of him, before all worlds. True indeed it is, that the manner is inexplicable,
as S. Cyp. says in explic. simboli, and therefore we ought simply to believe,
and devoutly to reverence, this his ineffable generation. For who will enquire
after that which can not be found? Of whom shall we learn it? of the earth? It
was not subsisting. Of the sea? It was not liquified. Of heaven? it was not
elevated. Of the sun? Of the Moon? Of the stars? They were not as yet
created. Of the Angels? He was inge^dred before they had their being. Briefly
therefore, we will conclude with S. Basil, saying, we must not enquire after
that which has always bin, of that which has not allwaies bin.

Deum, de Deo.
God, of God. Also, where as these Heretics said, that he was not God of God
his Father, but only man, of his mother, therefore the holy Fathers,
assembled in this council, concluded, that he was God of God, and that he did
no whit diminish his divine nature, by reason of his incarnation in the B.
virgin.

Lumen, de lumine.
Light, of light. These holy and venerable Fathers, to make this verity more
appare^t, declared the same by an apt similitude, to wit, that the Son of
God, was borne of his Father, eue^ the light, produces and casts forth light
of it self, without any manner of diminution of his own substance, and can be
no more divided from the Father, then the sun and the splendour thereof, can
naturally be separated or divided a sunder.

Deum verum, de Deo vero.
Very God, of very God. The same Catholic Church, further to confound, the
error of the Arrians and Euomians, deniyng that he was very God by natural
property, but only by grace, or communication of name, sometimes given unto
them, whom the Psalmist calls Gods, for the rarenes of their virtues as
psalm 81. Declared, that he was very God of very God, that is to say, so
verily God, as God the father was God, and truly sprang and issued out of him.

Genitum, non factum.
Begotten, not made. And whereas some of these Heretics confessed, that
Christ was indeed of the Father, but yet that he was less then the Father, and
not of the same, but of an other substance then the Father was: therefore, to
confound this error, there was inserted into this Creed, these words,
Begotten not made: But with what similitude, may a mortal man, be able to
express this divine generation? Or what comparison can be made, betwixt things
created, and which have a beginning, and things in created, and which have no
beginning? S. Ireneus, does hold them for worse then mad, who enforce
themselves, to conceive the same, by human reason, li. 3. aduers. haeres.
Valent, cap. 48. And S. Hilary, being not able to comprehend it, comfort
himself with this, that the Angels do not know it. li. 2. de Trinitate.

Consubstantialem Patri.
Consubstantiall to the Father. To prove more cleerlie, that the Son of God,
was nothing inferior to the Father, this holy council, devised against those
Heretics, this word Consubstantiall, to prove and confirm, his coequalitie
with the Father. This also was most cleerlie pronounced, out of the mouth of
our Savior him self unto the Jews, assuring them, that he who saw him, saw
the Father also John. 10.

Per quem omnia facta sunt.
By whom all things are made. Also some enemies there were, who said, that
the Father was the maker of all things, and not the Son. But contrary to
this, the Church defended, that by the Son also, all things were made, not
that the Father did aid him, as an extrinsecall instrument to their
production, but as S. John says Io: 1. That without him nothing was made, noe
not the world nor heavens them selves.

Qui propter nos homines.
Who for us men. In these words, the Church proposes unto us, the humane
nature, which the Son of God, took upon him for our salvation: whereof he was
so desirous, and so careful, that he expreslie descended from heaven into
earth, to seek out the strayd and wandering sheep Luc: the 19. and by his
blood, to reconcile him to his Father. What other occasion had he so to do?
Take away the wounds, says S. Aug. and what necessity is there of a Surgean.

Et propter nostram salutem.
And for our salvation. This also, was added by the Church, for as much as some
there were, who affirmed, that Christ became man, not only to save man, but
also to save the Devil, and all those Angels, who fell from heaven with him
by plain Apostacye. For remedy and redress of which error, the Church added
these words, Who for us men, and for our salvation.

Descendit de caelis.
Descended from heaven. The better to express, the benevolence of our blessed
Savior, toward mankind, it is said, that he descended from heaven: not that
he abandoned the heavens, or that he had never been in earth. seeing that by
his divine essence, he fills and replenisheth, both the one and the other,
and is in all places: but for that by taking human nature, he was there by a
new and miraculous manner of being, to wit, by hipostaticall union and
conjunction, of the divinity with the humanity, in one person, after which
manner, he had never been in earth before.

Et incarnatus est.
And was incarnate. In which words, the means of his descending is declared,
to wit, by his incarnation. Who will not admire, says Pope Clement the sixth,
that the same person remained God, as he was from all eternity, and became
man, which he never was; he came to be borne in earth, whom the Angels adore
in heaven. cap. 6. de poen. and remis. in extra. commnib.

De Spiritu sancto.
Of the holy Ghost. This article, does confirm us in the belief of the
miraculous, and supernatural operation, of the holy Ghost, by whose virtue,
was disposed the matter, whereof the precious body of Jesus Christ was
organized and formed, to wit, of the most pure blood, of the chaste and holy
Virgin his mother S. Marie. Luc. 1.

Ex Maria.
Of Marye. Some Heretics there were, who said, that Christ brought with him
a body from heaven, and that he took not his body of our Blessed Lady: which
is refuted by these words, saying. Of Marye. Octauius (who in his time ruled
all the world, and therefore of the Romans was reputed as a God) did consulte
with a prophetess, to know if in all the world, there was to be borne a
greater then he: and in the same day, wherein Christ was borne of the virgin
Marie in Judea, Sybilla saw a golden circle near the sun, in which circle, a
fair virgin did sit, having a most beautiful child in her lapp, which she
showed to octauius Caesar, and did declare unto him, that at that very time, a
more mighty king was borne the^ he.

Virgin.
A Virgin Not only Mary, but of Mary a Virgin; wherein we acknowledge her
perpetual virginity, to have bin no more hurt by his conception, then it was
by his nativity, her chaste womb, being miraculouslye contergarded with
fecunditye, in such sort, that she amongst all others, obteyneth the title, of
mother, and Virgin: which never was, nor ever shall be granted, to any woman
but to her self.

Et homo factus est.
And was made man. Again some Heretics mantayned, that Christ had no soul,
but that his Godhead, was united to his body, in steed of a soul: and so they
inferred, that Christ was not man, because man is composed of a body, and
soul. To refute which error, the Creed of the Mass says, and was made man.
For both these opinions are of like danger: to believe Christ to have bin only
God, and not man: or to have been only man, and not God.

Of the genuflexion of the Priest, at the reciting these words.
These words of the Creed, are in effect the same which are read in that
divine gospel of S. John, viz. Et verbum caro factum est. And the word was
made flesh. Words truly full of great majesty and reverence, and therefore
both the priest, and the people, at the pronunciation of them, do humbly bow
down, and incline to the ground, in sign of thanks giving for so excellent
a benefitt. It is recounted of a certain person who hearing these words
recited, and making no reverence thereat, the devil gave him a box on the
ear, saying. If it were read, the word was made devil, all we devils would
never have omitted to have bowed our knees at the pronunciation of these
words. Ludol. cap. 18. part. 1.

Crucifixus etiam.
Crucified also. After his miraculous, supernatural, and incomprehensible
incarnation, mention is made of his death and passion, with the time, manner,
and order of the same. Wherefore, even as our first parents, did grieueouslie
offend by the wood, in eatinge of the fruit of the forbidden tree: even so
would our B. Savior, satisfy by the Cross, upon the wood whereof, he has
borne our sins in his own body, and has restored us life by the same
means, by which death entered into all the world.

Pro nobis.
For us. This punishment of the Cross, was always reputed for a death, the
most ignominious and infamous, that could be devised as is testified in Deuteronomy.
12. And hereon was Jesus Christ fastened for our sins. O profound wisdom of
God, how much more easy is it, to admire such mysteries, then any way to
explicate or utter them with words?

Sub Pontio Pilato.
Under Ponttus Pilat. This Pilat, being governor of Judea, under the Emperor
Tyberius, and having sundry times, declared Jesus Christ to be innocent, of
the false accusations which were imposed upon, him by the wicked Jews, yet in
the end, did abandon him, for fear to incur the disgrace of Ceasar. But
within a while after, this ambitious officer, having for his own advancement,
and to the oppression of the innocent party, perverted all order of justice,
and let loose the bridle to the popular insolency, was him self overwhelmed,
with so many miseries, that in punishment of this wicked fact, he killed him
self with his own hands: much after the example of the traitor Judas, who
hanged him self; for having betrayed his innocent master. Eusebius. Eccles. hist.
lib. 2. cap. 2,

Passus.
Suffered. In this his sufferinge, is comprehended all that, which he endured,
to accompish the mystery of our redemption, unto his death: whereunto he
offered him self voluntarily and of his own accord, to satisfy the divine
iustce, and irreuocable decree of his eternal Father: which could not
otherwise be accomplished, but that the innocent, must dye for the nocent, the
obedient, for the disobedient.

Et sepultus est.
And was buried. Express mention is here made of his burial, for an
infallible argument, and proof of his passion. Which some, with that execrable
heretic Basilides, did deny, maintayning that he came into the world in a
fantasy, and that it was not he that was crucified, but one named Simion, and
that therefore he was not to be adored. As is testified by Tertulian. de
praescrip aduers: heret.

Et resurrexit.
And he rose again. By this Article, is declared, the glorious mystery of our
Lords resurrection, which poinct is so necessary, that all our faith were
otherwise meerelie in vain, as testifies the Apostle 1. These 4. Neither is
there any one thing, which may more comfort, and confirm our hope, then to
believe, that our head is risen for our Justification, as he was dead, for our
transgression. No resurrection of any person whatsoever, is to be compared to
his, he being raised by his own proper power, without any aid or asistance of
others. We read amongst other examples of holy Scripture 4. Reg. 13. that the
body of him who was cast into the Sepulcher of Helias, was raised to life, but
this came to pass, by touching the bones of the holy prophett (for whose sake
God restored life to that dead man) and not by the proper force of him that was
deceased, This therefore was only reserved to our Lord Jesus Christ, to return
from death to life, by the only power and virtue of him self.

Tertia die.
The third day. To the end we may believe, that this his death was true and not
feigned, he was not refuscitated incontinentlye, but remained truly dead, until
the third day after, which was a time more then sufficient, to make assured
proof, and to remove away all dout and ambiguity, of the truth of his death.
Yet was he not in his sepulcher, the space of three whole and complete days,
but one day only entire, part of the day precedent, and part of the day
subsequent, which by the figure Synecdoche, are called three days and three
nights.

Secundum Scripturas.
According to the Scriptures. This clause, was necessarilye annexed by the
Fathers of the Church, for as much as at the beginning, it was very hard,
especially for men of gross capacity, and as yet not thoroughly instructed in
the Christian faith, to comprehend so great a mystery, as is the resurrection
of the dead, which far surpassed the laws of nature: and therefore this was
added, as an infallible argument, why we ought to believe the same.

Et ascendit ad coelum.
And he ascended to heaven. Where the questtion may be demanded, how he
ascended up to heaven? True it is, that as God, he never was absent from
thence, but always filled it, and all other places, with his divinity: but as
man, he mounted thither in body and soul, leading with him captivity captive,
as the Apostle says, which he placed and set in liberty, by his excellent
victory over death, the devil, and hell it self. Ephesians. 4.

Sedet ad dextram Patris.
He siteth at the right hand of the Father. In which words the holy scripture
does accomodate it self to our weak understanding, using a metaphorical
speech, or locution, to instruct us that Jesus Christ has received of God his
Father, all honor and advancement of glory, in his humanity: eue^ as we
esteem here amongst men, the greatest honor to be done unto those, to whom we
give the upper hand. And it was most expedient, that he should be most highly
exalted, who had so greatly depressed and humbled him self, as to endure so
manifould diffamations, opprobries, and injurious intreatments for our sakes.

Et iterum venturus est.
And he is to come again. Having made mention of our Saviors first coming
into the world, to repair the fall and ruin of man, his second coming is next
proposed, wherein he shall sit in judgment, and manifestlye declare to all the
world, both his power and justice: rendering to every one, according to his
deserts. And as his first cominge was in great meeknes, so on the contrary,
shall his second coming, be in great majesty and glory.

Iudicare viuos et mortuos.
To judge both the quick and the dead. That is to say, the good, and the bad:
the one to bliss. and perpetual joy, the other to woe, and everlasting
pain. Wherein they shall, both the one and the other, perpetually abide, so
long as God, shall be God, without intermission of joy or pain.

Cuius regni non erit finis.
Of whose kingdom there shall be no end. This is the kingdom, which as Daniel
declared, to Nabuchodonosor, and Balthazar, kings of Babylon, should never
have end. Dan. 2.7. This is that kingdom, which the Angel fortould to the
virgin Marie, should ever endure Luc 1. This is that kingdom, prepared for the
blessed, from the beginning of the world, as testifies S. Mat. 25. This is
that kingdom into the which the good thief (acknowledging his misdeeds)
desired to enter. Luc. 23. This is that kingdom, whereof none can have part,
unless he be borne anew, and be without al blemishe and spot of sin. Ioh 3.
This is that kingdom, which is celestial, and heavenly, not terrene and
worldly, as our Savior showed unto Pilat, when he had suspicion, that he
would make some attempt, against the estate and Roman Empire. Ioh. 18.
Finally of this kingdom, there shall be no end, for as much as then, al
things shall be perpetually established, and shall never be afterward changed
again.

Et in Spiritum sanctum.
And I believe in the Holy Ghost. By the name of holy Ghost, is expressed the
third person of the B. Trinity, who is also caled by diverse other names, as
Paraclet, Gift of God, lively Fountain, Fire, Charity, spiritual Unction,
the finger of the right hand of God, his promise etc. ex hymno, veni creator
spiritus. He is caled Paraclet, which signifies a defender, an advocate, a
Patron, an Intercessor, a Teacher, and a Comforter. He is caled the Gift of
God, for that he does communicate, and impart freely, to every one as he
pleases, his gifts and graces. He is called, A lively fountain, for that he
is the source and spring, of all divine and celestial graces, which never
dries. He is called, Fire; for as much as he does enkendle our hearts, in the
love of God, and does warm them like fire. He is called Charity, for that he
unites all the faithful together, in one and the self same heart, desire, and
affection He is called, Spiritual unction; for that he sheadeth upon us, his
divine graces, in great abundance. He is called, The finger of God, for that
God does design all his graces by his operations. Lastly he is called, the
promise of the Father, for that Jesus Christ, promised unto his disciples, that
his Father would send him unto them, for their instruction and consolation,
with abundant infusion of all celestial graces. Ioh. 14.

Dominum.
Lord. The third person of the Trinity, is here caled Lord, to the end that we
acknowledge him for God, every way coequal, with the Father, and the Son: of
the same puisance, eternity, and infinite majesty.

Et viuificantem.
And giving life. Amongst the effects and operations, which are peculiarly
appropriated unto the holy Ghost, one is to viuificate or give life; For if he
have life in him self, as the Father and the Son have, how shall he not give
life unto others, seeing it is the property of life, to give life, as it is of
light, to illuminat, of that which is hot, to give and cast forth heat? If
also the humane spirit, does vegitat the body? how shall not the holy Ghost
quicken the soul?

Qui ex Patre, Filioque procedit.
Who proceeds from the Father, and the Son.

By this article we are to believe, that the holy Ghost proceeds eternally,
from the Father and the Son, as from the same begininge and spiration. Which
was added, to repress the errors of the Greeks, whereof the heretic
Nestorius was the first author, as testifies Theodos. li. 4. eccles. hist.
cap. 8. and 9. Denying that the holy Ghost proceeded from the Father and the
Son. For the which he was condemned by the council of Ephesus, reverenced in
the Church, as one of the four gospels. And for the further confusion of
heretics, and to the greater joy and consolation of all Catholics, the
said Simbole was publicly sunge, three several times of all that were
present.

Qui cum Patre et Filio, simul adoratur and conglorificatur.
Who with the Father and the Son, is together worshipped and glorified. To
repress the impiety of Macedonus the heretic, who denied the holy Ghost to
be God, houlding him for a simple creature, and to be altogether inequall to
the Father and the Son (as witnesses S. Aug. de Trinit. li. 1. cap. 6.) the
Church has proposed him unto us to be adored and glorified together with them:
which does plainly argue, that he is God, because that sort and kind of
adoration, pertayneth only to almighty God.

Qui locutus est per Prophetas.
Who has spoken by the prophets. To auert the people, from the false opinion
of those which despised visions, revelations, and the sacred predictions of the
holy prophets, as lies, dreams, and fables, the Church assures us, that the
Holy Ghost has spoken unto us by them, according to the testimony of Saint
Peter. 2.1. Instructing and teaching us, that prophecy, comes not by the will
of man, but that such men have spoken unto us, as they were inspired by God him
self.

Et vnam.
And one. There are four special notes or marks of the true church, gathered
partly out of the Creed of the Apostles, and partly out of that of
Constantinople. The first is, that she is One. The second, that she is Holy.
The third, that she is Catholic. The fourth, that she is Apostolic. The
first property therefore is, that she is One, because her head is one, to whom
she is united. Her spirit is one in which, as in one body, all are coupled and
coapted which do belong unto her. Her preaching is one. Her ceremonies are
one. Her end is one. And she alone has means to conserve this unity.

Sanctam.
Holy. For her second mark, she is called holy. 1. By reason of her head,
which is Christ Jesus him self, who is the holy of holies. 2. In respect of
her instructor, which is the Holy Ghost, whom Christ promised at his
departure, to send unto her. John 14.3.3. In respect of the holy Saints which
are in her (according to our Creed) sanctified by the same Holy ghost. 4. In
respect of the unity of faith, and absolute obedience, to one only chief and
supreme pastor, the bishop of Rome, 5. In respect of the holy laws and
ordonances, wherewith she is governed and directed. 6. In respect of the holiness
of the Sacraments, which are daily dispensed in her, by the hands of her
pastors. 7. And lastly, because only in her, and no way out of her, can any
one be sanctified or made holy.

Catholicam.
Catholic. For her third mark. she is called Catholic, or universal. 1.
For the vniuersallitie or faith, which she techeth all men alike to believe. 2.
For the vniuersallitie of doctrine, whereby she instructs, how to avoid vice
and follow virtue. 3. For the vniuersallitie of truth, which she defines in
general Councels. 4. For the vniuersallitie of nations, whom she calls to
the same faith, not excluding any. 5. For the vniuersallitie of times, because
from the beginning, to the ending, from Christ, to the consumation of the
world, the Christian religion shall ever continue. So that the Church to be
Catholic, is, to have been extant, in all places, and in all ages, which
never heretic could say of his Church. Let them (says Vinc. Lyr) show their
errors to have been believed every where, always, and of all, and then let
them brag that they are Catholics.

Et Apostolicam.
And Apostolic. This fourth mark of Apostolic, is also attributed to the
Church. for that she is built upon the immovable rock, of the Doctrine of the
Apostles, and has had a perpetual succession of lawful pastors (without
interruption) ever since their days, unto this present. This mark, no
heretic whatsoever, once dares to chaleng, it being an absolute perogatiue,
only belonging to our Catholic Roman Church.

Ecclesiam.
Church. The word, Ecclesia, is a Greek word, and signifies assembly, or
conuocatio^: and to believe the Church, is to believe that she is the lawful
assembly of the faithful, universally dispersed in the same profession of
faith, and divine worship: her faith including generally, that which is
requisite to the salvation of the believers: to whom in many things, it is
sufficient simply to believe, especially to the unlearned, that which she
believes, without other exact knowledge of al particulars.

Why (In) is here omitted.
And note, that the preposition, In, put in the precedent articles, is here
omitted, and it is simply said, I believe the Church, and not I believe in the
church, to discern betwixt the creatures, and the Creator of al things, in
whom only we must believe, and not in any other.

Confiteor vnum Baptismae.
It is here said, I Confess one Baptism, for as much as it can not be
reiterated, under the pains nominated in the holy decrees. cap. rebaptizare
de consec. did. 4 and to the end that none may think himself able to amend
the work of the holy Ghost. Which also agrees with natural reason it self,
according whereunto, a man is borne but only once.

In remissionem peccatorum.
For the forgiveness of sins. Here ensues the admirable effect of this most
wholesome lotion, wherein al sin, be it original, or actual is pardoned, quite
extinct, and abolished, as if it had never at all been committed, how enormous
and detestable soever it were, together with the pains due to the same: and
there is also given us (and that in great abundance) the infusion of divine
graces, to render us able, to al endeavors and offices, or Christian piety.

Et expecto resurrectionem mortuorum.
And I expect the resurrection of the dead: For the more assured establishment
of our faith* there is here set before us, the resurrection of the dead,
without the which we were of all other creatures, the most wretched and
miserable, and al our hope planted in Jesus Christ, were utterly frustrate.
Wherefore, this article does reach us to believe, that the bodies of al, both
men and women, which ever have been borne since the beginning of the world,
though they be rotten, burnt, eaten of worms, beasts, or fowls of the air,
yet shall be raised again at the day of judgment, and be truly reunited unto
their souls.

Et vitam venturi seculi.
And the life of the world to come. This is the mark whereunto all the faithful
ought to direct their designs, and to prepose unto them selves, as the hyer
and recompense, of al their labors. Without this, no man can but judge him
self much more unhappy and accursed, then the bruit beasts. Finally if we
esteem so much, and hold so dear this present life, which is so ficle and so
short that it may rather be called a death then a life, in what estimation
ought we to have the life that is eternal, void of al misery, and replenished
with all beatitude and perpetual felicity. Of which joy our Lord of his
mercy make us then pertakers, what sorrow soever we suffer in this world:
Amen.

Of the sign of the Cross made at, Vitam venturi seculi.
The sign of the holy Cross, is made at the words, Et vitam venturi seculi.
Least having been told of the bliss of the Saints, and of the joys of the
life everlasting, we should deceive our selves, by thinking to obtain them
without any travel, whereas Christ him self, did not enter into the kingdom
of his glory, but by the ignominy of his Cross. For from the Church militant,
unto the triumphant, none can enter but by the Cross, as says Ludolphus, in
vita Christi.

Amen.
For confirmation of that, which is contained in this present Simbole, there is
added for conclusion, this word. Amen, that is to say, in verity, truly,
certainly, or without doubt we believe, that, which is contained in the
precedent articles.

Of the kiss of the Altar.
After this, bowing down him self, he kisseth the altar: testyfiyng by this
ceremony, that he willingly submits him self under the Cross of Christ,
and that from the bottom of his heart, he imbraceth the same: confessing with
the Apostle, that the miseries of this life, and not worthy of the glory,
which shall be hereafter revealed unto us.

Dominus vobiscum.
The Creed being ended, the Priest turns to the people, saying Dominus
vobiscum. Praying that our Lord be with them, that they may make their profit
of that, which was repeated and rehearsed, in the aforesaid articles. And the
people answer.

Et cum spiritu tuo.
And with thy spirit. To the end, that being united together in the same faith
and religion, they may feel the effects of their salvation. Amalaricus
says, that this salutation of the Priest to the people, denotes an entrance,
to an other office. And Gabriel Biel says, that the Priest now faluteth the
assistants, with Dominus vobiscum, that God may be with them to receive their
oblations.

Oremus.
Having said Dominus vobiscum, next he says, Let us pray. Because, unless our
Lord be with us, we can not pray to our souls health. And then he turns him
to the altar; admonishing hereby, that now especially, every one should
return to him self, and diligently search, and discuss his conscience, that
so he may offer up himself, an acceptable sacrifice to Almighty God.

Of the Offertorie. And of the conditions of the Host that is to be offered.
The 1. Reason.
FIrst the Offertorie takes his name, Ab offerendo, Of offering; because in
this part of the Mass, the people are wont to make their temporal offeringes
at the Altar. Which, in a solemn Mass, is most melodiouslie soung, because as
the Apostle says. Our Lord loves a cheerful giver. 2. Cor. 1. Because also
it is convenient that after the gospel, there should follow faith in heart,
praise in mouth, and fruit in work, as testifies Innocentius tertius.

The 2. Reason.
Secondly, it is called the Offertorie, because at this time, the priest does
take into his hands, and makes an oblation of the Holies that are to be
consecrated. As also, because it is a most immediate preparation and
disposition, to the holy Canon.

Of the conditions of the Host.
As touching the conditions of the Host that is to be offered, sundry notable
things, are signified thereby 1. This bread is made of wheat: because Christ
compared him self unto wheat, saying. Unless the grain of wheat falling on
the ground do die, it remains alone. 2. It is made in the form or manner of
money to signify, that it is the same penny or reward, promised by our Lord in
the gospel, to the laborers in the vyneard. Mat 20.9 3. It is round: to put
us in mind, that God is the Creator of all things, both in heaven and earth,
Alpha, and Omega, without beginning or ending. By which also it denotes unto
us, the diuinty of our B. Savior, whereby he fills the round world. 4. It
is white: to represent unto us, the most pure fleash of our Lord and Savior,
taken of the most holy, perfect, and most pure Virgin. 5. It is thin: to
signify, that both the Priest, and the communicants, ought to come fasting to
receive the same. 6. It is made without leuain: to signify, that our hearts
ought to be made clean, from all leuain of envy and malice. 7. It must be
whole, not cracked or broken: and that to signify two sundry mysteries. The
one, that we ought to be always in love and charity with our neighbors. The
other, that we ought to live in the unity of the Catholic Church, and never
to be sundred by scisme of herifie. 8. In this Host is written, the name and
image of our prince and sovereign: to signify, that we ought to acknowledge
our selves to be his people, and the sheep of his pasture: as also, that he
has made us, to his image and likeness. Some likewise do form therein, the
picture of a Lamb, to signify, that he which is sacrificed, is the true Lamb
of God, which takes away the sins of the world.

Of the Paten whereon the Host is laid. And 1. why the same is covered or hid,
under the Corporal.
The 1. Reason.
THe Paten is so called, a Patendo, that is, of patencie, or amplenes: and
betokneth a heart large, open, and ample. Upon this Paten, that is upon this
latitude of charity, the Sacrifice of justice ought to be offered. This
latitude of heart the Apostles had, when Peter said. Though I should dye with
thee, I will not deny thee: likewise also said all the Disciples. Mat. 26. For
which cause our Lord said unto them The spirit indeed is prompt, but the flesh
is weak Mat 29.41.

The 2. Reason.
And because this latitude of heart, fled from them and lay hid, when they all
forsook and abandoned their master, therefore after the oblation is made, the
Priest hides the paten under the Corporal (or the Deacon removed from the
Altar, houldeth it covered:) whereby the flight of the Disciples is signified:
who whilst the true Sacrifice was offered, fled and forsook Christ, as he him
self foretold them saying. All you shall be scandalized in me in this night.
Mat. 26.31.

Of the two Palles or Corporalls.
And here it is also further to be noted, that there are two Palles, called
Corporalls: the one laid upon the Altar, under the Host and Chalice, extended:
the other laid upon the Chalice, foulded. That extended, signifies Faith.
That foulded, betokens understanding: for here the mystery ought to be
believed, but can not be comprehended, that faith may have merit, where humane
reason can make no demonstrance.

Of the preparation of the bread and wine for the oblation: and how therein is
most lively represented, the action of our Savior, in the institution of this
Sacrament.
The 1. Ceremony, and his signification.
FIrst, by seeing the priest prepare the bread and wine for the oblation, we
may be put in mind, how the disciples went before our Lord, to prepare his
passover, as the Evangelist witnesses, saying. The first day of Azimes the
disciples came to Jesus, saying. Where will thou, that we prepare for thee to
eat the pasche Mat. 26.17.

The 2. Ceremony, and his signification.
His offerring up the Host upon the Paten before consecration: signifies, the
great affection, where with our Lord and Savior, offered up him self to his
heavenly Father, to suffer his death and passion for us. As also the great
desire which he had to ordain this holy Sacrament, saying. With a desire have
I desiered, to eat this passover with you before I suffer. Luc. 22.15.

The 3. Ceremony, and his signification.
The priest preparing himself to perform the Offertorie, remoueth away the
Chalice a little from him, and then houlding up the Pate^ with the host in both
his hands, he says this prayer following. Suscipe sancte etc. The removing
away the Chalice a little from him: does signify, how our Savior in the
garden, went a little a side from his Disciples, as the scripture says, about a
stones cast. The laying of the Host down upon the Paten, represents the
very manner of his prayer, to wit, procidit in faciem suam, orans as S Mat.
says, cap. 26.36. He fell upon his face, praying.

The 4. Ceremony, and his signification.
The prayer also it self, is imediatlie directed to God the Father, as
likewise that of our Saviors was, saying. Suscipe sancte Pater. For even so
our Savior immediately directed that of his, saying. Pater etc. My Father if
it be possible, let this chalice pass from me. ibid. And now to explicate the
words them selves.

Suscipe.
Receive. Our Lord is then said to receive our hosts and oblations, when
approving our hearty prayers and devotions, he does liberally pour forth, his
blessings, favors, and graces upon us.

Sancte Pater.
O holy Father, Where note, that the name of Father, does insinuat unto us, not
a person by him self alone, but such an one, as has also a son. And further
in this place may also signify, the fatherly pity, care, and providence,
which he has over all his dear, and beloved children. Which Father is
therefore said to be Holy, that we his children, should imitate him our
heavenly Father, in purity, sanctity, and holiness of life.

Omnipotens.
Omnipotent. This Father, is here said, not only to be holy, but also to be
omnipotent: that by acknowledging his omnipotency, we may believe him to be
such, who can do much more for us, then either we are able to understand, or
desire at his hands.

Aeterne Deus.
Eternal God. Besides the two former attributes of sanctity, and
omnipotency, there is added a third attribute, to wit, of Eternity: and this,
to the end that we may believe him to be such, thoroughe whose everlasting
goodness, these our bodies, now frail and mortal, shall hereafter be raised to
immortallitie, and consequently unto eternity.

Hanc immaculatam hostiam.
This immaculat host. Which words, have principally respect, unto that which
the host is afterward to be made, to wit, the most precious and immaculat
body, of our Savior Jesus.

Quam ego indignus famulus tuus.
Which I thy unworthy servant. The Priest, how holy soever otherwise he be,
willinglye acknowledges him self, either for a wicked or unworthy servant: and
this he does without any detriment unto the Sacrament. For not in the merit of
the Priest, who is the co^secrator, but in the word of our B. Savior, is this
mystery effected. So that the evil life of the Priest, does not hinder the
effect of the sacrament; as nether does the infirmity of the physician,
corrupt the virtue of the medicine.

Offero tibi, Deo meo, viuo, and vero.
Do offer unto thee, my living, and true God. Which words, do clearlie
confound all manner of profane, and superstitious worships, together with all
those oblations, which are made by Idolaters unto their Idols. For the Church
makes her offering, to the living, and true God: and contrariwise they, both
to dead, and to false gods.

Pro innumerabilibus peccatis, and offensionibus, and negligentiis meis.
For my inumerable sins, and offenses, and negligences. Where, by (sins:)
are understood, the transgression of the divine commandments. By (offenses:)
the scandal of our neighbors. And by (neglicences:) the omission of good, and
godly works.

Et pro omnibus circumstantibus.
And for all that are present. Most peculiarly al those are named or
commemorated, who are present at Mass: because of these, the priest takes a
most peculiar care, who are so peculiarly joined unto him, by their personal
presence at his Sacrifice.

Sed and pro omnibus fidelibus Christianis, viuis atque defunctis.
As also for all faithful Christians, living and departed. A particular care
is so had of them that are present, that a general solicitude is also extended
to those that are absent. O how blessed a thing is it to be a member of such a
Church, wherein, be we present, or absent, be we alive, or be we departed,
perpetual care is had of us, and perpetual prayers are offered for us.

Vt mihi, and illis, proficiat ad salutem in vitam eternam. Amen.
That both to me, and to them, it may profit to health to life everlasting
Amen. Health truly is desiered, but chiefly that of the soul, which leads
unto happiness and life everlasting: for as the scripture says, what should it
avail a man, to gain the whole world, and to loose his own soul?

Of the mingling of the wine and water, and of sundry notable circumstances
concerning the same.
Having ended the former prayer, he makes the sign of the Cross with the
Paten, then lays the host upon the Corporal, and afterward pours wine
and water into the Chalice: of the which (as likewise before of the Bread) many
notable circumstances, are to be considered.

The 1. Ceremony, and his signification.
First, as the Bread which is prepared for the consecration, ought to be of
pure wheat, so likewise the wine, for the self same reason, ought to be of the
natural grape. Because, as our Savior compared him self to bread, saying. I
am the bread which came down from heaven. Ihon 6. So likewise he compared him
self to a Vine, saying. I am the true Vine, and my father is the husbandman.
John. 15.1.

The 2. Ceremony, and his signification.
The wine is first poured into the Chalice, without the water: and this is done
according to the example of Jesus Christ him self, as S. Ciprian testifies
li. 2 ep. 3. to signify, the blood which he poured forth at the time of his
agony in the garden of Gethsemanie.

The 3. Ceremony, and his signification.
The water is first blessed, before it be mingled, but not so the wine. The
reason whereof is, for that the wine, in this place, signifies Christ, who
needs no benediction: and water the people, who in this life, can not be
without sin, and therefore have greatly need of benediction.

The 4. Ceremony, and his signification.
Next it is to be noted, that in this mixtion, there is more wine put into the
chalice, then water: and this in signification, that the Church ought to be
incorporated into Christ and not Christ into the Church. And Pope Honorius
affirms, that it should be a pernicious abuse, to do the contrary. cap.
perniciosus de celeb. Miss.

The 5. Ceremony, and his signification.
In the Chalice of our Lord, wine is not alone without water, nor water alone
without wine: because both flowed forth together out of his side at the time
of his passion, as says S. Alexander Pope and martyr, the fifte from S. Peter.
Which S. Cyprian very notably confirms, saying. Si vinum tantum quis
offerat. etc. If any man offer wine alone, the blood of Christ begins to be
without us: and if the water be alone, we begin to be without Christ: but
when both are mingled, then is a spiritual and celestial sacrament
accomplished. ep. 65. And Theophilus upon the 19. of S. John, says that the
Armenians are hereby confounded, because they do not mingle in the mysteries,
water with the wine, for that they believe not, as it seems, that water
issued out of our Lords side.

The 6. Ceremony, and his signification.
Again water is mingled with wine: to signify the effect of this divine
sacrament, to wit, Christ united to the people believing, and the people
believing, united to Christ in whom they believe. For by water, is understood
the people, as Apoc. 17.15. Aquae multa, populi multi. Many waters, are many
people.

Another signification of the creature of water.
Some there be likewise, who will have water to represent, the blood of Christ,
whose virtue and property is, to cool, to quench, to refresh, to moysten, to
fructify, and to wash. For true it is, that the precious blood of Jesus
Christ, does work in our souls, all these effects: for it cools her
concupiscence: it quenches the flames of her wicked affections: it moysteneth
the arriditie and drynes of her understanding: it refreshes her fervent
desires in almighty God: and it washes and purges her, from all the foulnes
and spotts of her offenses.

The 7. Ceremony, and his signification.
And here by the way it is to be observed, that that he which asisteth or
serves the priest, nether lays the host upon the Altar, nether pours the
wine, nor water, into the Chalice, but both are done by the priest himself:
insinuating, that Christ himself, first instituted this sacrament, and after
recommended the same to his Apostles. For as the Evangelist says. He took the
bread and blessed it: and after, he took the chalice and consecrated it: and
said to his Apostles; do this in remembrance of me. And now to speak of the
prayer which follows.

Deus qui humanae substantiae dignitatem mirabilitater condidisti.
O God which have wonderfully created the dignity of man's substance. This
dignity of man's substance, consists principally, in the image of God, which
is indeliblie imprinted in him. Which is therefore said, to be wonderfully
created, because it is produced by the power creatiue, whereof none of us,
nether understand the reason, nor are capable of any manner of participation.
For the creatiue power (says S. Cyril, 2. Thesauri. cap. 2.) the creature can
not receive, that he can so much as create (that is produce of nothing) the
least thing whatsoever that is in the world.

Et mirabilius reformasti.
And have more wonderfully reformed. To wit, by our redemption, or reformation
by Christ: which worthily may be called more admirable, then our creation by
God: for who ever heard infirmity, by infirmity, to be healed, or death, by
death, to be extinguished? Which thing is so unwonted and full of admiration,
as that it caused the very Angels themselves to wonder, saying. Si tu
propugnator ad saluandum. If thou be the defender to save us, how is it that
thy garment is redd? Isay 63. As if they should say; How do thou save from
sin, seeing thou thy self, art made redd with the similitude of sinful
flesh?

Da nobis, per huius aquae and vini mysterium.
Grant us, by the mystery of this water and wine. Which mystery truly, is
nothing else, but the inseparable conjunction, betwixt our souls, and our
Savior Jesus. Which conjunction, as S. Cyprian says, nothing can sever, that
there always hold not and remain, betwixt the lover, and the beloved, an
inseparable and indivisible love Cyp. Ep. 63.

Eius diuinitatis esse consortes.
To be partakers of his divinity. Because (for the obtaining of his beatitude)
man ought to follow none but God, and because of the grossenes of his
carnallitie, he could not follow the invisible God, therefore the Son of God,
by the conjunction of his divinity with our flesh, made us a way, by the
which, we may be brought to the perfect vision and fruition of his divinity.

Qui humanitatis nostrae fieri dignatus est particeps.
Who vouchsafed to be made partaker of our humanity. O wonder, says S. Aug.
God would him self be made, the self fame which he before had made, to the
end, that which he had made, should not perish, but be saved!

Jesus Christus Filius tuus Dominus noster. Qui tecum viuit. etc.
Jesus Christ thy Son our Lord, who with thee, lives and reigns, in unity
of the holy Ghost God: world without end. Amen. Which words I pass over at
this present, partly because I have before already explicated them: and
partly, because I judge them so clear of them selves, to every one, that they
need no further explication.

Offerimus tibi Domine.
We offer unto thee o Lord. Having mingled the water with the wine, as a
forsaid, he takes the Chalice and offers it up, saying. We offer unto thee o
Lord. Signifying by this ceremony, how our blessed Savior most willingly
offered up him self unto his Father, to be the oblation and sacrifice, for our
redemption. And here offer yourselfe to his grace, by true and unfeigned
contrition of heart for all your offenses.

Calicem salutaris.
The Chalice of health. By anticipation, this Chalice is called, the Chalice of
health, that is of salvation, both because it prefigureth the blood of Christ,
which is the price of our salvation: and also because it impetrateth health, to
all the people which are offered in the same.

Tuam deprecantes clementiam.
Humbly beseeching thy clemency. Where very aptly mention is made, of
goodness, and clemency: for this chalice, his Father gave him, and not the
Jews: for love, not for anger: for good will, not for necessity: for grace,
not for revenge. For this is that Jacob, who humbly obeying the commandment
of his Father Isaac, and the counsel of his mother Rebecca, served Laban
fourteen years, that he might take Rachel and Lia (to wit, the people of the
Jews and Gentiles) unto him in marriage. Genesis

Vt in conspectu diuinae maiestatis tuae.
That in the sight of thy divine majesty. Rightly is this acceptable
sacrifice, presented and interposed, betwixt the sight of Gods majesty, and
our sins: for whenever our sins do provoke him to punish us, we have no
better means to pacify his anger, then by presenting before his sight the
merits of this sacrifice.

Pro nostra, and totius mundi salute.
For our health, and for the health of all the world. In these words, as in
the like going before, all Christian Catholic people, may receive wonderful
consolation, that by every particular sacrifice, every Catholic present,
and every Catholic in the world, whersoeuer absent, is without omission,
daily remembered in this divine sacrifice.

Cum odore suauitatis ascendat Amen.
It may ascend with the odor of sweetness. Amen. Which is done, when he does so
approve the sacrifice of our praise and prayer, that in favor, thereof, he
pours forth more abundantly, his benediction upon us. And in this sense,
Jesus Christ his Son, is said to have offered up him self, an host, and
oblation to God, in the odor of sweetness Ephesians. 5.

Then he makes the sign of the Cross with the Chalice, sets the same upon
the Corporal, covers it with the palle, and next joining his hands together
upon the Altar, a little inclined, he says.

In spiritu humilitatis, and animo contrito, suscipiamur a te Domine.
In the spirit of humility, and in a contrit heart, let us be received of thee
o Lord. In which words, are touched two things, which make our prayers
acceptable to God; to wit, humility, and contrition. Of the first
Ecclesiasticus says; The prayer of him that humbles him self, does pierce
the heavens. Of the second, the prophet Esaias says. Unto whom shall I look,
but unto the humble, and contrite in spirit? ca. vlt. The first of these
virtues, is found in that mirror of all perfection, who said of him self. I am
in the midst of you, as he that ministers. Luc. 22. The second, in that devout
Publican, who knocked his breast: so highly commended thorough the universal
Church Luc. 18.

Et sic fiat sacrificium nostrum in conspectu tuo hodie.
And so let our sacrifice be made before thee this day. To wit, in the spirit
of humility, and in a contrit heart: for the spirit of humility, acknowledges
the want of virtues: and a contrit heart, the number of vices. And worthelie is
it said, sic, so, as if he said, let that be done in respect of humility of
confession, and of hearty contrition, which can not be, by the merit of
devotion and perfect innocence.

Vt placeat tibi, Domine Deus.
That it may please thee, o Lord God. Whom nothing more pleases, then meeknes
and humility; who^ nothing more displeases, then pride, and superbitie. For
as S. Aug. says, Unless in all things wherein we do well, humility go
before, keep company with, and follow after, pride will wrest all out of our
hand. Aug. ep. 56. Then follows.

Veni sanctificator, omnipotens aeterne Deus.
Come o sanctifier, omnipotent eternal God. Eleuating his eyes to heaven, and
contemplating the greatness and sublimitie of this mystery, which he prepares
him self to offer, he humbly requires the assistance of the Holy Ghost, to
sanctify his oblation, (from whom also it is, that all good desiers and holy
inspirations do proceed) that by his supernatural and miraculous operation,
that which he desiereth, may be effected, saying. Come therefore o sanctifier,
come by thy mercy, come by thy grace, come by thy goodness, come by thy
sweetness, come by thy love come by thy benignity, come by thy piety, and
infinite bounty.

Et benedic hoc sacrificium, tuo sancto nomini preparatum.
And bless this sacrifice, prepared to thy name. At which words, he blesses
the offeringes, calling upon the Holy Ghost: which albeit he is named alone,
yet he can not be alone, but is even both from, and with, the Father, and the
Son.

To conclude, of the Offertorie mention is made by Walfridus de reb. ec. cap.
21 Rab. l. 1. de divine offic. cap. 2. Amal. l. 3. de ecl. offic cap. 19.
Microlog. de ecles. obser. cap. 10. Isid. l. Etymo 6. cap. 19. Innoc. l. 2. de
mist. Missiae cap. 53. and others.

Of the Priests washing his hands.
The 1. Reason.
HE that looks diligently, and narrowly, to the first institution of this
ceremony, shall find it expreslie to be taken, from the model and example of
our Savior himself, when he first ordained this holy Sacrament. For before
he consecrated his body and blood, or communicated the same to his Apostles,
he first prepared them, by washinge their feet. John. 13.5.

The 2. Reason.
This very custom, the Church observed sometime, after his example.

Tertullian witnesses, that this custom of the priest, to wash his hands at
the Altar, was observed amongst the Christians in his time, Tertul ad vxorem
li. 2. And S. Ambrose also, and diverse others, make mention thereof. Amb. li.
3. de sacr.

The 3. Reason.
Misticallie, this ceremony admonishes, that every one ought with strick
examination to cleanse his conscience, presenting him self at this holy
table, if he desire truly to feel the effects thereof, to the health of his
soul.

The 4. Reason.
In particular the priest washes his hands at this present, notwithstanding
he had washed them before, that if perhaps by humane frailty, he has admitted
into his mind, any vain fantasy or imagination, he may now at the least,
cast it from him, and take as it were unto him, another new cleanness. For he
ought to procure so much the more purity, by how much he approaches the
nerer, to the work of this most pure, and most immaculat mystery, that so he
may touch with the more cleanness, the most immaculat and precious body of
our Savior Jesus.

The 5. Reason.
And it is to be noted, that he washes not his whole hands, but only the
tippes or ends of his fingars: to signify, that our greater faults, and
grosser offenses, ought first to be cleansed else where (to wit, in Confession)
so that at the Altar, we should not need to wash, but the tippes of our
fingars only, that is to say, some little affections, which may sometimes
distract or disturb our spirit. And now to expound the words them selves.
Lauabo etc. psl. 25.

Lauabo inter innocents, manus meas.
I will wash my hands, amongst the innocents. Where he prays, that as he
washes them from exterior uncleanness, which defiles the body, so it may be
the good pleasure of God, to wash him from all inward uncleanness, which
defiles the soul.

Et circumdabo altar tuum Domine.
And I will compass about thy Altaro Lord. When our heart is lifted up to God
then (says S. Aug) it is to him an Altar. li. 10. de Ciuit. cap. 4. which then
is compassed about, when with the door of circumspection, like an enclosed
orchard, it is on every side enclosed, that nether by irruption of enemies it
be polluted, nor by the cares of the world, it be distracted.

Vt audiam vocem laudis tuae.
That I may hear the voice of thy praise. And note that he says, (that I may
hear:) for true it is, that it is the part of him that sacrifices, to offer
praises unto God: but because God ought to be worshipped of his own, and ought
to be presented with his own gifts, the priest ought vigilantlie to watch,
that in every moment of the sacrifice, he first hearken to God inwardly
inspiring, and cheiflie to present, and offer up those desires unto him, which
he has received of him.

Et enarrem vniuersa mirabilia tua.
And may declare all thy wonders. Which may aptly be understood, of this most
holy sacrament, which being but one, surpasses al other, and therefore to
declare it, were to declare all other.

Domine dilexi decorem domus tuae.
O Lord I have loved the beauty of thy house. Which house we our selves are,
as the scripture says. Ye are the temples of the Holy Ghost. And the beauty
thereof, is the beauty and purity of our souls.

Et locum habitationis gloriae tuae.
And the place of the habitation of thy glory. To wit, of the Church
triumphant, wherein thou art glorified of thy Saints in heaven: or of thy
Church militant, wherein thou art praised of thy servants in earth.

Ne perdas cum impijs animam meam.
Destroy not my soul with the wicked. By the wicked, are understood those
which nether worship God, nor fear God, nor obey his Church, all which are
truly termed wicked.

Et cum viris sanguinum vitam meam.
And with the men of blood, my life. They are men of blood, which commit the
manifest works of the flesh, of which the Apostle says, that none such shall
enter into the kingdom of God.

In quorum manibus iniquitates.
In whose hands are iniquities. Men of blood, (in whose hands are iniquities)
S. Aug. interprets of those that bate their neighbor for the house of God is
adorned with two precepts: the love of God, and of our neighbor.

Dextra eorum repleta est muneribus.
Their right hands are filled with gifts. Because that which is given them to
the obtaining of everlasting life, they convert to obtain the gifts of the
world, esteeming gain, to be godliness.

Ego autem in innocentia mea ingressus sum.
But I am entered in my innocence. Innocence, not of perfect consummation, but
of right intention: that it may be called, innocence, as justice is so called
to wit, for the end of the true good where at it aymeth as S. Aug. teaches
cap. de ciuit. Dei.

Redime me, and miserere mei.
Redeem me, and have mercy on me. For such is the innocence of this life,
that even the innocent may say, redeem me, and have mercy on me.

Pes meus stetit in directo.
My foot has stood in the direct. That is, in the way of rectitude, or in a
right way, it has not bowed to wickedness, nor preuaricated from the paths of
justice.

In ecclesijs, benedicam te Domine.
In the Churches, will I bless thee o Lord. That is openly, and publicly,
will I celebrate thy praises, in the congregation of the godly: nether will I
hide from them, whom thou have called, thy benediction; because to thy love, I
refer the love of my neighbor.

Gloria Patri, and Filio etc.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. As it was
in the beginning, and now, and ever, and world without end. Amen.

Then enclining a title before the midest of the Altar, his hands joined
thereon, he says the prayer following.

Suscipe sancta Trinitas, hancoblationem quam tibi offerimus.
Receive, o holy Trinity, this oblation which we offer unto thee. Having now
placed the bread and wine in a readiness to be consecrated, he requires the
holy Trinity, to accept his oblation, and that in the memory, of the most
sublime and high mysteries, of the Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension of our
Savior Jesus: which points are here proposed, as the most principal
articles, of the belief and health of all the faithful.

Ob memoriam.
For the memory. Wherein the Church of Christ, has right dutifullie, observed
the precept of her spouse, which he gave unto her, at the institution of this
holy sacrifice, saying. Do this, for a remembrance of me. Luc. 22.19.

Passionis.
Of the Passion. The passion of our Lord is first mentioned, by the which he
conquered and subdued sin, death, the world, and our capital enemy, to wit
the devil.

Resurrectionis.
Resurrection. Next mention is made of his resurrection: for as he put to death
sin, by the merit of his passion, so rose he by his proper force, for our
justification. He was crucified in infirmity, but rose most victoriously.

Et Ascensionis Jesus Christi Domini nostri.
And Ascension of Jesus Christ our Lord. Next of his Ascension, in which, in
great iubilation, he mounted up and sits, on the right hand of his Father,
to raise up our human nature, baselie, and wretchedlie fallen, thorough
consent to sin. Leading with him the holy Fathers, which as a spoil, he had
victoriously redeemed out of the hands of the devil.

Et in honorem beatae Mariae, semper virginis.
And in the honor of blessed Marie, always a Virgin. Where the forsaid oblation
is also made, in commemoration of the Virgin Marie, by whom, the Son of
almighty, God vouchsafed to come unto us. The respect which is carried unto
her, is referred unto the honor of God him self, who has abundantly endwed
her, with the plenitude of all singular graces and perfections. Who is named
before all others, as being queen both of heaven and earth, and as having the
chiefest and most supereminent room in both Churches, next to her Son.

Et beati Ioannis Baptistae.
And of blessed John Baptist. Worthelie after the glorious virgin, is next in
order placed S. John Baptist, of whom our Savior him self gave this
testimony. Amen I say unto you, there has not risen amongst the sons of
women, a greater then John the Baptist. Mat. 11.11.

Et sanctorum Apostolorum, Petri and Pauli.
And of the holy Apostles, Peter and Paul. Where note, that it is an usual
thing in many of our prayers and inuocations, always to join these two
Saints together: because they both in one city, both in one day, both under
one tyrant, and both for one faith, were gloriously martyred together.

Et istorum.
And of these. Those are demonstrated, either with whose relics the Altar is
consecrated, or whose feasts are celebrated. And that right worthelie, seeing,
as S. Ambrose says, we by a certain pledge of their bodies, do especially
claim, and challeng their protection, S. Amb. de viduis.

Et omnium sanctorum.
And of all Saints. This oblation is likewise made, in the commemoration of all
Saints, who by their exemplar life, have greatly edified the Church of God, by
shining in the world as most clear lights. Let us therefore, bless and honor
our Lord in them, who has made them so honorable, and would that their
memories, should with thanksgiving be magnified after their deaths; For they
cause us to feel the effect of their prayers in heaven, and make almighty
God, to become propitious, and favorable unto us.

Vt illis proficiat ad honorem.
That it may profit them to honor. They which rejoice to find somewhat in our
prayers and ceremonies, which may appear to them to turn to our reproach, do
say, that in this sacrifice, we give divine honor unto the Saints. But this,
how far it is from the Churches meaning, S. Aug does witness saying. Who ever
heard any priest standing at the Altar, yea even over the body of the holy
martyr, to say in his prayers, I offer sacrifice unto thee Peter, Paul, or
Cyprian? Thus he, li. 8. de Ciuit. cap. 27. For seeing the Saints love God
above them selves, they can not but be highly offended, when any divine honor
is done unto them: as in this life, Paul and Barnabas well declared, by renting
their garments, when the people would have honored them as Gods. But you will
ask, what honor therefore is it, to the which we pray that our sacrifice may
profit them? To which we answer, that it is only to be understood of
accidental, and nether of divine, nor of essential glory.

Nobis autem ad salutem.
And to us to health. This is the second end, which we are to aim at in all
our actions, after the glory of God, and the honor of his Saints: with which
our own spiritual good, and eternal salvation, are always conjoined. Nether
can we negotiat this better by any other means, then first by serving God,
next by honoring and soliciting his B. Saints. Briefly, in that we worship
their memories, it is our benefit, not theirs.

Et illi pro nobis intercedere dignentur in coelis.
And let them vouchsafe to pray for us in heaven. We put great confidence in
the prayers of the B. Saints, and this especially for two causes. First
because the divine goodness of God, does most willingly hear those, that are
joined together in prayer, for (says he) if two of you consent upon earth (how
much more if they upon earth, with them in heaven) of any thing whatsoever
ye shall ask, it thall be given you of my Father. Secondly because that in
craving their prayers as S. Aug. says Sermon. 46. de Sanctis, and imitating
their examples, the Saints may acknowledge some thing in us of their own
virtues, and thereby the rather be moved, to make supplications unto God in our
behalf.

Quorum memoriam agimus in terris. Per eundem Christum etc.
Whose memory we make in earth. Thorough the same Christ etc. We offer
sacrifice unto God, at the memories of martyrs, that by this celebritie, we may
both give thanks to God for their victories, and incite our selves to the
imitation of such a crown and palm, by inuocating them, and by renewing of
their memories.

Of orate fratres. etc. And of the reason of the priests turning unto the
people upon the left hand.
THis done the priest kisseth the Altar, and then makes one whole turn
thorough out, from the left hand to the right, saying. Pray brethren, that
mine, and your sacrifice, may be made acceptable in the presence of God the
Father almighty.

The 1. Reason.
Touching the reason of the priests tourning to the people upon the right
hand, we have already spoken before, showing that by the right hand, the
priest represents the person of our Savior, as now by the left hand, he
represents his own person: for by the right hand, is understood virtue and
perfection: and by the left hand, frailty and imperfection. The priest
therefore representing our Savior, passes not to the left hand: to signify,
that in our Savior, there was no sin nor imperfection. But when he
represents him self, to acknowledge that he is a sinner, frail, and
imperfect, he passes to the left hand saying. Pray for me brethren.

The 2. Reason.
Again by the right hand, is signified mirth, and joy: and by the left, hand,
sorrow, and sadness. Wherefore, the priest turning him to the Altar on his left
hand, begins to represent the mysteries of the death and passion of our
Savior Jesus, a matter full of great sorrow and sadness, and signified by the
left hand, as joy by the right hand. For of the Angel which declared the
joyful resurrection of our Savior Jesus, the scripture says, that he sat on
the right hand of the sepulcher Marc. 16.5.

The 3. Reason.
The good Hesther (as we read in her book cap. 4.) before that she would
speak to king Assuerus, in the behalf of all her nation, was not content to
betake her alone to her prayers, but also recommended her self to the prayers
of all the people. The priest therefore does here the very like, considering
that at this time he presents him self before the king of all kings, to
speak in the behalf of all his nation, that is to say, in the behalf of all
the Church of God.

The 4. Reason.
Again, it may be said, that therefore the priest requires to be assisted with
the prayers of the people, for that he judges him self insufficient to
consecrate so great a sacrament, unless he be also helped, and assisted with the
prayers and supplications of all the asistants.

Suscipiat Dominus hoc sacrificium etc.
The people immediately make answer, and pray for him, saying. Our Lord
receive this sacrifice of thy hands, to the praise and glory of his name,
also to our utility, and of all his holy Church Wherein they imitate the
counsel of the holy Scripture, which says. Orate pro inuicem vt saluemini.
Pray one for an other, that ye may be saved. James 5.

2. Secondly, because also it is requisite, that both the people pray for the
priest, and the priest for the people, for both the priest and the people are
all sacrificers, though in a far different manner, the priest sacrifieth by him
self: and the people by the priest, which is his special commission in this
behalf.

3. And rightly say they, Our Lord receive this sacrifice of thy hands etc.
to wit, at the hands of the priest, because it is the self same sacrifice
which before, the celestial Father, him self, vouchsafed to receive at the
hands of his Son. Wherefore with this oblation, the devout soul may
likewise offer her self to almighty God.

Of the Secret of the Mass, and of the sundry reasons rendered for the same.
The 1. Reason.
FIrst, to declare why it is called by the name of Secret: All agree, that it
is so called, because it is pronounced in a secret, and silent manner: there
being nothing more beseeming this high and ineffable mystery, then silence, as
witnesses Fortunatus l. 3. do eccles. offic. cap. 21.

The 3. Reason.
To declare therefore what this secret is: it is no other thing, then certain
petitions, which the priest makes unto almighty God; that it may please him,
to accept the prayers and sacrifices, which there are presented unto him in the
name of the church universal. As for example, that which is appointed for the
fifth sunday after Easter. Suscipe Domine fideltum preces etc. Receue o Lord,
the prayers of the faithful, with the oblation of hosts, that by these
offices of pious devotion, we may come to thy celestial glory. Thorough
Christ our Lord. etc. That of the feast of the Ascension. Suscipe Domine munera
etc. Receue o Lord these gifts which we offer, in memory of the glorious
Ascension of thy Son, and mercifully grant, that we may be delivered from
all sin and evils, and that we may come to the life eternal. Thorough Christ
our Lord. That of Penticost, Munera quesimus etc. Sanctify o Lord we beseech
thee, these gifts, which we here offer, and also purify our hearts by the
grace of thy holy Spirit. Thorough Christ our Lord: and of this sort are all
the other.

The 3. Reason.
And here let it be noted, that these Secret prayers must always agree with
the Collects in number, order, and matter. As for example, if the Priest do
take three Collects. The first of the Sunday. The second for the peace of the
Church. The third, that which is common for the living and the dead. Then must
the first Secret also be of the Sunday. The second for the peace of the Church.
And the third for the living and the departed: not that either the number or
order, makes so much in this matter, but because the Church herein follows
the doctrine of S. Paul, saying. Omnia honest and secundum ordinem fiant in
vobis. Let every thing be done decently, and according to order amongst you.

The 4. Reason.
The priest recites these prayers in secret and that especially for five
causes. First, to show, that the virtue of the sacrifice, which our Lord was to
make for the redemption of man, was concealed and hid from the world, until
the time, that he offered him self upon the Cross.

The 5. Reason.
Secondly, to show, that the Jews, presently after the raising of Lazarus,
conspired amongst them selves to kill our Lord; for which cause, he did not
walk openly amongst them (as the scripture says) but retired him self in
secret, into the city of Ephrem. John. 11.53.

The 6. Reason.
Thirdly, to put us in mind what our Savior did, during the time he was thus
retired. VVherof Rupertus li. 2. de diuinis officijs, renders the reason,
saying. The priest therefore, standing in silence, and secretly praying upon
the offeringes, prepares the holy sacrifice: because our Lord, even when he
hid himself, and walked not openly amongst the Jews, prepared for us, the
wholesome sacrament of his passion: Thus he. Neither can the priest more
conveniently represe^t unto us, the mysteries of the death and passion of our
Savior Jesus, and the order of them, then by beginning at the conspiration of
the wicked Jews, from which he withdrew him self in secret, because as the
the Evangelist says, his time was not yet come.

The 7. Reason.
Fourthly, to represent the great taciturnitie and silence, which our Savior
used, at the time of his examination before the Judge: which, as the gospel
witnesses, was so great, that the Judge him self did wonder thereat.

The 8. Reason.
Fifthlie to put us in mind, of the silence which he used at the time of his
passion, when he was led as a meek and innocent lamb unto the slaughter.
Which example the holy Martyrs do therefore imitate, of whom the Church
sings. Non murmur resonat, non querimonia. There is nether murmur, nor
complaining heard.

Of the Preface; And of sundry reasons rendered for the same.
The 1. Reason.
Touching the name, interpretation, and etymology of the word, the word
Preface, is a word, which we retain of the Latins, as that of Trinity,
Sacrament, and the like: and signifies no other thing, then a certain
preparation, preamble, or prolocution, which is used before we come to the
principal narration, or matter intended, the better to prepare and dispose the
auditors: like unto the Proemes and Exordiums, which Orators use before they
enter into their narrations. And for this reason, this exhortation and Preface,
serves to prepare and dispose the Christians to devotion, whilst the priest
addresseth him self to recite the holy Canon: which contains the most in
effable and incomprehensible mystery, of the consecration of the body and
blood of our Savior Jesus.

The 2. Reason.
Now according to the interpretation aforesaid, this Preface, may be referred
to that action of our Lord, Luke 22. Where he sent two of his disciples, to wit
Peter and John saying? Go and prepare us the Pasche that we may eat. Who as
our Lord willed them, went and prepared the same.

Per omnia secula seculorum.
World without end. The priest (being come to the end of the Secret, lifts up
his voice, pronouncing his word on high to be heard and understood of all the
assistants: to signify, that our Savior having absented him self from
Jerusalem, returned thither again five days before his passion, showing him
self openly to his enemies, and making his entrance into the city, with a
great multitude of people following him.

Amen.
Amen. The reply of the people answering Amen, does signify the joyful
acclamations of the people, who to honor our Savior, some of them cut down
branches from the trees, others cast their garments in the way where he was to
pass, and others cried out on high, saying. Benedictus qui venit in nomine
Domini. Blessed is he that comes in the name of our Lord.

Dominus vobiscum.
Our Lord be with you. Then the priest to dispose the assistants to be the more
attentive to that, which he goes about to do, saluteth them a new, requiring,
that our Lord be with them. And that not without need: for great were the
misery of man, not to be with him, without whom he can not be.

Et cum spiritu tuo.
And with thy spirit. The people having received this so wholesome a salutation
of the priest, do likewise resalute him again; praying, that even as he has
wished, that God may be with the^, so also he may be with his spirit, to the
end that he may spirituallie accomplish his office, with all decency.

Johannes Diaconus, in the life of S. Gregory, recounteth. That S. Gregory in
the time of Mass saying, Dominus vobiscu^, and his chaplins which attended
him, being negligent to make him answer, an Angel from heaven supplied their
default, saying. Et cum spiritu tuo. Ioh. Diac. in vita Greg. li. 4.

Sursum corda.
Our hearts on high. This is another salutation of the priest to the people, to
the end, that they should again with new fervor, lift up their hearts on
high to heaven, to consider the marvelous greatness of the mystery which is
there undertaken. Yea we may truly say, that in this salutation, he further
exciteth the Angels themselves, and all the celestial hierarchies, to laud
the majesty of almighty God.

Habemus ad Dominum.
We have them to our Lord. Of this sursum corda. S. Aug. ser. 44. de tempore,
says. The hearts of the faithful are a heaven, because they are daily
directed up to heaven, the priest saying, Sursum corda, and the assistants
answering him. Habemus ad Dominum. Yea this the very work of nature it self,
and the proportion of out heart wherewith we pray, does likewise preach, and
proclaim unto us; whereof, that part which is turned downwards toward the
earth, is very little and picked, and that which is directed vpwardes to
heaven, is large and extended. Which being considered, let those that are
present at this dreadful mystery, well and duly remember, what they have
protested to the Priest at Sursum corda, answering him, habemus ad Dominum.

Gratias agamus.
Let us give thanks. As in the former exhortation, it was needful to crave
of the divine goodness elevation of mind, where with to pray well: so next it
is expedient, that having received this elevation of mind, we render hearty
thanks to our Lord God for the same: and for this cause the Priest admonishes
the people saying. Let us give thanks.

Domino Deo nostro.
To our Lord God. For he is God, which of nothing created us. He is Lord who
with his blood has redeemed us. He is Ours, who liberally communicates him
self unto us. Again, he is God, who in creating, gave us nature. Lord, who in
redeeming, gave us grace Ours, who in saving us, will give us glory.

Dignum and iustum est.
It is meet, and just. The people make answer, acknowledging that it is meet
and just. Meet in respect of him, because he is our Lord. Just, in respect of
us, because we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture. Again. Meet, in
respect of his manifould benefits. Just, in respect of our gratitude and
obligation.

Vere dignum and iustum est, equum and salutare.
It is verily meet, and just, right, and wholesome. Which words the priest
repeating after the people, addresseth unto almighty God; containing so many
several mysteries, as there be sundry words repeated. For I find, that the
learned and holy Doctors of Christ's Church, have taken great delight and
pleasure, to explicate unto us these five words of the Preface.

First Albertus Magnus, refers them to five dignities or excellencies,
contained in this holy sacrament, saying that this sacrament is a sacrament of
undoubted verity: of a most excellent dignity: of exceeding liberallitie: of
weighed equity: and of most wonderful efficacy For to the verity thereof,
answers this word, vere: to the dignity thereof, answers this word,
dignum: to the liberallitie thereof, answers this word, iustum: to the
equity thereof, answers this word, equum: and to the efficacy thereof,
answers this word, salutare.

Others refer these five words, to the fouer principal benefits which we
receive of almighty God; to wit, our Creation, Redemption, Justification, and
Glorification. And amongst others Innocentius the 3. thus expounds them.
Truly Meet, because thou of thy mere Goodness have created us. Just, because
of thy pure mercy thou have redeemed us. Right, because gratis thou iustifiest
us. Healthful, because thou do perpetually glorify ye.

Nos tibi semper, and vbique gratias agere.
That we always, and every where, give thanks unto thee. By which words,
semper and vbique, always, and every where: is understood, the greatness and
immensitie of almighty God, who is present every where, and in all places. Or
Always, that therefore we ought to render him thanks, in all times and in all
seasons. And every where, because where soever we be, in him we live, move,
and have our being.

Domine sancte, pater omnipote^s aeterne Deus.
Holy Lord, Father omnipotent, eternal God. Which other words, express diverse
most high attributes of his most excellent majesty. As by the word Domine,
that he is a Lord, and therefore to be served. By the world Sancte, that he is
holy, and therefore that his servants ought also to be holy. By the word
Pater, that he is our Father and we his children. By the word omnipotens, that
he is almighty, and able to defend us from the power of satan, and of all our
enemies. By the word eterne, that he is everlasting, and can glorify us
eternally. By the word Deus, that he is sole and absolute God, our only
maker, redeemer, and preserver.

Per Christum Dominum nostrum.
Thorough Christ our Lord. Which words do give us to understand that we
miserable creatures which have offended a God of such goodness and excellency,
a Lord, a holy Lord, a Father, an omnipotent Father, a God, an eternal God,
being of our selves nothing else but dust and ashes; and most unworthy to
present our selves before his majesty, do therefore not only give humble
thanks for all his benefits, but also do seek to appease him for our
offenses, and that only, Per Christum etc. Thorough Christ our Lord.

Per quem maiestate^ tuam laudant Angeli.
First this name of Angel, is a name of office, and not of nature: wherefore
when they are sent, they are called Angels or messe^gers, ^or as much they
reveal the mind of God ^to men: which name is common to all the celestial
spirits, though in this place, it is perhaps understood particularly, of those
which are of the lowest order; whereof every man has one for his keeper, unless
he drive him away by his evil life. For so S. Aug. says of them, that they
love, what God loves: keep, what God keeps: and forsake what God forsakes
Soliloq. cap. 7. Of these mention is made in the 1. of S Marc. 18. of S. Mat.
and Heb. 1.

Adorant Dominationes.
The Dominations adore. Dominations are those, by whom the other Angels
receive the ordinances of God, and who do see them executed: of which
pre-eminence and predomination over other Angels, they are called Dominations.
Now then if these so noble spirits to whom, by reason of their office,
adoration does seem to be due, do them selves with most profound reverence,
adore almighty God, how much more ought we, who are but dust and ashes, to
humble our selves under his almighty hand. Of Principallities, Powers,
Virtues, and Dominations, S. Paul makes mention, all in one epistle. Ephesians.
cap. 1.

Tremunt Potestates.
The powers do tremble. The Powers are such, to whom the wicked powers are
subject: and hereof thy receive their name, because the malignant spirits by
their power, are bridled and restrained that they can not do so much hurt as
they desire. Of these it is said, that they tremble: not for timorous fear,
being perfectly blessed, but (says Gabriell Biell) for obedience, reverence,
and admiration of so ineffable a majesty, acknowledging their power to be
nothing, in respect of the divine and immense power, of him who is contained in
this dreadful Sacrifice.

Coeli coelorumque virtutes.
And the powers of the heavens. In this place these words do signify all the
company of the celestial spirits which are the intellectual heavens. But
some understand them of the material heavens, in that sense of the 19. psl.
Coeli enarrant gloriam Dei, The heavens declare the glory of God. For as
Euthymius in psl. 148. and S. Chrisostom say; The heavens, and also the
stars, although they want a voice and have nether life nor soul, yet do
they laud and praise the majesty of God by their greatness, beauty,
situation, nature, utility, ministry, perseverance, and by other like
means: whereby also they do draw the minds of their behoulders, into the
admiration and praise of their Creator.

Et beata Seraphim socia, exultatione concelebrant.
And the blessed Seraphins. With mutual joy do jointly celebrat. Seraphim
in Hebrew; is interpreted Ardentes, burning, or inflaming, for that they are
enkindled and inflamed in charity above all others; betwixt whom and God,
there are no other Angels: being so inflamed with the brightness of the divine
light that as the prophet Esaias says. (cap. 6.) They cover the face and feet
of him that fitteth in the throane.

Cum quibus and nostias voces vt admitti iubeas deprecamur, supplici
confessione dicentes.
With whom we beseech, that thou would command our voices to be admitted,
with humble confession saying. For as much as all the celestial orders of
Angels aforenamed, are chiefly employed in continual praises and
thanksgiuinges before the presence of almighty God, therefore the priest makes
his humble petition to our Lord in the name of them all, that he would
vouchsafe to receive our lauds and praises, amongst the praises of the holy
Angels: that so men associated with the celestial spirits, as the lower
stringes of an harp with the higher, they may jointly sound forth the
heavenly hymn of Sanctus following.

Of the sacred hymn of Sanctus and of sundry reasons concerning the same.
The 1. Reason.
FIrst, Gabriel Biel in his exposition of the Mass, says, that Sanctus, is so
called of Sancio, which is to consecrat, dedicate, establish, ratify, or
confirm: and thus laws, customs, and men also, are called holy.

The 2. Reason.
The same author says, that Sanctus may be so called, a sanguine hostiae, of
the blood of the host, for emongst the people of the old law, that was called
holy, which was consecrated or sprinkeled with the blood of the host; and so
Sanctus may be as much, as sanguine vnctus.

The 3. Reason.
Ciryllus, or rather Origines says, that the word Sanctus, with the Greeks is
called Hagios, which is, says he, extra terram esse, to be, out of the earth:
li. 11. in Leuit. which thing does in very deed, most perfectly and
excellently agree with that most divine, and pure, nature of almighty God.

The 4. Reason.
S. Denise in his 7 cap. of his heavenly Hierarchy, says that this Sanctus,
is a voice of exceeding praise, full of much dread and reverence. And S. Ambrose
says, that we find nothing more precious, wherein we may set forth and extol
almighty God, then in that we call him holy. li. 3. de Spir. Sancto cap. 12.
Add, that holy, is one of the names of almighty God. Luc. 2.

The hymn of Sanctus, confirmed by miracle.
Biell in his learned exposition upon the Mass says, that when
Constantinople was shaken with an earthquake, and the people for fear prayed
in the fields, in the fight of all, a little child was taken up into the air,
for the space of an hour; and afterward descending again, said, that from
heaven this Angellicall hymn, resounded in his ears, as from a great
multitude, or quyre of celestial fingers; and that he was commanded to declare
that song of praise to all the people: which as soon as they began to sing,
God delivered them from that iminent danger.

Sanctus Sanctus Sanctus.
Holy, Holy, Holy. These sacred words thrice repeated, may put us in mind
of the three persons of the most B. Trinity (the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost (every one of which are infinitlie holy, with the same sanctity.
Which sanctity, in these three persons, does far surpass the sanctity of all
other creatures by many degrees. For first, the sanctity of God is infinite,
without bound or measure. Secondly, it is independent, and nether springing
nor flowing, from any other fountain. Thirdly, it is to God essential, and
not perticipated.

Dominus Deus.
Lord God. The Church in this devout Canticle, does most lively declare and
set forth unto us her faith in the doctrine of the B, Trinity. For the word
Sanctus, thrice repeated, plainly signifies the Trinity of persons: and the
word Dominus, once repeated, truly declares the unity of essence.

Sabbath.
Of hosts. The word Sabbath, signifies as much as militiaru^, of hosts or
armies: for so many armies has God in earth, as there are several orders in
the Church: and so many armies has he in heaven, as there are sundry orders
of holy Angels. And rightly do we call the Angelical spirits an army:
because they fight against the spiritual powers, to wit, the Devils.

Pleni sunt coeli and terra gloria tua.
Heaven and earth are full of the majesty of thy glory. To wit Angels and
men, replenished with divine grace. Or heaven and earth are full of his divine
glory, because his dietie is every where: above all things not elated: under
all things, not prostrated: with in all things, not included: without all
things, not excluded.

Again, heaven and earth are full of his glory: because the self same glory
which is in heaven with the Angels, is likewise with us in earth: the self
same glory, which is sitting upon the throane and right hand of the Father,
the self same glory is upon the Altar: and therefore both heaven and earth at
one and the self same time, is filled and replenished, with the self same
glory.

Hosanna.
Hosanna, in Hebrew, is composed of hosiach, save, and anna, which is an
Interiection of beseeching, and being put together, sounds as much as, save
we beseech thee. Which Pope Simachus interprets more manifestly, saying.
Save me o Lord I beseech thee.

In excelsis.
In the highest. These other words, in excelsis, joined to hosanna, do
clearly show what this saving is, which is before understood in the word
hosanna, to wit, in exce^sis in the highest, that is in heaven, because Christ
came to give, not earthly, but heavenly, not temporal, but eternal salvation.

Benedictus qui venit in nomine Domini.
Blessed is he that comes in the name of our Lord. Blessed is he which
comes, once to offer him self for us in a cruentall oblation upon the
Cross: and blessed is he which comes daily to be offered incruentallie for
us, upon the Altar: and blessed is he which comes to replenish us, with
abundance of all spiritual graces and benedictions.

Hosanna in excelsis.
Hosanna in the highest. This Hosanna is twice repeated, for the two parts of
glory, the one of the body, and the other of the soul: or for the salvation
of the two people, the Jews and the Gentiles.

Of the sign of the Cross, made at the end of the aforsaid hymn.
The words Benedictus etc. were (as before was said) the praises and
acclamations of the people, when our Savior returned to Jerusalem, at the
pronounciation whereof, the Priest makes the sign of the Cross before his
face: to signify, that this honorable entry of Christ, with all those high
acclamations of the people, was not to receive the pomp of a worldly kingdom,
but by his passion and death, to purchase our redemption.

The use of singing of sundry Prefaces in the holy Mass, is very ancient, as
appears out of Clemens Romanus, Cyprianus, Chrisostomus, Basilius; Ambrosius,
and sundry others, cited by Durant in li. de rit. Eccles. Cath. li. 2. cap. 30.

Of the holy Canon of the Mass, and of sundry notable mysteries contained in
the same.
FIRST Canon, is a Greek word, which signifies, a rule, or a thing regularly
composed: and this part of the Mass is so called, because it contains,
certain prescriptions and ordonances, for the consecration of so high a
sacrament. As also, because it has by the authority of the Church of Rome,
obtained the force of a prescript or law.

Of the holy Canon do make mention most authors which ever took upon them to
write of the Mass, even from the Apostles unto this present: and therefore it
shall not be needful in this place or in the discourse ensuinge to fill up
paper with the particular names of any, either ancient or modern.

Why the holy Canon of the Mass, is said in secret.
The holy Canon of the Mass is said in secret: because that which is performed
therein, is so hiden and secret, that no human reason, is able fully to
comprehend it.

Durandus says, that the holy Canon of the Mass is said in secret, least
otherwise those sacred words should be made over common, or wax contemtible
amongst the simple people, who by daily use of hearing them, might carelessly
recite and sing them in the open streets, and other places not convenient. For
as the same author recounteth, when in former, times the holy Canon of the
Mass was pronounced publicly, almost all manner of persons learned it by
rote, and would singe it in the fields and open streets. Whereupon it
happened, that certain shepheardes singing it for recreation, and laying bread
upon a stone, at the prolation of the sacred words, the bread was turned into
flesh, but they by Gods justice, were stricken with fire sent down from heaven.
For Which cause the holy Fathers of Gods Church have ever since ordained, that
these sacred words, should always be said in silence.

The like also happened to three little boys, who to make them selves sport,
would seem to take upon them to sing Mass. Who first placeing a stone instead
of an Altar, and then laying their bread thereon, instead of an Host, and after
putting water into a wodden dishe, instead of a Chalice, were soddainlie
stricken to the earth, and their bread and water, consumed with fire which fell
from heaven: and for the space of three days (to the great amazement of their
parents) remained speechles. And after three days, coming again unto them
selves, recounted openly, all that, which had befell them: al which is
testified more at lardge, by Ioannes Moscus, and by many others.

The premises therefore considered, I am here to pray the gentle Reader to
pardon me, if I do not turn the words of the sacred Canon, immediately
ensuing, into our vulgar tongue, as I have done the former, which I protest in
regard of their dreadful venerablenes, I dare not to do. Hoping nevertheless,
sufficiently to explicate, their sense and meaning, by another method.

Now then, according to S. Hierom let us sprinkle our book, and the posts of
our houses, with blood. And with Zara let us bind a red third upon our fingar,
that we may set forth, the passion and death of our redeemer, and sorrowfully
consider, the unspeakable pains, which he vouchsafed to suffer for us.



T. E.
FOR as much as in the holy Canon of the Mass, special memory is made of
the passion and death of our redeemer, therefore perhaps it was ordained by
divine providence, and not by humane industry, that the sacred Canon, should
take his beginning from that letter, which by his proper form, does lively
express the sign of the Cross, in the figure of Thau. As the Prophet
Ezechiel says cap. 9. The sign of Thau in the foreheades of the men, which
sorrow and mourn.

Igitur.
Which word Igitur, is a particle Illatiue, connecting the sacred Canon, unto
the Preface before rehearced. As if he should say; After such preamble of
prayers, and celebration of praises, at the lenght we enterprise that, which
hitherto for reverence we have deferred.

Per Iesum Christum Filium tuum.
In which words, is clearie alleged, the virtu of the Mediator: the which,
of what marvelous operation and efficacy it is, plainly appears, by the
great propinquitie which he has with both parties, between whom, he is in the
midst as Mediator. For first with God he has propinquitie, because he is the
Son of God: also with us he has propinquitie, because he is the Son of
man. Whence it follows, that he first praying to his heavenly Father for us,
does set open his ears to our petitio^s, and in a sort, addicteth them to
hear our supplications.

Dominum nostrum.
And worthelie is he said in all these to be ours, to wit, our Jesus, our
Christ, and our Lord: given, for a preservative of our health: in food for our
refection: in sacrifice for our reconciliation: in sacrament for our
sanctification: and in price for our redemption.

Supplices rogamus ac petimus.
Which two words, do somewhat differ in signification: for to ask, is simply
to demand: but asking joined with beseeching, is an obsecration which is made
with earnest entreatie and perswation. And therefore aptly by two diverse words
the demand is doubled, that so the prayer which is made may be of greater
moment.

Why the Priest here kisseth the Altar.
This devout ceremony may signify unto us, that Christ not only of his
humility, obedience, and love to his Father, gave him self to death for us,
but also of his exceeding love and charity toward us. For as God so loved
the world, that he gave his only begotten Son for it: so also his Son
loved the same, that he would likewise willingly dye to redeem it; not
compelled by any necessity, as him self signified saying. I have power to lay
down my life, and to resume, or take the same again.

Vti accepta habeas, and benedicas.
God is said to accept our offeringes, not that they are, either profitable, or
delectable to him, but that according to the accustomed and wonted manner of
acceptance, we do beseech him, that upon those things which we offer unto
the glory of his name, he would pour down the increase of his heavenly
benediction. And therefore there is subioyned. Et benedicas.

Haec dona, haec munera, haec sancta sacrificia illibata.
Which three words, Dona, munera, sacrificia, may be thus distinguished.
First, those things are called Dona, which are given us of God for our
sustentation, as testifies the Apostle saing. Every best gift and every
perfect gift, is from above. James. 1. Furthermore Donum, according to S.
Isidor, is that which the superior, gives or bestows upon the inferior. Or
as Cyrillus says, a thing which is given to such as are in need. Cyril. in
Collect. 2. They are called Munera, in as much as they are received of us with
a grateful mind. Or rather in as much as we, who are poor and inferior,
present them to God as to our superior, expecting in lieu of them, to receive
some better thing from his blessed hands. 3. They are called Sacrifices, in
as much as we offer them up to God, to please and pacify him for our sins Or
as they are offered up unto him, to honor him with the highest latrial honor.
So that they are to be considered 1. As they respect the giver, and so they are
called Guiftes. 2. As they respect the receiver, and so they are called
Rewards. 3. As they respect the offerer, and so they are called Sacrifices.

Again some of our holy Doctors there be, who accommodate these three words,
(Dona, Munera, Sacrificia) maruelously well, to the most precious body and
blood of our Savior Jesus: as for example. 1. It is a Gift (say they) because
God has given it us of his mere liberallitie: and it is of such excellent
greatness, that he could not possibly give or bestow a greater upon us 2. It
is a reward or present, because of all the oblations that we can present unto
him, we have nothing of price, but his most precious body and blood which he
has given unto us, that we may give or render again unto him. 3. It is also a
Sacrifice, for that it is the very lamb of God, which truly was sacrificed
for the sins of the world. And lastly, this so worthy a Sacrifice is said
to be Illibata, for as much as it ought to be offered up, without any spot of
soul or body.

Of the 3. Crosses, which are made at the prolation of the three words
aforsaid.
Concerning the 3. Crosses, which the Priest makes at the prolation of the
three words aforsaid, Stephanus Eduensis says, that the bread and wine, are
signed with a triple Cross, to declare the whole mystery to be wrought by the
marvelous might of all the Trinity.

According to Albertus magnus, and Innocentius tertius, by these three Crosses,
may be understood three derisions, or illusions of our B. Savior. The 1.
before the high Priest. The 2 before king Herod. And the 3. before Pontius
Pilat.

Imprimis quae tibi offerrimus pro Ecclesia.
Every Sacrifice ought to be offered up for all, that is to say, for the
Church universal, for it is great reason, that every Priest pray for all,
because Christ, the proper Host of this Sacrifice, was offered up for all: as
writes S. Cyprian. epist. 63.

Tua.
This word is added to the former, by way of obsecration, wherein we crave, that
he would be good and merciful unto his Church not for her own merits, but for
his own gifts and many most singular graces, which he has vouchsafed to
bestow upon her, and wherewith he has marvelously adorned and enriched her.
And Gabriel Biel says, that the Church uses this world Tua, calling her self
his, the rather to insinuat her self into his grace and protection. For as S.
Ambrose notes, every one does willingly keep and protect his own. l. 2. de
poenit cap. 8.

Sancta.
This Church is called holy for sundry reasons* Holy, for her holy religion
Holy, for her holy laws Holy, for her holy Sacraments. Holy, because her
head is the holy of holies. Holy, because the Holy Ghost, her ruler and
director, is holy. Lastly holy, because she is vowed and consecrated unto
almighty God, and sanctified and washed, in the most precious blood of our
Savior Jesus, as writes the Apostle. Ephesians. 5.

Catholica.
Next this Church is called Catholic, that is to say universal, for as much
as she has been diffused by the splendour of faith, even to the uttermost ends
of all the world. In which name S. Aug. does admirablie rejoice, because he was
contained with in the lap of that Church, under the sacred name of Catholic.
Epist. quam vocant fundamenti. cap. 4.

Quam pacificare.
Rightly in the first place, do we pray, for the pacification and peace of
the Church, this peace being the bond of all concord, and the redress of all
discord: and which Christ our Savior, departing from his Disciples, last of
all bequeathed unto the^. John 14. And after his resurrection, first of all
preached unto them Luc. 24 Secondly, aptly is peace here asked of almighty
God, because God is the God of peace, and not of dissension. Thirdly, very
well is peace required, in the time of sacrificing, because this Sacrifice is a
Sacrifice of peace. Fourthlie, because as no community can consist without
peace, so nether the Chutch.

Custodire.
In the next place, we pray that our Lord would keep his Church, especially
from the deceitful allurements, of the world, the flesh and the devil. From
the dangerous incursions of all ravening wolves, as from Infidels, Turks,
Heretics, wicked Pastors, and from all false brethren. Which prayer, Christ
him self, before his departure, made for his Church and chosen, saying. That
thou keep them from evil. John. 17. Again three sundry ways, God
preserves his from evil. 1 By a blessed and happy death, that they live not
to see them, as we read of king Joshua. 2. That they escape them by flight, as
did S. Paul from Damasco. 3. By giving them fortitude, constantly to overcome
them: as diverse holy Martyrs, and Confessors have done.

Adunare.
And for as much as Christ himself says, that he has other sheep, which are
not as yet of the same sheepefould John. 10. therefore for these also do we
pray, that they may be brought to the unity of the same Church* In which word,
according to S. Aug. we pray for that, which always ought to be prayed for, in
the Church of Christ: to wit, that faith may be given to Infidels: unity to
Scismatikes: and resociation to such, as by the censure of the same Church, are
for a time, severed to do penanee for their offenses. Cont. Iulianum cap. 3.

Et regere digneris, toto orb terrarum.
Which words, together with the other before recited, may be more briefly
thus expounded. To pacify, from enemies, that she be not oppressed. To keepee,
in peace, that she be not disturbed. To unite, from scismes, that she be not
divided To govern, in the disposition of her counsels, that she be not
deceived.

Vna cum famulo tuo Papa nostro N.
Where note, that Papa, is said of the Interiection Pape, which is an
Interiection of admiration, as admirable for sanctity. And right worthelie is
this name attributed to the bishop of Rome, for where as in many other seats,
faith and religion has failed, to this chair and seat of Rome, never could
perfidiousnes have access.

Et Antistite nostro. N.
A Bishop in this place, is termed by the name of Antistes, so called of these
two latin words, Ante, and stes, because he stands and is placed, before
other Priests. Touching this our Bishop, we ought also to have remembrance of
him, for so S. Paul wills us saying. Remember your Prelates which have spoken
the word of God to you. Heb. 13.7. And, Obey your, Prelates, and be subject
unto them, for they watch over you, as being to rendar an account for your
souls. verse. 17. Seeing therefore, that they stand answerable and accountable
for our souls, should it not be very great ingratitude in us, to forget them
in our prayers.

Et omnibus orthodoxis.
Doxa, in Greek, signifies sentence or opinion, and Orthodoxos, as much as
right believers. By which word it is most plain, that all Infidels, Heretics,
and Scismatikes, separated from the mystical body of our Savior Christ, are
excluded from the fruit and benefit of this Sacrifice.

Atque Catholicae and Apostolicae fidei cultoribus.
Where it is to be noted, that to worship the Catholic faith, is not only
for a man to believe it in him self, but also to declare and express it in
his deeds: as namely, to sustain and defend the same, against all such as
shall impugn it: all which are truly termed, defenders and aduancers,
protectors and worshipers, of the Catholic faith.

Memento Domine.
HItherto the Priest, has prayed for the Church universal, and for her
rulers. And now in this place he does recommend unto the divine clemency, his
own particular frindes, for whom he intends to offer up Sacrifice: as, his
parents, brethren, sisters, kinsfolks, and other benefactors, or such as he
has taken in charge unto him, as speaks S. Aug. Epist. 59. quest 5. saying.
Memento Domine. In which words, he desiereth that our Lord would be mindful
of those, whom in his present prayers, he offers up unto him: because, to be
had in mind of God; is to be helped of God. And Gabriel Biel adds, that when
he asks, that our Lord would remember them, he demands that he would have
mercy on them.

Famulorum, famularumque tuarum.
First, as the same author says, men are set before women, for the dignity of
their sex, because as the Apostle S. Paul says, the man is the head of the
woman. 1. Cor. 11. and Tim. 2. Next he calls all those for whom he prays
unto almighty God, not simply men, but his servants: thereby acknowledging him
for their good Lord and master, full of all mercy, clemency, and sweetness.

Why the Priest joins his hands together, and meditateth a while in prayer.
In this place, the Priest meditateth a while, and calls to mind all those
aforesaid, for whom he is obliged and bound to pray: as his own parents,
friends, and benefactors etc. And this truly greatly moved diverse of our
holy ancestors, to induce some one or other of their children, to the office
of Priest hood, because they knew very well, that the Priests were bound, to
pray and offer Sacrifice particularly for their parents, friends, and
benefactors. For how should the Priest at this present, standing in the
presence of Christ and his Angels, not remember his faithful and loving
frindes, their benefits bestowed upon him, their particular necessities, and
their pious, holy, and devout intentions? This therefore the Church duly
observes, as being grounded upon the law, both of God and nature.

Et omnium circumstantium.
The same holy Mass, is further particularly applied, to all those which in
fervent faith and attentive devotion, do asist at the same, that they
especially, may participat of the fruit, of the death and passion of our
Savior Jesus, who by particular devotion, have adjoined them selves to asist
at the Sacrifice. And well does he pray for all those that stand about, that
is, who stand firm in quietness, inward recollection, and elevation of mind in
almighty God: and not for those who walk or state about them, for all such,
do rather stir, then stand still.

Quorum tibi fides cognita est, and nota deuotio.
Faith, according to S. Paul, is defined to be, an argument of things not
appearing; To the end therefore, that all those which are present at the
Sacrifice of the Mass, may reap the fruit which they desire, there is here
required in them, these two things principally. 1 A firm, and immovable
faith, to believe without staggering, that the body and blood of Jesus Christ,
together with his soul and divinity, are truly, reallie, and substantiallie
present, under the species of bread and wine, after the prolation of the
sacramental words. 2. Devotion; which is defined to be, a spiritual act of
the will, readily obeying unto almighty God. For it is not enough that the
understanding be united to God by faith, unless the affection likewise, be
conjoined unto him by pure devotion.

Pro quibus tibi offerimus, vel qui tibi offerunt.
The Priest does pray and offer Sacrifice, not only for those that are
present, but for others also which are absent. Because some there are, who
nether in body are present at Mass, nor yet in intention such are the souls
in Purgatory, little infants, and also many wicked and evil Christians, for
whom not withstanding the Priest does offer, and that in particular. Others
there be who are present at Mass, either in intention only, and not in body,
or both in body and intention: and these both offer them selves, and the
Priest also does offer for them, although in a far distinct and different
manner; for the people offer spirituallie, the Priest properly: the people in
affection, the Priest in function: the people offer in heart, holy desire,
faithful asistance, uniform consent, and humble prayer, the Priest by actual,
external, and visible ministry, with absolute power to consecrate and
sacrifice.

Hoc sacrificium laudis.
This oblation is here called a Sacrifice, of the effect; quia sacros nos
efficit; because it makes us holy. And of praise, 1. Because Christ, with
praise and thanksgiving, first instituted the same. 2. Because he himself,
offered it up to the honor and praise of his eternal Father. 3. Because there
is nothing in this Sacrifice, which is not abounding and full of praise. For if
respect be had to Christ's divinity, it is here. If his sacred humanity be
sought for, here is his soul, here is his body, here is his blood, all most
worthy of praise and honor.

Pro se, suisque omnibus.
In these words, the Priest who makes this oblation, ought first (according
to the well ordered rule of charity) to remember him self, and the care and
safety of his own soul. Next that all such as have any charge committed unto
them, to rule or govern, that they do not only commend them selves unto God,
but also all those that are committed to their charge and oversight: as, the
Pastor, for his flock, the Prince, for his subjects, the Captain, for his
soldiears, the Father of a house, for his family, the Master, for his
scholars, and so of others.

Pro redemptione animarum.
Which words do show, that the Priest ought not to pray, nether for any
earthly appetite, nor temporal gain, but purelie and sincerely for the
salvation of their souls: for to do otherwise, were with Simon Magus, to buy
and sell the guiftes of God for money.

Pro spe salutis incolumitatis suae.
That is to say, for hope of health, as touching the sick: for hope of safety
as touching the healthie: for frindes, if they fallen at enmity: for their
safe return, if they be in journey: and for they amendment, if they live
viciouslie.

Tibique reddunt vota sua.
Where note, that a vow in this place, is not properly taken for a promise of
some spiritual thing made unto God, but for pious intentious, holy desires,
and other good works, which the Priest requires to be accomplished with a
most inward affection, by the asistants, according to the saying of the Prophet
David. Offer up to God the sacrifice of praise, and render thy vows unto the
highest.

Eterno Deo, Viuo, and Vero.
In which three words, are plainly excluded three sorts of creatures, which
falsely have been taken and reputed for Gods, to wit, Devils, Men, and Idols.
For the Devils, they are living, but not eternal: first because they had a
beginning: and next, because they have lost the life eternal. The second also
are living, but nether eternal, nor true: not eternal, because they shall
have an end: not true, because as the Apostle says. Every man is a liar. The
third are are nether true, nor living, nor yet eternal, as being without all
manner of sensibillitie or motion.

To conclude, concerning the first part of the holy Canon, four things are
chiefly to to be noted: to wit, to whom: for whom: how: and wherefore we ought
to offer up this sacrifice of praise. To whom? Only to God, that is to the
most B. and undivided Trinity. For who^? For the holy Catholic Church, that
is for all true and faithful believers How? In the unity of faith, that is to
say, in the communion of Saints. Wherefore? To wit, for all benefits,
temporal, spiritual, and eternal.

Communicantes.
IN four things do we communicate with the B. Saints. 1. In Faith: believing
what soever they believed, concerning the verity of this B. Sacrament. 2. In
Hope: because the Saints did hope, and we do hope, for we still hope, and
expect in patience, that which they already posesse in full assurance. 3. In
Charity: for such is the perogatiue of Charity, that though Faith do cease,
when beatificall vision is present: though Hope do desist when pleasant
fruition is posessed, yet in heaven, Charity never fails, but is more
increased and perfected. 4. We do co^municat with them, in the use and and
oblation of this B. Sacrament, whose former viaticu^ this has been, to bring
the^ to that most blessed life whereunto they are so happily arrived: Because
also it is said of the Saints, that they were perseuering in the doctrine of
the Apostles, and in the communion of breaking bread.

Et memoriam venerantes.
The 1. reason why before the consecration of the body of Christ, the Church
has ordained the commemoration of the Saints to be made, is, because she has
been taught and learned this out of the figures of the old testament. For as
the legal priest and Bishop, entering into the holy of holies, brought in with
him the names of the twelve tribes, written upon his Rational: even so the
evangelical priest, entering into the holy of holies, brings in with him the
names of the twelve Apostles.

But besides this, there are sundry other reasons, for the commemoration, and
veneration of the B. Saints. 1. Because the odor and fame of their virtues, is
every where dispersed thoroughout the world. 2. Because their holy bodies and
relics, are had in high veneration, and visited and frequented with many
pious pilgrimages. 3. Because both Churches and Altars, of unspeakable riches,
are dedicated unto God, in their names and memories. 4. Because upon the tombs
of Martyrs, and relics, and bodies of the B. Saints, the sacrifice of the
Mass, is daily celebrated, 5. Because at the sepulchers, and memories of the
B. Saints, God does work many marvelous miracles. 6. Because in this, the
Church does that, which all antiquity was accustomed to do: for it has ever
been the practice of the Church, to make commemoration of the B. Saints, in
all her prayers and supplications. As. Exodus 32. Genesis 38. and Dan. 3.

Imprimis.
First. Where being to speak of our blessed Lady, he well says, first, to
wit, before all Angels before all men, and before all creatures. For to which
of the Angels was it at any time said. The holy Ghost shall come upon thee Or
to what man was it ever said, The power of the most high shall ouershadow thee?
Luc. 1.35. Or to what creature was it ever said, that which of thee shall be
borne holy, shall be called the Son of God.

Gloriosae.
Where note, that to this most excellent queen, four most singular and
renowned titles, are attributed and given 1. She is said to be glorious,
because she is most gloriously assumpted both in soul and body. 2. Glorious,
for the great glory which she enjoys in the kingdom of heaven, wherein she
far surpasses all Cherubins, and Seraphins, yea all the Angelical Spirits and
orders of Saints being put together. 3. Glorious, for the high honor which the
Church militant does give unto her: for whereas other Saints, are served with
the honor which is called Dulia, she is worshipped with that honor which is
termed Hyperdulia, which Hyperdulia is an especial honor, due unto her, for
the affinity and heroical virtue, even contracted with almighty God.

Semper Virginis.
In the second place, that most excellent and supernatural gift, to have been
always a virgin. For she was a virgin in body, a virgin in mind, and a
virgin in profession. A virgin before her childbirth, in her childbirth, and
after her childbirth; without any corruption of her virginal chastity.

Mariae.
The name of Marie, has three intepretations. Star of the sea. Iulluminated.
And Empress or Lady. First she is Marie, (that is star of the sea): for as
much as all that are laboring in the bitter sea of penance, and sorrow for
their sins, she safely brings to the secure harbor of health and
salvation. She is Marie, (that is illuminated): because those that walk in the
darkness of sin and of error, are converted by the means of her singular
merits. She is Marie (that is Empress or Lady): for she shows her self to
be Empress and Lady of absolute power, over all the devils and infernal
spirits, in defending vt against them, both in our life, and at the dreadful
and fearful hour of our departure.

Genetricis.
In the third place, she which before was called a maid, is called a mother. A
marvelous fecunditie is expressed when mother is mentioned: for marvelous
truly was the holy virgins fecunditie. Whereat the prophet admiring, says.
A woman shall compass about a man. Ierem. 31. to wit, Marie, Christ: a maiden,
God.

Dei, and Domini nostri Jesus Christi.
In the fourth place, she is adorned with the supereminent title, not only of
a mother, but of the mother of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ. For the holy
virgin did not beat or bring forth only a mere man, but true God: nether
was she only Christipara, mother of Christ, but also Deipara, mother of God.

Sed and beatorum Apostolorum.
After the glorious virgin Marie, mention is made of the blessed Apostles, and
that not without just cause. For first they were the only witnesses of this
divine Sacrament, who were present, when our Lord first instituted the same.
Secondly they were those who received first authority and commandment to
celebrate the same. Thirdly they were those who first put in practice the
celebration of this divine Sacrament. And Fourthlie, they were those, who set
down the chief orders and prescriptions, to all Christian nations, for the
administration of the same.

Ac Martyrum tuorum.
After the Apostles, the holy Martyrs are also named, because of their great
constancy which they showed in the hot persecutions, and sheading their
bloodes in the defense of their faithes: who therefore were truly martyrs,
that is to say, witnesses of the verity of the Christian faith: for martyr
properly signifies a witness, and martyrs are truly witnesses, yea even unto
death. For great is the work of martyrdom, and manifould the praises
belonging thereto. The first praise is, that it is an act of most noble
Fortitude. The second, that it is an act of most perfect Patience. The third,
that it is an act of most firm Faith. The fourth, that it is an act of most
fervent Charity. For as our Savior says, Greater, charity then this no man
has, that a man yeald his life for his frindes John. 15.13.

And here in this place may occur a question: why in the Mass, no
commemoration is made of the holy Confessors, seeing the Church, amongst the
Saints, does so highly worship their memories. The cause whereof seems to be
this; for that in the sacrifice of the Mass, (in which is represented the
passion of our Lord) the memory of none was to be made, but only of martyrs,
who sheding their blood for the love of Christ, are made thereby perfect
imitators of his passion: which the Confessors, though otherwise holy, have
not done.

Petri.
Amongst the Apostles, the name of Peter is first expressed, as being the
chief and head of the Apostles. He was in great reputation at Rome, the
Emperor Nero being angry therewith, caused him to be crucified, with his head
toward the earth, and his feet upward; the which he him self requested, not
thinking him self worthy to be crucified in that manner, as his Lord and
master was. The people of Rome upon this occasion, embraced the faith and
Christian religion with great fervor. He was buried on the side of Neroes
garden at the Vatican. He held the seat of Antioche in the time of the Emperor
Tiberius, the space of 7. years. And 25. years, that of Rome.

Et Pauli.
S. Paul a vessel of election, and endued with singular divine graces, was
called from heaven, to bear witness of the name of Jesus, before kings and
Potentates. Of whom a religious father says; He would have no other university
but Jerusalem, no other school but mount Caluary, no other pulpit but the
Cross, no other reader but the Crucifix no other letters but his wounds, no
other commaes but his lashes, no other full points but his nails, no other
book but his open side and no other lesson, but to know Jesus Christ and him
crucified. He suffered innumerable travels in the promulgation of the gospel.
He was the same day, that S. Peter suffered at Rome, beheadded, in the year
37. from the passion of Jesus Christ, and the 14. Year of the Emperor Nero. He
was buried in the way of Ostia, where since is built a most sumptuous Church
and monastery under his invocation, not far from whence are to be seen yet at
this present, three fountains of springing water, which did break forth of
the places, upon which his head leaped thrice after his decollation.

Andreae.
Who at the voice of one only calling, followed our Savior Christ. Who
brought his brother Peter to be instructed of our Savior. Who disputed with
the Proconsul Egaeus of the verity of this B. Sacrament. Which Proconsull
caused him to be crucified after the example of Jesus Christ, but in a manner
different, for that he had not his hands and feet peirced with nails, but
straightly bound with cords, to the end to put him to a more slow death.

Iacobi.
S. James the greater, was a Gallilean by nation, the son of Zebede, and
brother of S. John. Both which agreed to follow our Lord with such affection,
that they forsook at an instant their carnal father, and company of fishers.
They were so greatly beloved of our Lord that their mother douted not to
require seats for them on either side of him, in his kingdom. He took them
with him for witnesses of his glorious transfiguration. Also at the raising of
the daughter of the prince of the Sinagouge Iairus for proof of the inward
love which he bore unto them. He was put to the death of the sword by Herod,
in the time of the Emperor Claudius. He was the first of the Apostles, who
exposed his life for the love and faith of his master Christ. Our Lady, and all
the Apostles, were present at his martyrdom.

Ioannis.
S. John, Jesus Christ did most dearly love, and for this respect he was
called his Evangelist. He was sent with S Peter to prepare the Passover. He
only leaned upon the breast of our Savior at his last supper, from whence he
sucked those divine mysteries, which he has left written unto us. At the point
of the death of Jesus Christ, he recommended unto him his mother, for an
assured argument of his confidence and amity. After his resurrection he ran
the first of the Apostles, to enjoy the fight of him. His martyrdom was to be
put into a vessel of hot oil, but by the providence of God, it could not hurt
him. Having religiously preached the gospel in the lesser Asia, he entered at
the age of 99. years into a sepulcher, which he was accustomed to frequent,
and was never since seen in earth.

Thomae.
This Thomas was also called Dydimus, which is interpreted, doutfull, because
he douted of our Lords resurrection, until he first had touched his wounds,
and thereby has taken from us all wounds and doutfulnes of infidellitie; in
such sort, that since then, the grounds of the Resurrection were laid in him.
He preached to the Parthians, Meedes, Perses, Hircans, Brachmans, and Indes.
After he had well deserved of Christendom, he was thrust thorough the side. His
memory is yet very much reverenced in the Indes, not only of the Christians
which dwell there, but of the Jews, Mahumetans, and Paynimns, as is declared
in the history of the conquest of the east Indes, written by the Bishop of
Sylues. li. 3.

Iacobi.
To wit, the Less, who was called the brother of our Lord. He was held for
just from his mothers womb, because of his excellent virtue. He did never ear
flesh, drink wine, nor ever clothed him self with cloth dressed, or shorn.
Moreover he was so assiduous in prayer, that he had his knees as hard as a
Camels. He asisted at the first Counsel held by the Apostles. The Jews, angry
at his innocent life, for hatred cast him down from the top of the temple. He
had his head cleft with a Fullers book. The city of Jerusalem being sacked by
Titus Vespasian, this heavy disastre was imputed by some, to the cruel and
inhuman massacre committed upon the person of this blessed Apostle.

Phillipi.
S. Phillip, received express commandment from Jesus Christ to follow him,
wherein the blessed Apostle promptlie obeyed. He also brought Nathaniel with him
to see our Lord, of whom he was presently acknowledged for the Son of God,
and king of Israel. He instantly besought him to show him his Father. Of him
our Savior asked the five loaves, wherewith he miraculously fed so many
thousands of people in the desert. He preached in Samaria, and after in
Heropolis of Phrigia, which he cleansed and purged from the worship of Idols:
yea of the impure and venomous viper there reserved. In the end the vulgar
people rose up against him, and hunge him on a pillar: but after acknowledging
him, honored him with a goodly sepulcher, and embraced with unspeakable
fervor, the faith and religion which he had preachead.

Bartholomaei.
Who only amongst the Apostles is said to have bin of noble birth, and a
philosopher. He preached to the Indians the Gospel of Christ, which he turned
into the vulgar tongue, as it was written by S. Matthew. He passed unto the
great Armenia, and there converted the king, his wife, and twelve cities, to
the true worship of almighty God. Where upon the brother of the king, being
enraged against him, caused him cruelly to be fleane a live in contempt of
Christianity, at the instigation of those, which adored the Idols.

Mathaei.
S. Matthew, called to follow Jesus Christ, was a rich man. Of a common
publican, he was made an Apostle. And of a receiver of custom, a distributer
of spiritual treasures. The Indians and Ethiopians, were by him, and by his
prayers converted, with their king and his wife unto the faith, by reason of
the miraculous raising of their daughter from death to life. Hirtacus
displeased, that by the Apostles advise she had vowed unto God perpetual
virginity, made him pass by the point of the sword, as he was celebrating at
the Altar. He wrote the Gospel preached by him, in the Hebrew tongue: whereof
the text (written by the hand of S. Barnabe) was found upon his breast, at the
invention of his body, buried in Cypres.

Simonis.
S. Simon was the brother of S. James the Less. The zeal of this Saint, was
very great, by which having carefully planted the word of God in Egypt,
Cyrene, Afrique, Maritaine, and all Libia, he was put to death in the reign of
the Emperor Traian, at the age of fourscore years, under pretense that he was
a Christian, and of the issue of the royal line of David. Every one marvelled,
to see a spirit so stout, resolute, and coragious, in a body so crasie,
feeble, and decrpid by age.

Et Thadaei.
S. Thadeus, called Judas, was the third brother of James the Less, and of
Simon. Thadeus, is interpreted houlding: and this Thadeus most firmlie and
constantly held the faith of Christ. He wrote most sharply against the
corrupters of the truth, as his Catholic epistle does very well testify. He
animated the faithful, to constancy in the faith once received, by fearful
examples of the relapsed Angels, and commemoration of the future judgment. He
announced to Mesopotamia, and the adjacent contries, the word of God, by the
sweetness whereof he mollified and made tractable the minds and spirits of the
people, otherwise fearfullie barbarous, feirce, and wild.

Lini.
To these twelve Apostles are added, the number of twelve glorious Martyrs, who
in the beginning of the Church, offered them selves to God living hosts, and
shed their bloodes, for the Confession of the name, and faith of Jesus.

In the first place is named S. Linus, who was the first Pope after S. Peter in
the government of the Church of God. In which seat, he sat until his passion.
Having endured sundry kinds of torments for the love of Christ, he rendered up
his holy soul unto his Savior.

Cleti.
S. Cletus succeeded Linus in the popedom. And albeit the desire to be a Bishop
is a thing right laudable, not withstanding S. Cletus could not be won to
accept of the bishoppricke of Rome, but by the persuasion of S. Clement,
deputed by S. Peter for his successor. Having religiously ordered the affairs
of the Church, the space of twelve years, he was martyred under the Emperor
Domitian. The seat by occasion of his death, was vacant 20. days, with the
unspeakable grief of the people, destituted of their incomparable good pastor:
having never been touched in his actions, but with the zeal of piety, holy,
and religious devotion.

Clementis.
S. Clement was the disciple of S. Peter, and the fourth pope after him. He
chose him amongst others, to be his immediate successor in the Apostolat: but he
would not of humility accept the charge, but deferred it to S. Linus, and S.
Cletus, by whose decease it was committed unto him. The Emperor Traian offended
that by his exemplar life the Romans were daily converted to Christianity,
confined him within an island, in the which two thousand Christians were
condemned to saw marbles for the ornament of Rome. The people of the island, in
great distress for want of fresh water, were by him refreshed, having found a
springing fountain under the feet of a Lamb. Whereupon the Emperor more
offended then before, caused an anchor to be fastened about his neck, and his
body to be cast into the sea.

Sixti.
S. Sixtus was the eight Pope after S. Peter. He ordained in the solemnities of
the Mass, the holy hymn of Sanctus to be sunge, and of Agnus Dei. He was
greatly given to divine things, as his holy decrees do sufficiently
testify. He also received the glorious crown of martyrdom in the time of the
Emperor Valerian.

Cornelij.
S. Cornelius was the twentieth Pope in the time of the Emperor Decius. He
transported, by the aid and asistance of S. Lucina, an honorable matron of
Rome, the bodies of S. Peter and S. Paul, from the place of their burial, to
put them in sauegard. VVherof the Emperor being advertised, and that he
converted many of the people to the faith of Christ, sent him into bannishment,
where S. Cyprian often comforted him by letters, exciting him to constancy. The
which, was imputed unto him for treason to the state, for the participation and
intelligence which he was said to have with the public enemies. For this he
was beheaded, and for not yealding to adore the Idol of Mars. His matyrdome is
confirmed by the testimonies of S. Ambrose and S. Augustine.

Cypriani.
S. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, suffered also under the Emperors Valerian and
Galeen, in the eight persecution raised against the Christians: the same day
that S. Cornelius, but not the same year. The actions and deportments of this
good Father were such, that there is none who in reading his writings, can
choose but think to hear speak a true Christian Bishop, and one designed to
martyrdom, for the honor of God. His life and passion are written by Pontius
his Deacon. He had at his death such firm constancy, that at the
pronounciation of the judgment against him, understanding that he was to
suffer by the sword, he cried out aloud in the consistory of the Tyrant,
saying. Deo gratias. After his execution there was found in his heart, the
figure of the Cross made in gould, in witness of his invincible faith.

Laurentij.
S. Laurence was disciple of S. Sixtus, and Archdeacon of the Church of Rome He
receued of him (being prisoner for the cause of religion, in the eight Valerian
persecution after Nero) expres commandment to distribute unto the poor, the
treasures of the Church, which he had in his keeping: the which he performed,
with no less care, then fidelity. Upon this occasion, he was committed
prisoner under the custody of the gaylet Hippolitus, whom he converted to the
faith, with nineteen more of his family. In the end he was cruelly roasted
upon a gridiron, with a slack and prolonging fire, in the presence of the
Emperor Valerian.

Chrysogoni.
S. Chrisogonus, having refused the dignities and offices, which the Emperor
Dioclesian offered unto him, to renounce Christianity, and to adore the false
and counterfeit Gods, was by his commandment beheaded at Aquila Nicephorus
inserteth in his ecclesiastical history, some epistles written unto him by S.
Anastasia, and of him to her. This devout Lady did liberally succor and
asist him with means, during the time of his imprisonment.

Ioannis and Pauli.
S John and Paul were brethren, no less zealous of Christian piety, then
noble and rich, who had bin brought up in the court, under the service of the
daughter of the great Emperor Constantin, and greatly favored of her. After
his decease, Julian the Apostata being come to the Empire, placed them in the
estate of his household servants, knowing that they would refuse this condition
by reason of their religion. Which they having done, he commanded that they
should be beheaded: so that the self same death and passion made them true
brethren, albeit they were so already by nature. In honor of their holy and
invincible resolution, the Church calls them Olives and Candlesticks shining
before God, in the Epistle of the Mass upon their feast, taken out of the 11.
cap. of the Apocalips.

Cosmae and Damianae.
S. Cosme and Damian were also brethren, and Arabians of nation. They were
famous in the art of Physic, and Chirugerie, which art they exercised
freely and purelie for the love of God, and were employed by the true
phisitien more to cure the diseases of souls, then of the bodies. For this
cause, Dioclesian and Maximian forced them to pass by water, fire, and sword,
in the manner described in their Legend: but God who never forsakes those that
are his, refreshed them, and gave them happy repose, according to the
consolation promised to the afflicted by the Royal prophet.

Et omnium sanctorum tuorum.
Whose number and multitude is so great and marvelous, that Constant in the
Emperor passing over the seas, and finding Eusebius, Bishop of Cesaria, desired
him to ask somewhat of him to enrich his Church. Who answered the Emperor,
saying. Sir my Church abounds sufficiently in riches, but I beseech you, to
send out into all parts of the world, to know and understand the names of the
Saints: the times of their passions: under whom: how: and in what places they
suffered martyrdom. Which being done, there was found for every feast in the
year, more then five thousand Saints: excepting on the day of the kalendes of
January, in which the Gentiles gave them selves to their banquettinges and
solemnities, and not to the matyring of the blessed Saints.

Quorum meritis precibusque concedas.
And here least any should think it in vain to crave the intercession of the
most B. Saints, or dout that those holy Saints whom specially we pray unto,
do not again employ their especial protection toward us, S. Gregory, in
his hom. 35. tells of a certain matron, who often frequenting the Church of
the blessed martyrs, Processus, and Martinian, upon a day was met with all by
the two holy Martyrs them selves, who spoke unto her, saying. Thou do visit
us now, we will therefore demand thee in the day of judgment, and all that we
are able, we will perform, and do for thee.

Vt in omnibus.
To wit, which either in the behalf of the glory of thy most blessed name, or
of the salvation of our own souls, is on our part to be believed, desired, or
to be accomplished.

Protectionis tuae muniamur auxilio.
In faithfully believing, clearelie understanding, hartelie desireing, and
readily accomplishing in all things, thy good will and holy pleasure: and
thereby may be protected against the machinations of all our enemies, visible
and invisible.

Per eumdem Christum Dominum nostrum, Amen.
The aforsaid prayer concludes, like as all others, thorough Jesus Christ our
Lord. Which conclusion plainly declares that in the veneration of the blessed
Saints, we do not so much worship the Saints, as our Lord in the Saints: For
whilst in them, we praise and magnify the wonderful gifts and goodness of
God, what else do we, but magnify God him self, who as the Apostle says,
works all things in all.

To conclude; this part of the holy Canon, as some grave authors affirm, was
undoubtedly composed by the instinct and ordonance of God him self. In
confirmation whereof they report, that some Fathers, out of a singular devotion
which they boar to some other Saints, added their names to the holy Canon, and
removed the names of some of these, already added. But, the day being passed,
on the morrow, they found those blotted out, and the former written again in
letters of gould.

Of the priests spreading his hands over the Chalice.
At this part of the Canon, next ensuing, the priest lifts up both his hands
from the Altar, and spreads, or extends them over the Chalice: to
signify, that now at this present, he ought to lay away from him all temporal
cares, and to have his mind wholly fixed and attent to his sacrifice. All the
people therefore behoulding this ceremony, ought spirituallie to imitate his
example.

Hanc igitur oblationem.
FIRST he says. Therefore, to demonstrate that this part of the Canon, is the
conclusion of that which went before; as if he should say. Therefore, because
there is no place to offer the sacrifice of unity, out of the unity of the
Catholic Church, we communicating with the memory of the Saints, and in
communion with them, offering up this sacrifice unto thee, do beseech thee,
that by their intercession, thou would accept and receive this sacrifice at
our hands.

Seruitutis nostrae.
Out of which words it is manifestly to be gathered, that never in the law of
the gospel, was it permitted to all men a like to offer sacrifice, but only to
such as were priests, ordained and consecrated by the imposition of the hands
of an Apostolical Bishop. These terms therefore, are to be understood of the
clergy, which in all humble service, obedience, and subjection, have this
peculiar charge committed unto them.

Sed and cunctae familiae tuae.
But because the priest is the public officer, and that all the prayers and
oblations which he offers, are for the Church universal whereof he is an
officer, therefore he adioyneth, as also of all thy family. Wherefore as the
former words concern the clergy, so these latter comprehe^d all the laytie,
which are also a part of the great family of almigatie God.

Quesumus Domine, vt placatus accipias.
Here the priest requires, that God, appeased by the prayers of the Saints,
would accept this oblation: not of the part of the Sacrifice it self, (which,
can no way displease God, because it contains his only Son, of whom him
self has testified saying. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased:) but of the part of the Sacrificer. In which respect sometimes it is
rejected, by reason of his indeuotion or profanation: like as the sacrifices
of the ancient law, vnduelie offered.

Diesque nostros in tua pace disponas.
In which words may be understood, three sorts of peace which we demand of
almighty God. Peace in our souls. Peace in our bodies. And peace in our
wordlie goods or substance. The peace of our souls, is disturbed by evil
thoughts, desires, and disordinate appetites. The peace of our bodies, by
sundry sorts of diseases, and corporal indispositions. The peace of our
goods, by wars, famins, sterilitie, dryness, and such like calamities: who
then may give us these three sorts of peace, but only he who has command and
power, over our souls: over our bodies: and over our goods: and can deliver
us from all evils of mind: from all diseases of body: and from all misfortune
of our temporal substance.

And aptly in this place is added the word Tua, Thy. For as Odo says, there
are two sorts of peace. There is the peace of the world, and there is the
peace of God. The peace of the world is unprofitable, but the peace of God, is
both wholesome, and delectable.

Atque ab eterna damnatione nos eripi.
He which prays to be delivered from everlasting damnation, without dout
prays also, to be preserved from the sin which deserves damnation. For in
vain does he pray to be delivered from eternal death, who chooses to abide
in deadly sin.

Et in electorum tuorum iubeas grege numerari.
The flock of the elect is double. The one, the good Pastor has, upon his
proper shoulders, brought already into the fould. The other, is as yet
preserved and kept in the pastures. Those in the fould, are the secure
triumpha^t. Those in the pastures, are the doutfull militant. We therefore now
pray, that thorough the grace of the Holy Ghost, we may be made of the number
of the elect, and be placed in heaven, in the society and company of the
blessed.

These three petitions before recited, were added by S. Gregory, which are
very short, but very sweet. For what can be more short, or what can be more
sweet, then that which is contained in these three petitions? For to dispose
our days in peace. For delivery from everlasting damnation. And for the
obtaining of everlasting salvation. Out of these words therefore, many notable
things may be collected. First, that God is sovereign Lord of all things,
both temporal and eternal: both of earth, hell, and heaven. Of the earth,
saying. Dispose our days in peace. Of hell saying. Deliver us from everlasting
damnation. Of heaven, saying. And place us among the number of thine elect. For
if God were not sovereign Lord of the earth, how could he give us peace in our
days, and in all our temporal goods and substance? And if he had not all
power over hell, how could he deliver us from everlasting damnation? And if he
were not Lord of heaven, how could he place us amongst his elect, in perpetual
felicity and salvation?

Again these words may be expounded in another sense. Dispose our days in
peace. To wit, thorough him, which for us was betrayed into the hands of those
that hated peace. Deliver us from everlasting damnation. To wit, through him,
who for us was condemned to a temporal death. And place us amongst the number
of thine elect, or blessed. To wit, thorough him, who for our sakes, was
numbered amongst the wicked,

Per Christum Dominum nostrum, Amen.

This prayer is concluded, through. Christ our Lord: to the which, says
Albertus, none do answer Amen, but only the Priest and the B. Angels who are
present in this ministry.

Quam oblationem tu Deus.
HERE begineth the principal part of all the holy Cano^, which is the
Co^secratio^, where the priest insisteth, and beseeches almighty God, that
the creatures of bread and wine, requisite to the confection of the holy
Eucharist, may be sanctified and blessed, yea changed and converted into the
precious body and blood of our Savior Jesus. This part of the Canon, is cited
by S. Ambrose above 1200. years agone. l. 4 de Sacram. cap. 5.

In omnibus, quesumus.
Which words, In omnibus, in all, may be diversely understood: and first thus.
In all, to wit, thou o God, being in all creatures and natures, without
definition: in all places, without circumscription: and in all times, without
alteration, bless we beseech thee, this oblation. Or, In all, to wit (make
this obla-blessed) in all ways, in all manners, and in all circumstances. Or,
In all, that is to say (vouchsafe to make it blessed) above all hosts, by
transferring it into that Host, which is blessed above all Hosts. Or, In all,
to wit, (blessed) in all degrees, both clergy and laytie, both in the priest,
and the people. Or, In all, to wit, in all our understandings, in all our
powers, in all our thoughts, and in all our intentions.

Benedictam.
The priest in this word prays, that the oblation made in the begning, of
gifts not blessed, God would make blessed, to wit, by that mystical
benedictio^, where with of bread, it may be changed into the body of Christ
(the cause of all benediction.) Or blessed, to wit, with glory, that it may be
made glorious. blessed with imortallitie, that it may be made immortal.
Blessed with incorruption, that it may be made incorruptible. Blessed with
divinity, that it may be deified.

Adsriptam.
Not finite. And in this sense he craves, that his oblation, which before
Consecration, is circumscriptible and finite, God would make incircumscriptible
and infinite. For as much as in this most holy Sacrament, Christ is
incircumscriptiblie, as the divines do teach and the Catholic Church does
hold.

Ratam.
We call that ratified, which we account for certain, fix, and firm. Let it
therefore be made firm or ratified, that is, let it not remain instable, and
subject to be altered, or changed by corruption.

Rationabilem.
The blood of Bulbcks and of Calves (being unreasonable creatures, was
sufficient to purge man from sin, they being much inferior, and lesser then
man. For a reasonable man therefore, a reasonable host is requisite, to wit
Christ, that we may offer a true man, for men, and that so for man's sake, God
may be propitious and merciful unto men.

Acceptabilemque facere digneris.
That can not be but acceptable, which has receued the three former species of
all sorts of benediction. God can not hate God: but because God is charity,
God loves God, and the host which is God, is acceptable to God. Why then pray
we, that to be made acceptable which no way can displease? Because though it is
acceptable for it self, yet we may displease in respect of our selves.

Others again have interpreted these words in another sense, as thus. That
God would vouchsafe to make our oblation Benedictam blessed, whereby all that
participat thereof ar made blessed. Adsriptam, Writtten, by the which we are
written in the book of eternal life. Ratam, Ratified, by the which we are
incorporated in the bowels of Christ. Rationabilem reasonable (not
unreasonable) by the which we are made clean from all unclean and beastly
desires. Acceptabilemque, and acceptable, whereby we, who have displeased him,
may be made acceptable unto him in his only Son.

Vt nobis.
That to us. That is to our health and profit. Or, to us, for whom he delivered
his body to death, that he might give us the same body in food to everlasting
life. Again aptly says he, To us, that is to us worshippers of the
Catholic faith, to us communicating, to us worshipping the memory of the
Saints. To us, excludes Pagans, Jews, Heretics, and all sorts of Infidels.

Corpus and sanguis.
The words aforegoing were dark, obscure, and hard to understand, but now the
gate is opened, al is made manifest, to wit, that there be made to us, the
body and blood of Jesus Christ; which only is an host, in all, and above all,
blessed, adscript, ratified, reasonable, and acceptable.

Fiat.
And worthelie in this place is the word Fiat, added, because now there is
required the same almighty power in this conversion, which was in the
incarnation of the almighty Word, and in the creation of all the world. For God
said when he was to create the world, Fiat lux. And our Lady said to the
Angel, when Christ our Lord was to be incarnat, Fiat mihi. And the priest
therefore in this place, Fiat corpus.

Again he says Fiat, by way of deprecation: to denote, that the priest by his
own natural ability, cannot work that supernatural conversion. And
therefore he says not in his own person. Facio, I make: but Fiat, let be made,
to wit, by the omnipotent power of almighty God.

Dilectissimi Filij tui Domini nostri Jesus Christi.
That of the substance of bread and wine which are offered unto thee, may be
made by divine and miraculous transubstantiation, the body and blood of thy
best beloved Son: The substance of bread, to be converted into his blessed
body: and the substance of wine, into his precious blood.

Of the fiues Crosses which are made at the prolation of the five words
aforesaid: and what the same do signify. The 1. Reason.
You are here to understand, that there is no ceremony in all the Catholic
Church, more proper to represent the mysteries of the death and passion of our
Lord, then is the sign of the holy Cross. Where it is further to be noted,
that commonly the order and number of Crosses, which are made upon the
Sacrifice, do represent the order and number of the mysteries of his blessed
passion. Wherefore if you consider how our Lord and Savior was sold for money,
you shall see in this sale, sundry persons, and sundry practices. You have
the Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, who were the buyers: You have Judas, who
only was the seller. And you have our Lord, who only was sold. The three
first Crosses therefore, signify the Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, who
bought him. The fourth, Judas who sold him. And the fifth, our Lord who was
sold by him.

The 2. Reason.
Again, some of our Doctors, have marked the very manner of making these
Crosses, and say, that the first three are made together upon the whole
oblation: to signify, that the Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, conspired
altogether with one intention, against our Lord and Savior Jesus. But the
other two are made a sunder, the one upon the bread, the other upon the wine;
to signify, the different intention betwixt our Savior, and the traitor
Judas: for the intention of our Savior, was love and charity: but that of
Judas, avarice, and treahcerie.

The 3. Reason.
Again by these five Crosses, may be considered five principal places,
wherein our Lord suffered sundry torments and abuses. In the garden of
Gethsmanie, where he did sweat blood and water for the great fear and
apprehension which he had of death. In the house of Annas, where he received a
blow on the face by a wicked varlet. In the house of Caiphas, where he
received many outrages, reuylinges, hidinge of his eyes, spittinges in his
face, and strikinges. In the house of Pilat, where he was bound to a Pillar,
lamentably scourged, crowned with thorns, and clothed in mocquerie. And upon
the mount Caluarie, where he was ignominiously crucified betwixt two thieves.

The 4. Reason.
Again, these five Crosses may be referred to the five principal parts of
our Lords body, wherein he received his holy wounds, to wit, in both his
hands, both his feet, and his blessed side. And the two last Crosses which are
made apart, (the one upon the bread, the other upon the wine) signify unto us,
that our Lord truly died for our redemption: for the blood separated from the
body, is a most true and certain sign of death.

The 5. Reason.
Again, the three first Crosses which are made upon the oblation, may signify
three special things, which our Lord did in his last supper, concerning the
bread and the wine: to wit, he took, blessed and gave to his Disciples.
Afterward one Cross is made upon the bread, because he said. Comedite, hoc
est corpus meum. Eat, this is my body. Another upon the Chalice, because he
said. Bibito ex hoc omnes, hic est sanguis meus. Drink ye all of this, this
is my blood. And according hereunto rightly is subioyned that which follows.
Qui pridie quam pateretur. Who the day before he suffered.

Qui pridie quam pateretur.
THE time of the institution of the holy Eucharist is here declared, by the
ordonance of Pope Alexander the first. The day before, that is to say, the fifth
feria, which was next unto the holy feast of the passover, upon which day this
blessed Sacrament was first instituted. Wherefore the priest celebrating this
holy mystery, ought to direct his intention, to that end which our Savior
him self then did, sitting in the midst of his Disciples. For this veire day
Jesus Christ, having eaten the paschal lamb with his Disciples, for the final
acco^plishment of the law of Moses, prepared for them a new sort of meat,
giving him self unto them in spiritual food, under the forms of bread and
wine.

Accepit panem.
After the observation of the time of this institution, is expressed the matter
which he used, to wit, bread (truly) not yet flesh. And therefore bread,
because as the material bread comfort the heart of man above all other
natural meats: so this holy Eucharist, serves him to the nourishment and
sustentatio^ of his soul, above all other spiritual meats.

In sanctas ac venerabiles manus suas
By very good right, the Church does call the hands of her spouse Jesus
Christ, wherewith he touched the blessed Eucharist, holy and venerable, for as
much as the divine and human nature, are both in him co^ioyned. These are those
sacred hands, by whom the admirable work of the world was formed, without any
pattern, or example. Man made after his divine image. Bread so many times
multiplied to his use. The posessed, delivered of malignant spirits. The
leprous and sick, healed The dead raised. And we daily replenished with all
divine benediction.

Et eleuatis in coelum oculis.
None of the Evangelists, do testify, that Christ in his last supper, lifted
up his eyes to heaven, but Apostolical tradition has delivered this to the
Church; For this has the Mass of S. James the Apostle. The Liturgy of S.
Basil. And also S. Ambrose in his 4. book de sacramentis. Where S. James and
S. Basil, do not content them selves to say that he lifted up his eyes to God
his Father almighty, but furthermore that he showed unto him the bread which
he held betwixt his hands. Whereby they would signify unto us, that our Lord
intended to work some such great and marvelous thing, as required there unto,
the whole omnipotency and power of almighty God.

Ad te Deum Patrem suum.
Our blessed Savior, about to consecrate his precious body and blood, lifted
up the eyes of his humanity unto God his Father, not those of his divinity,
because he was in nothing unlike or inferior to his Father: who as he is
coequall to him in dignity, so likewise in his everlasting vision and
comprehension.

Omnipotentem.
Where special commemoration is made of the almighty and divine omnipotency,
to setle and confirm our faith, that we fear not the consecration to be a
thing impossible, nor dout of the truth or verity thereof.

Tibi gratias agens.
And hereof it is that this sacrifice is called, a sacrifice of praise or
thanksgiving; because the best procurer of benefits, is the mindfullnes of
benefits, joined with continual giving of thanks. Or therefore our Lord gave
thanks, being so near his passion: to teach us to bear all things, which
we suffer, with thanksgiving. Or, he gave thanks to his omnipotent Father, for
so excellent a grace, for so effectual a food, for so worthy a sacrament,
and for so profound a mystery; yet not for him self, but for us, that is for
our redemption and reparation, which was to be brought to pass by his death
and passion, whereof this should for evermore, remain a perpetual
commemoration.

Benedixit.
After the giving of thanks, he imparted the virtue of his holy benediction
upon the bread, and converted the substance thereof in to that of his precious
body. The same likewise he did at the creation of the world when he ordained
the increase and multiplicatio^ of his creatures, every one according to his
kind. Never do we read that he blessed the bread, but that there insued some
notable miracle, as in the multiplication of the five loaves and the two
fishes, whereof the fragments, were twelve baskets, after the refection of five
thousand souls.

In pronouncing this word, the Priest makes the sign of the Cross, because
as S. Aug. says, from the same all Sacraments do receive their efficacy, and
that nothing with out it, is decently accomplished. Add, that the Cross, is
the only carecter of all benedictio^, ever since it touched the blessed body
of our Savior Jesus,

Fregit.
Which is not so to be understood, that Christ did first break, before he did
consecrate, but after: like as in the genalogie of Christ, S. Matthew names
David before Abraham, who yet was not before, but after Abraham.

Deditque.
To wit, his B. body unto his Disciples, who then were present in body, and now
also he gives the same to all the faithful: to the end, that to those, for
whom he was to give him self in price of redempion, he would likewise give
him self in food and refectio^. For Christ two manner of ways gave him self
for us: once upon the Cross, for the sins of all the world, which needed not
to be renewed: the other, being miraculousie instituted, and diuinelie ordained,
to preserve the daily memory of his death, may wholsomelie be again renewed,
the latter being a true commemoration and remembrance of the former.

Discipulis suis, dicens.
Where it is said, to his disciples, to teach us, that none can worthelie
receive this Sacrament, unless he be his true Disciple, that is to say, do
faithfully believe what is to believed of this most high and divine Sacrament.
For this cause, the Caphernaits were not his true disciples, who hearing the
doctrine of Christ, touching this divine mystery, went back saying. How can
this man give us his flesh to eat? This is a hard speech, and the like.

Accipite.
By which word the administration of this B. Sacrament is expressed: such being
the office of the Priest in the Church, that it is not lawful for any other
whosoever, were he king or Emperor of all the world, to dispense the holy
Eucharist unto the people: Christ having resigned this charge only to
Priests, and not to any other, either man or Angel.

Et munducate.
Here is expressed the principal cause of the institution of this most holy
and blessed Sacrament: which is not only to be consecrated, and honorably
reserved, but to the end that the faithful Christians may receive eat, and
employ the same to their necessities, with firm faith, ardent devotion, and
exact proof and examination of their conscience, and by this means, to be
united and dwell in Jesus Christ, and he in them.

Ex hoc omnes.
First Florus Magister says, that these words commend unity and peace unto
us: that by this mystery participating of Christ, we may be all one in Christ.
Next, these words (eat you all of this) are not so to be understood, as that
diverse might eat diverse parts of the same, and not each one Christ
entirely, who although in respect of the diverse species, he, may seem to
receive one particle, and he, another, yet according to the verity, it is all
one and the same, the whole and entire substance, of our Lords body, which all
do eat, nether do a thousand receive more then one, nor one less the^ a
thousand, because all receive the whole body of our Lord, which now can no more
be divided into parts.

Hoc est enim corpus meum.
As these words of God (Increase, multiply, and replenish the earth) spoken
once in the constitution of the world, have still as yet their effect unto this
present, so that nature, obeing his Creator, engenders, produces, and
multiplieth in convenient season, all things according to their kind,
species, property, and condition: even so, ever since that Jesus Christ in his
last supper, pronounced these words, saying. (This is my body) he gave them
such benediction, force and virtue, that they are not only significatiue, but
furthermore effectiue, and as instruments of his holy will, to change that
which was before common bread, into his true, real, and blessed body.

Of the worship and adoration of the blessed Sacrament.
The words of the holy Sacrament being pronounced, the Priest houlding in both
his hands, the blessed body of Jesus Christ's in the form of bread, does
presently kneel him down and adore the same: showing herein, that by the virtue
of the divine word, our Lord, our God, and our Redeemer, is there reallie
present. And then rising up, he does eleuate the same on high, to the end that
the asistants also behoulding the same, may adore their Lord and maker, and
crave of him that which may profit the^ to their salvation.

By which elevation, we also are admonished to hasten us, and forth with, with
trembling and fear, to prostrate our selves unto the ground, and humbly to
beseech of him (who sometimes being reallie lifted up upon the Cross, and now
truly lifted up under the form of bread) that he, whose glory and
magnificence is lifted up above the heavens, would wouchsafe to draw us up
thither to him, who said, I, when I shall be exalted, will draw all unto me.

Simili modo.
WHere he says, in the like manner, because the same ought to be understood and
done, touching the blessed blood of our Savior Jesus, which was done before
concerning his blessed body, seeing they are both one and the same Christ, not
the one more, and the other less, not his body in the Host, without the
blood, nor his blood in the Chalice without the body, but his whole body and
blood in the one, and his whole body and blood in the other: all in heaven,
and all upon the Altar: sitting at the same time upon the right hand of his
Father, and remaining likewise present, under the species of the Sacrament.

Accipiens and hunc.
Where it is said, that Christ took (this) Chalice: if we should refer the
word (this) to the vessel, it is not the same, as touching the matter and
substance of the metal, but if we refer it to that which is contained in
the vessel, then that, and this, is all one. Again, it is called (this)
because it is daily blessed with the same intention, that it may be made now,
that which it was made then. Again (this) because this faith is one
thoroughout the whole Church, and he also one, to whom both then and now, the
same is offered.

Praeclarum.
The Chalice, as yet but wine, is called noble, because presently it is made
noble, by being converted into blood. As it is written My chalice inebriatinge,
how noble is it? Or noble, by comparison with that which Melchisedec, in the
law of nature, and others of the old Testament offered. Or because of the
great and noble majesty of him to whom it is offered. Whereupon in that which
presently follows he says. We offer to thy noble majesty.

Calicem.
Chalice, is taken in three sundry senses. 1. For sufferance, or passion, as
Mat. 20. Can you drink the Chalice which I am to drink? 2. For the drink
contained in the Chalice. 3. For the cup or vessel which contains the liquor;
and so Christ took the Chalice into his hands. Which vessel, according to
Albertus, is called. Calix, a calore, that is to say, of heat or calor;
because it enkindleth in us the fire of Charity.

In sanctas ac venerabiles manus suas.
Perfectly holy, because of the Holie-Ghost, and the plenitude of graces,
infused into him. Venerable, because of the sundry stupendous miracles which
he wrought with them. Perfectly holy, because never was there found in them
any kind of iniquitiie. Venerable, because they were of power to sanctify.

Item tibi gratias agens.
To wit, for the redemption of mankind, Which was to be purchased and wrought,
by the shedding of his blood. Again, giving thanks to thee, to wit, for his
infirm and weak servants, who were daily to be refreshed and comforted, with
this most precious and celestial nourishment.

Benedixit.
The priest taking into his hands the holy Chalice, gives thanks, as
aforesaid, and with the words of Jesus Christ, does likewise bless the same,
making the sign of the Cross thereon, as before upon the bread. Upon the
Chalice, (as before upon the bread) the sign of the Cross is but once made:
because our Lord was but once crucified. And therefore once upon the bread, when
it is consecrated, and once again upon the wine when it is consecrated:
because our Lord was crucified for the salvation of two people.

Deditque Discipulis suis, dicens.
He gave, and neither sold, nor rendered what he had borrowed of others, but as
a free gift he gave it freely: that after his example, we should not give the
same, nether for favor, nor any price of money, to unworthy dogs, or
obstinat sinners, but having receued freely, we should give it freely, to the
worthy receuers.

Accipite and bibite ex eo omnes.
Where Jesus Christ commanded all to drink of the said Chalice: but this
commandment was made only to his Apostles, ordayning them Priests in his
last supper: which is sufficiently demonstrated by the number of twelve,
curioussie noted by the blessed Evangelists, and namely by S. Mark, witnessinge
that they al (to wit the Apostles) drank, with out expressing, that any other
drank thereof, besides them selves.

Hic est enim calix sanguinis mei.
In this place: is expressed the form which Jesus Christ used in the
consecration of the Wine, together with the order and manner thereof. Where it
is called the Chalice by a metaphor, for that which is contained in the
Chalice: as in the promise of the reward of him, who shall give for, and in,
the name of Jesus Christ, a cup of cold water. Where the gift is not
understood of the cup, but of the water in the cup.

Noui and aeterni.
First according to Innocentius 3. it is called nouum, id est vltimum, new,
that is, last: as the last day is called, dies nouissima, a new day. And next
eternal, not for want of a beginning, but for denial of the succession of any
other, for never shall any other follow it: for nothing can succeed that which
is eternal, otherwise it should not be eternal. Again, it is called new, and
eternal for the old testament, promised only things transitory, and
temporal, not permanent and eternal, as does the new.

Testamenti.
First, Testament, is not here taken only for a writing, but for a promise.
Next, a Testament, is the final distribution of goods, ratified by the death
of the testator. And Christ in this his last Testament, distributed, ordained,
and promised everlasting inheritance to his beloved children, that is, to all
faithful people. Again, therefore is it called a Testament, because he
confirmed, all the promises testified, in his blood. In figure whereof, Abraham
having made a league, with Abimielech and Phicol, offered up sheep and oxen,
and with their blood confirmed the league. And Jacob, flying into Galaad,
having made an oath to his ouncle Laban, offered sacrifice, that by the blood
of the sacrifice, the oath of the conuenant might be confirmed. And Moses,
that he might confirm the Testament, which he received in Syna, sprinkled all
the people with the blood of the offeringes.

Mysterium fidei.
This word is borrowed of the Greeks, signifying a secret, which we must
vndoutedlie believe by faith, albeit we can not see it sensibly to the eye,
nor apprehend it by humane reason. The mystery of faith, because it belongs
to Catholic faith, to believe after consecration, that it is true blood, so
that now he is an Infidel, which believes not the same. The mystery of faith,
because one thing is seen, and another thing is believed. Nam verus sanguis
creditur, quod vinum visu sentitur and gustu. For that is believed to be true
blood, which both to sight and taste, seems wine: it tastes wine, and is not;
it appears not blood, and yet it is blood.

Qui pro vobis and pro multis.
For you, to wit, for you that are present. For many, to wit, for all Pagans,
Jews, and false Christians. And the words for many, seem purposelie to be
added, to the end that this speech should not only be referred to the persons
of the Apostles, but generally to all faithful. For although one only drop
of the blood Christ, is in it self sufficient to purge the sins of all, and
to give life and salvation to the whole world, yet it is not simply or
absolutely shed pro omnibus, for all, but only, pro multis, for many. The
reason whereof is, because all do not receive benefit thereby, but only such,
who by faith and good works, do labor and endeavor to make them selves
grateful in the sight of God. Durandus says, that it is shed for the
predestinate only, as touching the efficacy, but for all, as touching the
sufficiency: for the just, says he, the blood of the just: yet such is the
riches of this treasure, that if all universally believed, al universally
should be saved.

Effundetur.
Where he speaks not according to some part thereof, but according to the
whole: For liquour which is shed forth of a vessel, according to some part
thereof, is truly said to be shed, but not to be shed out, because some
remains with in: but or the blood of Jesus Christ, it is here said not,
fundetur shed: but effundetur, that is, shed out: to wit, wholly and entirely
shed out of his blessed body. And even as the loving Pellica^ douteth not, to
shed her own blood, to revive her young ones which are dead: even so Christ
our Lord feared not for us that were dead by sin, to power out his precious
blood, to restore us to life.

In remissionem peccatorum.
The cause for the which the aforsaid effusion was made, is the remission of
sins. Which is done by two manner of ways; The first is, by way of lauer and
washing. The second, by way of payment and satisfaction. Touching the first; as
he that enters most foul into a bathe of wholesome waters, comes forth
most clean by the lauar of the same: even so the soul which is foul by the
spots of sin, entering into the bath of Christ's most precious blood, is
purelie washed by the virtue thereof. Touching the second; as he that pays
another man's det, sets the party as free as if he had paid with his own
money: even so Christ thorough his bitter death, having shed his blood, has
thereby paid our det, and satisfied the justice of his Father on our behalf;
and that much better then if we our selves had paid with our proper blood.

Haec quotiescunque feceritis, in met memoriam faciatis.
First these words are to be referred to both parts of the Sacrifice, as well
to the bread, as to the wine: and to the consecration, as well of the one, as of
the other. Next they may also be understood two manner of ways. First thus; So
often as you shall eat this bread, and drink this Chalice, do it in the
remembrance of my death and passion: and this belongs more generally to all
Secondly as thus; So often as you shall consecrate this bread and this wine,
according to this my institution, do it in the remembrance of me: and this
appertains particulatlie to priests. And well is it said, in the remembrance
of me. For this truly was one cause of the institution of this most holy
Sacrifice, in the Church militant, that it should be a sign, representation,
and remembrance, of that high and excellent Sacrifice which Christ offered up
upon the Cross. Again, In remembrance of me. For this last remembrance of him
self, our Lord left and recommended unto us. Even as some one going into a far
country, should leave some singular pledge or token of his love to him whom he
loved, that as often as he should see the same, he should remember his
friendship and kindness; because if he loved him perfectly, he can not behold
it, without very great motion or affection of mind.

Vnde and memores Domine.
Mindful, as if he said, this we do according to thy commandment. After the
example of Elias, who praying that God would approve his sacrifice. Heat me,
says he, o Lord, because I have done all these things according to thy
commandment. Mindful; because our Lord him self commanded that we should do
this in memory of him, therefore three things the Church proposes in the
words following to be remembered: his blessed Passion; his Resurrection: and
his Ascension.

Nos serui tui.
To wit we priests, who according to the degrees received of clergy, do
serve thee in the oblation of this sacrifice: and do celebrate the same, after
thy example, and in the memory of thee. For the people perform that only in
mind, which the Priest both performs in mind, and an also inexternall and
peculiar manner.

Sed and plebs tua sancta.
The people also are said to be mindful, because Christ died not only, for
the Priests, but also for the people: and ordained this Sacrament for the
comfort, as well of the one, as of the other: and therefore as well the one
ought to be mindful of him, as the other. And this people is said to be holy,
because having received baptism and Gods holy grace, they are thereby truly
sanctified, how far soever they be dispersed, being firmly lincked together
in the unity of the same Church.

Eiusdem Christi Filij tui Domeni nostri tam beatae passionis.
And very rightly is the passion of our Lord and redeemer Jesus, called
blessed: because by it we are delivered from all curse and malediction, and by
it we receive all bliss and benediction.

Nec non and ab inferis Resurectionem.
Iansonius in his exposition upon this place has very well noted, that because
in the words aforegoing, mention is made of our Saviors passion, that says,
Christ will not have the later part of his mortal life to he seen, but when
he passes, that is he will not have his death to be commemorated, unless we
also believe in his resurrection.

Sed and in caelos gloriosae Ascensionis.
The holy Doctors who have expounded the Mysteries of the Mass, do bring
sundry reasons, why in making remembrance of our Lord, we principally do
mention his Passion, his Resurrection, and his Ascension. And some say, that
this is done, because by these three means principally, he has wrought and
accomplished our Redemption. For, he died, say they, to deliver us from death
He rose again, to raise us to life. And he ascended into heaven, to glorify us
everlastingly. His passion, exciteth our Charity: his Resurrection
strenghtneth our Faith: and his Ascension, rejoices our Hope. By his Passion
he has blotted out our sins: by his Resurrection he has spoiled hell. And
by his Ascension he has showed unto us, the way to heaven.

Offerimus praeclarae maiestati tuae.
That is to God the Father: for often in the Scripture, by the titles of
omnipotency glory, majesty, and the like, the person of the Father is
understood, as Heb. 1. and in sundry other places.

De tuis donis ac datis.
The body and blood of Christ, are offeringes prepared by God for us: yea true
offeringes, but placed in heaven. Offeringes when they are made to God: guiftes
when they are given in earth to men. Yet both here and there, truly the same.

Hostiam
First some explicating this word (Host) say that it is derived ab Ostio, in
English, a door: because in the old law, the Hosts were immolated in the
porch, or entry of the temple. The Christians do give it the same
denomination, because that Jesus Christ (Sacramentallie immolated at the
Altar) has opened unto them the gates of heaven, shut thorough the
preuarication of Adam. Whence the Church at the Elevation of the Host sings
this verse. O salutaris Hostia qui caeli pandis ostium, Bella premunt hostilia,
darobur fer auxilium.

The Paynims and Gentiles have derived this term ab Host. in English, an
Enemy: because being to make war against their enemies, they did first
sacrifice, to the end that they might over come. And after happy success,
they ordained other sacrifices which they called victimes, leading their
enemies bound even to the Altar. Whereupon Ovid composed the disticque
following.

Hostia quae cecidit dextra victrice vocatur. Hostibus a victis, victima nomen
habet.
And Christ Jesus being to fight against the enemy of mankind, offered up his
body and blood in an Host, whereby he has delivered us out of the bondage and
servitude of the devil.

Puram.
Next this host is called (Pure) because it is the fountain of all purity,
cleansing us from all pollution by the force of his virtue: contrary to those
of the old Testament, which did not cleanse but only bodily foulenes.

Hostiam sanctam.
It is also called (Holy) because it contains Jesus Christ; the holy of
holies, and the only fountain of all holiness, from whom the graces of the
holy Ghost pour down upon the faithful, in unspeakable abundance.

Hostiam immaculatam.
Conceived and borne without all sin, and lived in this world without all
sin, and therefore immaculat. Conceived of a virgin, with out the help of a
man, and therefore immaculate. Only by power divine, and therefore immaculate.

Panem sanctum.
Where this holy Host is named Bread, not that the substance of bread now any
more remains after Consecration, but because it is instituted or ordained
under the same species. Add, that in holy Scripture the creatures are called,
earth, and ashes, because they are formed of such matter. Simon was surnamed
leprouse, of that which he had bin, and was no more etc.

And this bread is rightly called sanctum holy; because it truly sanctifies
the receauers.

Vitae aeternae.
And of eternal life, because, as the gospel says, he that eats of this
bread, shall live for ever. Again of eternal life, because it is no more
common as it was before consecration, but spiritual, celestial, divine,
Angelical; surpassing all corruptible meat, an incorruptible alimeur, a food
giving life to our souls; and by virtue of which, in the general
resurrection, our bodies also shall be made immortal.

Et Calicem salutis perpetuae.
The priest, besides the Eucharistical bread, offers to God the holy
Chalice, to wit, the blood of Jesus Christ, contained under the species of
wine. The consecration of both which, is made separatlie, and yet nevertheless
is but one Sacrament: even as the material food of the body, is but one
meal or banquet, although it consist, both in meat and in drink.

Of the five Crosses made at the rehearsal of the five words aforsaid.
Because the Church has said before, that she was mindful of our Lords
blessed passion, therefore presently after the Elevation of the precious body
and blood of Jesus Christ, the priest makes five Crosses, in the remembrance
of his five most precious and principal wounds, to wit, two in his hands,
two in his feet, and one in his side. The first three that are made upon the
Host and the Chalice together, may signify, that Christ truly suffered,
truly died, and was truly buried. And the two last which are made, one upon
the Host, and the other, upon the Chalice a sunder; do insinuate the
consequence of those his bitter pains, to wit, the separation and disjunction
of his holy soul, from his blessed body.

Supra quae propitio, acsereno vultu, respicere digneris.
Upon the which (to wit, Bread of eternal life, and Chalice of perpetual
health) vouchsafe to look with a merciful and shining countenance. Which is
to be understood in respect of us, least we put any impediment, which may
hinder the benefits and graces, that otherwise we should receive of almighty
God.

Et accepta habere.
Not of his part who is offered, who no way is, nor no way can be unacceptable
unto thee, but of his part who is the offerer. For it can not be, that the
only Son of God, in whom he is well pleased, and who rests in the bosom of
his Father, should not be most acceptable to him.

Sicuti accepta habere dignatus es munera.
Where it is to be noted, that we do no ways mean by these words, to
equalize the sacrifice of those, (who are immediately to be named) with this
of ours, which is infinitlie more worthy and acceptable then all other
sacrifices that ever were, or ever shall be (for they offered sheep and
lambs, but we the Lamb of God: they creatures, and we the Creator: they the
figure, we the verity:) but the sense is, that God would receive as
acceptable, this Sacrifice at our hands, like as he did the sacrifices of those
holy Fathers, who for the sincere devotion of their hearts, were acceptable
unto him.

Pueri tui iusti Abell.
Two titles are here given to Abell, the one to be a child; the other to be
just. 1. To be a child, in holy Scripture is often taken to be harmeles, and
to live in simplicity and innocence. Whereupon our Savior said in the
gospel, Unless you become like little children you can not enter into the
kingdom of heaven Mat. 19.2. This title of Just, is given unto Abel by our
Savior him self, saying. That all the blood of the just which is shed upon
the earth may come upon you, even from the blood of Abell the just. Mat. 23.
Add, that Abell was a figure of our B Savior: for the blood of Abell was shed
by his brother Cain: and the blood of Jesus Christ, by his brethren the Jews.
Abell was a Priest, a Martyr, a Virgin, and the first Shepherd: and Christ was
a Priest, a Martyr, a Virgin, and the chief shepherd or Pastor of our souls.

Et Sacrificium Patriarchae nostri Abrahae.
In the second place is proposed the example of the sacrifice of Abraham, who
thorough singular faith and obedience, offered to God his only son. For the
patriach Abraham was of such singular faith and obedience, that at the
commandment of almighty God, without any manner of dout or hesitation, he had
presently sacrificed his only son, if the voice of an Angel from heaven,
had not speedily prevented the execution.

Et quod tibi obtulit summus sacerdos tuus Melchisedech.
Melchisedech is placed in the third place, who is here called the high priest
of God for two respects: The one, because his priesthood was preferred before
that of Aaron, and for that he gave his benedictio^ also to Abraham. The other,
because he was the first that ever we read, to have offered sacrifice in bread
and wine; the true figure of this blessed Sacrament.

In the sacrifices of these three holy men aforementioned, is truly
represented unto us, the conditions requisite for all such persons, as will
offer up sacrifice agreeable unto God: 1. Innocence of life, signified by Abel.
2. Faith and obedience signified by Abraham. 3. Sanctity and religion,
signified by Melchisedech.

Sanctum sacrificium.
The sacrifice of Melchisedech is called holy, not absolutely, nor as
touching it self, but in respect of that of the new testament, the which it
represented more expreslie, then did all the other oblations. And it was
foretold in the law of nature, that Jesus Christ should be established a
priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech.

Immaculatam hostiam.
The same sacrifice, is also for the self same reason called, immaculat, for
the which before it was called holy; to wit, because it was the figure of the
verity of the same which was to be offered in the Church, without any manner of
spot or blemish: and it may be very well, that these two last clauses, are
rather meant of the present sacrifice, then of that of Melchisedech.

Of the priests inclination: joining his hands: and laying them upon the
Altar. The 1. Ceremony, and his signification.
First the Priest here lowly boweth, or enclineth him self toward the
Altar: to signify, how our blessed Lord and Savior giving up the ghost,
inclined his head upon his breast saying. O Father into thy hands I commend my
spirit.

The 2. Ceremony, and his signification.
Next he joins his hands before his breast: to signify, that humble prayers
(denoted by his forsaid inclination) are then especially heard, when they
proceed by faith from the bottom of our heart.

The 3. Ceremony, and his signification.
And he lays them upon the Altar: to signify, that not every faith, but
only that which works by love, is acceptable to God which work is well
understood by the hands.

Supplices te rogamus omnipotens Deus.
Together with the performance of the aforsaid ceremonies, he jointly
pronounces the words of the holy Canon, saying. Supplices etc. We humbly
beseech thee, o omnipotent God, we heartily pray thee, we prostrate our selves
before thee, we meekelie entreat thee etc. For prayer is an act of subjection
and submission, as notes Caietan upon S. Thomas.

Lube haec preferri.
But what is all this which is desired with so great instance? Verelie this,
that God by the ministry of his Angels which attend both upon us, and upon
these holy mysteries, would command the body of his Son our Lord to be
carried up before him: not according to changing of place, or local mutation
of the sacrament, but according to his gracious acceptance of our service.

Per manus sancti Angelitui.
This place Hugo de S. Victore, expounds to be of the Angel keeper of the
priest. And Thomas Waldensis (who wrote so learnedlie against Wicliffe, calls
this Angel. Angelum vernaculu^ sacerdotis. The proper or peculiar Angel of
the priest: signifying hereby, that every priest, as he is a priest, has an
Angel deputed to him by almighty God, to aid and asist him in the discharge
of his function.

In sublime altar tuum.
As the Church has a visible Altar beloue in earth, so has she an invisible
Altar above in heaven. And because the Angels are said to be ministering
spirits, therefore we pray that by the hands of the holy Angels, the Hosts
which we have here upon the Altar in earth, may be presented above upon the
Altar in heaven. For as S. Chrisostom says, at the time of Consecration,
there are present many thousands of Angels, who enuiron the Altar, and do
honor and homage unto our Savior Jesus.

In conspectu diuinae maiestatis tuae.
To wit the same first entering and going before, we also by means thereof may
be admitted to follow after, and to enter in, before the fight of the same
majesty.

Vt quotquot ex hac Altaris participatione.
The Church, as we said before has a visible Altar here in earth, and an
invisible Altar above in heaven. And because we do participate of Christ's
body and blood two manner of ways, Sacramentallie and reallie, or by faith and
spirituallie, therefore all good Christians have often recourse to these two
Altars, sometimes to the one, and sometimes to the other: and so we participate
of the same body and blood, both upon the Altar in earth, and upon the Altar
in heaven. When we receive our Lord from the one, we go up by faith unto him:
and when we receive him from the other, he descends and comes down unto us.

Of the kiss of the Altar.
The priest at the prolation of these words does kiss the Altar: by which
ceremony is represented unto us, our reconciliation with God, made in the
death of Jesus Christ, by the commemoration of this sacrifice: for a kiss (as
before we have said) is a true representation and sign of peace.

Sacrosanctum Filij tui corpus and sanguinem sumpserimus.
To express the excellency of the holy Communion, the body and blood of
Jesus Christ therein contained, is called, sacrosanct, or most holy. Which
prayer does not only concern the priest who does celebrate, but the people
also who do communicate by faith, and devout asistance at Mass, with intention
to communicate often, and at the least on the times appointed by the Church.

Omni benedictione caelesti and gratia repleamur.
The end of this present petition tends to this, that as well the priest
communicating Sacramentallie, as also the people spiritually (by religious
assistance at this holy sacrifice) may be replenished with all celestial
benediction and grace, to carry from this holy Communion, fruit profitable
to their salvation.

Per eumdem Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.
Wherein we desire, that God for the love of his Son would both hear us, and
have mercy on us: as though God should seem little to regard his Son, if he
should not mercifully hear us for his sake And as if the Son ascend not to
the Father, if our devotions ascend not unto him, and be accepted of him.

Of the three Crosses which are made at the three words aforesaid.
By the first (which is made at corpus) is commemorated the cold and stiff
extension of the body of Jesus Christ: which according to the saying of the
prophet was such, that they might denumerat all his bones. By the second (which
is made at sanguinem) the abundant effusion of his precious blood: whence it
followed, that all the humors being quite exhausted, his body was wholly
parched and withered. By the third (which is made at omni benedictione) is
designed the fruit of his holy passion, from whence all benediction flows
forth upon us for which cause, the priest makes this third benediction or
Cross, upon him self.

Memento etiam Domine.
AS before Consecration, mention was made of the living, for some in
particular, but for all in general: even so after Consecration, commemoration
is made for the departed, for some in particular, but for all in general,
saying. Remember also o Lord: to wit, remember to comfort them, remember to
have mercy upon them, remember to deliver them, remember to take them out of
their pains, and to glorify them.

Famulorum famularumque tuarum.
Where they are called his servants, that is to say, of his family, because
whilst they lived in their bodies, they were true members of the Church (which
is the family, or house of God) And also when they died, they died in the same
Church, and therefore are rightly called his servants, or family.

N. et N.
These leters, put in this place of the Canon, do serve for a mark to reduce
particularly into memory, the names of those, for whom the Priest does
specially pray, or celebrate Mass, as his parents, benefactors, friends, and
others committed unto his charge, for whom he prays secretly.

Qui nos paecesserunt cum signo fidei.
Which sign of faith, is to have been regenerate of water and the Holy Ghost,
and signed with the triumphant sign of the holy Cross, the peculiar mark or
caractter of Christians, whereby they are distinguished from all Infidells.
Sign of faith, to wit, for those who before they departed, received the holy
Sacraments, and were not separated from the unity of the Catholic Church, by
any note or mark of Heresy. Sign of faith, in which words, as well notes
Gabriell Biell, is touched the devotion and piety of the departed, to wit,
that when they were living, there appeared in them evident signs, that they
were both faithful and true believers.

Et dormiunt in somno pacis.
That is, are departed in peace of conscience without mortal sin, and in the
frindship and grace of almighty God. Who therefore are said to sleep in peace;
because as those that do sleep in peace, awake again: so those that are
departed out of this life in peace shall arise again. And as those which
depart out of this life without the sign aforenamed, are truly said to die: so
they that depart with the same sign, are not said to die, but rather to sheep
or to rest, then to be dead: for they are properly said to be dead, which
never shall be raised to the life of glory.

Ipsis Domine.
To wit, to those, of whom before he has made particular commemoration: taught
so to do by the Church, instructed by the holy Ghost, that the souls
departed, are aided by the suffrages, prayers, alms, and other works of
piety, and principally by the acceptable sacrifice of the Mass.

Et omnibus in Christo quiescentibus.
After particular commemoration of his friends and parents, he makes his
general prayer for all the departed, wherein he asisteth those who have no
particular friends to be mindful of them. Who also are said to rest in Christ,
because they died in Charity: having yet some defectes to be purged, for that
either they have not fully satisfied for their venial sins, or for the pain
due to their mortal sins.

Locum refrigerij.
By the which is understood the kingdom of heaven, where all the Saints do
daily draw out of the springes of the Lamb, the pleasant and coolinge waters
of everlasting comfort, after their long labors and torments, sustained either
in this life, or in the fire of Purgatory.

Lucis.
That is to say, such a place, which needs nether the light of the Sun,
nor of the Moon, nor yet of the Stars, because the splendour of Gods
presence, does face to face illuminate it, and the glorious Lamb of God is
their perpetual lantern.

Et pacis, vt indulgeas precamur.
In which place of light, most perfect, full, secure, and sempiternall peace
does reign, where is nether faintnes, nor sadness: nor fraud, nor fear of
foes: but one everlasting and joyful harmony of voices: in which place of
peace, our Lord him self does dwell, who does guard and keep it, so that
nothing can enter therein, which may disturb their peace.

Per eumdem Christum Dominum nostru^.
To wit, into this most B. city, into this place of refreshing, of perptuall
light, and of peace, we humbly beseech thee, that the souls of them that are
departed, having their offenses forgiven them by the virtue of this Sacrifice,
may be brought to repose and dwell for ever, thorough him whom now we offer up
unto thee in their behalfes, Christ Ie. Am.

Of the Ceremonies used in this Memento.
In this Memento, three Ceremonies are observed. 1. The silent prayer of the
Priest, with his hands joined together. 2. The disioyning of them asunder. And
3. the conioyning of them again together.

The 1. Ceremony, and his signification.
At the first joining of his hands, he meditateth a while, and prays for his
friends departed And by this may be understood, the descending of our Savior
into Limbo Patru^, to comfort the souls of his dear friends, who had long
sat in darkness and in the shadow of death.

The 2. Ceremony, and his signification.
At the disioyning or spreading of his hands abroad, he prays for all the
departed in general. And by this may be understood, how our Lord in triumphant
and victorious manner, ledd forth with him out of Limbo, all that company of
holy souls.

The 3. Ceremony, and his signification.
At Per Christum etc. he conioyneth them again together. And by this may be
understood, that both they and we, as members of one body, shall one day be
inseperably united to our sovereign head, Christ Jesus.

Nobis quoque peccatoribus.
The 1. Ceremony, and his signification.
AT the recital of these words, there are two ceremonies to be observed. The
first, that the priest interrupteth his silence, which he used a little before:
representing thereby, how the good theife reprehended his companion, saying. We
receive worthy of our doings, but this man has done no evil. And presently
after, with contrition and sorrow for his sin, said to Jesus. Lord remember
me when thou shall come into thy kingdom. Luc. 23.41.

The 2. Ceremony, and his signification.
The second, that in pronouncing the words a foresaid he smites his breast:
expressing thereby that of the Centurion, and others who were present at the
death of our Savior, who seeing what had happened, were sore afraid, saying.
Indeed this was the Son of God. Mat. 27.54. And the people who were present
at his spectacle, departed sorrowful, and knocking their breasts.

In saying, Nobis quoque peccatoribus, he knocks his breast, because as
Alexander Hales says, albeit we ought at all times, from the bottom of our
hearts, to acknowledge our selves sinners, yet that chiefly it is to be done in
the time of the sacrifice of the Mass, which is celebrated in the remission
and forgiveness of sins.

Famulis tuis.
In which words, there may seem to be a certain contrariety, to wit, to be
sinners, and yet to be Gods servants. But as because of our procliuity and
pronenes to sin, we may justly affirm our selves to be sinners, so having
been contrite and confessed, of those, wherein by frailty we have fallen, we
are nevertheless bold and confident, to call our selves his humble servants.

De multitudine miserationum tuarum sperantibus.
In the multitude of his mercies, not in our own iustifications, do we
prostrate our prayers before him. For holy David, albeit so great a king and
prophet, yet that his prayer might be heard, grounded it only in the mercy of
God, saying. According to thy great mercy do thou remember me, o Lord for thy
goodness. Psl. 2.

Partem aliquam.
Titlemanus expounds this word partem a part, (wherein we desire to have some
part of the kingdom of heaven with the B. Saints) not for a piece, but for
participation, for else our petition were absurd, if we should think that the
kingdom of heaven, were divided amongst the Saints, by parts or pieces.

Et societatem.
The learned doctor Gabriel Biel, explicating this word, says, that they are
said to have Society, because (in that place of beatitude (to each one in
particular, the goods of all the Saints are made common. Add that by the
name of Society, is insinuated the singular peace, charity, and unity of the
B. Saints. And Alexander Hales very well notes, that in the commeration of
the Saints, made before the consecration of Christ, their prayers and
suffrages are implored: but in this which is made after consecration, the
Society of the Saints is required. To signify, that before the coming of
the kingdom of Christ, we have need in this life of the suffrages of the
Saints, but after that the body of Christ is consecrated, that is, after his
kingdom is manifested, we shall enjoy their company and society, nor shall
any longer stand in need of their prayers or suplications.

Donare digneris.
And it is said Danare, not Reddere, that is, to bestow or give (of his bounty
and liberality) not to pay or render as a thing due in rigor.

Cum tuis sanctis Apostolis and Matyribus.
So often as there is any occasion to speak or make mention of the B. Saints,
first the Apostles are named: and next the Martyrs: the one, because of the
singular dignity of their office, wherein they excelled al others: the others,
because of their unspeakable patience in their torments, wherein they surpassed
al others

Cum Ioanne.
Amongst the Saints that are specified in this part of the Mass, S. John is
first named. Some there be that suppose it to be meant of S. John Baptist, who
although he could not be named before amongst the Apostles, yet may be
mentioned amongst the Martyrs Others think it more probably, to be understood
of S. John the Evangelist, amongst whom is Innocentius terrius, saying, that
although S. John was mentioned in the first commemoration, yet that he is here
again rehearced in this, because Christ upon the Cross, commended his Mother
to his Disciple, the Mother a virgin, to the Disciple a virgin.

Stephano.
Next after S. John, is named S. Steven. The one excellent for the perogaiue of
Apostleshipp and virginity: the other excellent for Martyrdom and virginity.
He was the very first that suffered for Jesus Christ. In imitation of Christ,
he prayed for his enemies at the time of his passion. To him was especially
deputed by the Apostles, the charge of the devout widows. In him shined the
singular praise of sanctity, of whom it is said. Steven full of grace and
fortitude, did great wonders and signs amongst the people. Of whom it is
further said, that all that sat in the council behouldinge him, saw his face,
as it were the face of an Angel. At the time of his disputation with the Jews,
being full of the holy Ghost, looking steadfastly up to heaven, he saw the
glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God.

Matthia.
S. Matthias was diuinelie elected by lot into the Apostleship, to supply the
sacred number of twelve, diminished by the disloyal preuarication of Judas:
Having commission to announce the gospel in Aethiopia, he accomplished the
same with exceeding labor. His enemies attempted to stone him to death, which
not being able to take effect, he was in the end martyred with a chopping knife.

Barnaba.
S. Barnabas was native of Cypres, and one of the seauentie two disciples of
Jesus Christ. He was also by the ordonance of the Holy Ghost, separated with
S. Paul, for the execution of the ministry whereunto he was called He was put
to death in the seventh year of the Emperor Nero. His bones were found in
Cypres under a tree, having upon his breast the gospel of S. Matthew written
with his hand, as is before noted. To him and to S. Paul, is attrbuted to have
bin the first Apostles of the Gentiles.

Ignatio.
S. Ignatius was companion of the Apostles, disciple of S. John the Evangelist,
and second successor of S. Peter in the Bishopric of Antioch; The footeman, or
page of the glorius mother of God, the Virgin Marie, and her Chaplin. Who as
Dionisius writes of him, had nothing else in his mouth, but Amor meus
crucifixus est. My love is crucified. He was condemned under. Traian the
Emperor of Rome, to be devoured with wild beasts. He affirmed, that if they
refused to hurt him, as they had done other martyrs, he him self would provoke
them, saying that he was Christ's corn, and must be ground betwixt the teeth
of the Lions. When he was dead, the name of Jesus was found written in his
heart, in letters of gould.

Alexandro.
S. Alexander was pastor of the universal Church, the sixth pope from S. Peeter
in the seat of Rome. He gave him self wholly to advance the worship and
service of almighty God, as his laudable institutions do very well witness.
He added to the Canon these words Qui pridie etc. Having virtuously ruled the
space of ten years in Rome, and converted Hernetus and Quitimus, he was there
martyred together with Euentius and Theodulus his Deacons, under Adrian the
Emperor Whose blessed body lies in S. Sabins, under the high Altar.

Marcellino.
S. Marcellinus was a Priest of the Church of Rome in the time of the Emperor
Dioclesian. He baptized Paulina the daughter of Artemiras, keeper of the prison
of the city, (whom S. Peeter, the Exorcist, delivered of a malignant spirit
that posessed her) together with father and mother, family, and neighbors,
who ran to see the miracle. For which he was most strangely tormented, and in
the end beheaded by the order of the judge Serenus, who could nether bend nor
move him, from the holy and invincible resolution of the observation of the
Christian faith and religion.

Petro.
This S. Peter was ordained an Exorcist in the church of Rome, to impose
(according to the form there observed) his hands upon those which were vexed
with unclean spirits, either to cast them out, to repress them, or to appease
them. Who for having dispossessed the keepers daughter, and asisted at the
Baptism aforesaid, performed by S. Marcellinus, suffered like martyrdom with
him, and upon the same day. Their holy souls, Doretheus who beheaded them,
saw clothed in most bright and shininge garments, set with most rich jewels,
and carried up into heaven by the hands of Angels, whereupon he also became a
Christian.

Felicitate.
S. Felicitas was a noble woman of Rome, who not only obscured the luster of
all the Ladies of her time, but also far surpassed them in all virtue. She was
mother of seven sons who endured sundry kinds of torments in her sight for
the faith of Jesus Christ, al which she beheld with wonderful constancy and
more then manly courage, and gave unto them many wholesome admonitions and
exhortations. And a little after after she her self followed them with the
same courage and constancy. For which S. Gregory says, that she suffered
eight times, 7. times in her children, and once in her self. She made such
proose of hit immovable and inflexible resolution, that al were filled with
astonishme^t and admiration. By the commandment of Publius, ruler under
Antonius Augustus, she was commanded to be beheaded.

Perpetua.
Amongst the perfections where with S. Perpetua was adorned, she is highly
praised, for that she always strongly resisted against the passions and
prouocations of the flesh, having vowed to God her chaste virginity. She
suffered martyrdom in Mauritanie under the Emperor Seuerus, whereby she happily
arrived to heaven, where she gloriously shines with a double diadem.
Tertullian and S. Augustine make honorable mention of her in their writings.

Agatha.
S. Agatha was amongst the noble virgins of her time very famous both for her
virtue and beauty, and for this cause was extremely loved of Quintianus
governor of Scicilie, even to the attempting of her virginal chastity. But
she not enduring any breach nor blot in her honor, strongly withstoode him.
Whereupon he was so discontented, that his disordered affection was changed into
a marvelous hatred, and extreme desire to reueng him self by all the means he
might possible devise. After many insupportable torments, she was martyred,
having first both her breasts cut of by the commandment of the said
Quintianus, ruler under the Emperor Decius. In the time of her imprisonment,
she was visited by S. Peter the Apostle, and healed of her wounds. Finally
this holy Virgin received in her sepulcher, a testimony of her sanctity by
the hands of Angels.

Lucia.
S. Lucie was of a very noble family, and from her infancy wholly given to
piety. Having by her prayers made at the sepulcher of S. Agatha, obtained of
God the healing of her mother, extreemelie afflicted with a flux of blood,
distributed by her consent unto the poor, that which she had assigned for her
marriage. Whereupon he to whom she was betrothed greatly offended, brought her
before the Justice for a Christian. Pascasius Provost of the city, not being
able, by infinite horrible torments, to divert her from her religion, commanded
her throat to be cut.

Agnete.
S. Agnes was a Roman by birth, and borne of noble parents, exceeding
beautiful, both of mind and body. The governors son of the city, falling
greatly in love with her, desired to have her for his wife, whom she
constantly refused, saying that she would have none other, but Jesus Christ to
be her husband. The Father of the young man, understanding that she was a
Christian, thought by that means to constrain her to marry with his son.
Which she absolutely refusing, he commanded her to be led to the common
brothell, or stews. But God so provided, that her hair grew so thick and so
long, that it covered her all over, and seemed to adorn her more then her
apparel. In the said brothell house where she was put, an Angel of our Lord
came unto her, to defend her that she should not be abused or defiled. She was
cast in to a great fire to be burned, but the flames had no power to touch her
chaste body. At the last Aspasius caused her to be beheaded. She suffered in
the year 317. S. Ambrose wrote of her.

Cecilia.
S. Cecilie was also of the lineage of the noble citizens of Rome, in the time
of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius. She was wholly devoted to the honor of God, and
to his divine service. She was married against her will to Vallerian a citizen
of Rome. Whom she warned in the first night of her marriage, that he should not
touch her, for that she was committed to an Angel of God, who would preserve
her from all pollution, and sharply revenge the wrong, which he should do
her. Whereunto he willingly accorded, and was converted to the faith by the
exhortation of S. Urban, of Whom he was baptized, together with one of his
brethren. Afterward perseuering constantly in the faith, they were all three
martyred by the fire and the sword. S. Cecilie had her head cut off. And being
dead was found to have an hair cloth under her precious habits of goulden
tissue.

Anastasia.
S. Anstasia, was the daughter of a noble citizen of Rome, called Pretextus.
She was wonderful charitable to the poor, amongst whom she liberally
distributed all her substance. Whereupon Publius her husband, who was an
Infidel, was greatly offended, and caused her streightlie to be restrained in
a most hideous prison. And not being able to divert her from her faith, caused
her to be burned a live. During her imprisonment she received sundry
consolatorie letters from S. Chrisogonus, which, together with her answers,
are inserted in the ecclesiastical history of Nicephorus.

Et omnibus sanctis tuis.
To avoid prolixitie, the priest comprehends in general all the Saints,
after the special commemoration of those which are expressed in the Canon.
Always insisting to be admitted into their number, and to come with them unto
everlasting glory, by imitation of their virtues. And therefore proceeds,
saying.

Intra quorum nos consortium, non aestimator meriti, sed veniae.
In which words the Church does not simply deny God to be the esteemer of
merits, but the sense and meaning is, that God will not barelie reward every
godly man according to his merit, but of his goodness and liberallitie, will
add to him above his deserving: nor rigorously punish the defectes of him
that sins: but always reward the one above his merit, and punish the other
less then his desert.

Quaesumus largitor admit, per Christum Dominum nostrum.
Not to be refused in his request, he makes and concludes it thorough Jesus
Christ. For what exterior show soever our works may have, they are not
agreeable to God, but by his Son woorking in us. Who has so greatly loved
us, that he would descend from heaven unto earth to be our Mediator, and
finally to place us amongst his Saints.

Of the joining of the priests hands.
In saying, Per Christum Dominum nostrum. He joins his hands together. By
which ceremony used at the commemoration of Saints, may be understood the same
that before was said concerning the souls departed, to wit, that thorough the
merits of Christ our Lord, who is our head, we hope to be joined with him, and
his Saints, in everlasting glory.

Per quem.
For as much as the confection of the holy Eucharist is attributed to Jesus
Christ, who is the author of this holy institution, therefore the priest
gives thanks and prayseth God the Father, for that by him he has created the
matter, to wit, the bread and the wine, under the forms whereof, he does
exhibit unto us, truly and reallie, his body and blood in food and
nourishment of our souls.

Haec omnia, Domine, semper bona.
To wit, all the Hosts, which the Church does immolate thorough the whole
world. Which if we consider the sensible qualities, are of infinite number, but
if the substance, all is one body, and all is one blood, which is daily made
present in this holy Sacrifice, by him, by whom as says S. John, all things
were made, and without him, was made nothing that was made. John. 1.

Creas.
Here a question may be moved, why the Priest does not make the sign of the
Cross at the word Creas, as well as at the other words following Sanctificas,
viuificas, etc Whereof Alexander Hales, gives a very sufficient reason, saying
that the sign of the Cross is a representation of our Lords passion: and
because the creation of man was no cause of his passion, but the fall of man
was thereby to be repaired, therefore when sanctification, vivification, and
benediction are mentioned, the sign of the Cross is made, but when creation
is named, the priest does not to make the sign of the Cross is made, but when
creation is named, the priest does not to make the sign of the Cross, because
the creation of man was not painful to our Savior, but his redemption. And
S. Thomas in his exposition of the Mass says, that this was ordained by the
admirable providence of almighty God, to signify, that man had not that by
nature in his creation, which since he has obtained by the Cross of Christ in
his redemption.

Sanctificas, viuificas, benedicis.
These three words may be considered three manner of ways. They may either be
referred to the bread and wine. Or to our Savior. Or to our selves. If you
consider them as spoken of the bread and wine, then it is most easy to
conceive their sense. Do sanctify, to wit, according to their sacramental
causes. Viuificate, by converting them into thy flesh and blood. Bless, by
pouring down and multiplying thy graces upon them. If you refer them to
Christ, then are they thus to be understood, to wit, those creatures which
before were but earthly, void of life, and of all benediction, are by the
blessing of Christ, made heavenly, lively, and every way most blessed. If we
apply them unto ourselves, then may they thus be taken, to wit, that this
sacred Host is sanctified in respect of us, (that it may be our sanctification
from all sins.) viuificated, that it may be the life of our souls (to
quicken us in spirit to newnes of life.) Blessed, that we may by the same
attain the abounda^ce of all spiritual grace and perfection.

Of the three Crosses which are made at the three words aforsaid.
As touching the three Crosses which are made in this place upon the Host and
the Chalice together, they are made to signify unto us, that our redemption
wrought by Christ by the virtue of his Cross, was with the consent of all the
blessed Trinity. Or, according to Albertus Magnus, three Crosses are made in
this place, to signify that al things are sanctified, viuificated, and
blessed, by the virtue of the Cross and passion, of our ^emer.

Et praestas nobis.
The thing which in these words, we desire of God may be given unto us, is the
precious body and blood of Christ his Son, for our refection: who lying hid
under these species, gives him self to us to eat, that so he may be in us,
and we in him. And Titlemanus says that this holy Host is given us, to our
vtility and health, it is given us in meat, it is given us in drink, it is
given us in life, it is given us in norishment, it is given us in preservation,
it is given us in defense, it is given us in remission of our sins, it is
given us for the obtaining of good things, it is given us against the
assaults of our enemies, it is given us for the subduing of our flesh, it is
given us in commemoration of the death of Christ, and of all his benifits.

Per ipsum, et cum ipso, et in ipso.
Then uncovering the Chalice, bowing his knee and houlding the Host in his
right hand and the Chalice in his left, he makes three Crosses, from side to
side of the Chalice, saying Peripsum, as by the Mediator betwixt God and man.
Et cum ipso, as every way equal with the Father. Et in ipso, as
consubstantiall and coeternal, both with him and the holy Ghost. Again, per
ipsum, by whom thou have created ^hinges. Et cum ipso, by whom thou gouernest
all things created. Et in ipso, in whom thou consummatest all things.

Est tibi Deo patri omnipotenti.
Not called Father only by name, honor, and veneration as we call our elders
and betters fathers, but by nature and origin, so that truly and properly the
divine generation appertains unto him.

In vnitate spiritus sancti.
That is to say, in the communion of the Holy Ghost, who is the knot and love
of the Father and the Son; in whom they communicate as in one common gift,
proceeding from both Omnis honor and gloria. Be all honor, as to our Lord, and
al glory as, to our God. Where, ^n the same order that God the Father does
send his graces and blessings unto us, which is by the means of Christ his
Son: even so in the same order all honor and glory returns again by the
means of Christ unto the Father, and that evermore in the unity of the holy
Ghost.

Of the five Crosses which are made at the five words aforesaid. The 1. Reason.
As touching those three which are made with the Host over the Chalice, at
these words Peripsum etc. diverse things may be signified by the same. First
they may signify, the three hours, wherein our Lord and Savior hung upon the
Cross, in most unspeakable pain alive.

The 2. Reason.
According to S. Thomas, these three Crosses are made, to signify the triple
prayer of Christ upon the Cross. First, Father forgive them. Secondly, My God
why have thou forsaken me. Thirdly, Into thy hands I commend my spirit.

The 3. Reason.
The other two Crosses, which he makes betwixt the Chalice and his breaste, at
these words. Est tibi Deo Patri omnipotenti etc. do signify, the mystery of
the blood and water which issued out of the side of our B. Savior, hanging
dead upon the Cross, and the two Sacraments, which were instituted in virtue
of the same, to wit, Baptism, and this B. Sacrament of the Altar. According to
the testimony of S. John. One of the soldiears with a spear opened his side,
and incontinent there came forth blood and water. John 19.34.

The 4. Reason.
At the words. Omnis honor and gloria, the Host is held above, and the Chalice
beneath and both a little elevated. Which Ceremony does very aptly signify
the death of our Savior, to wit, how in his passion, his blood was truly
separated from his body, and consequently also his blessed soul.

Of other Ceremonies performed after the short elevation.
The Priest having performed this short elenation, lays the Host down upon
the Corporal, covers again the Chalice, and then adoreth,

The 1. Ceremony, and his signification.
First the Host is laid upon the Corporal, because Joseph and Nichodemus,
beging of Pilat the body of Jesus, took it down from the Cross, wrapped it
in a fine sindon, and after buried it.

The 2. Ceremony, and his signification.
And because they rouled a great stone before the door of the sepulcher,
therefore the Priest with the Palle covers the Chalice, And because those
holy men worshipped the body of Christ in the sepulcher, at their departure,
therefore the Priest adoreth our Lord in this holy Sacrament.

The 3. Ceremony, and his signification.
This done the priest lifts up his voice and pronou^ceth on high these
words saying. Per omnia saecula saeculorum. And the people answer. Amen. Our
Doctors here do say, that this lifting up of the voice of the priest,
represents the strong cry of our Lord and Savior when he yealded up his
spirit into the hands of the Father. And that the answer of the people,
signifies the lamentation and pity of his devout women which were present at
this spectacle. In this manner Inno centius tertius interprets the same.
Because Jesus (says he) crying with a high voice, rendered up his spirit,
therefore the priest lifts up his voice saying. Per omnia saecula saeculorum.
And because the women lamenting bewailed their Lord, all the quyre, as
lamenting, do answer Amen.

Per omnia saecula saeculorum.
By the words them selves, are commonly understood, one of these two things.
Either that all honor and glory, appertains to God world without end, Or that
the Son does live with the Father and the holy Ghost, world without end.
Again, Per omnia secula seculorum, that is, thoroughout all ages of the world,
for seculum, is taken for a time somewhat long: and so is called seculum of
this word sequor, to follow, because time follows time.

Oremus.
The Priest having gotten as it were, a good opportunity, having now before
him, the Lord and Maker, both of heaven and earth, and that according to his
corporal presence, he exhorts all the people heartily to pray, saying.
Oremus. Let us pray.

Praeceptis salutaribus moniti, and diuina institutione formati.
And therefore the Priest says that it is by precept, and divine institution,
that we are admonished to say this prayer, because both our Lord instituted
the same, and also commanded his Apostles to use the same, saying. Pray always
and be not weerie Again Pray without intermission. Which prayer, Christ him
self taught his Apostles to say in the holy sacrifice of the Mass, as S.
Hierom witnesses. Hier. li 3. contra Pelagianos.

Audemus dicere.
The reason why we here affirm, that we are bold to speak unto the majesty
of God almighty, is because that this self same prayer which we pour forth
before God, the self same prayer proceeded out of the mouth of God: so that in
this prayer, we recommend our selves unto God, with no other then the very
words of God. For as S. Gregory well says, it were very unmeet, that upon
the holy Eucharist, any prayer should be recited of the scholars composing,
and that ommited of the Masters making.

Pater.
I will here set down for this first point, a right worthy consideration of
Leo Magnus, saying. Great my beloved is the gift of this sacrament, and this
gift exceeds all gifts, that God should call man his son, and man name God
his Father. Hence also S. Aug. admonishes the rich and noble of this world,
not to wax proud, or contemn the poor and ignoble, because they pronounce
and say that together to God our Father, which they can never truly say, unless
they acknowledge them selves to be brethren.

Noster.
As by the word (Pater) we understand the grace of adoption: so by the word
(noster) we understand brotherly union. For as S. Cyprian says, our Lord who
is the master of peace and unity, would not that when any one prays, he
should pray for him self only, and say, My Father, nor give me my daily
bread, not forgive me my trespasses, nor lead me not into temptation, nor
deliver me from evil: but our Father, give us our daily bread, forgive us our
trespasses, lead us not in temptation and so of others.

Qui es in coelis.
1. The priest in saying that God is in heaven, does not enclose or confine God
with in heaven; but endeuoreth to draw him which prays, up from earth to
heaven. 2. In affirming our Father to be in heaven, we are put in mind that we
are strangers here in earth, and far from our proper country and home which is
heaven.

Sanctificetur nomen tuum.
The name of God, has in it self no need of sanctification: but because here
in earth it is not worthelie sanctified as it deserves, and that by many, and
even almost hourlie, it is most sinfullie profaned, by execrable blasphemies,
imprecations, detestations, cursinges, swearinges, forswearinges and the like;
therefore we pray, that the same may be honored, praised, exalted and sanctified
of all in the world.

Adueniat regnum tuum.
The kingdom of God in which he does reign, is the Church militant on earth,
and the Church triumphant in heaven. Wherefore by thy kingdom come, is
understood, kingdom to kingdom, the militant to the triumphant, that these
two may be united and made one kingdom. This likewise does reprehend all those
persons, who would prolo^g this worldly life, whereas the just do heartily
pray, that that kingdom of God would speedily come.

Fiat voluntas tua.
The will of God is taken two manner of ways The one, his will and decree as it
is eternal. The other the signs of his will, which are temporal. And these
are five, to wit, precept, prohibition, permission, counsel, and operation:
these latter are not always fulfilled, for which cause we pray daily that they
may be fulfilled, saing. Fiat voluntas tua, to wit in all thou command, in
all thou forbidest, in all thou permittest, in all thou counsellest, in all
thou workest

Sicut in coelo and in terra.
By heaven, is understood the heavenly spirits, to wit, the Saints and Angels;
For the blessed Angels, so soon as they conceive the conception and mind of
almighty God, do incontinently, with inexplicable delight and readiness,
transport them selves to accomplish the same. And therefore we pray that the
will of almighty God may be fulfilled, Sicut in coelo. and in terra. To wit,
as by Angels in heaven, even so by men in earth.

Panem.
Four sorts of bread are necessary for us. Three whilst we are pilgrims in
this life, and the fourth in the life and world to come. To wit, Corporal,
Spiritual, Sacramental, and Eternal. Of the first it is written, man lives
not by bread only. Of the second, My meat is to do the will of him that sent
me. Of the third. He that eats this bread unworthily, is guilty of the body
of our Lord. Of the fourth. I am the bread of life which came down from heaven.

Nostrum quotidianum.
Our, not mine, says S, Chrisostom, because all whatsoever God gives us, he
giueeth not to us alone, but also to others by us; that of that which we have
received of God, we also give part thereof unto the poor. Again our bread, to
wit, got by our true labors, for all that which we eat unjustly gotten or
stolen, is not ours, but other men's bread. Again, our bread, to wit, the
spiritual food of our souls, as true Catholic doctrine, Sacraments,
wholesome Ceremonies, and the like: not others, that is, the doctrine and
ceremonies of Infidells or Heretics. And this our bread is called daily,
because we daily stand in need thereof.

Da nobis.
This does Christ teach us, that we do not only pray that bread be given us,
that we may have to eat, but, as S Chrisostom says, that what we eat we may
receive from the hand of God. For, to have to eat, is common both to the good,
and to the bad, but to acknowledge it from the hand of God, is proper, or
belongs only unto the good.

Hodie.
This day, to wit, in this present life, as S. Aug. expounds the same. Which
we ought to account but as one day, it is so frail and of so little lasting.

Et dimitte nobis.
Three manner of ways we offend and trespass, whereof we crave of God
forgiveness. Against God Against our selves. And against our neighbor. Because
we have offended against God, we say, Et dimitte. And because we have offended
against our selves, we say, nobis. And because we have likewise offended
against our neighbor, we say, Sicut and nos dimittimus debitoribus nostris.

Debita nostra.
Our trespasses are called Debita, Dettes, because they make us debtors of
pain, which must of necessity be paid, either in this life or in the other.
Again sins or trespasses are called dettes, for that sin, being the wealth
and substance of the devil, a man which commits sin, is made a dettor to
the devil: even as he is made a dettor, which uses or houldeth an other man's
money.

Sicut and nos dimittimus debitoribus nostris.
In this request we ask to be forgiven, upon condition, to wit, as we forgive
others: he therefore that asks to be forgiven, and does not himself forgive,
requires of God not to be forgiven. By reason whereof, who soever is in hatred
or malice, is more hurt, then helped by this prayer, unless at the very same
present he have a purpose to forgive.

Et ne nos inducas in tentationem.
After we have required forgiveness of sins past, we demand to be preserved
from those which we may commit for the time to come, which we call by the name
of temptation. Concerning which we crave of almighty God, not that we may not
be led to temptation, but that we may not be led into it, that is, suffered to
fall into it.

Sed libera nos a malo.
Upon these last words Cardinal Bellarim has very learnedlie noted, that
our Lord with great wisdom teaches us to demand to be delivered from all
evil, and comes not to particulars, as to poverty, sickness, and the like.
For that oftentimes it seems that a thing is good for us which God sees is
evil for us: and contrariwise euel for us, which he sees to be good for us.
And that therefore according to the instruction of our Lord we demand, that he
vouchsafe to deliver us from all that, which he sees and knows to be evil
for us, be it prosperity, or adversity, well, or woe. The Fathers of the
Greek Church, commonly understand by the name of Evil, the devil as S.
Chrisostom, Cyrillus, Euthymius, S. Germanus Tertulianus, and others. Yea and
some great Saints of God, never would call the devil by any other name. As
amongst others S. Catharin of Sienna.

Amen.
After the answer of the asistants, the Priest says, Amen: which imports a
great confidence, that God will give them their demand: even as if, having
obtained, he sent the^ that by the Priests means which they desiered.

Of the Priests resuming the Patin.
By the roundnes of the Paten, as before we said, is signfied charity. And the
hiding and covering thereof duringe the Sacrifice (wherein the mysteries of the
death and passion of our Savior are represented) signifies, the flight of the
Apostles, who at the first, through the great affection and charity which they
bore to their Lord and master, promised to dye at his feet, rather then they
would ever forsake him: yet as soon as he was in the hands of his enemies,
they all forsook him, and hid them selves.

Libera nos, quaesumus Domine, ab omnibus malis, praeteritis, praesentibus, and
futuris.
The priest in resuming the Patin as aforesaid, repeateth the prayer made by
the asista^ts at the conclusion of our Lords prayer. Which is nether in vain
nor superfluous, because it explicateth the same more particularly. Wherefore
here there are named three sorts of evils, from the which we have great need
to pray to be delivered, to wit, from all evils, past, present, and to come,
tempests, souddaine and unprovided deaths etc. All which because they are
punishments due to our sins, we here pray to be delivered from them.

Et intercedente beata.
The Virgin Marie first is here called, Blessed, for so the woman in the gospel
witnessed of her, saying. Blessed is the womb that bare thee and the pappes
that gave thee suck. Or blessed, to wit, in the generations both of heaven and
earth. Of heaven, to whom she bare their restorer. Of earth, to whom she
brought forth their redeemer.

Et gloriosa.
Next she is said to be glorious, because she is the seat of the king of
glory, of whom he taking flesh, sat in her as in his seat. Or glorious,
because she dwells on high, where she sits gloriously on the right hand
of her Son. Or glorious, because she is most gloriously assumpted, both in
soul and body, and highly exalted far above all human and Angelical virtues.

Semper Virgin.
Always, to wit, before her delivery, in her delivery, and after her
delivery. A virgin, in body, in mind, in profession, in observation.

Dei Genetrice Maria.
This blessed and glorious virgin, is said to be mother of the Son of God,
whereupon it follows that she has one Son common with God; O wonderful
mystery, he has not a Son, whereof Marie is not mother: she has not a
Son, whereof God is not the Father.

Cum beatis Apostolis tuis, Petro.
S. Peter is next named, because commandment was given to the holy women by
the Angel, to carry the good tidinges of our Lords resurrection (which the
priest by and by goes about to represent unto us) to the Disciples, and in
especial to S. Peter: Having need of particular consolatie^, because lately
before he had denied his master, and had now bitterly wept and done austere
penance for the same.

Paulo and Andrea.
After our Lady and S. Peter, S. Paul and S Andrew are next named for some
special perogatiues. Gabriel Biel says, that to obtain the gift of peace
these four, albeit recited before, are here introduced again, because these
above others, were most configurat to the passion of Christ, in virtue whereof
peace is given unto us.

Et omnibus Sanctis.
By which words the intercession of other Saints is not ommitted, but in the
commemoration of these few, and those the most eminent, the suffrages of all
are required. For so are all united to God, and so do all desire one thing,
that in one all are in some sort included, and in one all are neglected

Why the priest signeth him self with the Paten.
That the Priest signeth him self with the Paten, it is done, to signify that
the chief of the priests and pharisees, signed and sealed the stone of the
sepulcher, setting soldiears and watchmen to keep the same.

Da propitius pacem.
Having prayed for our deliverance from evils, next we crave for perfect peace:
to wit, in the remission of sin, perfect peace in the tranquillity of
conscience, and perfect peace in amity with our neighbor: because this
perfect peace, is the holy and sacred band of of all human society.

In diebus nostris.
To wit, in the time of this life, according as Titelmanus expounds the same.
And this we crave, after the example of king Ezechias, that we may live in the
fear of God and observation of his holy commandementes, without seeing the
opressions and incomodities, which the uncertain change of worldly things,
may unexpectedly bring upon us.

Vt open misericordiae tuae adiuti.
That our petitions which we offer and present to almighty God, may take the
better effect, it is most necessary, that we have his merciful help and
asistance here unto, without the which we do confess, that we cannot, as we
ought, either begin, continue, or end, nor ever obtain the thing which we
desire,

Et a pecctao simus semper liberi.
The thing whereunto we principally require the aid of his mercy, is, to be
freed from our sins, because sin has this property, that it always
brings three evils with it.

The first is it makes us of free men bond men, for as our Savior says, he
that commits sin, is the servant of sin. Seco^dlie, it alienateth us
from Gods holy grace. Thirdly, it justly wroketh his wrath against us.

And hence it is that S. Bernard says, that so so long as in any creature
there is power to sin, it is secure in no place, nether in heaven, nor in
paradise, nor in the world; For in heaven fell the Angels even in Gods
presence. In paradise fell Adam from the place of pleasure: in the world fell
Judas from the school of our Savior.

Et ab omni perturbatione securi.
Next, to be secure from the perturbations tumultes and troubles of the world,
because from thence proceeds the matter of sin, and hinderance that when we
approach to this most holy Communion, we come not in such purity as is fit and
requisite.

Of sundry ceremonies performed by the priest in this part of the Mass.
The 1. Ceremony, and his signication.
First he puts the Paten under the Host (which as we said before, by this
roundnes, represents Charity.) The Host therefore laid upon the Paten to be
broken and divided; signifies, that Christ of his love and Charity, exposed
his body to suffer death for our redemption.

The 2. Ceremony, and his signification.
Next he uncovers the Chalice. By the Chalice, is signified the sepulcher.
And the uncovering of the same, is done to signify how the Angel of our Lord
removed away the stone from the door of the sepulcher.

The 3. Ceremony, and his signification.
After this, he deuideth or breaks the Host into two parts, which signifies
the separation of the holy soul of our Lord and Savior from his blessed
body: the one descending into hell, and the other remaining in the Sepulcher.
Whereof Innocentius tertius yealdeth another reason; saying that therefore the
Priest breaks the Host, that in the breaking of bread we may know our Lord,
as the two disciples knew him in breaking of bread, to whom he appeared the day
of his resurrection, as they went to Emaus.

Per eumdem Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum Filium tuum.
In dividing the Host he says, Per eumdem Dominum nostrum. To wit, unto whom
all power is given both in heaven earth. Iesum, Savior, for he comes to save
his people from their sins. Christum, Anointed above all his fellows with
the oil of gladness. Filium tuum, Natural and only begotten.

These words ended, the part of the Host which he houldeth in his right hand,
he lays upon the paten, and from the part in his left hand, he breaks of
another little particle, and so the Host is divided into three parts. The host
thus divided into three several parts, represents unto us the state of the
Church in three several places. The part held in the right hand (which is no
more divided but remains entyre) represents the Church triumphant,
signified by the right hand, which has passed over all her troubles, and has
now no more to suffer.

The other which is held in the left hand, and is again divided, does
signify the estate of the Church militant (understood by the left hand) part
whereof remains in this life, and part in Purgatory, both which are subject
yet to suffer.

This part held in the left hand, is next conjoined to that which lies upon
the paten and was before held in the right hand: to signify, that those which
are in purgatory, shall infallibly after a while, have their part and fruition
in glory, and be conjoined with the Church triumphant.

The part subdivided from the second, held in the right hand and put into the
Chalice, signifies those which yet remain in this present life (who by doing
penance, for their sins, may obtain mercy and remission thorough the
merits of Christ before their departure) and therefore the part which
represents them, is not laid with the other, but is put into the sacred blood
contained in the Chalice.

And let it here be noted, that this third part of the holy Host is held over
the Chalice with two fingars: to wit, with the thumb, which is interpreted
Force, and virtue: and with the second, named by the Latins Index, interpreted
discretion of understanding. To declare that this divine mystery ought to be
considered with force of Faith, and with discretion of understanding.

Qui tecum viuit and regnat in vnitate spiritus Sancti Deus.
In the subdiuision of the second part as aforesaid, he says. Qui tecum viuit,
(incessantly in all eternity.) Et regnat (with all power and majesty.) In
vnitate (in essential identitie of the Holy Ghost.) Spiritus Sancti Deus. (The
third person the Holy Trinity.

Per omnia secula seculorum.
Having by sundry devout ceremonies set before us the death and passion of our
blessed Savior, he begins now not only by signs, but also by words, to
set before us the joy of his resurrection: for which cause he lifts up his
voice saying. Per omnia secula se culorum. And the people answer. Amen. The
Priest does therefore eleuate his voice in this place, not only to have the
consent of the people, but also to represent the gladness which the Apostles and
Disciples had, when they understood the joyful news of the resurrection. For
as they were in great fear and sorrow, to see their Lord and master in the
hands of his enemies, and afterward to suffer his death: so were they filled
with great joy, when they saw him restored again to life, Gauisi sunt
Discipuli viso Domino. The Disciples rejoiced having seen our Lord.

Amen.
The people answer by this Hebrwe word that they do firmly and steadfastly
so believe.

Pax Dominisit semper vobis cum.
To show this more evidently, the Priest saluteth the people with the same
words, wherewith our Lord saluted his Apostles, at his resurrection, saying.
Pax vobis. Now there are three sorts of peace right necessary for us, to wit
spiritual, temporal, and eternal: and according hereunto, the Priest makes
the sign of the Cross three times in pronouncing the words aforesaid. The
spiritual peace, is the repose and tranquillity of conscience, which is
obtained by the means of a virtuous and innocent life. The temporal peace is,
that it would please almighty God, so to bless us and our labors, that we
may eat our bread in peace and quietness: that is, to preserve us, and all
ours, from wars, misfortunes, sicknesses, suits, wrongful molestations,
detractions, diffamations, and all other sorts of troubles and vexations, The
peace which is eternal, is the chief and principal of all the rest, which
sets us free from all the cares and labors of this life, and brings us,
from mortallitie, to immortallitie: from corruption, to incorruption: from
fear, to felicity: from relation to glorification: and finally, to the clear
vision and everlasting fruition of God him self. He therefore of his infinite
mercy, give unto us, both the spiritual and the temporal peace in this
world: and the peace everlasting in the world to come.

Et cum spiritu tuo.
The asistants for answer desire to the priest, the same peace which he has
wished unto them, to the end that being united by the bond of this celestial
benedction, they may mutuallie receive the grace which they desire.

Of that part of the Host which is put into the Chalice.
This done, the priest puts one little part of the Host into the Chalice: to
show unto us hereby, that our Lords body, is not without his blood, nor his
blood, without his body, nether body and blood, without his holy, and lively
soul. Secondly, to show, that but one sacrament, is made of the species, both
of the bread and wine. Thirdly, to show, that as he joins the body to the
blood; so we being conjoined to the same body thorough the merits of the same
blood, are purged from our sins: and herupon it is that he immediately asks
the remission of sins, saying. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata etc.

Haec commixtio.
This commixtion of the body and blood of our Lord, is not according to their
true and real essences, (in which sense, they are never separated) but
according to their exterior, or Sacramental forms, under which, the body and
blood of Christ is truly contained. For many things which appertain to the
only species, by the use of speakinge, is attributed to that which is
contained under the species.

Et consecratio Corporis and Sanguinis Domini nostri Jesus Christi.
Not that by this immission, the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, is
either made holy, or consecrated: but that the consecration first made, by
virtue of the sacramental forms, now takes his effect in the mind of the
receuer. And therefore it follows.

Fiat accipientibus nobis.
To wit, unto us Priests, who receive it sacramentallie, and to all others who
receive it reallie or spirituallie by the means of the Priest, who is as it
were the hand and mouth of the mystical body of Christ, as by which
nourishment is drawn and imparted, to all the several members of the body.

In vitam aeternam. Amen.
To wit, by conservation of the spiritual life, here in this world, which is
done by daily augmentation of grace, wherewith our soul is sustained, least
thorough defect thereof, it decline and fall away by evil desires and hurtful
deeds, and afterward come utterly to loose the everlasting life in the
world to come.

Agnus Dei.
THE Priest having put the third part of the Host into the Chalice, as before
we have declared, next he covers the same, and knocking his breast, says
twice; Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world, have mercy
upon us. And once Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world,
grant us thy peace. And therefore Agnus Dei is said, the Chalice being covered:
because Christ appeared to his Apostles the doors being shut, and gave them
power and authority to remit sins.

As touching the word it self, Agnon in Greek, signifies as much as gentle
or meek in English. And Christ is here called a Lamb, because a Lamb hurts
nothing, nether man nor beast.

Again Agnus is called ab Agnoscendo, because amongst a great flock and
multitude by his only cry and bleating, he is acknowledged by his mother. And
even so Christ the Lamb of God, hanging upon the Cross, by his voice and cry,
was acknowledged by his mother.

Qui tollis peccata mundi.
Upon which words Theophilactus says. Non dixit, qui tollet, sed qui tollit:
quasi semper hoc faciente. He says not, who will take away, but who does take
away, as daily and continually doing the same. For he did not only then take
away our sins (as says Ludolphus) when he suffered, but also from that time
unto this present, he does daily take them away, although he be not daily
crucified for us.

Miserere nobis.
Have mercy on us, to wit, by taking away our sins, because S. John (whose
words these are) has assured us, that he is the same Lamb, who truly takes
away the sins of the world. And Algerus says, that with this faith we adore
the Sacrament as a thing divine, and we both speak to it and pray to it, as
having life and reason, saying. Lamb of God etc. Thus he.

Agnus Dei:
Lamb of God, says Biell, which suckedst thy mother in the stable: followedst
her flying into Egypt: and heardedst her bleating, seeking thee in the Temple.

Qui tollis peccata mundi.
Original, by Baptism. Mortal, by Penance. And Venial, by the virtue of
this holy Eucharist.

Miserere nobis.
Flying unto the for pardon for our sins past. For victory against
temptations present. And for preservation from sins to come. Further, besides
the former exposition, in these words are plainly testified, two notable
verities of Christ our Savior: the one of his humanity, the other of his
divinity. Of his humanity, in these words. Agnus Dei. etc. Lamb of God, that
is to say, sent of God as a most innocent Lamb, to be offered up in sacrifice
for our salvation. Of his divinity, when he adeth. Qui tollis peccata mundi,
which take away the sins of the world: because, to take away sin, is
proper to God, and to none other.

Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi.
This Agnus Dei is said or recited the third time: because this La^be of God
not only was acknowledged of others, but also him self acknowledged others,
namely, his heavenly Father: his blessed mother: and also us. He acknowledged
his Father when he said. Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. He
acknowledged his mother, when he said. Woman behold thy son. And he
acknowledged us, when he said. Father forgive them they know not what they
do. So that Agnus Dei thrice repeated, is as much to say, as. Lamb of God
which did acknowledge thy Father, have mercy upon us. Lamb of God which
did acknowledge thy mother, have mercy upon us Lamb of God which did
acknowledge us, grant us thy peace.

Dona nobis pacem.
The devil, that old perturber of peace, did ever labor to break and take
away this triple peace, to wit, betwixt God and man: Of man in him self: and
betwixt man and man. For first he brake the peace betwixt God and man, when he
seduced our first parents to transgres the commandment of almighty God.
Secondly, he brake the peace of man within him self, when leaving him
confounded with the sight of his own shame, he sought for leaves to cover his
nakedness. Thirdly, he brake the peace betwixt man and man, when thorough
malice he incited one brother to murder the other. This triple peace therefore
the priest prays for, to wit, peace betwixt God and man: peace of man within
him self: and peace betwixt neighbors, that is, betwixt man and man.

Why we ask mercy and peace for the living, and repose or rest for the
departed.
The reason why we demand mercy and peace for the living, and repose or rest
for the departed, is to signify the true and proper place of forgiveness, to be
in this world: as contrary, the other world is the place of justice and
punishment. Again in this world we are in continual war as holy Job says.
Militia est vtta hominis super terram. The life of man upon earth is a warfare.
And for this cause we justly ask for our selves peace, but as touching the
departed, they are in peace, although they are not in repose; for they are in
peace with all their former enemies, the world, the flesh, and the devil, (for
otherwise they were not in state of salvation:) but they are not as yet in
repose, but in pains and torments, until they shall have fully satisfied for
all their sins and offenses, for which they remain indetted to almighty
God: and for this cause we do rather wish the^ repose, the^ peace.

And Rest is therefore added thrice, because there is wished to the souls
departed a triple or theefould rest. One from the affliction of pain: an other
for the beatifying of the soul: and the third for the glorfying both of the
soul and body.

Domine Jesus Christ.
To wit, most pitiful, merciful, loving, gentle, and bening Lord Jesus.

Qui dixisti.
Being by thy passion to depart and leave this world.

Apostolis tuis.
Called by thee to the knowledge of the faith; sent by thee to the preaching of
the faith: and: who suffered for thee, for the confession of the same faith.

Pacem relinquo vibis.
To the end that they might firmly remain in peace, lest terrified and
affrighted with miseries, they might fall from the faith.

Pacem meam do vobis.
Giuinge us thy peace, and taking to thy self in steed thereof all our evils.
O change of incomparable charity!

Ne respicias peccata mea.
To wit personal, where with I haueing offended thy majesty, am unworthy to
obtain at thy hands the peace of thy Church, unworthy to offer up thy sacred
body to thy Father, and unworthy to take upon me to reconcile sinners unto
thee.

Sed fidem ecclesiae tuae.
Wherein thou have espoused her unto thee as thy spouse: wherein thou have
sanctified her in the lauer of the word of life: wherein lest she should fail,
thou have for ever confirmed her.

Eamque secundum voluntatem tuam.
To wit, will most amorous, out of which thou vouchsafedst to take frail
flesh, will most pitiful, out of which thou vouchsafedst to die, will most
bountiful out of which thou vouchsafest to give thy self in this holy
Sacrament, in meat for her love, redemption and comfort.

Pacificare and coadunare digneris.
That pacified in good, preserved from evil, counited in charity and governed
both within and without by thee, she may be accounted worthy of the communion
of so excellent a food.

Qui viuis and regnas Deus per omnia secula seculorum.
Who live mightelie: and raignest, wisely, God, consubstantiallie: world
without end, sempiternallie.

Of the Priests kissing the pax, saying, Pax tecum. The 1. Reason.
Innocentius tertius says, that after our Lord had saluted his Apostles, he
said again unto them: Pax vobis. Peace be unto you; and then breathed upon
them saying. Receive ye the holy Ghost. Which to signify unto us, the Priest
in the Mass kisseth the Pax (which is reverently held unto him by him which
serves at the Altar.) And because the love of God is diffused in our hearts
by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us, therefore the kiss of peace is
diffused in the Church, amongst all the faithful.

The 2. Reason.
By this ceremony we are admonished to have perfect love and concord with our
neighbors. And that if we have any enemies, we endeavor to kiss them, as we
kiss the Pax, to wit, to reconcile our selves unto them in such conjunction of
perfect love, that we kiss them and embrace them as our dearest friends.

The 3. Reason.
Again this kiss of the Pax, serves us for three things. First, to show
that Jesus Christ has appeased the wrath and anger of his Father toward us.
Secondly, that we do al believe in one and the same God, and do swear to
maintain one Christian doctrine. Thirdly, we profess to love christianlie one
another, purposinge to reconcile us to all those, who have any way offended us.

The 4. Reason.
This custom certainly first came from our Lord him self, for it is not
probable that Judas would ever have been so hardy as to kiss his master, were
it not, that this was the custom of the house of our Lord, and a common thing
amongst the Apostles to use this sign of love when they returned from some
iornie, as well toward their master, as one of them toward another. The
which they have practiced ever since, and exhorted other Christians to do the
like, as we may see in the last chapter of the epistle to the Romans. 1. and 2.
to the Corinthians. and 1. of S. Peeter saying. Salute one another with an
holy kiss.

Nether is there any of our Docters, who have expounded the mysteries of the
Mass, that affirm not this ceremony to have come from the Apostles, and to
be founded upon the places of scripture before alleged. The which is
evidently to be proved out of the Liturgies of S. James, of S. Basil, and of
S. Chrisostom. Out of the 3. cap. of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy of S.
Denis. Out of the 2. and 8. book of the Apostolical constitutions of S.
Clement. Out of the 2. Apology of Justin Martyr, and many others. Lastly one
principal reason of the institution of this ceremony, was, the dignity of
this most holy Communion, to the which none ought to present him self with
hatred and rancour, but first to be thoroughlie reconciled to his brother.

Pax recum.
The priest in kissing the Pax says. Peace be with thee, which by this sign
of a kiss I represent unto thee.

Why the Pax is not given in the Mass for the dead.
In a Mass of Requtem the pax is not given, because such a Mass is
principally said for the souls in Purgatory, amongst whom there is no
discord nor dissension. But the same is given, when Mass is said for the
living, which oftentimes be at debate and discord, to the end to reconcile them
to peace and concord.

Domine.
Here the Priest having his eyes and intent, fixed and bent toward the blessed
Sacrament, speaks unto our Lord Christ reallie and truly present under the
visible forms, saying, Lord.

Jesus Christ.
Savior of all mankind, and anointed of the Father with the plenitude and
abundance of the Holy Ghost.

Fili Dei viui.
Son of the living God, natural, consubstantiall, and coeternall.

Qui ex voluntate Patris.
Who by the will of the Father, most liberal, bountiful, and most merciful,
sending thee in the fulness of time unto us for our redemption.

Cooperante spiritu Sancto.
The Holy Ghost cooperating, who as he has with thee and the Father one
essence, so both in will and work is inseparable and undivided.

Per mortem.
To wit, the most bitter, painful, and opprobrious death of the Cross, which
thou patiently enduring, did thereby make thy self obedient to the will of
thy Father.

Tuam.
Thine, to wit, put in thine own power, because thou had power to lay down
thy life, and power to take it again.

Mundum viuificasti.
Have given, spiritual, life to the world, for thou art the true bread which
came down from heaven to give life to the world, all the whole world for one
only sin being deprived of life.

Libera me.
Deliver me, (offering this sacrifice) as also all other faithful people for
whom it is offered, that we may be in perfect liberty from all sin.

Per hoc sacrosanctum corpus and sanguinem tuum.
Holy above all holies: holy because it was made in the womb of the most
holy virgin, by that high artificer the holy Ghost: and holy, because it was
united to the holy word.

Ab omnibus iniquitatibus meis.
That is from all my sins, wherewith I have defiled and polluted my soul,
made after the image of the holy Trinity.

Et vniuersis malis.
To wit, either of body or soul, present or future, and to be endured either in
this life, or in the life to come.

Et fac me.
And make me who of my self am not able to do any good deed, nor yet so much
as to think any one good thought, unless I be assisted and enabled by thee.

Tuis semper inherere mandatis.
Always, that is to say, that at no time I transgress thy holy
commandments. Or always, that is, that I obey and fulfill them al least
offending in one, I be made as the Appostle says guilty of all.

Et a te nunquam seperari permittas.
To wit, nether in this world by sin, nether in the world to come, by that
horrible sentence to be pronounced against the reprobate. Depart ye cursed
into everlasting fire.

Qui.
Who, by thy divine essence.

Cum eodem Deo Patre.
Of whom all paternitie both in heaven and earth is denominated.

Et cum Spiritu Sancto.
The knot and bond of charity, both of the Father, and the Son.

Viuis.
For as much as one is the life, divinity, and essence, of the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost.

Et regnas.
Both in heaven and in earth, as absolute Lord over all the inhabitants, both
in the one and in the other.

Deus.
True, natural, and undivided.

In secula seculorum. Amen.
Infalliblie, immutablie, and eternally without all end. Amen.

Perceptio corporis tui.
The receiving of thy body, which verelie and truly lies hid and veyled
under this divine and dreadful Sacrament.

Domine Jesus Christ.
O Lord Jesus Christ. O Lord who have created me, O Jesus who have redeemed me, O
Christ who shall judge me.

Quod ego indignus.
Unworthy for my manifould and sundry sins committed. Unworthy for my
great defect and want of fervor and devotion.

Sumere praesumo.
Not confiding in mine own justice, but in thy great benignity, mercy, and
bounty. Which have promised not to quench smoking, flax nor to break a sunder
a bruised reed.

Non mihi proueniat in iudicium and condemnationem.
Which the Apostle threatens unto all those who approache unworthily to the
same because they discern not our Lords body: to the end that none which are
dead, do presume to take the meat of life.

Sed pro tua pietate.
By the which thorough thy only goodness thou have exalted me to the state of
priesthood: hitherto have patiently borne with my offenses: and mercifully
expected my repentance.

Profit mihi ad tutamentum mentis.
That so it preserve me for time to come, that I never consent in mind to
sin, not any way offend thy gracious presence within my soul.

Et corporis.
That nether by the way of my body, or gates of my senses, I ever admit death
into my soul, nor make the members of my body consecrated unto thee, weapons
of sin to procure the death of soul and body.

Et ad medelam percipiendam. Qui viuis and regnas. etc.
To the receiving of medecin, to wit, of thee, who art the true physician both
of soul and body, and only can cure the diseases, both of the one and the
other.

Panem coelestem accipiam.
Then having adored, he rises up to take the healthsome Host, saying. I will
receive etc. To wit, I a poor pilgrim in this world, will receive the
viaticum and food of this frail life, in the strenght whereof I will walk to
the mount of God. I sick, will receive the celestial bread which fortifieth
and corroborateth the heart of man. I hungry and starued, will receive the
bread, which who so tastes, shall never hunger more. I disqueited and anxious,
will receive the bread which establishes the heart, and calmeth the storms of a
troubled conscience. I feeble and lame, will receive the bread being invited of
that great king, unto the supper whereunto all the feeble and lame were
brought in. I sinful and unclean, will receive the bread which only can make
clean that which was conceived of unclean seed, and of stones can raise up
sons to Abraham.

The celestial bread not made of the grain of the earth, but of the virgins
blood. The celestial bread, which refreshes the Angels with beatitude. The
celestial bread, which descends from above to nourish the hearts of his
poor ones, aspiring and sighinge after the celestial joys. The celestial
bread, which changes the receauer, though a sinner, into a celestial creature
and a Saint.

Et nomen Domini inuocabo.
That is, will inuoke or call the name of our Lord upon my self, and by the
means of this celestial bread, will sup with Christ, that he may show mercy
unto me now inhabiting in heaven, as he did unto them that supped with him on
earth. Or I will call upon the name of our Lord, that he may call me a sinner
unto him, place me amongst the number of his elect, and for ever reconcile me
unto his Father.

What the Priest does before receiving of the host.
This done, the Priest a little inclininge his body, and uniting all his
cogitations as much as is possible, does devoutly recollect him self, and
directs, not only the corporal eyes of his body, to the outward species and
forms of the Sacrament, but much more the inward eyes of his faith to our Lord
Jesus Christ, truly contained under those visible forms: whom with all
reverence, fear, devotion, charity, affection of mind and soul, he is to
receive.

Domine.
The Priest therefore, being ready to receive, and harbor with in his soul,
this sacred Host, first says, Domine, Lord. Which word of it self does
clearlie show, what manner of house it ought to be, and how it ought to be
decked and adorned, wherein so sacred a ghuest ought to be lodged: for a Lord,
ought to have a lordly lodging: and a noble personage, a noble habitation. For,
talis hospis, tale hospitium: such a Lord, such a lodging.

Non sum dignus.
Next considering him self to be a miserable creature, and an earthly vessel
of clay, says, I am not worthy. To wit, of mine own preparation, knowing
that thou have said, that when we have done all that which is commanded us, we
should still confess our selves unprofitable servants. Yea which is more,
although he should burn with Seraphicall charity, yet may he truly say he is
not worthy.

Vt intres sub tectum meum.
Darkened with the obscurity of sins, ruinous for defect of virtues, stirred
to unlawful desires, subject to passions, repleate with illusions, proane to
evil, and procline to vice, finally a wretched child of Adam, utterly
unworthy of the bread of Angels.

Sed tantum dic verbum.
As thou said the word to the sick of the palsy, willing him to take up his
bed and walk, and he incontinently arose and walked. As thou saydst the word
to the woman sick of the issue of blood, who only touched the hemme of thy
garment, and she was immediately healed. As thou said the word to the
faithful Centurion, and his servant was immediately cured.

Corpus Domini nostri Jesus Christi.
The body of our Lord Jesus Christ, offered upon the Altar of the Cross for
the sins of all the world in expiation. The body of our Lord Jesus Christ,
given unto us under this venerable Sacrament for our vivification. The body of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to be received of me for the obtaining of future
glorification.

Custodiat animam meam.
Preserve and keep my soul, to wit from relapse into sin, least, I become
contumelious against my Savior Christ. Keep my soul, to wit, by
corrobarating, fostering, and fortifying me daily more and more in the
spiritual life. Keep my soul, to wit, at the dreadful hour of my
departure, forth of the claws and jaws, of the fierce, devouring, and
infernal Lions.

In vitam aeternam.
That as the bread ministered by the Angel to the prophet Helias so fortified
him, that in the force thereof he walked up to the mountain of God, Horeb. And
as the bread which descended from heaven, brought the people of Israel
thorough the desert into the land of promise: even so o gracious Lord I humbly
beseech thee, that this heavenly bread may be my true viaticum, to lead me
thorough the desert of this world, to that blessed and supernall country,
promised to all that faithfully serve thee. Amen.

Of the priests receiving of the Chalice.
As before the receiving of the body of our Lord, the priest (to acknowledge
his own insufficiency) prepared him self thereunto by prayer and humility:
even so proceeding to the receiving of the blood of our Lord, he does again by
prayer and humiliation of him self, acknowledge his own indignity, saying.

Quid retribuam Domino.
What shall I (dust and ashes; handie work and workmanship of my Creator;
frail, unworthy, and vile man; the lowest and least of all his servants
render unto our Lord; who if I have but one good thought, (where with to render
thanks unto him) the self same thought is sent of him, the self same thought
proceeds from him.

Pro omnibus.
For all things, whose number and immensitie, does far exceed all humane
sense and understanding. For as Hugo says, if thou should look into the
whole world, thou shall find no kind of thing which does not live to do
thee service.

Quae retribuit mihi.
Not only to all in general, but to me in ticular to, me I say his creature,
his gift of mighty and marvelous Creation; his gift of careful and Fatherly
conservation: his gift of gentle and patient expectation: his gift of
celestial and divine inspiration: his gift of all gifts, his precious body
and blood for my refection. Never am I able o my Lord, to come out of this
dett, albeit I had as many liliues to spend for thy sake, as I have several
drops of blood within my body.

Calicem salutaris accipiam.
Accipiam. I will take, being dry and thirsty for lack of the humor of
heavenly grace. I will take, being parcht and withered for want of the dew of
divine benediction. I will take, being dead and unfruitful for lack of the
fruits of good life. I will take, which am a stranger and pilgrim in this
world, and have as yet a long and laboursome journey, to my celestial
habitation.

Calicem. The Chalice, that is the blood of Jesus Christ in the Chalice, the
blood which in his last supper he gave to his disciples. The blood, which
Longinus pearcing his side, ran forth abundantly out of his glorious breast.
The blood, which in his glorious resurrection (to conserve the integrity of
his nature) the most miraculouslie reassumed. The blood which he commanded us
to take in memory of his passion, saying. Drink ye all of this, so often as
you do this, do it in remembrance.

Salutaris. Of salvation. So called, because it contains in it Christ, the
author of our salvation. Or of salvation, as greatly wishing and desiring our
salvation, which none may say so truly as our Savior Christ, because never
any so greatly desiered and seriously sought the same as he. Or of salvation,
by reason of the effects, because it effected out salvation, when shed on the
Cross, it reconciled us to God.

Et nomen Domini inuocabo.
To the end that sacred blood may come upon me to my benediction, which the
wicked and perfidious Jews asked to come upon them, to their destruction and
damnation, saying. Sanguis eius super nos, and super filios nostros. His blood
be upon us, and upon our children.

Laudans inuocabo Dominum.
Praising him for the exhibition of so great a benefit, who did not only shed
the same his precious blood for us, but also gave the same in drink unto us.
And who but most ungrateful will not land our Lord for such a benefit?

Et ab inimicis meis saluus ero.
For this most precious blood of Jesus Christ, has many most singular effects
and operations. It gives grace, it gives glory, it takes away our sin, it
fortifieth our frailty, it calls Angels to us, and drives the devils from
us, and as Lions, breathing forth fire, so depart we from this table, being
made terrible unto them.

Sanguis Domini nostri Jesus Christi.
The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is the fountain and lauer of our
emundation and sanctification. The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is the
price of our redemption and reparation. The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which is to the worthy receauer the chalice of all benediction.

Custodiat animam meam.
Keep my soul in innocence of life and purity of heart, least with Judas I
cry, Peccaui tradens sanguinem iustum. I have sinned betraying the innocent
blood. Keep my soul, from that smitinge and plague of our Lord, which smote
all the first borne of Egypt, whose posts of their houses were not sprinkeled
with the blood of the lamb. Keep my soul in spiritual force and vigor, that
in virtue of this blood, I may undertake to fight against devils and infernal
furies, like as the elepha^t is encouraged to fight at the sight of blood.

In vitam aeternam.
According to the promise of our Savior him self, saying. He that eats my
flesh and drinks my blood, has life everlasting, and I will raise him up at
the latter day, to wit, from a temporal death, to a perdurable, everlasting,
and eternal life.

Of the priests giving the holy Sacrament to the assistants, when any be to
communicate.
This done, the priest (as Innocentius says) communicates to the people,
insinuating, that Christ after his resurrection, did eat with his Disciples,
as S. Luck testifies, saying Jesus took bread and brake, and reached unto
them.

And here let the Christian receauer understand that so much difference as
there is betwixt heaven and earth, betwixt the Creator, and the creature, so
much, difference is there betwixt this sacred viand, and al others which ever
at any time God gave to man. For in this divine Sacrament, there is to drink,
there is to eat: there is wine, and there is milk: there is bread, and there
is water. Drink for those that are dry: meat for those that are hungry:
wine for great ones: and milk for little ones: bread to fortify, and water to
refresh. Finally, in this divine Sacrament our Lord does nourish us with him
self, with his own, true, and proper substance, as well divine, as humane.
What could he do more for us? What banquet, what feast, could he provide more
exquisite or more noble for us?

Quod ore sumpsimus Domine.
Where first let it be noted, that the Priest speaks in the plural number,
saying. Which we have received, etc. signifying hereby, that he did not
consecrate this Sacrament only for him self, but for the whole mystical
body of Christ whereof he is a part, and as it were, the mouth of this body.

Pura mente capiamus.
Free from all spot and pollution of sin from all spiritual drowsines and
tepiditie, with full faith, love, and fervent devotion, to the strenghtning of
the soul, and to the spiritual sustentation of all good actions.

Et de munere temporali.
To wit, as touching the visible forms, which of thy gentle gift, and
bountiful liberallitie, we have received.

Fiat nobis remedium sempiternum.
To wit, against all diseases both of soul and body, that in our last end,
fortified with this viaticum, we may be brought to the true beatifying and
sempiternal security, both of the one and the other.

Corpus tuum Domine quod sumpsi.
Under the species of bread, thy true body, thy natural body, the same which
was borne of the virgin Marie, laid in the manger, adoted of the Sages, borne
into Egypt, apprehended, whipped, crowned, and crucified of the Jews.

Et sanguis quem potaui.
Which I have drunk under the species of wine, thy very true and proper blood,
the same blood which thou did shed being circumcised, the same which thou
did swear in the garden, the same which thou did shed being scourged, the
same which ran out of thy hands and feet being nailed, the same which gushed
out of thy most holy side being peirced.

Adhereat visceribus meis.
The bowels of our soul, are her powers, such are our understanding, our will
etc. And here we pray that, to these powers of our soul, this precious food
may so adhere, that it do not presently pass thorough our minds, like as
some liquid corporal meats pass thorough the stomach, leaving behind them no
succor nor nourishment, but so to cleave, to our bowels, that it make its
aboade and stay in our souls.

Et praesta vt in me non remaneat scelerum macula.
By this spot of wickedness, may be understood the guilt of venial sin or
temporal pain remaining in the soul, from the which he prays to be
released, for that existing and remaining in the soul, it cannot be admitted
to the joys of the blessed, although it be adorned with grace and charity.

Quem tam pura and sancta.
Pure, by reason that it purifieth the mind, from all impure cogitations. And
holy, because it is sanctification in it self, and also sanctifies the
receauer, replenishing him with all abundance of grace and sanctification.

Refecerunt sacramenta. Qui viuis etc.
For this holy Sacrament, refreshes the bowels of the soul of the worthy
receauer: it refreshes the understanding by the illumination of knowledge: it
refreshes the will, by inflammation of love: and it refreshes the memory, by
excitinge it to the rememoration of the passion; and by leaving a certain
spiritual joy and sweetness in the whole man.

Of the washinge of the ends of the priests fingars after receiving. The 1.
Reason.
After the receiving of the holy Eucharist, the priest washes the ends or
tippes of his fingars: for it were most unworthy, that the hands which have
handled that incorruptible body, should touch a corruptible body, before they
were first dilligentlie washed and cleansed.

The 2. Reason.
The triple washing of the priests hands, the first before he begin Mass,
the second after the Offertorie, and the third now after Communion, or as
Innoce^tius says, in the beginning, in the midest, and in the ending, does
insinuate the clensing of thoughts, of words and of works. Or the purging, of
original, mortal, and venial sin. And this last ablution, may properly be
referred to the ablution of Baptism, the form whereof Christ instituted after
his resurrection, saying. Going therforce teach ye all nations, baptisinge
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, he
that believes, and is baptized, shall be Saved. Marc. 16.16.

Of the return of the priest to the right hand of the Altar.
Let us now come to the last point, which is of the return of the priest, to
the right end of the Altar, after the Communion. This is not done for
superstition, as if the prayer were better at one end, then at the other, as
scoffing heretics do calumniate, but to signify some special mystery
comprehended in the holy Scripture, to wit, the final conversion of the
Jews. This Hugo de sancto Victore, avouches most clearelie saying. His
completis etc. These things accomplished, the priest returns to the right
end of the Altar: signifying, that in the end of the world, Christ shall
return to the Jews, whom now he has rejected, until the fulness of the
Gentiles be entered in, For then the remaynder of Israel, according to the
Scriptures, shall be saved. This he. li. de special. mis. obser. cap 4.

Of the Anthem or Post- Communion. The 1. Reason.
It is more then manifest, that the custom and use of reciting a hymn, or
Canticle in the end of the Mass, is come unto us, from Christ him self, and
his Apostles, for after our Lord had communicated his body and blood to his
Apostles, the Scripture presently adds. Et hymno dicto, exierunt in montem
Oliueti. And an hymn being said, they went forth unto mount Oliuet. This is
most evidently to be seen in the Liturgy of S. James, wherein you shall find
these four psalms following, to have been song in this part of the Mass.
Dominus regit me. Benedicam Domino in omni tempore. Exaltabo te Deus meus rex.
And Laudate Dominum omnes gentes.

The 2. Reason.
These Psalms, Canticles, and Hymns aforesaid, were so^ge in the primitive
Church during the time of the holy Communion, in which time the Christians did
communicate very often, yea every day, as diverse histories do testify: for
which cause the number of Communicants being very great, the Church retained
these long Anthiemes, very agreeable to the seruent devotion of that time. But
since the Christians ceasing to communicate every day, and the number of
communicants much decreasing, so long Canticles were not thought expedient,
and therefore in place thereof are said these short Anthiemes after the
Communion. Which is the reason and cause, that most now at this day, do call
them by the name of the post-Communion.

The 3. Reason.
Misticallie, according to Innocentius, the Anthiem which is recited after the
Communion, does signify the joy of the Apostles for Christ's resurrection.
According as it is written saying. The Disciples therefore were glad when they
saw our Lord. And therefore, in high Mass, the same is sounge reciprocallie,
to insinuate that the Disciples did mutuallie recite one to another the joy of
the Resurrection As S. Luc. testifies, that the two Disciples to whom our Lord
appeared in the way to Emaus, went back into Jerusalem, and they found the
eleven gathered together, and those that were with them, saying. That our Lord
is risen indeed, and has appeared to Simon. Luc. 24.34.

Dominus vobiscum.
According to some these several salutations of the priest to the people, do
represent unto us, the several apparitions of our Savior to his Disciples. Or
the promise of our Lord made unto them, touching the sending of the holy Ghost.

Et cum spiritu tuo.
The property of Christian charity is, that every one should be careful,
not only for him self but also for his neighbor. For this cause the
asistants answer the Priest, in recognissance of that which he has done for
them by his prayers, that God may be with his spirit, to guide him by the
inspiration of his divine grace whersoeuer need is, for the execution of this
his sacred function.

Of the last Collects. The 1. Reason.
These prayers are made after Communion in the end of the Mass, to give us to
understand, that subsequent prayer is as necessary for us as precedent:
because we are admonished always to pray without intermission. Luc. 18.

The 2. Reason.
Of these Collects, or thanksgiuinges we are admonished in sundry places of
the holy scripture to do the same, as Colos. 3. saying. All what soever you
do in word or in work, all things in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
giving thanks to God and the Father thorough him. Besides it is most conform
to reason it self, that receiving so great a benefit from God, we should
render due and convenient thanks unto him for the same. And what greater
benefit could we possibly receive at his hands, then the most precious body
and blood of our Savior Jesus, for the health and nourishment of our souls
and bodies.

The 3. Reason.
Mystically the Collects signify, how the Apostles and Disciples, after the
Ascension of our Lord, perseuered in prayer. As also the prayers of Jesus
Christ our head, who makes daily intercession unto his Father for us.

Dominus vobiscum.
The Collects being ended the priest saluteth the people the second time,
saying. Our Lord be with you. As if he should say. The time to let you depart
is now at hand: but albeit you depart from the temple of our Lord, yet depart
not away from our Lord, but so lead your lives that his holy grace never
depart away from your souls, And the people make answer saying.

Et cum spiritu tuo.
And with thy spirit, praying, that in all ways wherein the Priest wishest our
Lord to be with them, in the same sort our Lord may also ever be and abide
with him.

Of Ite Missa est.
This was ordained to be said, to let the people know that the Mass was
ended, and so to give them leave to go away: because they are, not to depart
till Mass be ended, and until they have received the priests benediction.

The word Missa is in this place diversely expounded by our learned Doctors.
Some consider it adiectiuelie, and understand for the Substantive, Hostia, aut
oblatio, and so they interpret it thus, Ite Missa est, scilicet, Hostia aut
oblatio. Go or depart, the Host, or oblation is sent for you, that is to say,
is presented or offered to God in your behalfes.

Others consider it substantiuelie, sometimes referring it to the mystery which
has been celebrated: and sometimes to the people who have asisted at the same.
When it is referred to the mystery, the sense is. Ite Missa est dicta aut
peracta. Depart ye, Mass is said or ended: which exposition in the opinion of
many is the most proper: and most familiar. If one would refer it to the
people, Missa, imports as much as Missio, and missio, as much as dimissio,
that is to say, to let depart, to dismiss, or send away the people, and so the
sense according to this interpretation is. Go your ways, license or
permission is given you depart. For as by this word Missa, Mass, they
understand commonly and properly, the great and divine mystery of all
Christians: so when it is said unto them Ite Missa est, they understand
presently that Mass is ended, and that leave is granted them to with draw
them selves.

Innocentius the third says, that this Sacrifice, that is the holy Host, is
called M^ssa, quasi transmissa, as sent betwixt. First from the Father to us,
that it may be with us. And then to the Father from us, that it may intercede
with the Father for us. By the Father to us by his Incarnation: from us to the
Father, by his passion. In the Sacrament by the Father to us by sanctification:
and by us again to the Father by oblation.

Of the last benediction.
This done, the Priest kisseth the Altar, and then with his hands elevated,
gives the last benediction unto the people: signifying that last benediction,
which Christ, Ascending, gave unto his Disciples: for as S. Luke says. He
brought them forth abroad into Bethanie, and lifting up his hands he blessed
them. And it came to pass, whiles he blessed them, he departed from them, and
was carried into heaven. And for this cause (in a high, or solemn Mass)
after the last salutation which the priest makes unto the people, the Deacon,
with a high voice, pronounces Ite Missa est, depart, it is sent, or,
ascended, for you. And the people presently with gratulation, do answer
saying, Deo gratias, giving thanks to God, and imitating herein the Apostles
of our Lord, who as the same S. Luke says, adoring, went back into Jerusalem
with great joy, and they were always in the temple praising and blessing God.

It may likewise signify the mission of the Holy Ghost, which our Lord sent
down from heaven upon his Apostles; accordingly as he had promised them,
saying. You shall receive the virtue of the Holy Ghost coming upon you.

S. Aug. makes mention of this benediction, and houldeth, that the priest by
the same offers the people unto God, and leaves them to him in protection.
In the ecclesiastical history of Ruffinus is recited that it was made with
the hand, and he further says that him self was blessed in this manner by
the Heremites of Egypt.

Finally, Ite Missa est, is said, upon solemn and festival days, and that
in sign of spiritual joy and iubilation.

Benedicamus Domino, upon the week days, and days of fast, in the which the
songs of joy do cease in the Church; and is to admonish us, that we ought to
begin all our actions in him, and to finish them thorough him.

The office ordained for those which are dead in the faith of Jesus Christ,
ends by this prayer Requiescant in pace, to obtain unto them rest and repose.

To the two first, the asistants answer Deo gratias. In thansgiuing for the
accomplishment of the holy mysteries of the Mass, to the end that they may
not be blamed of ingratitude, as were the nine Lepers mentioned in S. Luke, who
returned not thanks, nor magnified Jesus Christ for the recovery of their
health, and healing.

To the prayer made by the priest for the remedy of the souls departed,
Answer is made Amen; which is as much to say. Be it so as has been requested,
and our Lord vouchsafe to give them everlasting repose (as he has promised
them) in Abraham's bosom.

Of the Gospel of S. John.
This gospel all Christian people have evermore held in wonderful reverence;
for it has been accustomed to be read unto them, not only in the end of the
Mass, but also after the sick has received the B. Sacrament, and the Extreme
unction, when children are Baptized, and when women are churched: the which
gospel, the very Panims them selves have much admired, for as S. Aug.
testifies, a certain philosopher, and Platonic, haueing read the same, was
in so great admiration thereof, that he said it was worthy to be written in
letters of gould, and to be placed by Christians in all their Churches in the
most eminent places.

Finally, the praises of this gospel can never be sufficiently expressed,
and especially where it is said. Et verbum caro factum est and habitauit in
nobis. For reverence whereof as we daily see, the priest falls down on his
knees, at the pronunciation of the said words. I will briefly recite certain
examples concerning the efficacy of the same; In Aquitania there were two
posessed of the devil, both beggars; and the one perceauing that more was given
to his fellow then to him, he said in secret to a priest. If thou will do what
I shall tell thee, to wit, that thou will read in my fellows ear, the
gospel, In principio erat verbum, but yet so as I hear not the same, know for
certain the devil shall be driven out of him. But the priest understanding the
craft of the devil, pronounced the said gospel out a loud. And when he said.
Et verbum caro factum est etc. presently the evil spirits flew from them, and
both were disposessed and delivered of the devil.

It is also declared, that the devil him self said unto a certain holy man,
that there was a certain word of the gospel, very dreadful to the devils.
Who asking what that word was, the devil would not tell. When the holy man had
recited diverse authorities, the devil answered to every one, that it was not
that. At the last being asked if it were that, Verbum caro factum est. He
answered not, but with fearful cryinge forthwith vanished.

For conclusion (gentle Reader) I will close up this discourse with the words
of a godly writer, and not with mine own, saying. Let no man suppose, having
heard this exposition, that this Sacrifice is sufficiently explicated, lest
perhaps in extollinge the work of man, he do extenuate so divine a Sacrament.
For in this divine office there are so many mysteries inuolued, that no man,
unless diuinelie inspired, is able or sufficient to explicate the same. I
therefore herein, have done diligently what I could, not sufficiently what I
would. The only recompense which for this labor I look for from men is, that
they would vouchasafe before the merciful judge, (who best knows with what
intention of heart I wrote this treatise) to shed forth their devout prayers
unto him for my sins. Beseeching, him, that if it profit not many, yet it may
profit some, or at the least me alone, though never so little. Make this
petition for me, and I am paid for my pains.

FINIS.
THE ERRATA.
page 15. Faancis, read Francis.

page 17. perfome, read perform.

page 19. consider, read to consider.

page 29. represent, read represents.

page 52. coming, read coming from.

page 71. and in the new law, read and on the Altar.

page 80. Confiteor, read Confitebor

page 102. not a cold prayer, which, read, not a cold prayer, but a prayer
which.

page 114. is to signify, read it is to signify.

page 169. bitter, read better.

page 250. refer these five, read refer four of these five.

page 310. was sufficient, read was not sufficient.

page 333. that says, read says that.


