THE PARAGON OF PERSIA; OR THE LAWYERS LOOKING-GLASS.

Opened in a Sermon at S. MARY'S in Oxford, at the Assizes, the 7 day of July,
1624.

By WILLIAM HAYES, Master of Arts of Magdalen Hall.

Terent. Adolph. Act 3. Scen. 4. Inspicere, tanquam in speculum, in vitas omnium
Iubeo, atque ex alijs sumere exemplum tibi.
Make others practice as a Glass, to show,
What thou must do, and what thou must eschew.
AT OXFORD, Printed by John Lichfield, and James Short. Anno Dom. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Sir RICHARD GIFFORD Knight, the much honored Patron
of my studies, together with the religious Lady his wife, all grace and
happiness, etc.
Right worshipful,
THis was once the Preface to David's thanksgiving, What shall I render? and
in a borrowed sense it may be mine Quid retribuam? Could I imitate his
resolution, I should not give that which cost me nothing, 2 Samuel 24 (for so I
value my best endeauours, when they are counter-poysed with your merits.) I
know my dependence and engagements, and find my self guilty of too weak
performance: yet such as I have, my piety makes it Gods, and my duty, yours.
And I wish the worth of this, which I present unto your hands, could as easily
satisfy your deserts, as the sight of it will many men's requests. Then might
the same favor, which has sustained the Author, have greater encouragement to
protect the works: Then might I hazard it among these severe eyes, which daily
scanne our shops and staules: whereas now the number of my Copies shall not
exceed the number of my friends. Yet in this fewness, I congratulate my own
providence, that I leave my self liberty to choose my readers; which (as nigh
as I can) shall be only such, as either will respect this Task for my sake,
or me for my own, or both it and me for yours. The very name in my Dedication,
does promise me to be speak some in David's compassionate language for Absalom,
Deal gently for my sake with the young man. If so, let their love enjoy the
use, and not grudge your deserts, the patronage. Thus while you encourage me
with your Countenance, and they with their acceptance, I shall praise God for
his mercies, and solace my self in your favors. So resting in hope of this
happiness, I attend you with my prayers, which shall be incessant both for you
and yours from

Your Worships in all duty and service unfeignedly devoted WILLIAM HAYES.
(...) Oxford this 20 of July, 1624.
ESTER 1.15. Part of the verse. What shall we do unto the Queen Vasthi
according to Law? etc.
THis Text may persuade you, I am making toward Persia, to see the King
banqueting with his Peers. A sight as well worth your notice as my pains. Let
your thoughts but accompany me, I will undertake to show you Ahasuerus, whom
Joseph. Antiq. Iudaic. lib. 11. cap. 4 1. Esd. c. 3.
Josephus and others call Darius Hystaspis, sitting in his royal palace; where
(that Persicus apparatus) his stately complements in entertaining his subjects,
proved him not more a Prince then a Persian. Such was wont to be the port of
that nation, that they would surpass other Countries as well in magnificence
as dominion. Insomuch that one (...). In hist. a Photi^ excerptis.
Ctesias and Dion deliver in their histories; that the King had at meals 15
thousand a day in his Palace. Now to make up the solemnity of those meetings,
Ahasuerus invites the Queen his wife, that her comely presence might add
glory to his Festiuals. But we find in the Text, she refused to come at the
Kings command. Serarius the Jesuit (an enemy to Kings prerogatives by his
profession) has the face to approve her disloyal action; and taxes our
Brentius for disliking her palpable disobedience. But he whose sovereignty
might have made his word a law proceeds against her, not after his private
humor, but according to law. To which purpose he appeals to his Judges (fit
oracles for a King in execution of justice) and referres himself to their
advise.

What shall we do unto the Queen Vasthi according to law?

Wherein is set before us, 1 An offender to be adjudged; The Queen Vasthi. 2
Deliberation before judgment; What shall we do? 3 The level and rule of
judgment; The Law. What shall we do unto the Queen Vasthi according to law?
Begin (I pray)
with the party to be sentenced, the Queen Vasthi. Quaeres about this woman
could make me out-runne your attention as far as some in this point do their
reason. But I omit scruples concerning her person, and content my self with
the evidence of her condition. The Text is manifest she was the Queen.

Could any thing privilege disloyalty toward Kings, eminence and alliance
might be fair pretenses: but neither of these could yield her advantage. The
reason is pressed by one of the Judges in the 3 next ensuing verses. In effect it
is this. The offense of the Queen an eminent person, would become exemplary,
therefore must be censured with the greater severity. Such is the servile
baseness of our disposition, that sin it self shall not want imitation. Nay
August. de pec. meritis. cap. 1.2.3.
St Austin tells us, it was once the opinion of the Pelagians, That only
imitation is the cause of original sin. That Father did not, and I dare not,
yield to them for original; but I may safely for actual: especially for those
offenses, which gain countenance by a great ones practice. Nay, it is sometimes
in fashion, to take the resemblance and pattern of a natural imperfection.
Tull. de oratore lib. 2.
Imitari etiam vitia voluit: Let Caius Fimbria but speak clownish, it is hard
but some Fusius will take up his language. Plutarch. moral.
Aristotle's authority, and Plato's estimation, can make sects of crump-backes
and stammering tongues. It Is the unhappy privilege of greatness, to warrant
both their own and Natures errors. Hence it is, that so many unadvised idiots
borrow their just ruins, taking up crimes on trust, that they may perish upon
credit: for such are not swayed by reason so much, as by opinion. Let an
admired Pharisee but say, CHRIST ought to dye; the vulgar dare blaspheme
themselves to hell for his company, Acts 7.51.
As your fathers did (said Steven in the Acts) so do ye: you sin by
prescription, and have authority for your damnation, Habet aliquid ex iniquo
omne magnum exemplum, etc. As Cassius has it in Tacitus. The example of great
ones, does wrong to all sorts. It teaches the good to be evil, and the evil
to be worse: for the luster of their eminence adornes the deformity of their
offenses; and cheates the world with the fair garb of their persons;
especially being beheld by such partial eyes, as cannot discern the truth of
things from their appearance. When a pesant meets luxury in Socrates gown,
he dares to be such, having so fair a cloak for his sin. Ask but Tert. Apol.
Tertullian or Aug. lib. 2. de ciuit Dei. cap 7.
Austin, their censure on the gods of the Heathen; they will tell you that no men
were more incestuous, then they that were taught by their Jupiters practice.
Ter. E^.
And that wretch in the Comedian, would take leave to sin under his
protection. What? Jupiter memorable for fornication, and I so chaste, being but
a silly man? Ego homuncio non facerem? Thus every slip is a crime in a Leader,
since it does become a rule of error. If a mean one offend, his sin is
neglected as much as his person: but the supposed wisdom, gravity, and
justice of superiors, win credit to their vilest actions. Well then might
judge Mines in Lucian. dial. mort.
Lucian, acquit Sostratus on this condition, (...), See thou teach not thy
offense unto others. Cyp. epist. 2.
Scelus enim non tantum geritur, sed and docetur, says Cypr. for such as these
do not so much act, as teach offenses. Therefore it is presumed, that the
torments of such increase in hell, as the living increase in sin through their
example. No marvel then that they are so afflicted in St John's vision; Who
are so forward there, as the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the
chief captains; and the mighty men, to hide themselves in the deus, and in
the rocks of the mountains? Rev. 6.15. They that once made the earth tremble
with their power, do now tremble like the earth under the hand of the God of
power. They that once did teach to offend by their examples, are now taught
what it is to be precedents of offenses. If God deal thus on his heavenly
Tribunal, no reason his Deputies on earth should be partial. If he spare them
least, whose offenses are exemplary, then what shall be done unto the Queen
Vasthi? Again, it is the custom of greatness, to challenge impunitie, by
reason of their eminence; so that in time they will outface authority; then in
this respect what shall be done unto the Queen Vasthi?

The stamp of sovereignty is sacred; therefore quickly defaced by a rebellious
hand. Touch not mine anointed, preuailes nothing with a seditious mind;
especially where the hand is as well armed with power, as the heart with
disobedience. None but such as are able to make head, dare demand, Who is
David? It Is conceit of equality that encourages great ones, to a contestatio^
with magistrates. They dare imitate Socrates, Tul. 1. de orat.
Qui Dominus videbatur esse Iudicum, whose proud innocence disdained the
Judges, and made his unmannerly zeal, laugh Justice in the face. Should one
ask herein the Athenians advise, they would prescribe an Ostracisme,
banishment at least for such daring offenders. As Cato persuaded the Senate in
Rome, that Carthage was an enemy too powerful to be so nigh them. Then the
security of the State must be purchased with the ruin of Carthage.

Laws had never resembled cob-webs, had there not bin such strong offenders.
The feeble gnats yield to the least resistance, whereas violent fowls will not
be restrained by such contemptible engines. It Is easy to vanquish an unarmed
slave, and to insult on the weakness of a manicled captive: but to subdue those
that like him in the Gospel, neither fear God, nor care for men, requires both
power and resolution. Or howsoever these high transgressors may escape man's
judgment, or 1 Cor. 4.3
(...) Man's day, (as Paul calls it) yet the Lord of hosts has a day, if they will
believe Esaias, which shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and upon
every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low, And upon all the
Cedars of Lebanon, that are high, and lifted up, and upon all the oaks of
Bashan. 2 of Esaias. They shall then confess with vanquished Julian, (...). Thou
have overcome, O Galiaean. This out-brauing wretch (as Theod. Ecclef. hist.
lib. 3 cap. 20.
it is in Theodorit) that but now did swell with vaunting threats, lay groueling
on the unwelcome ground, when he apprehended the terrors of God. Such acts of
divine Justice, prescribe courage to temporal magistrates, and bid them not
fear the most puissant offenders. This also we learn of humane policy: Then
what shall be done unto the Queen Vasthi?

Now to make way for resolution, may it please you to examine, how her
condition does agree to this our occasion. Our Land does afford many Vasthi's,
eminent offenders; the authority of whose persons, draws others to second them
in their crimes. It is pesterd also with powerful offenders, whose daring
greatness does promise them immunity from punishments. But the merciful justice
of our gracious Sovereign, does with Ahasuerus, depend on his Assessors, for
the censuring of these enormities. I could carry back your memories but a few
scores of years, and there show you a King of this land, relying on the Judges
determination, What should be done unto the Queen? There are more which admire
his impartiality, then approve his fact. But our present happiness, bids me
confine my speech to our own times, and apply to your consciences a noble
president for your happy proceedings. That sincere Court, whereof your Honors
were lately members, durst adventure on the States most potent enemies. They
had, I presume, both your approbation and assistance. Wherefore, ride on, ye men
of renown, and prosper; good luck have you with your honor. You may in your
circuit meet with such, whose power does arm their crimes, and makes them
sin authority in the face. Therefore let me bespeak you, as the Prophet did
that God whose dispensation does term you Gods: you ask, What shall we do?
I answer in his words, Psalm. 83.
Do unto them as was done to the Midianites, unto Sisera, and unto Iabin at
the brook of Kison, which perished at Endor, and became as the dung of the
earth. Let an impartial doom pursue their transgressions, and let their due
shame attend them to their graves. Non tam ut ipsi pereant, quam ut alios
pereundo deterreant. Senec.
Seneca shall give you the reason: Not so much that they may perish, but to
terrify others by their perishing. 2 Samuel 24 17.
I have sinned (says David) I have done wickedly, but these sheep, what have
they done? His conscience thought the punishment preposterous, that his people
should be led as sheep to the slaughter, and yet he escape his deserved
censure. And among us how many silly sheep sacrifice their cheap lives to
appease the law for their offenses? whereas eminent transgressors, that sin
with an high hand, make shift to fly above the reach of Justice. I fear,
sometimes they borrow wings of that Dove in the Psalms, which is covered with
silver wings, and her feathers of gold, Psalm. 68. It Is they that sin, they that
do wickedly, and in comparison of them, these sheep, what have they done? The
punishment of these impotent wretches, does not argue the Judges valor, but
the laws justice. The edge of authority will be thought but dull and grown
rusty, except it wound others, beside them that cannot make resistance. It Is
mercy to let those no longer live, in whom imprisonment has left scarce life
enough to dye. So that did we not perceive in them speech, whereby the
Philosopher distinguished men from beasts, we should scarce distinguish these
from carcases. There they stand arraigned, not more the prisoners of the King,
then of death. Some of them have lived long enough to see their lasting
calamities out-liue their friends and fortunes: insomuch, that their aged eyes
can do them no other service, but see themselves miserable, and weep for their
distress. That our Laws do vanquish these halfe-dead vassals, proves them (I
confess) impartial, yet nothing powerful. Consent of time.
Cambyses would show, what his tyranny could invent, and what his hand durst
execute, by shooting a great man's Son to the heart. Then does appear the
force of our Laws, and the courage of our Magistrates, when Phoneas-like, they
thrust the sword of Justice through the noblest transgressors: He was only to
sacrifice for the sin of the people; yet he durst sacrifice Zimri and Cosbi.
Number. 25.
two Princes of the people for their daring sin. A fact that deserved not
more thanks from the Jews for its benefit, then it does from us for its
example.

But by persuading impartiality to great, ones, I intend not to procure
impunity for inferiors; No, Quisque exercetur paenis, veterumque malorum
Supplicia expendat -- Aen. 6.
Quisque excercetur paenis, etc. We have a good rule from Ezekiels Prophecy,
The same soul that sins, shall dye, Ezekiel. 18. If the same, then the mean
as well as the mighty: for though they are not so hurtful, yet they are as
guilty. And yet they are hurtful enough too: for what they want in power, they
make up in number. A Varro auctor est, a cuniculis suffossum in Hispania
oppidum etc Hist lib. 8. cap. 29. pli.
Town in Spain may as well be undermined with Conies, and another in Thessalie
by Moles, as by the strongest pioners. United force in contemptible accomplices,
may be answerable to more powerful machinations. Therefore let Justice have her
due course on both sides: and let the Emblem make her hood-winkt, but not
blind. Let her see offenses only, and punish them; but not offenders, lest her
con^ivence spare them. She had (I confess) well tutored the T. Liu. dec. 1.
lib. 2.
Consul Brutus, when she taught him to play the executioner, and put off a
father. So that when punishment was inflicted on his children, before his eyes,
he rould see the malefactors, but not his sons. (...). Arist. Rhetor. 2.
And passionlesse Amasis could endure the Lictors to shed his childs blood,
without shedding of his own tears. Then is Justice her self, when she can
ouer-looke Nature, and all respects whatsoever. Then will she take heed lest
she misplace her mercy, and so make it degenerate into cruelty; for though
there be no mercy in cruelty, yet there is a cruelty in some kind of mercy.
Est quaedam crudelis misericordia, says the proverb, and the mercies of the
wicked are cruel, Proverb. 12.10.
says the Holy Ghost. Now if Justice spare great ones for their might, and
mean ones for their misery, Haec est crudelis misericordia, this is a cruel
mercy. Cruel to the State, in causing Laws, (which Demosthenes calls, the
soul of a state) to be but dead letters. Cruel again to the Laws, in making
them stales for men's sinister purposes. Then let the sword be brandisht on all
sides, and strike alike all ranks and conditions. And though charity to the
State, allows me not to entreat for their lives; yet David's charity to their
persons, bids me petition for their souls; Lord, let the sorrowful sighing of
the prisoners come before thee, according to the greatness of thy power
preserve thou those that are appointed to dye, Psalm. 79. And so from the person
to be adjudged, I pass to deliberation before Judgment, What shall we do?

In doubtful actions, Aquinas 1a 2ae, makes deliberation the first act of our
reason, and will have Judgment come between that and election. So noble is the
souls natural progress, that she resolves on nothing, hand over head, but
upon mature advise. And it is well that a King, a god on earth, can remember, he
has so much of man about him, as that he needs this consultation: for he
that contemns all advise, is below a beast, he that wants none, is above a
man. It were to be wished, that all good Princes might enjoy Saul's prerogative
to ouer-top the people by the head as well as out-reach them Longae Regum
manus. Adag.
with the hand: or all might with Solomon, have hearts as large as their
dominions. But they must content themselves with that abridgement in Euripides,
(...). Eurip.
One man cannot see all; and with that other in Tacitus, Nec unius men's tantae
molis est capax. Tacit.
One man cannot bear all; Answerable to that of Iethro unto Moses, This thing
is too heavy for thee, thou art not able to perform it thy self alone, Exodus
18. The head might quickly draw the members to inconveniences, were not for
intelligence from the eyes and ears. Therefore the King, the head of Israel
sometimes, must enquire where the Seer dwells: And who is fitter to be the Seer
of Israel, then Samuel that judges Israel? His discerning thoughts must both
see the peoples duties, and foresee the Princes dangers: Wherefore both Prince
and people repair to him as to an Oracle; with (Quid agendum) What shall we
do? Happy State of ours, where the coactiue power, thus submits it self to
the guidance of the directive! and thrice happy Sovereign which can hear his
power flatter him, that he may do what he will, yet so yields to convenience,
that he will not do what he may. Hence it is that he scarce attempts any
thing, but as 'twere with this Motto, Quid agendum? What shall we do? Men in
their Panegyrickes may style him a Solomon, a mirror of wisdom: of late
especially he has made it good; and never gained a greater opinion of
wisdom, then when he least relied upon his wisdom. In high matters of
deepest consequence, it is his usual Parliament-phrase, I crave your advise.
Such was the mild method of glorious Constantine, when he allayed the iarres
of disturbed Christendom, (...). Socrat. eccles hist. l. 1. cap. 5.
He cried not out, This I will have done, but meekely entertained the whole
Councels resolution. Blessed time when a man's tongue may be as free as his
opinion; and when he may with Tacitus, Rara temporum faelicitate, ubi sentire
quae veli^ and quae sentias dicere licet. Tacit. procem. hist.
not only think what he will, but also speak what he thinks. Let the like
happiness of ours be a joyful memorial for ensuing ages and let vn-borne
posterity have cause to triumph in the matter of our glory.

But I leave this consultation in business of State, and pass to deliberation
before judgment, Quid agendum? What shall we do? (...). Arist. 3. Eth.
Things of small importance, may for a while possess our fancies, but seldom
take up our serious thoughts. We ca^ here quickly resolve, This we will do,
whereas weighty affairs deserve pawses and demurs; What shall we do? You are
now (beloved) in Ahasuecus case, expecting when the Judges will pass their
sentence: The one upon men's estates, the other upon their persons. The least is
a matter of no ordinary consequence; I need not exhort either Judge or Iurer,
otherwise then God enjoined in the like case, Thou shall enquire and search,
and ask diligently; in the 13 of Deuteronomy. Questionless he well weighed
the value of a man, and prized his life at an higher rate, then to have rash
decrees make havoc of his blood. -- meruit quo crimine servus Supplicium?
quis testis adest? quis detulit? Iuv. Sat. 6.
Such a cause deserves an earnest inquiry, concerning the matter of the
objection, the reputation of the witnesses and the disposition of the accusers.
Targ. Ionath. in Number. 9.8.
Rabbi Jonathan observes of Moses, that being to examine ordinary inditements,
he did hasten; but in the cause of those that were to dye, his sentence was not
so speedy. In Targ. Nulla unquam de morte hominis cunctatio longa est. Juven.
ibid.
No delays can be tedious, no pains superfluous, no interrogatories
frivolous, when a man's life depends on the Judges and Iurers diligence. His
life, which Satan perceived to be so much worth, that a man will ransom it Job
2.4.
with all he has. Precious gale of breath, that cost the mother so many pangs
and throes to bring it forth! that cost its owner so much care to preserve it!
so much tenderness to cherish it! and must he now at last, through the malice
of accusers, or the perjury of witnesses, be deprived of it, which for want of
deliberation are not discovered? Vlpian.
How does old Rome, that allowed nine hours for defense of each petty cause,
condemn our ouerture, and our hasty proceedings? shall they have such large
respite for their estates, and we so little for our lives? Well may the life of
man be termed a buble if it deserve but such a momentary trial. But observe
the Holy Ghost, Deuteronomy 19. The Judges shall make diligent inquisition; which
implies long advise, and mature deliberation. But while I exhort to
deliberation before judgment, a tedious suit long depending, prevents my
exhortation. The forlorn Client is tired out with delays, while his Advocat
demurs about his cause, as long as Deliberandi unum sibi diem postulauit, etc.
Cicer. de not. Deorum.
Simonides did about the nature of GOD. Hieron must first allow him a day,
afterward two; at last the longer he was about it, the less he had
determined. Thus while they are consulting and doubting what may be done, the
deluded Client is quite vnd one. Charron of wisdom.
Therefore a certain Lawyer does advise every King to abolish that pernicious
mystery of pleading: you see, he makes bold with his own profession; but I
forbear such peremptory and tart language; and reprehend it no otherwise then
mild Ismenias did his Scholars, (...), Plut. in vit. Demet.
It ought not thus to be. No, it ought not to be, that the Lawyers (What shall
we do?) in a pretended deliberation, should drive the Client to his (Quid
agam?) in an exigent of passion, and so make him cry with those in the Acts,
which were pricked at the heart with sorrow and anxiety, Men and brethren, what
shall I do? I am now a companion for that distressed Steward, Luke 16.3
Dig I cannot, and to beg I am ashamed. Those many acres which I once
possessed, are through lingering suits brought to six or seven foot to hide my
carkeise. Neither can I enjoy that, without the submisse Epitaph of Cyrus; O
homo, ne mihi sepulturam invideas. Cons. of time.
O man, envy not unto me this small parcel wherein to bury me. Thus having
nothing left of what he was, but the remembrance, he passes from a tedious
judgment on earth, to one in heaven more speedy, such as Paul tells us, shall be
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye; and he that wanted the favor to be
judged here, may have the honor to be a Judge hereafter. Know ye not that
the Saints shall judge the world? 1 Cor. 6.2. Their nimble thoughts shall not
be clogged with needless demurs, but will instantly approve what the supreme
Judge decrees. And Lord, let this cheerful expedition hasten the zeal of our
earthly Judges, that thy people may have quick dispatch from misery, and thy
truth an increase of its due glory. And lest thy Vicegerents should through
misprision or connivence be misled; give them understanding to know the law,
and grace to follow it as their vn-erring guide, which is my last part, The
level and rule of judgment The Law. What shall we do unto the Queen Vasthi
according to Law?

The positive Law, and Man, were once of an equal extention; One Law, and one
Man. That Law accidentally taught him to know Sin; the increase of Sin has
taught his posterity to know good Laws. Ex malis moribus bonae lages. When the
Laws of nature would not serve the turn, humane power, put on Majesty, and
angry Justice learned how to discipline their enormities with a rougher hand.
So that at last, variety of Laws began almost to prevent their crimes;
Justinian makes them Instit. lib. 1 Tit. 2.
National and Civil. Those, natural reason made common to every Country,
these upon particular occasion, were peculiar to such a society. Aquin. 1a 2ae.
quaest. 94. art 3.
Therefore it is the rule of Aquinas, that a Law must agree with time and place,
1a 2ae, q. 95. art. 3. It seems there was some Law proper to the Persians,
that took hold of the Queens disobedience. And it was a good precedent of the
King, being above that Law, to submit himself to the direction of the Law.
What shall we do (says he) according to Law? Hereby a King is distinguished
from a Tyrant. The King does measure his attempts by Justice; the other,
Justice by his power. The Tyrants force is his equity, and the sword his duty.
Laborious cruelty is but sport to his guilty hands, till his wild and unbridled
passions have run out of breath in a curreer of blood. The pleasure of Commodus
was Law enough to warrant the mangling and massacres of his subjects, by making
them enter the list with beasts. O that excess of power should so transport
one beyond nature, as that his will should be all his reason, to rank men with
creatures so unreasonable! wherefore one in Seneca would have those to be least
free, which have power to be most guilty: and wishes it not lawful for such
to have liberty to do that which is unlawful to be done.

But what? Shall any dare to limit sovereignty, and prescribe Majesty its duty?
shall he that enioyes the subjection of others by the law, be subject himself
to the law? No, in no other sense then that of Aquinas. Quantu^ ad vim
directivam non coactivam, in 1a 2ae of his Sums. Not that the law should
draw him by compulsion, but lead him by directive persuasion. In Decret. lib.
1. Tit. 2. Cap. Cum omnes.
If he conform his actions to the prescript of the laws, it is of his own
accord, if he do not, is he liable to acount? Yes, but it is only to God.
Against thee only have I sinned, says King David. Psalm. 51. Those modest
times had not the face to capitulate with their Sovereigns. The pride of
faction had not yet hatched this rebellious doctrine, That if Kings obey not
laws, subjects have leave to disobey their kings No; let it glory in no
ancienter author then New Rome; and in no better success then confusion. And
seeing it owes it self to Iesuited Patrons, let it be banished this land
together with their persons. And let them whom it concerns be inquisitiue for
autoriz'd Rauiliakes, such as do not value the price of a man, much less of a
Prince: otherwise a fee should never persuade them to hazard their own lives;
nor to rifle for a few pieces of coin in the bowels of their Sovereign, and
so sell his dear blood for an hours wages.

But while I exempt Princes from humane censures, I encourage not their neglect
of humane laws. The law is the life of a state, and their practice is the life
of the law. Then it concerns them that have most power to uiolate laws to
have most care to fulfill the^. Non tam imperio nobis opus qua^ exemplo. Plin.
Pan.
Else the imitating vulgar will grow unruly by the example of their Rulers.
Which his Majesty implies in advise to his son in 2d book of his Basilicon
Doron. Wherefore himself, measures not the law by his own will, but conformes
his will to the measure of the law. This is his practice; and this is the duty
of all Judges: What shall we do according to law?

Which words admit of a double sense. First, According to law; that is, as much
as the law inioynes. Secondly, According to law; that is, No more then the law
intends. And first of the first sense; as much as the law inioynes; What shall
we do according to Law?

Justinian. lib. 1. Tit. 2. institut.
That Imperial giver of the law, makes giving every one his own the end of the
law. And I desire no iuster distribution then S. Paul's, in 13 to the Romans The
Magistrate is the minister of God, to thee that do well, for good, but if
thou that which is evil, be afraid. The law then does assign to every
public action, Reward, or Punishment, as its due guerdon. The least open good
may challenge some reward; if thou gain nothing else, yet the Apostle
promises, Thou shall have praise: But if thou do not well, sin lies at the
door; God made it the doom of Cain, and the law makes it thine. Sin lies,
that is, punishment, the reward of sin; by an Hebrew metalepsis, as I am
warranted by Parae. etc. in locum.
approved authors. Now this punishment without the Law were but a wooden sword
in the hand of a grim Anticke, able to awe none beside fools and children. But
if authority come armed with laws, the sinnewes of State, it can strike
terror to the stourest heart. Justinian. in proaem. institut.
No marvel then that the Emperor thought Majesty but adorned with arms, and
to be armed with Laws. The^ let any piece of this furniture be laid aside,
malice will level its aim at that open part. Whether it be the helmet for the
head, or the breast plate and shield for the body politic. Those helmet-lawes
which do fence the head are of the greatest moment. Seeing on the safety of
that, depends the welfare of the whole State. Our glorious Head has received
in this kind, from the providence of Ancestors, armor of proof against all
annoyance. Now bloody Jesuits, those sly messengers of Antichrist, are always
furnished with messengers of death: Thanks be to God, this body of ours has
escaped in the head; for God has dealt with us, as with David; by his
protection, Psalm. 140. verse. 7.
he has covered our head though we have, as it were, put off the helmet: I
mean, laws to this purpose have layen in a long sleep and for good reasons
of State, have not been executed. Yet we have with Achilles, received wounds
in the heel, which are still fresh bleeding in the inferior people. They
begin to putrify and to draw contagion through the whole body. But the sword
is now vnsheath'd; you have is again in your own hands; 'twere pity it
should ever be put up, till it has cut off our homebred corruptions, and
given all foreign factours their fatal blows. An ill man once spoke like a
good Citizen, Act. 19. The law is open. And how can I use a stronger motive
then to press your consciences with your free leave? His Majesty told you, he
did for a while His own word in his first speech in the Parliament, 1623
conniue, but now again, (...), The law is open. It is open, I hope, for the
Judges to execute, it is open for accusers to implead. Then having against
these maine enemies the laws full advantage what shall we do according to
law? The body of our State has other pernicious adversaries that daily afflict
it with continual wounds. The extenuating of murder by the favorable name of
manslaughter, has cost our King many a subject, and this land even streams
of blood. It Is not for me to censure the law; yet thus much I know; that the
Law of Moses, and the law of conscience, will scarce admit some of our
limitations. Does a man come presumptuously upon his neighbor? God tells you
by Moses, he shall dye. Ex. 21. But except he assault him upon long-studied
malice, and purposed revenge, with us he shall not dye. We say he did it in his
anger; and he slew a man, not murdered him. But old Jacobs propheticke spirit
well knew the mind of God; therefore suffered not his own sons so easily to
escape. Genesis 49.6.7.
O my soul, (says he) come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly,
mine honor be not thou united, for in their anger they slew a man: he blames
their anger only not their malice: yet mark what follows; Cursed be their
anger for it was fierce, and their wrath for it was cruel, I will divide them
in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. Here anger and the heat of blood could
not excuse the spilling of blood. They felt the rigor and full weight of
Justice: yea the heaviest punishment that then was, a Patriarchs propheticke
curse. And in conscience such resolute hot-spurres deserve with us that Curse
of Moses; the heauiest temporal one that now is, Cursed is he that hangs on
a tree, Deuteronomy. 21. Moreover blood is importunate; each drop whereof has a
tongue, and cries loud at the throne of Heaven. Or if that were silent, your
own eyes are trusty witnesses of many a widows tears. And the untimely
death of murtherd fathers bids their orphant children solicit your ears with
their sad lamentations. I, but the death of murderers will do them no good;
admit It do not; yet let not their life do others hurt. Let not the laws
indulgence encourage their bold hands to the like attempts: but ere others
feel again the extremity of their violence, let them first feel the
extremity of your justice; and to the utmost that the law inioynes, let them
know, What you can do according to law.

There is also the swearer, whose tongue wounds the State, and like a sharp
sword strikes deep even to the heart: hence it is that the land mourns,
says the Prophet. No marvel that this sin is grown licentious, for they
say, 'twas lawless and without the verge of justice. Till at last that
honorable assembly of Parliament (which posterity shall admire no less for
religion then for their wisdom) have restrained the freedom of this crying
sin. It concerned your Honors to further such a religious purpose; not only
for advancement of Gods glory, but to enlarge your own liberty; for til the^ a
blasphemous tongue might swear God and you in the face: you might tremble and
blush you could not punish. Twere pity this free crime (which Chrysostom
counts (...). Tit. Hom. 15. Ad pop. Antioch.
worse then murder) should longer violate the law of God, and Magistrates not
be able to say, What shall we do according to law? I could show you other
offenders, which happily among us are lawless; but with God they speed like S.
Paul's Gentiles, which having not the Law, are a law unto themselves. Romans
2.14. But I must hasten to the second sense, No more then the Law intends; of
which exceeding briefly, What shall we do according to law?

A depraved gloss may corrupt the Text; and a corrupt Judge may deprave the
Law. Thus truth that in the Orators time had strength enough for its own
defense, is enforced to yield unto crafty violence. Christ also that original
truth found the perverse Pharisee and petty-fogging Scribe wresting the
derivatiue truth to their own bent. Lib. 2. contra Apion.
Josephus may brag of the Jews privilege above other nations, in that they
suffered no change in their laws; yet by his leave though they remained entire
in words, they were much perverted in sense. Thus could the wit of iniquity
ouer-reach Gods intentions, and inhance its own advantage by the
misconstruction of his precepts. I wish that while we look upon those times in
detestation, God has not cause to look upon ours in revenge. I pray God the
sword of Justice do never among us become the Sword of Delphos, Eras. Adag
Chil. 2. cen. 3.
that served for all purposes: as those gross flatterers abused it in the
cause of Cambyses, who desiring to marry his own sister, was aduertisd by
them, that there was no law which allowed that copulation: but there was one,
that he being their King might do what pleased him. How do such Judges
befoole their Ancestors! intimating that they doted and spoke at random, for
enacting constitutions no surer then the old oracles, that might admit of a
double sense.

Wel-deseruing antiquity has made this land of ours as happy as any; by
leaving us so ample an inheritance of laws and ordinances. Twere shame not to
preserve them as inviolable, as those of Solon and the Dan. 6.8.
Medes, that sufferd no repeal. Now to rack them beyond their literal
intention, I count the highest degree of violation; Seeing extreme right is
extreme wrong: and when a law is not executed at all, it argues but too much
lenity, negligence or ignorance; but being wrested beyond its intent, and
ouer-executed to a man's prejudice, it condemns the Judge of vnchristian-like
malice. Then it is safest breaking the law in the Jews extreme; who having
charge and power to give Deuteronomy. 25.3
forty stripes to a malefactor, would (as Paul witnest of them) give but
forty lacking one. 2. Cor. 11. That they came short, charity may hope 'twas
commiseratio^ of their brother in his affliction: but should they exceed the
law, we might suspect their minds for bloody revenge. Then let the law of
Justinian be my last exhortation. Iudex ne aliter indicet quam legibus aut
constitutionibus aut moribus proditum est. Institut. lib. 4. Tit. 17.
Index ne aliter iudicet, etc. And as Balaams fear engaged his fidelity
concerning the word of the Lord; so let Justice deal with your consciences
concerning the word of the law. If Balaack would give me his house full of
Silver and Gold, I will not go beyond it to do less or more, Number. 22.18. In
which resolution the Lord make you prosper. So shall you be of their number
that had their robes washed in the Revelation: and made white in the blood of
the Lamb. This awful color of State shall then turn to the pleasing luster
of glory. And as you live to glorify God here, God grant you live with him in
his glory hereafter. Amen.

FINIS.

