APOLLO SHROVING

COMPOSED for the Scholars of the Free-schoole of Hadleigh in Suffolk.

And acted by them on Shrouetuesday, being the sixth of February, 1626.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Mylbourne.

To my singular honest Stationer, Mr. Robert Mylbourne, at his shop in decimo
sexto, by the south door of Paul's.
AS you are a true Booke-seller, you must approve your self a ^ue
Booke-restorer: and therefore by book o^ by crook, see that you ^end back my
Book. And yet not my Book. For it was but a borrowed Book, for which my
promise and credit lie in mortgage (...) the Author, the School^master of Ha^y,
who with some difficulty len^ it me, ha^ng no other copy of this English
Lesson w^. he prepared for ^a By-exercise for his scholars at the last
Carneual. He told me that he huddled it up in have, and that it being only an
essay of his own faculty, and of the actiuity of his tende^lings, he was loath
it should come under any other eye, then of those Parents and domestique
friends who favorably beheld it, when it was represented by the children. And
therefore, I must be, and am tender of suffering it to wander I know not
whither, by the out let of your friends hand: whom as I know not, so I cannot
challenge of any trust; but require restitution of you, as the Author does of
me. So, expecting without delay, the retu^ne of this bird into the cage, I end
with a threat, that if you fail, you must look to have this Comedy turned
into a Tragedy, and, for detaining this book, to have your name set on the
back side of my book. Whereto I add yet a de^per curse, that next time you
meet with good fellows in Epping Forest, you may not be so happy, as to feed
them with nuts in stead of money.

Yours as you shall deserve the endor^ement of this my letter. E. W.
From Hadley aforesaid March 21. 16^.
The aforesaid Stationers answer.
Loving, Challenging, Threatening friend, E. W.
I pray you extend your love so far to your friend, and your friends friend,
as to think that neither the first will defraud you of your borrowed Book,
nor the second expose the Author to any inconvenience. The truth is my friend,
upon the sight of this Moral, Scholasticall, Theatricall Treatise, protested
that the Author should receive much right in being thus wronged; and upon
sufficient bond undertook to save me harmless if I made it more public
then ever was intended. And withal he armed me with a legal defense, that,
if I restored ten sold for the principal, the Author (notwithstanding his
modesty) could frame no just quarrel against me or you at the bar of justice
or reputaiion. Accordingly he encouraged me (if Master Schoolmaster of Hadley
should school^ you for promise-breach) to stop his mouth with a dozen of
chi^ken ^tcht under his own hen.

I pray (...) ^refore in stead of his own single written Co^, (...) him ^ith
this packet of his own metal st^mped and multiplied by the Printers Alchimy.

The w^st I ^eare, (...), that he will complain to Apoll^ o^ me (...) I have
proclaimed abroad his private Shrouing. For which I have a defense from the
Authors own pen, that Apollos solemn v^tion begins with Proclamation. Act.
1. S^n. (...) And, I trow Proclamations are intended to fi^ abroad in print. So
in hope that I shall receive, if not th^nks, yet pardon from him. ^rather take,
then beg, leave to remain still

Yours no less by this, R. M.
^ndon, Apr^l, 25. 1627. From the sm^ll (...) ^f ^y shop, where the ^uth wi^
blows into Pa^ls.
Apollo Shrouing.
Composed for the Scholars of the Free-schoole of Hadleigh in Suffolk. And
acted by them on Shrouetuesday, being the 6. of February, 1626.
The Introduction.
PRologus a young Sch^llar Joseph Beamont. La^ a woman spectator. Nicholas
Coleman.
Dramatis personae.
Musaeus, Apoll^s Priest and Judge. Nicholas Coleman. ^io a Muse, his
assistant. Denner Stru^t. ^uterpe a Muse, another assistant. William
Richardson. L^iger his Ve^ger. Samuel Cric^e. Drudo his Booke-bearer. George
Richardson. Preco the Crier. Philip Beamont. Thuriger the Sexton of Apolloes
Temple. William Cardinal. Scopas the Sextons boy. James Stutfi^ld. Philoponus
(...) ^iligent student. John Bower. Amphibius a perplexed scholl^r. George
Liuin. No^ice a young fresh scholar. Henry Whiting. Rowland Retro an hasty
non-proficient. Henry Cock. Ger^ an old man, his mou^nfull father. John
Coleman. Ludio a^r ^antly schooleboy. Henry Meriton. Siren a sea ^mph,
messenger from Queen Hedone. Wentworth Randall. Captain Complement a teacher
of gestures and fashions. John Kidby. Jack implement his Page. Joseph Beamont.
M^sse Indulgence Gingle, a coc^ ^g Mother. George Meriton. John Gingle ^r son
a disciple of Captain: Complements. John Gale. I^gge Rubb^sh maid-seruant to
Mist^isse Gingle. Edward Andrews. Slim Slugge, a lazy droane. John Kidby.
Epilogue. Joseph Beamont.
Prologus. SI quisquam est, qui placere se stu^at bonis Quam plurim^s, (...)
mini^e multos laedere, In his (...) hic nomen profite^ur suum.


Lala. What? shall we have Latin again? Master (...) yongster. I pRay you
go to the University, and set up your Stage there.


Prol. What, Mist^esse Lala Spinster? content yourselfe, I now repeat that
which is past, I do not represent that which is present.


Lala. I pray you then tell us so much in honest English.


Prol I will, for your sake.


Lala. For mine? nay, for every she,
Whom here you see:
And for our honest neig^bours, many a good man that never
Was infected with this rauing latin^ ever.

Prol. Keep silence, thou party-col^ured chattering Mappy.


Lala. ^en speak sense, thou iabbe^ing al* black Iackdaw, with a green
coxcom^e.


Prol. Good men, good wives, good ^nds, (...) ^ds, good boys.


Lala. I many, this (...) for my stomach, ^me in the ^ber of the fourth rank.


Prol. Who meet, to see, and hear our childish t^yes.


Lala. Well said, such easy drops sink well into our br^ines.


Prol. Of late ye know, if ye have not mistook us.


Lala. I do not ^istake you now, you take us very well with your pl^ne dealing
English Poetry.


Prol. We acted Comicke Terence his Eunuebus.


He displaies the outer end of the Banner wherein is the name of Eunuchus. Lala.
Eunuchus! Out upon him, and thee too, and all of his kin. I have heard my
brother say, that this same Eunuchus is a man and no man,

The very scorn and hate of w^men.

I Will be sure, (...) (...), d^aw and quarter him; and for my part, si^
Prologue, She tears the paper.

I ^ad rather ye should ^at us,

(...) thus defeat us,

(...) us,

Then (...) v^


^rol. For my (...) dame Lall, I do but act my part, you must not (...) (...).


(...). I will not (...) (...) you, unless you name that h^tefull bilding
(...). O what a queame he has cast over my stomach with that filthy word.


Pr^. But now w^ (...) with mild audacity,
In vul^ar language unto low capacity.

Lala. See you ^old on your vulgar tongue, and bring not hither your latin
vulgars, and lessons which you have chanced in the school.


Prol. We come not with old worn common Thais,
^y ^rade the sister of Corinthian Lais.

(...). L^is? Thais? W^lke where your way is,
And t^ll us what this Play is.

Prol. Nor Parmen^, nor scolding Pythias.


Lala. Thou pithlesse ass, do thou tell us of scolding?


Prol. This waspe had almost put me out. Out (...) he^.
But in a nearer circle now we walk,
Where with our selves, and of our selves we talk.
Our School imagine here new built and dight,
This Scene our forms, our d^y this candle light.

Lala. Sir Prologue, I fear thou talk English extrumpery besides thy part,
only to beguile me, I doubt there is Latin in his budget.


Prol. I anow to thee, jealous Lala, that this same scholars feast is dressed in
English.


Lala. I dare not trust you, for you say you are here in the school. And you
scholars must not speak English in the school.


Prol. We are not now at ou^ task, but we have leave to play, and we play at
our best game.


Lala. What? Blow point? or Span-counter? or trappe out may hap?

Take heed you grow not Outish.


Prol. No Tomboy, no. Nor scourge-top, nor Trusse, nor Leap frog, nor Nine
holes, nor Mumble the pegge: But a more Noble recreation, where we have more
lookers on, then gamesters.


He displayes the Rowl^ upon his staff. Lala. What play call you it?


Prol. Take out thy fe^ue, and spell here, in this oneleau'd book. Tell the
stitches in this sample^ of black and white.


Lala. A. P. ap.


Prol. A. P. ap? Thou fumbling Ape. A. per se, A. P. O. L. pol.


Lala. A. per se, A. P. O. L. pol, L. O. lo. Apollo. On my maidenhead this is
Latin. We shall be choked with a dogrell Latin Play for all this.


Prol. I tell thee, this is Greek, Latin, and English too.


L^la. This Apollo is he an English man? I Will deal with none but my own
Countrymen. I wont have to do, so I wont, with these outlandish people that
speak gibberish.


Prol. It is a proper name, it signifies the Lord and Master of the Muses. His
Throne and Court here represented is the shop and staple of learning.


Lala. A proper name? As you are a proper man, let none but English wares be
sold in this shop, or else you have no customer of me.


Prol. Nay, read on what followos.


Lala. S. H. R. O. shro. I Will none of this. What, do you call us shroues?


Prol. Thou a^t not worthy to go a shrouing, that can not spell it.


Lala. V I. N. G. ving, shrouing I Am gl^d of that. Now I like this Apollo
well: he will go a gossipping with us. does Apollo come a shrouing to us, or
shall we go a shrouing to him?


Prol. All which we on this Stage shall act or say,
Does (...) Apollas shrouing day.
Whilst thus we greet you by our words and pens,
Our sorouing bodeth death to none, but bens.

Lala. Pens? hens? Me thinks the feathers of hens should not make good
pens. I do not like the death of hens. As I Am a true housewife, I wondered
what made our ^enne roost so empty, and see the scholars have gouen them.


Prol. I prethy, hold thy peace, thou go beyond thine office, thou wilt have
the first word and the last too, thou show thy self to be a true Lala.

But whilst I chat with her, the time grows late, I Will six this banner at
Apollos gate. Exit.


Lala. As I Am a true woman, I Will trust you slippery scholars no further then
I see you. I wont away, till I taste of the first dish of Apollos shrouing
seast, and know whether it was an English Cook that dressed it.

Enter Philoponus. She sits down. I see a black coat come in, I Will know
whether he be a true Britain.


Actus Primus. Scena prima.
Phil. Ecce vigil nitido (...) ab ortu
Purpureas aurora fores, et plena rosarum
Atria. Dissugiunt stellae, quarum agmina cogit
Luciser, and coeli statione nouissimus exit.
Iungere equos Titan velocibus (...) (...).

Lala. I can hold no longer. False play. I bar your dice. Body of me, I
thought how we should be served.


Phil. What bold Nymph is this, that durst intrude amongst the Muses?


Lala. Of My life, this is no English. My Mother never spoke it. I proclaim to
all of my sex, they have leave to depart. I Would rather spinne at home, then
hear these Barbarians spout Latin, Unless we had some kind scholar to tell
us what they say. What a foppery is this, that we must laugh for company, and
then ask what we laugh at.


Phil. Ignorant suspicious soul, be content, I will be thine Interpreter.


Lala. If you do not interpret to me, I Will make you plumme the play, you
shant be able to go on your part.


Phil. Then so.
Now gins the fair dew dabling blushing morn
To open to the earth heavens Eastern gate,
Displaying by degrees the newborn light.
The stars have ^ac'd their dance, and unto night
Now ^id good night.
The young days Centinell the morning slarre
Now drives before him all his glittering slocke,
And bids them rest within the ^old (...)
Till with his whistle Hesper call them forth.
Now Titan up and ready calls aloud,
And bids the rolling hours bosti^e them quick
And harness up his p^auncing foaming steeds
To hurry out the suns bright Chariot.
O now I hear their trampling feet approach:
Now now I see that glorious lamp to dart
His nearer beams, and all bepaint with gold
The over peeping tops of highest hills.

Lala. Trust you upon your word? Did not you promise to interprate? Here Is
^insey-woolsey ^ian, where every English thread is ouer-cast with a thick
(...) len woole of strange words, which have so deep a nappe, that the plain
ground cannot be seen. I pray you what have you said all this while?


Phil. I have said but one word, Lu^cit, ^t is morning.


Lala. And could you not have told me that in one word, by bidding me good
morrow?


Phil. I give no morrow unto thee, but to the Muses, and my self.


Lala. I have as good part it h day light, as the best min^g Muse of them all.


Phil. Welcome fair light, most welcome unto me, When these thy beams
reflect upon my book.


Lala. Now I understand you better. I hope he ^mend.


Phil. O how it joys my watchful eyes and heart, To crop the first fruits of
the virgin morn.


Lal. Crop the first fruits of Virgins* I'l^ take heed of him.


Phil. And spend that precious stock of common light
Upon this Authors lines, and such bookeware.
The morning is the Muses gainest friend.

Lala. Surely this scholar loves to come first to school*


Phil. O how my blood does warmely sweetly thrill,
My senses luld, my heart inwrapt with joy,
To see these plains, this fair two-headed hill,
Those bowers, these towers, those winding banks,
These shady laurels, and that Temple gate
The seat, the throne, the nest, the rest, the school
Of great Apollo, and his darlings nine.

Lala. Well, I see now it will be English. It shall go hard but I Will get a
part amongst them. I Will into the tyreing house, and scamble and rangle for a
man^ part. Why should not women act men, as well as boys act women? I will
wear the breeches, so I will. Exit.


Actus primus. Scena secunda.
Philoponus solus: Phil. NO Court of King, no Palace stately rich,
Though proud of marble feet and gilded head
Can outbid these for true and sweet content.
Let others grouell and embrace the earth,
(The earth the whole worlds basest sediment)
Let them there dig their mothers bowels out,
And thence ^ake gold (the earths worst excrement)
Let muddy minds ^oard up, and hug, and ^de,
And sit upon the eggs of au^rice:
Thence hatching vipers of their stinging care^.
Let others sell their lives away in sport,
Or play the Parasites in fickle Court.
Let others swell with greatness, burst with pride.
And others luske and s^ort in lazy sleep,
Or d^ench and soake themselves in Bacchus sudds,
Or wallow in the mire of pleasures lewd:
These seats, these bowers, are to Philoponus
True pleasure, riches, honor, kingdom, rest.
But now fair Phoebus with his rising rays
Strikes on his own bright Temples battlements,
The watchword for the daily sacrifice.
The suns first heat, that warmes this temples top,
Calls for the Altar to be warm below.
Now now Musaeus his obseruant Priest
With other sc^uiters bestirre them quick
To fe^d that neuer-ceasing sacred fire.
My part must be in that devotion,
To take from thence a blessing for the day.
Our actions hence have their prosperity,
By timely worshipping the deity.

Actus primus. Scena tertia.
Amphibius solus. Amph. What is he gone? I so. He keeps out wonted time, and
now is well employed in doing sacred homage to Apollo. There lays he the
foundation of his studious diligence. There s^re he misses me, and says unto
himself. Where is my Amphibius? Why keeps he not his accuostomed hour? What,
shall I after Philoponus into the temple? It Is with the latest now. And (to
confess the truth) alas I dare not there appear to present my self before
Apollos Altar. Nor have I now the boldness to look my dear Philoponus in the
face. His settled countenance and grave gesture give a che^ke unto my leuity.
His very silence reads unto me a ^ecture of reprehension. My passions so
deep inthrald another way, bid me now rather to withdraw from such society,
and hide my self in shades and g^oues, and solitude*

Alas Amphibius, though having ^ide himself to the mast of safety by the bo^ds
of temperance, yet breaks loose, and leapes into the sea of danger. Alas he
cannot hold. This Sirens song is so attractiue. I yield, I come And yet how can
I? shall I ^unne away from the worthy trade whereto I am bound apprentise? My
name is inrold in Apol^os register, and shall I raze it out, and be recko^ed
among the fugitives and renegados? Not so. And yet and yet it will be so. O how
my v^y book seems now a burden unto me, and that which heretofore did
eleuate my soul, and give it wings to fly aloft, sweet contemplation of
nature and of arts, that now alas lays on me the heavy load of vpbraiding, I
fly, I fly, I have into the by ways of these thickest groves

What dark some ca^e will give me shelter, and hide me from the light of
mortal eyes, and of the immortal eye of this world the all-vu^ewing Phoe^us.


Exit in lucum. Actus primus. Scena quarta.
Philoponus solus. Phil. ANd now me thinks my spirits lighter are,
My soul more clear, my wits more active far
Since I received from grave Mulaeus hand
Apollos benediction for this day.
But where is my Amphibius? he promised to overtake me at this morning
sacrifice. I hasted not, I did protract till Phoebus (whose swist Chariot no
hand can stay) by his visible messenger called for our common duty and devotion.

What will he thus leave me alone? And yet even thus alone I am not. Nunquam
minus solus quam cum solus. My books and meditations are my companions, that
never fail me. With me they walk and talk, with them I rest at home: and
other while when I travel abroad and converse with contemplation, how short
and easy are the ways? yea, and how safe too? I can fear no the eues: the
Muses are my guard. And in very truth, what can the eues rob me of? My purse is
light, and so my heart. My true riches treasured up in the cabinet of this
breast, no lurching hand by stealth, no robbing rouer by force can seize upon.
My Father has no land to leave me. I think his mean estate is the better
means of my happiness. This education which he astoo^ds me, I take for a more
goodly and durable inheritance, then if he could have left me thousands of
stocks and acres, without any bringing up in quality other then the gentle
vanities of the times.

I envy not our spruce gallant Gingle, that now forsooth scorns to be our
schoole-fellow any longer. Our sable robe is too homely for such gaudy
butterflies.

But ho Philoponus whither do thou range? These flies not worth the gazing on
would seduce me out of my way. Away ye flutering mothes that fain would eat
holes in the Muses robes.

Come wi^ Philosophers, come soule-plying Orators. Nay to you I come; ye are my
home, the true center whereon my circling thoughts do rest. O mellifluous
Tully. O streaming ouerflowing Ovid. O Maiestique Virgil. Grave Quintillian.
Sententious Isocrates. Virtuous Sentta Plentiful Plutarch. Profound Aristotle.
Divine Plato. My solace, my guides, my instructers. O how your words distill
into my thirsting soul, like to immortalizing Nectar.

Where left we last, sweet numbersome Isocrates?

O here, where thy lamp burns bright.

(...). Isocrat ad Demonic.

This rule he delivers, Think not to walk unseen when thou go about any
wickedness. For, though no man ouerspye thee, thine own conscience keeps
watch over thee. O the divine power of vnbred conscience? Suitable to this is
that of Seneca. Quid prodest non habere conscium habenti conscientiam? When
Amphibius and I discoursed on this point at our private reading of Seneca, I
remember how affectionately he would take the book into his bosom, and hug
it, and protest that this one sentence is able to make us honest men. I will
seek him out, that we may mutually kindle the sparks of conscience in our
breasts, Exit.


Actus primus. Scena quinta,
L^wriger, Drudo, Praeco. Lau. COme away, come away.
Now clearly shines our shrouing day.
Now are we fresher then in May,
Come, come awar, our work is play.

Drud. Apollos solemn shrouing feast,
Inuiteth all from cast to west:
Come away, come make no slay,
No Muses friend can say us nay.

Laur. Apollos yee^ely visitation
You know begins with Proclamation,
Come mouthing Praeco, clear thy threate,
And chant the law in twanging note.

Preco. O yez.


Dru. He may cry O yez till his belly burst. But, for ought I see, here is no
body to hear him.


Laur. No body? I hat's none of our fault. All may come if they will, Apollo
keeps open sessions. Look Praeco, can thou see no audience?


Preco. Nor man, nor mouse.


Dru. If I see any body, I would I were the Muses Tankard-bearer.


Laur. That Is a punishment would noe near to beggar you. For I am sure you
would be licking up the Castalian d^ops that fall from the Muses tankard, and
that would make you turn ryming Poet.


Drud. I wish I had no better fortune, then to be a pretty water Poet wi^h a
bi^h forehead like I. T. that acts the swanne by the banks o^ Thames in
England. I cursed my self happily.


Preco. What is that acting the swanne?


Drud. I mean the swannes, or gooses broad paddle feet, the natural prime
pattern of the artificial oar.


Laur. O que, I have him. He means the easy smooth volluminous untaught Poet,
that will row you over the Thames in rhyme, every stroke of his oar cuts out
the capering feet of his verses.


Drud. Would we had him in Parnassus. He would stroke our Mistresses the
Muses gently with his oar, and make their worships very merry, with his paper
Wherry.


Laur. Paper Wherry? you mean by a metaphor, that his papers and verses carry
a man's attention as smooth as a wherry.


Drud. No, I mean his sailing in a Paper Boat, and poetising upon that and
other his own adventures.


Laur. He shall have my voice to be admitted into the third form of the
Vshers part in Parnassus school, if he will lay his claim for it in solemn
session.


Preco. I Will register his name with a witness,
If he bring evidence of his fitness.

Laur. This Poetical Boat has made us sail out of our way. Drudo look down
there between the Temple and the hill, see if you spy any body. And you
Praeco, put on you spectacles, and look into the Grove.


Drud. Neither bird nor feather.


Preco. Neither fish nor finne.


Laur. We shall forfeit our liberties, if we can get no audience to listen to
our Proclamation. Praeco, up that bancke, nay mount up that tree.


Dru. It is more wholesome mounting that one tree, then some other three trees,
compact in a Greek Pee.


Laur. See thou any body now?


Preco. Abundance. O multitude! O variety!


Laur. What be they? discover them to us.


Preco. Men. Boys.


Laur. Who else?


Preco. Item there be others, shall I discover them too?


Laur. Why not?


Preco. I am too bashful to uncover them. They are women.


Laur. On prattling Preco.


Preco. Men, women, young, old, black, white, blew, sitting, standing, looking,
laughing.


Drud. Whence think thou come they, and what would they?


Laur. No doubt they come a shrouing to Apollo. If the Muses have not provided
for their pallat, what shall we do?


Drud. It is hard to dress a shRouing dish to please so many several tastes.
They must be content to take such as they find or bring, like good gossips.


Laur. Well sir Preco, for the first service, let them hear the Proclamation.
Begin.


Preco. O yez, O yez, O yez.


Laur. All manner of scholars and students


Preco. All manner of scholars and students


Laur. With their Reteiners


Preco. With their Reteiners and appurtenances that hold or pretend to hold in
Capite any learning, art or science of the grand Lord our sovereign Apollo or
of the mean Land. Ladies the nine sister Muses or of any of them Let them
appear this day in the afternoon at the great lowrell on the western top of
Parnassus there to do their homage luite and service and to give account to
our said Lord Apollo or to his high steward Muss us of the expense of their
time in their several trades and mysteries of the Muses also there and then
upon the oath of homagers strict inquiry and search is to be made concerning
all encroachments intrusions and Nuissances done or suffered to be done upon
the inheritance rites and royalties pertaining to the manner of Parnassus All
that will accuse, shall be heard and all that will answer shall have liberty
of defense by themselves or by their counsel learned in the Muses laws.

Keep Apollos peace, and then he end the Muses prosper you.


Laur. Come down now Praeco from your chair of stare, and walk with us
mortals here below.


Drud. Iauriger think you that any of those, whom Praeco oueruiewed, will lay
in any action at Apollos Court to day?


Laur. Why not? perhaps some of them hold for life some paper Tenement
belonging to Apollos ^nner. And thereupon may crave admitionce to it Others
upon their experience may inform Apollos jury what wast has been made of the
trees in Parnassus grove with cropping off laurel garlands to adorn the light
head of every ballad belching Po^. Or what delapidations have in process of
time grown upon the Muses cells. So that Boreas whistles euerloud in their
ears when they are retired to contemplation.


Drud. These and all other informations shall be firely heard. We know that is
our Lord Apollos express mandate.


Laur. Now return we up the Mount, and acquaint Mus^us what we have done.
Exeunt.


Actus secundus. Scena prima.
Compliment, Implement, Nouice. Imp. REnowned Father of fashions, Count of
courtesies, Marquess of modern motions, Duke of debonaire deportments, Chief
Justice of ges^iculations.


Comp. Go on with the Alphabet of my Titles. Comptroller.


Imp. I have it, Comptroller of Conges, Compactor of Cringes, Fea^ Framer of
^ian phrases.


Nou. O wonderful: this is a brave man. We have no such dainty words in our
school.


Imp. Dainty? I tell thee, Nouice, we have store of this plumporridge at our
house every day. (little else.)


Comp. Sir, you forget the Titles given me by the great Mogull, when I went
Ambassador to him from the King of Calecut, a golden ^mpet sounded them in the
Persian language.


Imp. That trumpet could speak Persian well, I can hardly hit upon them in the
original. Varletto, p^one, manigoldo.


Comp. You masque unknown, unseen. Descend I say to the apprehension of the
base vulgar. Give us them ^n translation.


Imp. Indoctrinate of young Nobility. Accompli^r of Kings Courts, chief
engineer of cap and knee. clock-keeper of (...) (...) (...), and finally,
ingrosser of all saylable, available adresses, garbs, faces, graces in all
places.


Nou Yet gooder and gooder. O admirable! This man is for us to the heavens.


Comp. It is well, somewl at toward the superlatiue of my wo^h and pro^ssion
But Imp. I like not that word finally. When you rehearse me before the Lady
Muses, they will think we are at the wall, that thou have told all my
virtues, and offices. I tell thee, not thou, nor the loud long tongue blabbe
^ame, can give the inuentary of my perfections. Think thou with the small
wherry boat of thy short memory, to arrive at the Terra incognita of the
virtues and indowments o^ mighty Captain Complement?


Nou. O eloquence. I see now that Tully and Ovid are but course w^e.


Imp. I tell thee, and thou shall find, that tittle tattle Tully is but brown
bread, if he be laid near our Marchp^e.


Comp. Ergo therefore my nimble Imp. take away that padlocke finally, and in
stead of the aforesaid, add to the ^agge end of my Catalogue, that endless
chain which the vulgar Gramatians call e^ c^ra.


Imp. Indeed M^ster I have heard you say, that you would have your title like
the great Western Monarchs ^e, with a long tail behind it.


Comp. True: And therefore you know, the motto which I subscribe in banner is
plus vltra.


Nou. My sweet friend, Master Implement, you told me that you would speak --


Imp. I marry, and so I do.


Nou. For me to the mighty man. All you have yet said to him, is but in the
vocative case. And that case makes no sentence, as I have learned when I was in
the second ^orme. You know I gave you*


Imp. What did you give me? Nothing but a dozen of rotten ^ke points. You must
tagge them better ere I the up your request.


Nou. I le steal my mothers Peacocke, and bring it you.


Imp. A Peacocke? That Is well. You may make us latter by it; but you cannot
make us prouder.


Comp. What talk you of a Peacocke?


Imp. Sir, this young ^ntleman presents you with a Peacocke. It ha^ a tail* he
ha^ a small request to your worship.


Nou. I dare as well he hanged as steal the Peacocke. My mother loves it so
well, and feeds it every day, and pricks the feathers of it in her sanne.


Comp. Where is this Peacocke?


Nou. What shall I dee? I have none.


Imp. I mistook a Peacocke for a Woodcocke.


Nou. I have never a Woodcocke neither.


Imp. Sir he would feign present you with a Woodcocke every day. His suit is to
be your scholar for an hour in a day. He would dedicate himself to fine
fashions and quaint quallicoms.


Comp. What Nobiliy? What atchieuements imbolden him to ob^ upon us with such a
request? An hour in a day? I tell thee, young chicken, great Princes have not
made such a motion unto me without an Ambassador, and a present of a gold
chain, or diamond ring, or some such tri^e.


Nou. Wo^'s me! Alas. I have no hope now, I think I must eene return to my
old trade again, and repeat In noua (...) animus, and Tityre tu pa^lae. O
sweet Imp. be my ^aithfull ^mplement to your Master. I Will do any thing for
thee, or for any of thy kin.


Imp. Will you steal me your fathers dagger with the ailuer have?


Nou. And my mothers silver bodkin too.


Imp. They shall prick forward thy cause. I gallop to save thy life. I will
beg a pardon for thee of this Judge. Relent heroicke soirit, relent. For my
sake entertain Master Nouice into your school.


Comp. Thou know our school is thronged. My hands are full. The truth is,
my virtuous faculty, joined with a strange dexterity, is so attractiue, that I
have scholars come flocking unto me, not only from the Theater and Venus
Court, but also from Apollos seminary. I swel, I swel with the stuffings of
the Grammar broo^.


Imp I am one of those that lest the fescue trade, to page it thus in state.


Comp. Nay, Logique and Philosophy does often break up shop, and come to set
up at my stall.


Imp. Indeed Master of late we have had very good doings. The Usher of our
school has had for fees of young gentlemen at their entrance, above an hundred
crowns within this 12. months, besides his yearly stipend.


Nou I Will beg hard, but I Will get a crown of my Mo there, and twelve pence for
thee honest I^ Implement.


Comp. As for money for stipend or entrance, I do not much stand upon it,
neither would I take any, but that I will not imbase my facult?.


Imp. Indeed Master, if you should not take some fair see, the gentlemen would
not think it such a reputation to be your Prentiles.


Comp. Truly the more cost, the mo^e worship. A wise saying. Write you that in
your table book Master Nouice upon my authority.


Imp. And their Parents would scorn our ware, and say it were like s^inking
fish it hend of a market.


Nou. Again for me good Imp.


Imp. I pray you sir let him be admitted. He Will be content to stand next the
door of our school. I warrant you sir, he will be fedfat for a whole year,
with two or three of the easiest plain tricks, of ^g the hat* or the gambrell
^th hammes, the man in the toe, an^ the gudiron in the forehead. He Will be pleased
with these till he can come to higher points of the Retort, the ^e, the
Catastiophe, the Antis^ropho.


C^p. I could be content to inroll him in our petty form, but that I doubt
^ome excep^ns will be taken at the confluence of so many of that tribe, to ou^
part. Master Philoponus a sour sloicalll scholar, told me to my teeth, that
Apollo should be complained unto, and I accused of robbery, for stealing away
his best hopes.


Imp. Sir, I see no reason but you may entertain him as well as another. One
s^one more will not make the boat sink.

One kernel more put in the sac^e

Will not break the M^s (...).


Nou. Good sir consider o^ me. Though I be not borne to so much land as master
Ging^e my forme-fellow, yet I shall learn b^ tricks as well as he. There is
Mumble and Tri^ram, Trump, and Iobbart, and nimble Nichol. I see not, but I may
leave the ^atchell as well as they, and turn fine gentleman.


Imp. Indeed they have ^ofited very well with us. For they have torn out the
leaves of all their books to light tobacco pipes, and they can i^me, and
effame, and resume with gentle pos^ M^ister Nimble can at one time, and wah one
(...) p^ ^his hat with his right hand in due circumference, and brandish a
battoon in's left hand, and suck a suming tobacco pipe in's mouth without any
hand, all at once.


Comp. They say the old gray beard Mus^us sets up inquisition, and ^at Apollo
keep^ Court to day. My sweet Siren sent me word this morning, that I know not
how many of us should be indi^ed for incroaching upon Apollo^ liberties.


Nou. Indeed sir, and't please you, this Philoponus is the best scholar among
us, but he is but a tell tale. There cannot one of us play the tron't, or run
away from school for recreation, or so, but presently he tells Musaeus of it.
But I care nor, I had rather stick to you, and show Apollo a fair pair of
heels.


Imp. He that sticks to us must bring some glue: And money is a binder.


Comp. Imp. are these young man's friends rich? Will they lard us with a fat
pension?


Imp. His father's but a plain Farmer; but he is called the rich Chuff^. He
keeps three ploughes, and fourteen yoke of Oxen.


Comp. But will his Oxen give down their milk?


Imp. ^aith his m^ther will stroke hard for it. She is a gentlewoman ot'h
left side. I have heard her say, that she would like her son better in a
scarce and ruffled boots, then in a gown with a ^ardell of books.


Comp. Well said, enough. You young man. My servant has entreated hard for you.
I am content to entertain you upon probation.


Nou. I am ouerioyed, ouetioyed.


Comp. Ouerioyed? What a plain packes^affe phrase is that? you must sublimate
your joy in triumph thus. Hold me down left I hit my head against a cloud.


Nou. Hold me down lest I hit my head against a cloud. O what a brane world is
this, all made of oa^meale: I Am now in the way of preferment and gallantry.
I Will presently run to my mother for some cash for my entrance. I Am all now
for Maskes, Revels, Court. sh^p. Poor Apollo farewell. Exit.


Comp. Sir Imp. I honor thee with thanks, a whole bushel, heap measure.


Imp. I, with such light come and husks am I sed.


Comp. I enrich thee with thanks. Thou have brought a pretty fat foul to our
net.


Imp. We shall make him a flat fool.


Comp. Is not the hour come appointed by me to give access and interviw to
Sir Orgolio?


Imp. Yes sir, the sun and clock says so. (And my clock tells me it is
breakefast time. If I could tell where to lunch.)


Comp Why then Vamos. I set my legs in due array, and march on foot down to
the plain.


Imp. So you had need. For all your horses have ten toes. Ex^nt.


Actus secundus. Scene secunda.
Amphibius solus. OR this, or that. This is my duty. So. And though so, yet why
not rather that? I o that mine inclination draws me. O strange Monster, worse
then ever nature did bring forth. A man in whom the light of reason shines, to
walk in the cloudy night of tempestuous passions, to live at once in two
contrary elements. Glorious Apollo I feign would still rrmaine chine. And yet.
And yet sweet Hedo^e, I cannot divorce my self from thee.


Actus secundus. Scena tertia.
Philoponus. Amphibius. Phil. PArnassus plains. I he banks of Hippocrene, The
laurel grove, all walked, all searched by me: and yet I find him not. O here
not hoped, yet now found. Found? Is this he? Is this my Amphibius? Where a^t
thou? Who art thou? Look up and show thy friendly brow. I Hope no distaste
estrangeth thee ^om thy Philoponus. What have we here: The walking ghost of
Amphibius? Where is his soul, his life, his look, his speech?


Amp. A wandering soul.


Phil. Wandering? I know no by way can call thee off from me. These groves,
these banks, and shades, O ^ow often have they bin companions and witnesses of
our friendship, and discourses of earth, of sea, of stars, of spheres, of
motions, of rest, of beasts, of plants, of all Dame natures works, and
wondrous art, by which this All stands thus composed, and framed in most exact
proportion. Awake I say, the Muses call us to our task.


Amp. Worthy Philoponus. I love thoe. I admire tho^. I envy thee.


Phil. I know thou can not envy me. Thy heart is so generous, and my worth so
mean, thou love me I know, for the parity of our dispositions and studies.


Amp Would I were like thee now, as heretofore I have been, then should I not
be thus dashed with shame.


Phil. What Amphibius, you are always modest. Hic virtutis color. Blushing is
virtues scarlet roabe.


Amp. Alas, I am now like a cropped flower, which fades and hangs the head, I
am pulled from the stalk on which I grew.


Phil. What blast has thunder-strucken thee? Whence art thou fallen?


Amp. I must untwist.


Phil I hope, not from our bond of friendship.


Amp. No: but from my bond of service to Apollo.


Phil. Thou from Apollo? First may the stars be plucked from heaven. Why but how?


Amp In a word, I am turned soldier.


Phil. Soldier? Which of the furies plucked thee from our woonted peace and
quiet in Apollos service, now to pitch thy tent in Marses field?


Amp. O how the drums and trumpets sound alarm. What strokes, what
shreekes, what fierce incounters, wounds and deaths!


Phil. O Tragedy! What Scene is this? On what Stage do thou tread?


Amp. Alarm, alarm, to war. I fight, I fight.


Phil. With whom?


Amp. I must maintain the quarrel on both sides.


Phil. Both sides? Who are the Cumbattants?


Amp. Amphibius, and Amphibius. Never till now a true Amphibius As I am*
Apollos and thine. I walk and march with thee, I fight under the Muses colors
against ignorance, idleness and voluptuousness. But as I am another self, my
left side walks another way. O force. O compulsion. I yield.


Phil. What force compels?


Amp. Fatis agimur, cedite fatis.

The destinies are powerful. If the fates say I, who dares say no?


Phil. Our fates? Speak ri^ht, and say, our faults. They overrule and
ouer-turne us, when we are willing to be conquered, and then to color our
follies, we put on the mask^ o^ tragique exclamation upon our stars, our
fates, our cross inexorable adamantine destinies.


Amp. Far easier is it to mock my misery then to cure it.


Phil. Cure it? I will cure it. Let me feel thy pulse. O what boiling and
beating waves of passion! W^ thou calm them?


Amp. O could I! or could thou my Esculapius?


Phil. Recipe a ^iletto or ^aylors bodkin; make but one oylet hole under the
left pappe, three inches deep: your blood would be cooled; and you shall fall
into a sweet sleep, and presently be transported into the Elisian fields.
T^obatum est.


Amp. Facile est miserum irridere.


Phil. Not I, but -- you fate mon^ers teach you this. But in earnest I advise
thee thus. Give over parling and combating: blow away your enemy out of the
field with one blast. One word will do it.


Amp. What potent charm is that? I pray you teach it me.


Phil. Only this sloutly said N^lo.


Amp. Often have I thought and said it, but another word crowds in withal, and
makes a counter charm. Volo.


Phil. What? do you blow hot and cold at once, at once will and nill?


Amp. Vos testor omnes Calites, hoc quod volo, Me notte.


Phil. O Sir, do you think Medea a sit pattern for you? Have you no better a
Mistress to instruct your wavering soul, then monstrous Medea?


Amp. Yes, another Mistress ouer-awes me, more powerful then that
Inchantresse.


Phil. Ouer-awes? O faint fondling, not worthy to march under the Muses banner,
whose Escuch^on is Virtue Argent, crowned Or. And the two supporters, winged
Victory, and winged all-eyed, all-eared, all-tongued Fame.


Amp. When this all-conquering Queen, sends sorth her mandates, alas virtue
melts into an aercall contemplation, and fame vanishes into an empty sound.


Phil. What mandates other then usurped Tyranny? What conquests other then by
voluntary yielding to false allurements?


Amp. O valiant Sir, can I, can you, can any mortal wight stand out and rebel
when he is apprehended by this Queens writ?


Phil. What writ? what arrest? you need not obey it. At least you might lurk
and withdraw your self, and make them return a Non est inuentus:


Amp. O but these arrests do not so much command by authority, as convince and
persuade by argument and reason.


Phil. Reason? what other reason then vt cum ratione insanias, that you may be
reasonably rauing mad?


Amp. Tu si hic esses, aliter sentires, the case would be altered, and you
would plead as hard on my side.


Phil. Then let all the nine Muses hiss at me, and banish me out of Apollos
school.


Amp. The Muses? Apollos school? I tell you the arguments by which I am
convinced, are translated out of the Records of the Muses, and cite every where
Apollos Parliaments.


Phil. What are these forged patches which plead their workmanship from the
Muses loomes? Have you bin weauing them in your sequestered studies?


Amp. Alas not mine, but on higher hand has spunne and twisted them. The
Queen her self vouchsafed with her own wit and hand to compose this
sovereign Nepenthe to imbalme my soul in most desirable content. Queen
Hedone her self wrote this lar^e mellifluous letter to me, poor me. I thought
she had not known me: but (O generous sweet gratiousnesse) to this mean
negected Amphibius, she (that high and mighty sovereign of delights) sent
this amiable garland of choysest flowers, culled by her own delicious hand;
that hand, which the chiefest Poets labor to paint cut, and the highest gods
affect to kiss.


Phil. O how Pocticall you are grown, and fantastical? I think that paper
has infected you. But by what hand was it conveyed to you?


Amp. By whom, but by her worthy maid of honor Dame Si^en, whole voice with
one warble can thaw the most frozen affections


Phil. Nay then I perceive he is handsomely caught.


Amp. I pray you view these lives. You will confess they are strong lines.


Phil. I have heard of strong lines, admited by weak judgments, and derided
by the judicious.


Amp. I p^ay you read. El^e you rob me of my defense, and your self of care
pleasing* soule-conquering suauity!


Phil. To my not so dear, as worthy to be far dearer, Amphibius the flower
of youth --


Amp. (Meaning me.)


Phil. Honor and envy of his rank. --


Amp. (Meaning me, very good still)


Phil. Accomplisher of vertue^ --


Amp. (O complete!)


Phil. In nothing wanting, but that he is indebted, --


Amp. (Yet she does not arrest me for money debt, No)


Phil. Indebted to himself, in infinite sums of most current delights, over
chu^shly neglected by him.


Amp. Had these title been of my own devising, modesty would not have
suffered me, to hear them read. But what Queen Hedone says, is a law; and it
is a part of my obedience to accept the honor she conferres upon me by her
own hand. She trusts no Secretary when she writes to me. I think the Muses
will wooc me for copies of this letter, they will imitate it, when they sing
hymns in praise of Apollo.


Phil. O forgery O soppery!


Amp. Why? what?


Phil. Think thou that Queen Hedone wrote this lever to thee? I think she
never heard of Amphibius.


Amp. Why? Am I not in the indorcement? I neue^ heard of any other Amphibius. I
will be this Amphibius till you find another Amphibius.


Phil. See how thy good nature is wrought upon. This inscription i^ none of
Queen Hedones hand. See thou the character nothing a kin to the letter within


Amp. Perh^ps indorcements and names of note, are written in another hand for
excellency. That is the Court style.


Phil. Let me tell thee a short tale. Thou have heard o^ Burching-lane in
London.


Amp. London? Where Is that? In England?


Phil. So. And there are many volumes of Apparel made at large by guess for
no man, and for every man, for all, whom they may fit, or who will buy them.


Amp. What then? I buy none there.


Phil. An honest rural guest coming thither, is hailed into a shop, and ca^ed
with a suite which though too wide, too long or short, he is persuaded '^was
made for him and none else, he pays, and goes, and after finds it s^inkes.


Amp. What Is this to me?


Phil. Yes to thee. Mutato nomixe de te Fabula narratur. Thou art this new come
guest, gazing on and admiring the varnisht wares, set out in the deceitful
shop of Hedone. She cuts out and tackes together, large declamations in folio.
In laudem voluptatis. These she sends abroad by the and of her Broaker Siren:
Who, lo^den with these blanke letters, rambles up and down: and, when she
lights upon any credulous soul, presently she adds an indorcement, and makes
the receiver believe that ^eene Hedone her self does woo him. Against the
concourse of this solemn day this Siren, houering here for gain, now seiseth
on thee. And thou beleeuest that this paper garment was cut out and sowed and
laced for Amphibius. I^ she meet with me, verily I shall have another the
same letter, indorced, To her dear, her only dear Philoponus. Then shall I
be the flower of youth, and what not?


Amp. Admit sir this, that my name, was put in by the bearer upon general
instructions only. Yet the powerful contents of the letter enforce in
themselves the conclusion of my yielding.


Phil. Thy yielding? And why not mine as well?


Amp. Yes brother, and thine, and anyes else, whose heart is not hewne out of a
marble rock. Mine is of flesh, I call a woman Mother.


Phil. I ^m of the same ^ould with thee. But I bethink my self, Why has
Reason the Scepter in her hand, if rebel Passion may be suffered to crowd
into the Throne.


Amp. True, no Oracle more certain. But alas. But I know not what within this
melting breast cries out louder, and says, Amphibius, Thou shall now to this
case dispense with those severe rules.


Phil. Where is thy Logique? thy Philosophy? Art thou an Orator to persuade
others to that which they know not, and can thou not persuade thy self, in
that which thou acknowledgest?


Amp. Nay, the Arguments used by Hedone, are not emptily blown up with
passion, but soundly grounded on Philosophy, Logique and Oratory. S^en told me
that her Lady Hedone is near allied to Manto, Cassandra, Aspasia, and the
ancient Roman Tanaquil. That this Hedone, better then Lesbian Sapph^, might
pretend to be the tenth Muse.


Phil. Why then comes she not now to Apollos Court at this solemn assem^ly, to
l^y in her claim for it?


Amp. Siren tells me, she had done so, but that she knew not of the set day,
and now resideth in one of the fortunate Islands in the Atlantique sea f^rie often
from Thessaly. And besides all this, she is invited to a feast of four or five
gods by Mercury into Ethiopia.


Phil. Such draste of si^ens by thy feast.


Amp. For the cause of her absence I pass not much But I Am sure she is
learned, and deeply read. That s^ee shows by the reasons and Authorities
heaped in her letter.


Phil. What slout reasons? What authorities?


Amp. Even those which we read and admire in Apollos school. What say you to
Tully, Plutarch, Aristotle, Scneca, Socrates, Horace, etc.


Phil I am sure these afford impenctrable a^mor against the ^ssaults of
Hedone. And now are they brought on the other side against their wills?


Amp. Read but this line here in the bottom of the second page. Attend what
your (...) Tully says, Dandu^ aliquid atat^. No^ s^mper ^ncat ratio, etc.


Phil. This time and place s^s not to examine these particulars. Come lets to
the lau^ell Grove. There will we gage to the bottom this fardell of false
wares.


Exeunt. Actus secundus. Scen^ quarta.
Ludio solus. Ludio. ONe tells me I must study next my heart. That troubles my
br^ne too much. Another tells me it is good to e^te bread and butter next my
heart. That sumes sumes into my head too much. And to say the truth, my stomach
is not yet up. For I Am but new up my self, and I hope that will not be so
saucy as to tread on his Masters heels. But I say still, it is best playing
next ones heart. That is to me both study and breakefast. Once again cross
and pile, handy dandy, which hand will you have?

He plays two gamesters, and wrangles. -- O for some Companions. O for some
^ood play fellows! Gingl^ he is grown so proud, he tells me he is not for
boys play now. And Slug I could not get him up. I boune'd with my bag of
counters against his door. And he answered me nothing but whough, pugh: He
outsnorts nine horses, and outsleepes ten dormise. I will go find out
Nouice. He Is a young fat gosling to pull. Exit.


Actus secundus. Scena quinta.
Lauriger solus. Laur. When we had signified to our Lord Apollo our
publishing of his Mandates, he was pleased to say that there was never more
need of warning a Court, then now, that abuses and usurpations have crept into
his dominions. And therefore he charged us that this inquity should be more
strickt then heretofore. Intra^ Siren.

But look you now. There is one of the worms and Catte^pillers of our harvest.

I know her, though I never saw her before. By her fawning gesture and
inchan^ing wand, she is that famous infamous Siren, which so troubles and
bewilders some of our society. She hooks at all she meets. It Is marvel if
she reach not at me.


Actus secundus. Scena sexta.
Siren. Lauriger. Siren. TO thee, renowned Lauriger,
I come a happy messenger,
From Hedone, Queen Hedone, sweet Hedone,
The Goddess of delight and pleasure,
The life of life, the worl is best treasure,
Perform what I advise,
And thou shall be more wise,
Then all the rest that follow
Your mighty god Apollo.
Apollos t^ske torments your brains,
Abates your spirits, dries your vain^s.
Vain is your labor little profit,
No quiet by it, no end of it.
O cast away that laurel bow,
And crown thy head with roses now,
Now whilst thy frolick^ youth gives leisure
To bath thy self in choysest pleasure.
Thy time does go,
As rivers flow.
Ere long, you know,
Gray hairs will grow.
Then shall thou sigh, and say with tears,
Why lost I so my youthful years?
My spring is past, yet feign I would,
(But cannot) budde in winters cold.
Come then before age bids good night,
Spend youthful day in sweet delight.

Laur. Is this the lecture you read to us? Is this all you can say? A
flourishing glosing poetical Theme, that has neither truth nor substance in
it. An empty sounding painted drum, fit ^or children to hear and follow with
their rattles and hobby horses. Go Gill flurt, go set up your Pedlars shop in
Venus Court. There shall you have those that will dance to your music.


Siren. No man so learned, wise, or strong,
But may be conquered by my song.

^au. I can hear thee no longer. Auaunt thou Circe. Think thou to
transform me into a swine? I fly. Exit.


Siren. If he gone? I will not leave him so. A letter from the goddess her
self may pierce deeper with him, as it did with Amphibius. Exit.


Finis Actus Secundi.
Actus tertius. Scena prima.
Mistress Indulgence Gingle, John Gingle her son, Judge Rubbish her maid.
Indul. IVgge Rubbish, what, Judge Rubbish. Come and bring hi^ g^dle.


Iug. Here forsooth.


Indul. Have you warmed it?


Iug. I can find none but seacole fire to warm it:


Indul. Out upon thee slut Seacoale? I cannot abide to have any of that
brimstone fume to come about the body of my child. Go kindle some Charcoale,
and warm it well on both sides. Exit Judge.

What Mother can think it any pain to bring forth so precious a fruit? O my
living walking joy, thy fathers picture, and thy Mothers self, why should
thou be weaned from my lap?


Ging. Sweet Mother. If I were to choose a Mother,

Thou and no other

Should be my Mother.


Indal. Sweet Child, when thou speak, me thinks the M^ses, if there were
nine times nine of them, are but Oysterwomen and Kitchinsluffe.


Ging. Honorable Mother Indulgence, I must be no more prentise to Apollos
trade. Must I?


Indul. No my Child, thou art in a better trade. We are higher slowne now.


Ging. I like this new Master better then Musaeus. We have no terrible scepter
shaken over us in the Captains school.


Indul. Out upon that bloody butcherly weapon. What a base thing it is, that a
man should be armed against children? What natural Mother can suffer her own
flesh and blood to be torn by these black gown? Canibals? He that rancheth
the flesh of my child, had as good kiss --


Ging. Mother, I have heard that he was hanged that invented burch.


Indul. I, and he that invented books escaped by burning in the hand. Redit
Judge.


Iug. I have almost scorcht my fingers with warming it:


Indul. Shrink in while I buckle it, that you may be gaunt and fine in the
wast.


Ging. Mother. When you go in your coach up Parnassus hill, I must sit in your
lap, must I not? and hold Tisbies left ear in my hand with two fingers thus
Must I not? O it is the finest Puppy.


Indul. I, darling, and hold my fan in thy other hand, and sometime shake it
at the common people when we pass by them.


Ging. Indeed Mother, these are very Gentlemanlike feats. I wonder the
Captain has not read any lecture to me of them.


Indul. The Captain is to teach thee more souldierlike tricks. I can teach
thee these at home. Why Judge do you see how the rose is ruffled on the top of
his spurleather, set it better with your poking finger. (valor.


Ging. He has already taught me one soldierly trick of


Indul. What is that my sweet Babby?


Ging. When you are in your Coach, if any horses, though never so well bred
(except the horses of Apollos own Chariot) shall presume to take the wall or
upper hand of any of your Coach-horses, I must straight leap out of the Coach,
and with my poniard stabbe one of those uncivil horses through both the ears
at once.


Ind. I see Captain Complement is an excellent Master, he will make my child
be called the son of Mars and Bellona. He deserves more stipend then I allow
him for thee. Why son Gingle, this will be an action not only of valor, but
of honor and duty to me.


Ging. If I thus venture my self in duty to you, I pray you forget not your
duty to me. You know my Father's a man of great worth, and lands, and I am his
heir apparent.

I pray you in good company, call not me plain son Gingle, or son John,
or so, but Master John, or Master Gingle my son, or so. Others will do me
the more honor for it.


Ind. True my honorable child Master John Gingle or so. If thou be used
with such respect by me, how great honor will others yield me that bare
thee? But son I doubt, if the horses be tall, thou can not have them by the
ears with thy poniard. Thou shall* have thy Fathers long guilt Rapier. That
will reach them, unless they fly as high as Pegasus.


Ging. O for that Rapier. If I had it, the Captain would teach me in one day
and a half, how to wear it, how high the pummell must sit above the chape,
and how to wind it about when I salute.


Ind. I preethy, sweet son, let me see thee once act the fine gestures, which
the Captain has taught you. You do them by your self alone in the chamber,
and the door shut to you. I looked in yesterday at the keyhole, and me
thought it did me good to see thee repeat some of them in the presence of a
Candlestick, and Bed-staffe that were set upon the table.


Ging. Are you ^uis'd of that Mother? That is a secret, which the Captain
tells me, that I must show my feats to none till I am well practiced. And
another secret, better then that, is, in my private practicing to set up
imagined spectators for the whetting of my care and diligence. And therefore
sometime I set upon my table, a full auditory of Cushion, Candlestick,
Slippars, Bellows, and Chamberpot.


Ind. See my son Master Gingle, see what wrong you do me then. You will not
allow me that favor, which you do to your Bellows, and that which is below
Bellows.


Ging. As I am a Gentleman Mother, I cannot do withal as yet. You know when
you put me to this mighty Master, you charged me upon your blessing to obey
him, and follow his instructions, rather then the precepts of Musaeus or Apollo
himself. But by the next month, I think the Captain will give me leave to
repeat my postures before you. I will do your Mothership the favor to be in
the first form of my Spectators.


Ind. Next month? I cannot tarry till next day. Hold, here is a crown, carry
to him for his favor, to make me a spectator without delay. It may be in your
repeating, I shall teach you some gestures that the Captain thinks not of.


Ging. But Mother, I hope you will not fail my Master Captain. You will be a
suitor to Apollo for him, that he may continue his school of fine feats here
near our door.


Ind. Why child to that end have I called to have my Coach made ready. Apollos
great hall is almost a flight shot off on the top of Parnassus, I cannot get up
thither without my four foure-footed prancers. Judge bid my Coachman lay the
Coach bed backward, for we are to climb the hill. But I must in to dress me
better, and set my face in Court fashion. Exeunt.


Actus tertius Scena secunda.
Complement, and Implement his page. Imp. VAlerous sir, I pray you clear your
brow. What cloud of discontent enuelops your heroic soul?


Comp. I tell (...) (...). I am duloros^, I am fumbled and sud^led, and stu^
with two horne^, grief and anger.


Imp. Has S^ ^ned on you?


Comp. Now b^y I have her love and shall.


Imp. (Well you may, you p^y dear for it.) I hope Sir you are not angry with
me sir, your diligent Implement.


Comp. With thee? Thou shrubbe, thou scrubbe. Thou art below my wrath. The
thunderbolt of my indignation, where it ^lteth fo^th --


Imp. (My Masters bolt is soon shot)


Comp. Bestunds the tallest oaks: it strikes not at such dazies as thou art,
dandiprat.


Imp. But Master, if you will give me leave, I dare ask who dares make your
choler boil.


Comp. Sir boy, I Am angry with my self, and with a certain Knight errant.


Imp. Errant? An errant ass he is, that angers you. I Will lay my cap against my
dinner (that is odds against a cheese paring) some Knight has taken the wall of
you, and has challenged you into the field. And now me think, your anger
makes you tremble.


Comp. Imp. learn this of me, no fear, but ange^, makes men of valor
tremble. For anger is the wherstone of fortitude, as sometime said Sir Harry
Tottle, my fellow Knight and Philosopher.


Imp. Woe to that Knight, which coniur'd up that spright. Your angry spirit
will not be coniut'd down, without blood shed. (The reason is, my Master loves
black puddings well.) But I pray you Master, what knight? I Will be your second.
My keen weapon feeds on bloodshed. But I shall have the worst in this bloody
combat. (For nothing but the pudding skins and knotted threeds, will fall to
my share.)


Comp. Did thou mark even now when Sir Orgoli^ came to me, desirous to be
intoll'd my scholar?


Imp. I remember you went aside: but I could not perceive so much as an angry
look between you.


Comp. No. He was well pleased: but little to my case. The truth is, for
fashions sake, I had him to dinner against to morrow at my lodging. And he. --


Imp. (He Is enjoined penance by it)


Comp. And he, like an vnnurtur'd swayne, --


Imp. Would have you dine with him.


Comp. NO. No, Imp. The swain accepted my p^sser. Was I so kind and generous
to inu^te him, and he be so unkind as to come?


Imp. Indeed that is plain Count^y fashion, unfit for us.


Comp. I tell thee Imp I hate him for it, and if he come, I Will sauce him for
it. He shall dine^s last. I Will temper the sallad with my own hands.


Imp. So you had need, (for we have no Co^ke to do it. My Master and I are all
the offi^ in the house) But Master, is it so hateful and deadly to accept a
dinner at another man^ table? How are you then alive? Me thinks the Lords and
Knights should have poisoned you long since.


Comp. Thou have a pestilent cross witted brain. I think thy conceits do
caper the cross point within thy P^icranion. But ^ee how fa^e thy reach comes
short of mine.


Imp. (I me saine to reach far^e sometime, else I may s^arue.)


Comp. Such young cubs as thou, though wily, yet cannot extinguish. I
extinguish t^us upon the point. A man may be said to eat another meat upon
inuitation, o^ sans inuitat^on. Which the vulgar call not invited* (...) walk
the second way. I will not be invited. My wo^th, my gentle faculty, My brave
profession, They are the Orato^s, the Messengers, the Sergeants that inuit,
and drive, and draw me to the tables of the best.


Imp. I would not be that Porter that should keep you out (in a cold hungry
day when we have fasted over night.)


Comp. I tell thee, my presence adds honor to the place where I come. Where
ere I dine, my virtues pay my share, and where I sit, I leave behind me the
^weet perfume of court^sie.


Imp. (A sweet perfume quoth he. He has forgot at the French Ordinary when two
L^quies fell out, and on^ of them drew his poniard, who was it fell in a swoun^
and le^t such a perfume behind him, that the Chamberlain spent six pence in
Frankincense.)


Comp. But hoe, where is this fly? My Imp. I do vouchsafe to stoop so low as
to ask thy counsel. It inhaunceth my wisdom, to choose such a servant, as
is able to advise his Master. The wise Commanders in the wars sometimes
listen to the counsel of a common souldi^r, as D^n Plato says in his
politickes. What ^yst thou Imp. What shall I do ^o beat this dog from my
d^ore, it he come to morrow?


Imp. Let him come, and b^rke (...) hunger: the cudgel of my wit shall ^ang
him away


Comp. So you (...) my honor, ^aithfull Imp. to thee I leave this (...), But
(...) I would know the medicine whereby thou woulded purge this distemper out
of me.


Imp. I was now temperin^ and preparing it. List how the hammers ^eate in the
(...) of my brain. Thump. I Will none of that. ^ump again. I like that better.


Comp. I long to see the bi^th of the child of thy brain.


Imp. What if you s^nd him word, that this day upon (...) call, the whole
Academy of ^ous students arriving here, the Captain of your Complementall
school Count (...) Gi^o, takes up the chief Inn in Parnassu^.


Comp. O, at the sign o^ the flying horse Pegasu^.


Imp And there makes his pro^ ^ast with a Mask, that must last till midnight.


Comp. I preethee do not hold ^e till midnight in the unmasking thy advise.
What Is this to m^e and Sir Orgolio?


Imp. And thereupon that the foresaid Don has over entreated your honorable
worship to be the Herald and Earl Marshall to set every guest in^ place, and
every di^ in^ rank.


Comp. That none can do but I, and those that learn of me.


Imp. Otherwise the Cooks and Sewers will make a ^ay with spi^ and choppi^g
knives: and among the guests the^ will be a mortal fight for p^ecedency in
place.


Comp. Well said my boy. I have it now. Therefore Ergo. the Exclusion is, that,
as he would prevent murder, he expect not to have me stay at home that day.


Imp. That is a charitable exclusion, and tends unto the preservation of
Apollos peace.


Comp. But how if Sir Orgolio say then he will come thither too, and be my
shadow there, and play the under* Marshall at my beck?


Imp. He cannot be so uncivil, as to intrude, vnbid, vncooth, vnkist.


Comp. He that would be so uncivil, as to come invited, I dare not trust him
where he is not called.


Imp. Let him come at his own peril, yet our house shall be thus acquit of him.


Comp. What ^f he return me word that he will come and dine with me next day?


Imp. If so, then rather then fail, I Will blaze it all abroad, that your
lodging is set on fire with (...) of whole showles and legions of p^ouision for
entertainment.


Comp. That will be for mine honor, that my great Chamber of entertainment
is in combustion with the fumes of my hospitality.


Imp. And for your thrift too, that none shall hereafter think to be your
guest. (Great Chamber? We have never a ^come bigger then a Cobblers stall; and
as for fire, it blases no further then a tobaccopipe with us.)


Comp. What say thou?


Imp. I say non^ but the son of a Cobbler would be so discourteous, as to
reply against this answer; and none so witless, if ever he refined his brains
with tobacco


Comp. O how have thou raised up my heavy heart, I warrant I weigh ten pound
lighter then I did e^e while.


Imp. Lighter ten pound of lead. (For I never kn^ him weigh heavy ten pound
of silver. I think the Faryes run away with his money. He suckes the young
Gentlemen's purses, and yet we sta^ue at home.)


Comp. Now is the time that Master Gingle is to mee^e with us on Parnassus
downs to act his trampling part Uamos. Exeunt.


Actus tertius. Scena tertia.
Lauriger solus. A Man had need to have a long forke, to keep off this Siren.
After I had repulsed her insinuating song, she follows me still, and delivers
me a letter, sent from the Lady Hedone (to me, she says) and shows a fair
indorcement in gilded letters. To the grand supporter of Apollos Court,
La^riger. And so ^orth as follows in that vn^st title, When I had read the
superscription, she by violence would needs embrace me. I vouchsafed not so
much as to open the letter. Whereupon with hateful heart, and spiteful look,
she vowed revenge. Now who but ^he has contrived to catch ^e in a sna^e. A
message is brought to me by a seeming ^riend, o^ prostering a pension from
Captain Complement, to procure a patent from Apollo to hold on his apish trade
within these walls.

The Broker told me, that, of Lauriger, that gold would make me Auriger, that
t^is Captain fetching over diverse of our yonglings, and cheating them of their
money, we, by way of reprizall, may take this p^sion, that it is no b^ibery to
receive it, but an act of justice: that he that robs a thief, has earned not
only pardon, but also praise.

Now Lauriger summons his wits, and says, this is a trap to bring thee in
disgrace, and to endanger thy office in Apollos Court. ^ay a straw there
Lauriger. Consider that this (...) hobbyhorse lives but in all ungry fashi^n.
All he can ^cratch by cheating, he spends on that witch Siren. He every quarter
to allo^ (...) pension of ^iue crowns, that can sca^ce allow himself five
dinners, or an honest flo^kebed to repose his vaulting bones? Lay another straw
th^e, Lauriger, ^t his straw M^sse.


Actus tertius. Scena quarta.
Ludio. Laur^ger. Ludio. I Think I rose not on the right side today. I have
rambled up and down, and can get no playfellowes.


Lau. Nay this snare which they have laid for me, when me the mo^e to accuse
them both anon at Apollos Judgment seat.


Lud. No^ice is so taken up with the Captain, that he cannot be for me all
this day.


Lau. First I will plead he is a corrupter of youth, and turns them from
humane shape into Baboones.


Lud. Will no body take pity on a de^olate gam^ster? Will you play with me?
will you?


Lau. Secondly, he ^obbes them of their patrimonies.


Lud. Come you in the bl^w iacket, I Will try with you at this, or that, or these.


Lau. Thirdly, he pulls away the sweetest nu^ngs from the Muses breasts.


Lud. At length well hit, I have found now. Ho. Sir Lauriger, I challenge you
at bull, bear, and horse.


Lau. You will be ho^st at school for this. Will not a snatch in the
afte^noone se^ue you, and then buckle to your book again, but you must lavish
out the cream of the morning so prodigally, and hold on thus till noone?


Lud. I tell thee, I had rather have this then cream with sugar. I taste my
play: all else is unsavory to me.


Lau. If Mus^us hear of this, Apollos curse will light upon thee.


Lud. Apollo is our great Lord. And yet I have heard that (...) loves boys
play, and therefore he still continues a boy.


Lau. Peace thou babbling ^auing tongue.


Lud. What is he else? I am sure he has no beard.


Lau. Thou ignorant ^ondling, that is hieroglificall. His beardlesse
flourishing youth, signifies the never fading some which is gotten by his
service.


Lud. I, but (...), by your leave, I have read, that Apollo was wont to play
at Quoits.


Lau. The gods may be said to Quoite when they cast into the lap of fortune,
the lots and fates of mortal men. This is the moral of it.


Lud. I say Apolloplaid at Quoits, as we do. And his play-fellow was young
Cyparissus, a boy about my pitch and years, but that he had not so manly a
look, as my self, but simpered somewhat womanishly.


Lau. Cyparissus that ^as turned into a Cypress tree*


Lud. Apollo played with him, by a good token, their Quoits were knockers,
heavier then horse shoes, I think. For the poor boy was brained with one of
them.

Does not our Ovid Naso,
That never told lie, say so?

Lau. A good token? that is a bad token.


Lud. O how it gueues n^y heart to think of that honest lad. Ah p^ore ^rissus.
When I learned the lesson in Ovid, I could have corn that lease out of my
book, for very grief, that such a mischance should fall out at the worthy
exercise of Quo^ng. Out alas, if my trade did not employ me better, I could
weep my pocket full.


Lau. You may take a better lesson thence, then weeping. The meaning of that
fable is, that shrode hoyes must beware of spending their time in play, lest
some mischief befal^ them: Nay lest Apollo himself brain them.


Lud. You conster false to us, so you do.

But I say still,

And so I will.

I gather thence and will lay ods,

That sport and play beseemes the gods.

Else our good Master Apollo would never himself have plai at Quoits in his
own proper person, with a palt^y boy, like one of us. I have writ this note in
the margin of my book. And I think verily if Ovid were alive again, and
should see my wholesome lines, he would turn them into verse, and add them to
that story.


Lau. Ovid had never been so good a Poet, if he had spent his school time
idly in play as you do.


Lud. Ovid loved play well. I have heard that he played with Corynna.


Lau. How this Lad p^ates? Ludio I tell thee that was no boys play.


Lud. By your leave sir, Ovid has honored my exercises. He describes in verse
our boys play.

Parna tabella capit ternos vtrinque lapillos,

In queis vicisse est continuasse tuos. Twice three stones, set in a crossed
square where he wins the game

That can set his three along in a row,

And that is sippeny morrell, I trow,


Lau. This boy consters that true, which many a man understood not. Verily thou
read books only where they speak of play.


Lud. I do not think that if he were here, he would entreat Apollo to play at
Quoits with me or check stone, or spurnepoint.

Good Sir Lauriger, you are better acquainted with Apollo then I. I pray you
entreat him to play with me this great play day. This is his fat remedy at his
shrouingfeast they say. I challenge him at all games from blowpoint upward to
football, and so on to mumchance, and ticketacke.


Lau. How this boys fancy makes him saucy. Is it not enough sir, that you
trouble me thus with your idle chat, but you must be so bold with great
Apollo? He thinks the gods can enjoy no greater bliss then gaming.


Lud. Sir, do you hear? rather than sit out, I will give Apollo three of the
nine at Ticketacke. I do not think but I shall take him at a why not every
other game. His mind will be so on the Muses, and upon his verses.


Lau. Apollo and his Musaeus take you too often with a Why-not at-schoole. You
know what should follow thereupon. Why-not, etc.


Lud. Threaten me not. I tell thee, no torture can make me bate an ace of my
play. You would not think it, but, as I am true Ludio whenever I am
trembling under the hand of the executioner, If I do but think on my play,
then even then, those back blows, (which others think so rufull) seem to me
nothing, but threshing hens at Shrouetide. He that spend^ his life in play,
keeps Shrouetide all the year.


Lau. Belike you think play to be Apollos Shrouetide


Lud. I that I do: elsw why play we now in honor o^ Apollo?


Lau. I tell thee this our play if it be weighed right, i^ three ounces study,
and but one ounce play. This fla^ of recreation is not kindled without a spark
of diligence. Our playing now is a kind of study, whereas a^ thy seeming study
is nothing but playing or ploddin^ how and where and with whom to play. Thy
trade i^ to be prodigal of (the chiefest riches which is in o^ power) time.
Thou art a very bankrout of thy own^ time: and love to pull others into the
same losses.


Lud. What speak you of losses? He that loses at o^ time may win at
another. I can tell you of o^ young Oleo, he got of Ganeo the Elder, all his
poin^ hatband, garters, and a gold ring, and five crown^ in money; and yet in
two hours to see to, see ho^ fortune came with a windlace about again.


Lau. Peace thou brat, whose mouth is armed with bale of dice, instead of a
stall of teeth. What prate^ thou of recovering lost rings and money? The shi^
wrack that thou make is vnrecoverable.

Nec reuocare potes, qui: periere, dies Lost days can never be recalled. Time
steals away, a^ thou art a stealer of time. See now how thou have i^ croached
upon my precious time, whilst I hear a^ speak, with such a canker of good
hours. Awa^ away.


Lud. You bid me away, because you dare not play wi^ me.


Lau. Do thou dare me thou elfe? I will.


Lud. I know you will venture no money, nor points. must play with you for
nothing. Come on therefore at hide and seek, o^ blind man buffe.


Lau. Come, I will once boy it again at either for a crash


Lud. Why then at bl^ndman buffe you shall be first blinded.


Lau. Nay sir boy, if you challenge and choose the game too, you must be first
blinded. But what tools have we?


Lud. Borrow one of these Gentlewomens maskes:


Lau. Nay then you will look through the holes. Will you gull me so?


Lud. If I once look through the holes, then say Ludio is set in the Pillo^y.
but rather then want ^ew, here take my ga^ter, and tie my sachell about my face.


Lau. O with what wicked bumbast i^ his sachell slust? I thought it was not
true begotten books, that made the belly of it swell so big.


Lud. It has cast calfe now. You must tie me to these winckers.


Lau. I had rather tie thee to one of our school posts, or hang our great
dic^ary at thy heel, for a clogge to keep thee from gadding to play.


Lud. Talk not to me of Dick snary, nor Richard-snary; I care not how little I
come near them. But sir you must have this Morice-bell tied to your point,
that I may hear where you go. Else you will have too much odds of me.


Lau. Will you make me act hobby horse, or Master Gingle? For once I will.


Lud. Now that is on, come and tie me.


Lau. So, you are tied, now I must turn you about thrice. Sic deluditur Ludre.
Exit.


Lud. I do not hear the bell. Lauriger stands still I doubt. Nay gentle
playfellow, you must stir up and down, ^e we shall have no sport.


Actus tertius. Scena quinta.
Sirca. Ludio. Sirea. I Hope to find more game here. O yonder is a ^h (...). I
think he is caught in our net already. So, so, Verily Cup^ has blinded him for
our purpose.


Lud. O I have him. I have him. But where is your bell? vnty^ me now (...) your
(...) to be blinded O what hand (...) Vndow me, undo me.


Sir. I have but the vn^oing of many in my days. But I (...) met with so
forward a guest, that would beg hi^ own undoing.


Lud. I have over come it now. What now? He turned to She? (...) Lauriger, me
thinks your looks are grown very long on the sudden. Has he served me thus?


Sir. How well art thou seru^d, when such a Nymph is at thy service?


Lud. It tho^ be at my service, s^ake thy silken coat, and golden ^and,
against my garters and hat. Lift who shall deal.


Sir. Itell thee, I use little plain dealing. I must shuffle and cut too.


Lud. Both? Nay that is against law.


Sir. Yet will i deal plainly with thee. I have neither skill nor mind to
play with thee.


Lud. Can any sweet Nymph be a stranger to Ludio? I have heard that Nimphs love
to play at more games then I know.


Sir. I do not refuse, because thou art a stranger, but because thou art our
friend; Thou a^t ours already. What need we spend bi^me upon those wanton
sparrowes, that are in our cage already? S^t (...) Ludio, thou art a member of
our fa^il Queen He done gets good acces^e by thee. Go on with all thy thrifty
wares to get in more letters up in our trade. Go to sir G^biano, make him pay
for thy acquaintance.


Lud. Gentle goldilockes. I would do so, but that I am now employed against my
wont in studying ^n oration to save my head from a blow, which Apollos
visitation may now bring upon me. Exit.


Actus tertius. Scena sexta.
Drudo. Praeco. Siren. Nouice. Drud. NOuice, you know you must appear too.


Praeco. I have cited him according to law.


N^u. What is the matter, think you?


Praeco. I heard a bird sing (hark in your ear) that there is an accusation
against you for misspending your time with Captain Complement.


N^. I do but as others do. I am not alone.


and. What strange guest is yon? A female I think. Who but Siren that has made
such turmoiles here o^ late. Pr^co have you cited ^er?


Praeco. She Is in my ^owle, I Am glad I have met with her. Dame Siren, thou
art ^ndited by the name of Siren for subuerting Apollos subjects; You must
along with me, and appear to answer such matters as shall be objected against
you, on the behalf of our Sovereign Lord Apollo.


Siren. Thou arrest me, who have arrested thy betters? I tell thee, I will be
there. I have good friends in Apollos Court. I will not be hired to tarry away.
But before I go, I must deliver a message to you from a great goddess.


Praeco. A goddess to me?


Siren. I^o thee, and thee, and to you all.


Drud. Say what thou must, or can.


Siren. Hedone, Queen Hedone, sweet Hedone,
Dame natures care, and noblest birth,
The i^y, and crown of heaven, and earth,
The aim, and center of desire,
The fuel of most sacred fire,
By me, and this, and this
She sends you all her bliss.
Among the gods she has her pla^e,
They all stand gazing on her face.
The clouds d^ from her presence fly,
It Is sunshine where she casts her eye.
Where are she treads on earth below,
A rose or ^illy up does grow.
Her breath a gale of spi^ brings:
Mute are the Muses when she sings.
What ere she touches turns to N^ar,
What man, but can, and must affect her?
No heart so hard, but needs must melt,
When once her kindly warmth is felt.
She, she vouchsafe, to call you to her,
And wooing prays you now to woo her.
By study soon, fresh youth does break,
The fair grow foul, the strong grow weak:
Leave leave this musing bookish trade:
Enjoy your selves before youth fade.
Time must be gone,
Old age creepes on.

Drud. She puts her message home, me thinks.


Praeco. I have arrested her; and I think she will arrest us.


Nouice. I like her song well, I Will get a copy of it. If Apollo give me leave,
I will have more acquaintance with her. Me thinks this Siren would make a good
wife for my Master, Captain Complement, and so she shall be my Mistress. O
fair Hedone, sweet honey Hedone, more sweet then Marmalet, or Quidony.


Drud. Away thou glosing slatterer. We are no game for thee. Let us about our
business. Praeco do your office, carry her away. Let her chant this song
before Apollo. The Muses will out-sing her, and tear her s^earing locks. I
will go cite Slug. Exeunt.


Finis Actus ter^ij.
Actus quartus. Scena prima.
Complement. Gingle. Implement. Comp. GEntle sir Gingle, the flower of my
school, return my thanks to the honorable Dame Indulgence thy high
deserving Mother, for the glittering token the sent me. I shall deserve it in
my readiness to accomplish thee. But where ended we yesterday?


Ging. You were instructing me how to salute a Lady, or so, if she had a
Monkey, or so, and wept, or so.


Imp. This is but so, so.


Comp. In case you find a Lady weeping and ^ournfull, for that her M^nkey is
sick of the mum^^, (...) say.


Ging. Fair ^ady weep not for your Monkey.


Comp This is bare and vulgar. Rather ^sh your salutation thus. (...) (...)
Clarid^na.


Ging. ^t as can be. T^ is Clarid^na was courted by the Knight of the sun. My
Mother has ^ad that book to me. Si^ your s^le is very h^h and lo^.


Imp. Ves sir, my master and I have gone over many ^s high a style, when we
went to rob orchards for our dinners.


Comp. Twice d^ble worthy dubbed Maddaine --


Giag. Twice d^ble dubbed. What does she wear a double^ (...) Ladies ^e to
wear doublets now?


Cyn^. You vnde stand not. There was of late years a sashion, when h^ vir, and
hic mulier were in request. But gentle Gingle, though thou do stand under me,
yet thou do not understand me. Twice doubly because she has two (...) to her
honor. The full a title of law which she has from ^et ^u band who was dubbed
Knight with an unbloody sword. The second The second What ^'st. him h^, the
second. Oh I have it, because the is rich^ in clothes then ^n ioynter. But
proc^ we in your approach.


Ging. Oh s^ you have wonderfully (...) ^dme.


Comp. I have wipe ^and cla^d the dull spectacle of thy intellect with the Nap^
of my Comment.


Ging. Indeed now me thinks ^espye her clearly w^ put a looking-glass. But
how should I forbid her to weep?


Imp. To weep? Madame I forbid the ba^es between you and s^ow.


Ging. I, the Knights name Sorrow?


Imp. Perhaps he is a o^y knight, (like my master)


Comp. What Imp. you are too nimble. Are you so saucy to step before me?


Imp. (I was saine to step before him when we stole hens together, and he put
me fir^ into the henn-^oost.)


Ging. Truly Captain me thinks Implement suggests very (...) would willingly
forbid those banes.


Comp. Forbidding banes? Away with this forbidding banes. It is a bane^ull
ominous word, not besitting the wooing (...). You shall mould all up in the
sine pulle past of poetry thus.

Twice double worthy dubbed Madame,

Whose virtues not the longest tongue can sadome.


Imp. I think La^es garments are measured by th'^ll and by the yard, but
measuring their virtues by the ^adome, I never heard o^ before.


Ging. Twice double worthy dubbed Madame, Whose long tongue no man can sadome.


Comp. O dismal. O dangerous! Take heed of stumbling so with your tongue when
you speak of female tongues. Whose virtues not the longest tongue can fadome.


Ging. Whose virtues not the longest tongue can fadome.


Comp. Right and straight. Then on.

Souse not thy glittering globy eyne

In d eary teary salt sea brine.


Ging. Globy eyne? What Is that?


Comp. Kno^st thou not what globy is? I perceive then thou a^ no traveler,
thou have not (as I have done) traveled about the globe of the earth. Know
not what eyne be? I see thou art no Poet, thou have never read Chau^r. Have
thou never heard of eyne tw^ine?


Ging. Souse not. This word will not down with me.


Imp. Mr. Gingles queasie slomacke cannot digest souse.


Ging. The Lady will think, I use to converse with Tripewiues, if I talk to
her of souse.


Imp. Mr you once courted a sousing Dame, (a fulsome Kitchinwench.)


Comp. Peace thou squeaking pigge; or else the bandogs of these hands shall
lugge thy lagging ears. Souse not thy globyeyne. I tell thee this is not such
as it is vulgarly taken. It is not a butcherly word, it is not descended from
the Tripe wife, nor has it affinity with the fryingpan.


Imp. Nor did it ever hang cheek by iole with a black pudding.


Comp. Mark the Philosophy of the phrase. The roaring dashing element, the sea
is salt, and brine is salt, and trickling tears are s^lt.


Imp. And P. I. S. is salt.


Com. The sea, the bryne, the tears, the tears, the bryne, the sea. Why may
they not all three thus dashing, soaking, soucing lie? It is a martial word. I
use it often my self, I tell thee.


Imp. I too often when you tell me you will give me a souse on the ear.


Ging. Souse not, etc. Fit. wondrous fit, as my persumed glove for my
sweethand. It she wept for sorrow before, I shall now make her weep for joy
to hear this eloquence.


Imp. But my Masters, you leave the poor Monkey too long in distress. Heelle
dye o'th Mumpes, unless we relieve him the sooner.


Ging. It Is true. Pray go on. I am to say your Monkey will recover. Master
Prompter do your part.


Comp. Then thus. Your sour legged, two-leg'd, Manimitating, two-handed,
long-tayled play fellow, shall be readuanced to his pristine integrity of limbs.


Imp. He had need put in sound of wind and limb, for the Mumps lay siege to
his throat, and breed more danger to his weazand, then to his ten bones.


Ging. Two-foot, foure-foot? how can that be? Has he six feet?


Imp. Six feet? six to one my Master puts the trick of the louse upon him. I
have known when he has blown them in a quill upon better men this this.


Comp. Thou art not worthy to be numbered among the two-footed, but rather art
to be imbased unto the foure-footed. If thou do not understand how Apes and
Monkeyes are two-leg'd and two-handed; sometime they creep on all four. Imp.
show him how, sometime they stalk on tiptoe. Thus.


Imp. If I had bin an Ape I should have climed plumtrees bravely.


Comp. Let me see how you can imitate this.


Ging. Sometime they trace on all four thus.


Imp. Sometime they ride upon a mastiffe dog thus. I want nothing now but my
whippe to keep this Lollard hound in awe.


He rides upon Gingles back. Comp. Come off Imp. Enough of this. We will send
him hereafter for instruction to Paris Garden, where he shall learn not only
Apetrickes, but the whipping o^ blind Bears.


Ging. Paris Garden? O sin^l Paris they say is a ^ne City in France. I am glad
he will send me thither. No man can be a complete Gentleman till he have
learnt their cringes and crinkling in the hams: which is in excellent request to
the heavens now adays.


Comp. Good sir, I hope my self, and such men of worth as I, have transported
thence already plentiful loads of this French ware, that you shall save the
labor and cost of living there at their dear Ordinaries and precious
dancing-schooles, you must therefore in your stipend to me allow me, for that
which I spent among Counts, Nobles, Knights and Monsiers there; sometime in the
five pound Ordinary, I tell you.


Imp. An horrible profitable lie My Master never dyn'd there but with O^llers
and Vintners boys.


Comp. I tell you it cost me sour Nobles to the Usher of the dancing school
to learn one trick, which they call Le Turn fuseau It wheels a man about,
as a boy does a stone in a ho^pe, and makes him appear as round and uniform,
as a loyne^s turned bed post.


Gins. I pray you learn me that whi^ legig trick.


Comp. You are not come to that. Be not so hasty, you are yet but in the
Rudiments, and to tell you plain, you must refund to me some charge for other
proficiency before we aspire so high.

There was another vaulting trick called the ^ur.


Imp. The base vulgar in English call it the hoister.


Comp. It lifts a man up til^ he grow less and less like a Hawke after a
Heron. Shaw. It cost me. Let me see.


Imp. how much?


Imp. Upon mine honor thirty Crowns.


Comp. I think it was but twenty.


Imp. By your leave master, I know better then you. Do not I keep your Count
Book? I Am sure 'twa^ that week that you bought the Iewellers rich Diamond
that was refused by so many Nobles. They could not reach the price of it.


Comp. O it was the late Queen Mothers Jewel. Thou didstill thou forgetful
brat to leave it behind. I should have worn it at this public show. All
Parnossus would have admired it.


Imp. Master, you lost the key of your Cabinet. I durst not break it open (The
devil a Jewel we have, but one that was bought of a Pedlar, and in the
Country Towns he makes a great show with it at Bear. baitings, but in such
civil places as this is, he durst not be seen with it.)


Ging. I pray you when I am in the humor of buying Jewels, let me have the
refusal of it.


Comp. Thou shall, because thou art an ingenious Gentleman (...) Imp. Remember
to set down a caveat in the Margent of my Inuentary, that no man el^e ^y so
much as look on it or have any price set of it.


Imp. M^ster Gingle I pray you pay me ten groars forentring this Caveat in mine
^ffice. My see my see sir.


Ging. Come to me at my lod^ (...), and I will lay ^alt on this birds ^yle dor
fear o^ flyingg away.


Comp. I tell you Master Gingle. It will go near to cost you the manner of
Foolingham.


Ging. Let oaks and lands fly. I mean to gl^tter bright in Diamond* dearly
dight.


Comp. You must add.

That men and dames may gaze, and say,

Wh^t (...) is that, that glides along this way?


Ging. What starts is that, etc O excell^ All the world could never have
furnished me with such a Tutor.


Comp. Say rat er all the habitable circumference of this muddy masly earthy
globe could not have affoorded and suppeditated unto me so melli^uous an
Indoctrinator, as is the curious Captain Complement.


Ging. O that I could by Metamorphasis be transformed into this eloquent man.


Imp. Thou had better be transformed with Apuleius ^o a golden Ass.


Comp. I tell thee I have written a large book of instructions how a man
should wear his clothes, on which side his p^e should lie in his pocket, which
^ocking he should draw on first upon ominous days.


Imp. Indeed (...) I have heard you often tell of a man that brake his leg
because he pulled on his left stocking first on one of the dog days.


Comp. I sir, and there was another, that had the toothach seven years
after, because he pic^t his teeth with the south end of his picktooth, in stead
of the north, while he was in his chamber meditating a discourse to be offered
up before a beny of Ladies.


Ging. Is there south and no^n a picktooth?


Comp. I, it was touched with a loadstone.


Ging. I would rather have picked my teeth with my knife thus, then have run
into such a mischief.


Comp. What say you? what do you? do you wear a knife about you?


Ging. I Am sure it cost me a Mark, and I got mine arms graven upon the
blade, three hobby-horses or, prancing in a field* or, b^idled and sadled
argent.


Comp. Then I must n^s tell you my mind. I hoped well that you would prove
under my hands, but now I doubt you are no Gentleman, I fear you le never
prove fashionable, I will rather employ my pains about other my scholars who
have vowed never to wear knives.

What? wear a knife. Nay I have done with you.


Ging. Nay, good sir, I pray you do not cast me off, I Will rather cast away
this clownish tool.


Imp. I may take it up and wear it. No knife can wound my gentry.


Comp. We burn day light. I must have, and muster up my friends and advocates
to plead for me in this Court. Sir Imp. run to Mistress Gingle, tell her,
now it is time.


Ging. I will be your Remembrancer to her: She shall protect you, else she is
no mother for me.


Actus quartus. Scena secunda.
Geron with a forke on's neck. I Have bin mending my hedges, which the scuruy
boy Ludio broake down. And now when I would rest at home, and take my
nooning-nap, I must be vexed with my son, my wretched son. They say that
Apollo keeps visitation to day. I will lay my son at his Palace gate,
perhaps this feast day we may get some favor, some drop of his clemency. Exit.


Actus quartus. Scena tertia.
Mistress Indulgence and Judge Rubbish. Indul. IV. ge Rubbish What Judge?
bring away the looking gla^e. Thou dirty Rubbish, thy singers have defiled the
lace of my Cuffes. Will not cuffing about the ears make you more cleanly?


Ing. The lace is so thick, that I was feign to tugge hard at it. I know not
what can foul it, unless the smoothing-iron cast a rusty color through the
paper


Ind. Out upon thee for an old rusty liar. The glass* Hold it on the other
side. You know I do not love to behold that moule on this cheek. Thou
spiteful baggage, more yet on the left hand. Is that the left hand?


Iug. Here Is my left hand.


Ind. I, but the other side is my left hand. You must conform your eyes and
hands to your* Mistress, and forget which is your own right or left. Does my
Veil hang in true proportion?


Iug. I can say nothing ^or any portion, but in hangs just behind you.


Indul. Unless I be set all in print, the Poetical Mus^ will make times on
me, when they see me in A^ Judgment Hall. But Judge, what had my son to
breakefast this morning?


Ing. A Pullets wing.


Indul. That Is not forsooth. What nothing else?


Iug. Forsooth a piece of Pie too But so sooth Mistress, if you give me leave,
I Will tell you what they say o^ him.


Indul. What? who? Why?


Iug. Marry forsooth P^ponus, and others eke also d^ say, if you feed him so
much, that he will never p^u: a scholar.


Indul. Prove scholar? Do they think my child is so low borne as to be made
a ^y scholar? Shall such a keen resin'd w^t be dul'd and imbased, by plodding
on a book? What is Philoponus but a Bookeworme, an Inckhorne squirt, a
botching patcher of Latin shred^ What is this learning, but a little gibberish
in the tongue, a sheepish look in the face, and pennilesse famine in the
purse? I he more scholar a young man is, the less like to speed of a rich
wife. I will have my son the mark and wish of the most renowned Dames.


Iug. I do not so hate scholars, but that I could ^ne in my heart to ma^y
Phil^us at a venture.


Indul. I will, as man^erly as I may, tell Apollo that it is an honor to his
school, that such a one as my son was of it, though but for a taste of the
Muses dish, a gentle touch of the verge of their garment. I, but is my Coach
ready?


Iug. One of the horses is very unruly, the Coachman. talks like a rogue, and
says that nothing but a wise will tame him.


Indul. This lewd horse-rubbers tongue must be tamed I doubt he is three
quarters drunk.


Iug. That Is no news.


Indul. I must away, the hour runs with swifter race then my horses. Exeunt.


Actus quartus. Scena quarta.
Enter Geron and Retro his son. (...). Keep on thy way, do thou not see?
hold on that path. See thou not how my staff does wise thee the way? I
think thou came backward into the world, that now art damned to this
crab-like pace. Shall I never be rid of this office? So: stand still Now me
thinks I see the portch of great Apollos temple. O great Apollo, if my son
have thus deserved to be punished, yet what has guiltless Geron, what has he
offended?


Retro. O. terg. ollota nodra^. (...).


Geron. Tnou do well to humble thy self before great Apollo. But why to
pardon us? Why me?


Retro. Rethaf, O. rethaf.


Geron. What say thou to thy Father?


Retro. Ti. saw. ruoy. tlaf.


Geron. What say thou? Was it my fault?


Retro. Voy. tes. em. ta. ot. ih, a koob.


Geron. Did I set you (...) (...) ^high a book? You were too proud of your
(...), and would needs slide over the ^udiments, and leap at first into an
higher form, then your capacity would reach unto.


Retro. (...). rehtom. Im. ^thom.


Geron. Thy Mother, thy Mother. I, it is true, thy Mother would needs have it
so. I must needs say 'twas her fault, not mine. She (...) ioggd me, and told
me, that her Rowland was as good a scholar, as his Master, and that the (...)
est book did best befit his ^gh (...) (...) (...) now (...) thy long long
(...) ^ ^nance unto me, then to thy ^ two years have I bin (...) ^ at home. It
grieves and g^ates m^e (...) (...) (...) this backward language imposed by
Apollos doom on my wretched child. It wounds mine eyes to see these backward
steps. And yet remains a (...) (...) for me,

To be the scorn and by word of this pla^e.
Old Gerons ouer-forward child
Retorted for his ^astinesse,
Is made the prou^ (...) of these times.
And likened to soon ^ipe soon ^otten fruit*
(...) how long time remains yet vnexpir'd
(...) this unnatural preposterous task?
(...) ^o. Rey. Sa^. Norey.
(...) I, so, it is one whole liuelong year.
^ich thy poor father (spent with tears and grief)
^arce hopes now to ou^last. Alas
The candle of my days is almost spent,
It waueth in the snufte, and little oil
Is left to make it flame.
And yet alas too soon these blasts of sighs
Will puff it out* ^ese tears will drown it quite.

Retro. Rethaf. reed. Rethaf.


Geron. What say thou my dear son, too dear to me, that have me cost so
deep a punishment.


Ret. Tell. su. geb so. ol^ pa.


Geron. Well What shall we beg of Apollo?


Ret. Ot, nodrap. su. sibt. ^ey.


Geron. To pardon this year to us, and release thee? I fear thy wishes are
far larger then ou^ hopes.


Ret. Irr^m. ollopa.


Geron. Merry Apollo? I doubt his ears are stopped, and I have heard the gods
v^e not to recall their doomes, which they have once pronounced.


Ret. Keps. o^ suesu^n.


Geron. What? would thou have me speak to Musaeus Apollos Priest, to
intercede for thee for this remission?


Ret. Os ot. mih.


Actus quartus. Scena quinta.
Geron. Philop. Musaeus. Retro. Geron. IN good time here he comes forth.
But son I dare not approach to him.
O what a trembling reverence does possess
My limbs, and all benums my chill cold blood,
When I behold his awefull gravity.
Let us retire beside this shady tree
This mossy ban^ke will rest my weary limbs,
And give me time to recollect my spirits.

Phil. Grave guide of ^ender youth, Interpreter
Of great Apollos laws chief secretary
Unto the learned Muses, all your words
Are lodged safe in this laborious breast.
Think your command's no sooner said then done*

Musaeus. Careful Philoponus, I approve your pains
And have already recommended you
Unto Apollos self. O that the rest
Of those, that undertake this worthy task^,
Pretending to the liberal sciences,
Could so acquit themselves.
But (...) all seeing (...) in circling round
About bot^ Hemispheares of this large world,
Has spied that some (O too too great a sum)
Have s^ly crept within the verge and pa^
Of his dominions. In truth they strangers are,
Nay enemies and rebels to his laws;
Yet would be counted Natives of his school,
By them his tender plants corrupted are,
Distorted, brui^ed, hindered of their growth.
Think they that these ^oundations have bin l^
These Cells erected, and those Temples dight
To harbor such foul el^es? Shall snorting sloa^
Think here to nestle, fixed to his bed,
As is the slow-paced snaile unto his shell?
Shall wanton pleasure think to revel ^ere?
Shall toying apish p^ating Complement
Outface the Muses, tear Apollos locks,
Entice away the tender brood, with shows
Of empty words, and bubbles vanishing?
Shall shifting sharkes defraud their innocence?
Shall hasty heady Nouices outl^ap their masters lo^,
Presuming on their wit, and undertake
To read a lecture to their teacher? No.
It Is well that some have heretofore for this
Bin made examples of such hastiness.
Nay let them backward go, that thus have run.

Geron. Alas poor child, I see, he means thee.
Have pity on us great Apoll^s Priest.
Worthy Philoponus entreat Mus^us for my child.

Phil. Do'es your child desire so much?


Retro. D^g. ris keps. ros. em.


Geron. Speak for him good sir.


Phil. His language is so harsh, that I will speak, if it be but to rid my
ears of this preposterous sound. Venerable Mus^us. May it please our Lord
Apollo, now after two years penance to remit the remaining year.


Musaeus. If there be evidence that in this time, he has retired and plied
what formerly he ouerslipped in his rudiments.


Phil. My self can partly witness that.


Mus^us. It may be that Apollo will consider him. But let us have up to
Per^assus top. The time is come, the Court must now begin.


Geron. My heart is warm with hope to follow them.


Actus quartus. Scena sexta.
Complement. Gingle. Implement. Comp. STill I say and swear upon my virtues,
that you are mistaken. Have you bin so long my scholar, and are you yet
unacquainted with the Callender of my stipend book?


Ging. My bargain was to allow you five crowns a month, and will you now
wire-draw me to thirteen months in the year? When I was Apollos scholar,
(...) sure Musaeus reckoned but quarterly, (...) (...) but twelve months in the
year.


Comp. Apollos Priest must follow his Masters walk, the suns yearly passage
through the twelve signs of the Zodiake. I will have nothing to do with
Astronomy.


Ging. I, but our Almanackes every year reckon but twelve months.


Comp. What do thou tell me of Almanackes? Vsurer^ go by the Almana^ke. I
scorn that griping trade. My month is (...) weeks ^ust, you may remember
them by the changing your shirts, every fourth shirt determines my pay.


Imp. I reckon (...) month by one shirt.


Ging. Who shall be judge between us?


Comp. Judge between us? Am not I thine instructor* I Will be thy judge. For
every one of my months I te^ch thee a several strain of Courtesy And so
thou have of me in the year, documents accordingly, thirteen to the dozen.


Imp. My Masters father was a Baker, and therefore he allows an odd call of
courtesy, nea^ly chipt.


Comp. Si^a Imp. draw out the Catalogue and number them.


Imp. The first month, the Semicircle.


Ging. I, with my hat thus. To make just half a circumference.


Comp. Remember always the drop withal.


Ging. In my motion, my gold hatband must fall down, thus.


Imp. I cry fallings: this is my see, I trow.


Comp. It is an excellent emblem, and signifies that for love of your friend,
you will cast away your gold, and trample it under your feet, and that is the
reason that Gentlemen now adays wear their hatbands loose. Register proceed.


Imp. The second month the Calue-claspe.


Comp. Perform it with Imp. that I may view you the better. Do you remember
that in arching your arm over his shoulder, you must never touch his band or
garment behind, but apprehend the calfe with your first touch entirely.


Ging. I warrant you, I am old dog at that.


Imp. If I had known you had bin an old dog, I would not have trusted you
with my Calfe. Ba.


Ging. And before I dismiss the calfe, I give it the gentle nip or prasye thus.


Imp. Ba, ba. No Butcher nips a Calfe more neatly in the rumpe.


Comp. Which shows your feruency of love, that you are loath to be unclasped
from your friends intimity.


Ging. I have it to a hai^e.


Comp. Register walk on your monthly pace.


Imp. The third month, the gentle shrug.


Comp. I must tell you, you have not got that perfect yet.


Ging. Not my shrugge sir? That was my last lesson.


Imp. Indeed sir I was by, when Signior Gosso in that action smiled, and asked
if you were not lousy.


Comp. O there is your fault, gentle Gingle. A hundred to one you shrugged but
with one shoulder.


Imp. I would advise you hereafter to shrugge by a looking-glass, that you may
see after what manner you do it.


Ging. Indeed my looking-glass is broken with dancing with it in my hand, to
mark the postures of my face when I caper'd. But I Will buy another.


Comp. Nay, you must buy two, that one may reflect upon the other, and then may
you at once see your motion in your shrugge both before and behind.


Ging. O excellent! for this double glass, I Will give you a double fee. But, I
pray you sir, wherein is my shrug faulty?


Comp. My dear scholar, thou must know, there are diverse kinds of shrugges,
there is the Misers shrugge, and that is accompanied with the scratching of the
elbow: the^e is the Beggars shrugge, and that is done with a quick motion,
^atching, to make a six* footed bandogge leave his hold.


Imp. My Master and I act that at home sometimes, when we are loath to part
with an old friend, our linen.


Comp. There is a winter shrugge, and that is performed with the hands insconced
in a Must, and a Foxe-surr'd co^ close gi^t. There is a drowsy shrugge, and
that sometime befalls a gallant, when he has set up al night at Card^, and saved
the pulling off his boo^es. This shrugge is commonly performed with displaying
out the arms, and yawn^ng with the mouth, which represents a kind of ^ibbards
face. And lastly, there is a gentle Italian shrugge.


Ging. I pray you sir let me go with you Let me see. The Misers shrugge, the
winter shrugge, the drowsy shrugge, the lousie shrugge. I shall hardly carry
away all these.


Comp. Nay, you must carry away none of these. You must leave them all behind
you. The last and only gentle shrugge, is your Italian shrugge.


Ging. O the Italian shrugge. The^e it is. How Is that? I shrugge with desire to
learn it.


Comp. That shrugge is performed by lifting up both shoulders exactly together
with one uniform motion, somewhat swift, and holding them a while in suspense,
with the neck somewhat couching, and the chinne thrust out, then the shoulders
are to be let down again, as it were by a double pulley, with a slow motion,
which by degrees vanishes. And if you will accomplish it with a grace, you
must all the while cast your eyes into a leering posture.


Ging. O excellent school of virtue! But when must I use this shrugge?


Comp. Upon diverse occurring cases, very usefully. But especially when you are
ask't a question, which you cannot deny with safety, nor assent unto with
honor. In such a tw^-forked dilemma, the shrugge relieues you, and you come off
with reputation of wisdom.


Ging. This is an oracle to me, I pray you expound by example.


Comp. Put case that some fair and honorable Lady were mentioned at the
Table, and thereupon some busy curious Gentleman should ask you whether there
past no terms of love between you and her. To deny it, were a derogation
from your honor. To love or be beloved is honorable. For you to acknowledge
it, were perhaps dangerous. Some of the company may be your Rival, and so
rusty iron may leap out of the Ecle-skin, and 'pricke your skin. Thus Venus
may be exchanged for Mars. And of the two, he is the most dangerous companion to
a man's naked side. One shrugge quits all this, by which you seem to say, I am
not to be examined upon this Intergatory. I stand upon my guard, all armed in
silent wisdom.


Ging. Incomparable dogments. Mus^us never taught me so good a lesson.


Comp. But high time it is for us to appear, the Session is begun by this.
The villain Pr^co i^ like death, and will spare none. Me think^ I hea^e him
(...), Captain Complement appear. Go Coach it up with your Mother. I and my


Imp. will march up the hill on foot. Here^ir, I appear sir.


Imp. Here sir, at hand. Exeunt.


Finis Actus quarti.
Actus quintus. Scena prima.
Philoponus. Amphibius. Phil. SEe how thy soul was sna^'d with sophistry.
No Author here alleged for Hedone,
But quels those poisons with their Antidotes.
Mark Tully in that place does smoothly plead
For youthful Calius, so to palliate
His Clyents true objected vanities.
There Tully played the Lawier for his fee.
Behold him now a sage Philosopher:
Discoursing of Old Age, he there concludes,
In voluptatis regno virtutem non posse ^onsistere,
That virtue cannot stand where pleasure reigns.
(...) was a wanton Epicure,
A glosing Poet, but ^wd Moralist:
He sold his soul to Uenus and her son,
Such writers we for style, not matter read.
Siren from Terence pleads, that in young men
Deep quaffing, roating, whooring, is no fault.
Does not that Poet represent the par^s,
The passions, and several enormities
Of cockering doting fathers, of lewd sons,
Of cheating slaves, and cogging parasites?
Thus he describes the vices of those times,
That readers might them hate, no^ imitate.
S^, Comique Poets set out drunkenness
In him that pleads for (...), and the while
Does swagger, stagger, swallow, wallow, snort,
The soul* that this picture is, the more
That swinish vice breeds loathing of it self.
If I would on a Comique slage display
Virtue in conflict stoutly laboring,
And then in conquest honored by (...);
First would I personate her enemy
In some such busy guiles and forgery,
As this lewd Siren represents to thee.
The rest of Authors, Motives, Arguments,
Which in that letter you so stood upon,
Are of no better stamp, as I have shown.
And can fa^re more at large.
But why should I distrust thy judgment so?

Amp. You have, ^udicious Philoponus,
More hardly in the grove, more briefly here,
Dispel'd those mists, which that enchanting witch
Had cast before mine eyes. I see, I see
The light of reason, then eclipsed quite,
But now reuiueing my recovered sight.
O how I loath, and hate that iug^ling hand,
That wrote, or ^each't to me these balefull lines.
What sacrifice to Virtue can I yield
More ^r, then thus to tear that ^obe, wherein
That poison was conuey'd, to be to me
As was the deadly shirt to Hercules?
So would I also her.
He tears thee letter, and stampes on it.
Phil. Your best revenge on her will be henceforth, No more to speak with her
by word or pen, Weomens fair words work deep with passive men


Amp. What heaps of thanks owe I, and cannot pay, To such a faithful other
self, whose hand Has reached forth that Ariadnes thread Which me out of this
Labyrinth has led.


Phil. Com^ let us up into Apollos Court. The Session (...) long since begun.
There shall you more confirm your resolution, by hea^ing Apollo himself in his
judgment seat. Exeunt.


Actus quintus. Scena secunda.
Drudo. Slugge. Drud. I Tell thee again, I have no great hope of it. You have
suffered so many repulses, that if I were in your case -- Where is he. So ho.
Come along, mend your pace. What? have you the gout?


Slug. Alas in foot, and hand too. My father and grandsite had so.


Drud. Stand up for shame. Else how will you appear in Apollos presence, so
much as to present your request.


Slug. Well. I Will stretch my limbs so far, though I be already tired with
ou^ long journey.


Drud. A long journey from your Cottage to Apollos Court? when your Tent is
fixed but on the other side of the wall. A man may fling a horse loase so far.


Slug. I Will rather be fed with horse bread, then travail so far again to
fetch whitebread. But I pray you let us sit down. I shall talk much wiser,
sitting then standing.


Drud. Why so?


Slug. Do not Judges sit^ as now Apollo does there. And I hope they are wiser,
then those that stand to hear them.


Drud. I judge standing, that thou have little understanding that art such an
enemy to standing.


Slug. But sir Drud^, why do you discourage me from hope of admittance?


Drud. The truth is, I see no great reason why you should be admitted. I Am
su^e for these seven years, every visitation day you have bin shut out of
doors by Musaeus as soon as ever he espied you lying upon the bench in
Apollos Court. And for the most part, when your name has bin called aloud by
P^co, you have bin asleep, and were feign to be ioggd and shak'd again before
you would answer.

Slugge snorts and sleeps. Out upon thee, what art thou in a L^thargy? I
think thy mother was asleep when thou wast begotten. So bo. So bo. I tell
thee again, after seven repulses, why should thou knock at Apollos gate.


Slug. I dare not knock at this gate* the hammer that hangs on it, is so cold
and heavy. And why should I disquiet the Muses with such a noise? Perhaps some
of them are asleep in Apollos lap.


Drud. Thou Dormouse, thou liu^st in a perpetual winter: think thou them
like to thee?


Slug. I cannot climb this hill. I pray fetch Apollo hither. Or be you Apollo.


Drud. What shall Drude be so bold. No. But say what thou can. Apollo sees
and hears all things in all places.


Slug. Why then Apollo. Drudo, I crave admittance.


Drud. What is your claim?


Slug I am the top of my kin. I am Slim Slugge, Sluggy Sluggorum.


Drud. What Is that to your plea? Are you a kin to the Muses.


Slug. I have long prescription time out of time. I have bin entertain d
evermore by some of Apollos prentises. They have kept me and sed me in their
chambers, and hugged me in their bed. I never wanted among them, those that
would rather rest with me in a cold morning, then dance after the Muses pipe
with benumbed hands and chattering teeth.


Drud. All Wines have some ^ees,

All Bee-hiues some D^oanes.

Think thou that such prescription shall get thee admittance?


Slug. I am weary of sitting. I think it were better for me to lie down upon
this bank. I shall talk much wiser yet when my head lies lower then my
heels, for then all my spirits and wi^s sink down into my brain. So ^'le
tell thee now what learned counsel I gave to a young scholar, when he told
me that his Master chid him for keeping his bed. Why (quoth I to him) then
answer your Master, I pray you sin, would you have me ^ll my bed? your law,
that you give us, is, Nil dabis, aut vendes. --


Drud. Very learnedly applied to the purpose.


Slug. When I read lecture to my auditors. --


Drud. Surely then thou give a deep nod at every s^ point.


Slug. I inioyne them, Sell your Books, sell your Inkehornes, sell your
Candlestickes, sell your Points, but never sell your beds. The bed is the seat
and throne of a scholar. For contemplation requires quietness. And when is a
man more quiet, then when he is in (...) bed? Ergo.


Drud. Spoken like a Philosopher, but of the Epicures sect.


Slug. Nay you shall have Philosophy up to the elbowes. The bed is the
beginning and end of a man. When we come into the world, are not our Mothers
said to be brought to bed? When we dye, are not we on our death bed? Whilst we
live, when are we more innocent then when we are asleep in our bed? then we
think no body any hurt. When are mischiefs done by men, but when they are
awake, and employ themselves most busily? Ergo.


Drud. It seems so by thee, for thou art seldom awake thus long, but to do
some such mischief at to talk in this manner.


Slug. The best Philosophers have said, and I have heard it in Apollos school.
Motus fit propter quietem. Nature intends motion, that it may attain rest. And
all scholars know, that what is desired, as the end, is better then that,
which is ordained as the means to it.


Drud. Nay siria, the best of them say, that motion is better then rest. For
the heavens move continually, and the earth, which is the dregs of the world,
that rests, and slugs like thee. The day is for labor, and the night for rest.
And I hope the day is far better then the night. Ergo.


Slug. Well. I have all the earth on my side: I Am safe enough. Go you and
dance after the stars. I Will hold my rest here.


Drud. Enough of this Philosophy. Thou lolling lubber, lasie Bough, get up,
Rise old huncks, rise drunken Bear, or I Will go in without thee.


Slug. A Bear? no. I Am a worthier beast, by my hardly rising. I am like an
Elephant.


Drud. I wood thou had a Castle upon thy back, then I wood hang thee out for
a sign, and it should be called the drowsy Inn. Come away, your name it
called ere this at the Session, and Prac^ woon't savor you. You will be in,
forty Marks in issues.


Slug. My turn is always last. Exeunt.


Actus quintus. Scena tertia.
Thuriger. Scopa^. Thur. S^spbu. Scopas. Come away with the Cull^. Lay that
Carpet smoother. When were these Cushions brusht. Sir. ha?


Scop. I have heard say, that too much brushing will we are them out.


Thur. Thou Lozell. Has Slugge infected you? Why do you give such kind
entertainment to that cobwebbe?


Scop. It shall have Tom Drums entertainment. A flap with a Fox tail.


Thur. For the preparing this Judgment seat. I pronounce judgment of
banishment against all presumptuous Cobwebbes. The Court will rise, and come
upon us ere we are aware. Scopas go see how forward they are, and bring away
the Frankincense.


Exit Scopas. Actus quintus. Scena quarta.
Ludio. Thuriger. Ludio. Where are they, tha^ay that Iudio is the Canker of
the school? I have pronounced a knocking Apology before Apollo and all his
Court.


Thur. What, nimble Ludio, is the Session so far on?


Ludio. Unto thee, O Thur^er, I am the Nuntio, to tell thee, that Apollo and
his Actors are by this time come to Actus quintus, Scena qua^ a. Pr^o told me
they will all com^ down hither to Act Scen^ ^ima.


Thur. I shall be ready for them. But I pr^, I^dio, how did Mistress Gingle
behave her self?


Ludio. She neue^ ^sed crying out to Apollo, O the ^enerous Captain
Complement! O that he may bold ^is ^enement. Apollo himself was feign to
command her silence.


Thr. Did not Siren creep into the souls of the auditory?


Ludio. My friend Siren slid on smoothly, like my feet upon the ice. I think
she has unbent Apollos bow. She will have a good day of it, I hope. Young
Gingle in his trial stood much upon his gentry, and carried himself like a
fine dancing Courtier. When I heard Slugge called, I thought we should tarry
long, and so away came peelegarlicke Ludio, to get him a room before hand here.


Thur. But thou tellest me nothing all this while of thy own trial. Were you
not put to it shrewdly?


Ludio I trow I put Apollo and all his Muses to it. There can no sentence pass
against me. My defense was so strong and unanswerable.


Thur. I am sorry that my office called me away from hearing you, will you do
me the honor to impart to me some of your discourse?


Lud. I have it here ^grossed and recorded.


Thur. I wonder how you could borrow so much time from play, as to compose so
large a declaration?


Ludio. I have a ^end in a corner, I teach him the knacks of gaining, how to
cut a bum card, how to help a dye, and such like, and he in kind requi^all
has drawn an Apology for me in form of Law, according to the style or Apollos
Court.


Thur. Could you before all them pronounce it lustily, as if it had bin your
own making?


Lud^o I have a certain virtue called audacity. I hat did bear me our where
my wit or memory failed.


Thur. I ^ng to hear some of it. Can you say it?


Ludio. So, ^o: As we do our lessons, with a casting a leere eye sometime upon
my paper.


Thur. It is l^ge. I will n^ (...) ^le thee to say it over. Only read I pray
you some of the principal points.


Ludio. I tell thee here be above a dozen of points. You sh^l have a touch of
the fore-point thus.


Thur. I have known the time when you have had neither fore not ^d point, when
you have returned from ^purne point.


Ludio. First, I looked gravely like Cato, and withal, cheerfully like
Pu^rilis And then to show what confidence I had in my cause, I strok't up my
foretop with the comb of my finders thus. My sister had sprinkled it with
rose water, and my lips too, to make my Rhetoric the sweeter.


Thur. No doubt rose water added a sweet sound to your words.


Ludio. Then I made ob^ysance thrice, with a nimble low stoop which I learned
when we played at Ducke Friar. Then (...) ^m, ^em to clear my voice, and to
provoke the Auditory to answer me with their gentle expectation.


Thur. Here is a large Entry to a low house.


Ludio. Then displaying my naked protesting hands, I said. O thou lovely Lord
of learning, beauteous, bounteous Apollo.

O thou ever moving Phoebus,
Whose golden locks and silver bow,
Embellish heaven and earth below.
O ye assistant sisters ^ne,
Attend this just de^ence of mine.
What law, what justice, what reason can pronounce a against Ludio the sentence
of expulsion? Is not Apollos School styled ladus literarius. Is it not Sc^ola
from (...) otium, remedy, play, relaxation? What talk we of Apollos Court. The
whole world is made free of Ludios Trade, and dances after his pipe.

What is our life but a game, wherein some win, some lose, some idly look
on, some have good fortune, and will not be known of their winnings, others
have bad luck, and curse their stars and fates; Some cheat and ^ke, and
others are befooled?

All Dame Natures lump is a true Ludio. If you banish Ludio, you must banish
the heavens and elements.


Thur. What? is this brat become a Philosopher?


Ludis. The highest fixed stars, what do they all the year but dan^e their
measures, and kee^ there^ their stately distances, and, to show their mirth and
wantonness, they with their glaring eyes twinckle on their spectators. The
Planets have variety of dances, sometime grave Pauins, otherwhile ^mble G^rds.


Thur. ^e Sellingers round.


Ludio. Now a pace forward, now retyring backward.


Thur. Like a new Corranto.


Ludio. What say thou Thuriger? did not I play the Astronomer well?


Thur. Better then sixteen Almanac^e-makers, with all their Sextile aspects,
and siery triplicities.


Ludio. But now sir here was I put to my trumpes, when I came to bring in our
Lord Phoebus himself for an example, in my own defense, in his own presence.
The ^fore I begun with c^auing pardon. O Maies^ Lord of the day, Moderator of
the year, R^ng-leader of all the glittering lamps; give poor Ludio leave to
show that in the work o^ thy bright Regiment, thou can not be without him.
Do thou not all the year long recreate thy self by taking the air about
the hill of heaven in thy gilded Caroch, drawn with four prancing horses?


Thur. Some mortals now adays have in their Coach more horses then Don*
P^oebus.


Ludio. In this thy yearly journey thou art so frolic every spring, that thou
give our mother earth a green ^owne.


Thur. That is (our Virgins say)
A pretty kind of play.

Ludio. And in thy iournall circle when thou come and go, every day and
night, me thinks thou playest at (...)* peep, and Hide and seek.

All night it our all hid. But in the day
We seek about. For what, say I, but play?

Thur. O Impudency! How durst thou base slay, skippe thus high into Apollos
face. Did thou not fear to be pierced through with the least dart of his
beams?


Ludio. The truth is, one of Apollos learned Council had like to pulled me
down, when he told me that it was against law to produce the Judge for a
witness. Else I had gone on to allege his playing at Quoits with Cyparissus.


Thur. He would have cond you small thank for that. But, how did our Lord
Apollo look upon you all this while?


Ludio. Me thought he put his hand toward his quiver, and withal, shaked his
golden locks. Then thought I, 'twas time for me to glide down lower, and
talk of Lady Lu^a. Mistress Moon (quoth I) what is her monthly task, but
to run a gossipping throughout all the twelve signs in the high street of
the Zodiac?.


Thur. The sign of the Ram, the Bull: the Lion, and the rest, they are
Tauernes set up by Bacchus, for the gods to feast in. Are they not?.


Ludio. She knocks at every door, and tarryes two days at the least in each
of those houses. And as the Sun courts her, she makes cur^es in her round
walk, sometimes ba^fully putting on her Mask.


Thur. That is in conjunction.


Ludio. Otherwhile she shows her half face very demurely.


Thur. Half moon; like my cheese.


Ludio. And after that appears her broad Owls face, to allure Endymion to be
in love with her.


Thur. The Shepherd with the bu^h of thorns has prevented sleepy Endymion,
and gotten up thit^ before him.


Ludio. The waves in the sea, what do they, but play at trusse and leapsrogge
on one another back? The winds in the are perform one perpetual exercise,
and that is blow-point.


Thur. Sometimes they blowest the points of ^eeples, and this is a very high
point, worth consideration.


Ludio. They play very merrily: and therefore we often hear them ^g and
whis^le.


Thur. Leave o^ now your rehearsal Ludio. Why pr^ted you of the stars and
winde^? What Is this to you, and to those creatures that have bound themselves
to the school trade? Do the Mules play?


Ludio. Yes undoubtedly, the Nine Muses play at Nineholes: every Muse has her
hole


T^r. Yes, and every Hate has her Muse. But what then becomea o^ the (...) h^e?


Ludio. That Is a great one (...) Apollo their Master and ours.


Pr^co. Think t^ou, that Apollo will be moved with these reasons, to let
such a ve^mine harbor in the pigeon house (...) the M^?


Ludio. Do ^u think that I will suck their eggs? Do I look lik^ a su^
(...)? I am sure the Auditory did entertain (...) speech (...) the si^ne of
approbation* hum, hum, hum.


Thur. That (...) (...) but the yo^er sort, and those that stood at the lower
end of the Session hall.


Ludio. I am much (...) taken if Apollo himself did not in the end hum and
(...).


Thur. I think rather Apollo frowned on you.


Iud. I think rather that Mercury frowned on me.


Thur. Why Mercury? he is not there.


Ludio. I Will tell thee, honest Thuriger, Whilst I was in the hear of my
pleading, some Villain, borne under the Planet Mercury, nims away my sachell
that lay behind me.


Thur. What loss suffered you in that vessel?


Ludio. The Shipwreck of all my best household stuff, and tools of my trade.
What think you, Thuriger, does this forebode ill luck to me?.


Thur. I think it had bin better luck, if you had bin robbed of those
Commodities seven years ago. But see yonder comes my Scopas.


Actus quintus. Scena quiuta.
Scopas. Turiger. Scopas. THey are coming hard by. Here is the frankincense.
Put it in your self.


Thur. This fire is almost out, stir it up.


Scopa^. Laurel wood does soon spend.


Thur. Apollos judgment seat
Makes all things pure and neat. Apollos judgment, etc.

Actus quintus. Scena sex^ et vltima.
Thuriger. Scopas. Drudo. Lauri^er. Pr^co. Musaeus. Clio. Euterpe. Philo^onus.
Am^s. Siren. Ludio* Implement. Slugge. Geron. Retro. N^ce. Lauriger. COme
along, come on in rank.


Pr^co. On before, On before* Hold up the book. Give room, room, more room.


Drudo. We must have room, more then the whole City of Rome.


(...). Clio, you must sit down, and you E^erpe. Musaeus croues your assistance.


Mus. P^o do your office.


Praeco. Silentium: et Tace^e. Our Lord Apollo by his deputed Judge, the
venerable Musaeus, does command silence, and charge all, whom it may
concern, to attend the Court, and hear the charge


M^. Ou^ great Apollos Palace seems like
A spacious gard'n set with choysest flowers,
Wherein creep up by small vnleene degrees
Vnu^ull, hurt^ull, and unsavory weeds;
Which ouergrow and choke the better plant^,
And make the tender flowers to hang the head.
Himself chief Gardner has, from yonder top
Of this our sacred ^ll, even now ^view'd
All that his herbage, and with cutious eye
Discerned and designed by his doom,
What must be cherisht, and what weeded out.
Me, his unworthy servant, he appoints,
As vnder-gardiner, with that wholesome hook.
To check, or nip, or toot up what he damned.
(...) by oracle he did unfold,
What lot attends on every name inrold.
Pr^co, read the Record, and cite the names.

Pr^o. Memorandum. On Apollos Shroueday, being the eight and twentieth of
Aquarius, in the great hall of the western top of Par^assus. Our sovereign
Lord Apollo sitting in person upon oyer and terminer, after full hearing of all
parties, did then and there adou^ the Court, to be presently continued at the
foot of the said h^, under the Laurel, at the Temple gate, and to be there
consummate by his reverend Judge Musaeus.

Nomina Reorum.

The names of the parties sentenced by Apollo.

Siren, the first is Siren. Appear Siren Spinster.


Phil. She spinnes nothing but spiders webbes, to catch flies.


^aur. Siren come out What do you lu^ke? Appear in your likeness, and hear
your doom.


Pr^co. Vous ^uez Si^.


Siren. I have a great deal more to say for myself, and for my Lady Hedone. I
hope, I shall be heard.


Laur. You would feign be heard; because you think your tongue inchants. There
is no pleading now. Apollos doom is past.


Praeco. You must hear the Judge, or else be pressed to death presently.


Musaeus. Siren, then thus for Siren.


Laur. Record the sentence Praeco.


Praeco. My pen is as nimble as your tongue.


Musaeu^. Siren must first be sea^cht.


S^. Sacred dispencer of Apollos justice, I hope you will not suffer a poor
Nimp^ to be used so immodestly. If I must be ransa^, I p^y you let it be done
by a Jury of Muses. The three Graces, empanneld with them, will make up the
whole number of twelve good weomen, and true.


C^o. If I be made fore-woman of your jury,
You shall be doomed by justice, not by fury.

^rpe. We Mus^ envy no man,
Much less will wrong a woman.

Musaeus. We shall not need to trouble you noble Clio* nor you sweet Euterpe.
This search is only of her upper garment. I auriger lift up ^er va^le.


Laur. Come, I must love, and court thee now.


Drudo. O ugly a filthy fi^es tail.


Musaeus. Pull off her head of yallow locks.


Drudo. O black b^stles. O nasty Vermin!


Musaeus. This seeming glosing Nymph is nothing else, but an ugly sea* Monster.
She is damned to return to the sea, and there to be tossed, and do^ssed,
together with S^ylla, that monstrous shame of nature. But, before you ^icke her
out, let her take a message to carry to Dame Hed^e, if ere they meet again.
That is, that Hedone shall ever unseparably be manacled to Lupe.


Phil. O just d^ome, that pleasure shall be always (...) to pain. Which also
this false Siren proves. first, a face see^ing fair to meet with: but if you
further go, turpem (...) in pisc^ mul^ formos^ superne.


Laur. Drudo. Pr^co. Philop Omnes. Out with her.


Amp. I will have one kick more at her for inueigling me: Out Bitch. -- Exit
Siren.


Mus^us. On Pr^co. Who is next?


Pr^o. The next is Ludio. Appear Ludio Gamester. Vous b^uez Ludi^.


Ludio. Here appears poor banckrout Ludio. I hau^ suffered losses by
misfo^tune.


Phil. What misfortune? fire? or thieves?


Ludio. I sir. Thieves, they have robbed me of all my brass^ coin, and unbound
paper books. I must set up with a new stock.


Phil. The (...) means his cards and counters.


Mus^us. Thou bold else, that can ^ot at thy trial for get thy play. Apollo
fit^ thee with a doom, that thou shall pl^y incessantly.


Ludio I Am glad of that A (...) play-day.


Mus^us. And thou sh^lt ^ue fifty (...).


Ludio. So much good company doe^ the b^tter.


Mus^us. They are the fi^ty daughte^s of (...); whose play is still to fetch
and fetch water in a sieue. Thou must play still at dice.


Ludio. At dice? that is well* I^e che^te all those fifty wenches.


Mus^us. But thus. Thy dice (...) must put into a bottomless box. So, when
(...) throwest, they fall to the ground: and thou must t^ke them up: they fall
again, thou (...) again. Thi^ (...) the M^ll h^ering, wherein thou must (...)
^und eternally.


^il. He that would find Lu^, must seek ^im at the sign of the Labor in
va^e.


Ludio. O would I had s^died when I played* rather then thus to play at lost
labor (...). Exit.


Praec^. Mistress Indi^ence (...).


Phil. Blind fortune h^th quit he^ o^ that; but she i^ true to her name (...).


Praeco. Mistress (...) Gin^le. Spi^ster.


Dr^do. All the wool and fl^xe, that (...) she spunne, I will eat and fear
no choking.


Mus^us. Does she not appear?


Drudo. She scowred awa^ in her Coach with her son, and said she would dwell
no longer in Thess^ly, i^ her sons best instructor be not suffered here. And
a^ she fled, her Coach oue^ned.


Mus^us. Let her four w^eeles carry Apollos curse with her, that none of her
kindred shall ever get above the petty form of Apollos school. Pass o^ (...).


Pr^co. Io^n Gingle, Gentleman Woo'd-be.


Mus. Apollo pronounces that his lot must be, before he be forty years old,
to spend all his five Manors upon the five Senses: Except the Mansion house of
^oolingham, which is intailed to the heirs of his body wo^fully begotten.


Phil. For ^y part I will not be of counsel to cut off the en^aile.


Pr^co. Complement, p^etended Captain, alias Captain Comp. Fashion^nger.


Drudo. He is ^led, ^s ^heare.


Laur. Fled with (...) witness. For he flew like a bird up in the air.


Mus. Then has he saved us a labor. For Apollo had doomed him to be blown up
with Vulcans bellow^ into the middle Region of the air.


L^r. The boys in the outer-court of Apollos Palace, when they (...) by
Mistress Gingles discontent, that the Captain was like to be banished, they
prevented execution, by tying squibs to his ^kirts; which being fired, this
light ^usball mounted up into the ay^ as high as a ^arke.


^hil. One boy said, that this was the Captains losty cap^ring trick.


Drudo. And whither did this whi^le wind carry him?


Laur. Who knows? But most do^ think to the Island of Coxcombria, a place
thick impeopled with such riff^ ^affe.


Pr^co. Jack Implement, Page to the aforesaid Complement. Vous hauez Implement.


Imp. Here sir, at hand. I pray you Master Musaeu^ be good to a poor Page. I
had but a hard service under him My bed and board was sc^rce to the mountenance
of a water-Spanniell. I would saine go to school again^.


(...). How right this boy meets with Apollos (...) Thy lot i^ for the school
again: but there for one whole year thou must smooth out the dogs care^ of
all thy fellows books; And vow to ply thy book as nimbly as ever thou did
thy Maste^ Ap^ry, or the hauty vaulting horse.


Imp. I vow, and will. Elle let me ^ide our blind horse that kickes us on the
back^.


Enter Slu^* Drud. What Slugge, could you not come along with us? You must be
lagge. An hour will s^arce serve you, though your journey be short, and down
the hill.


Slug. Soft fire, (...)


Musaeus The next name (...).


Pr^co. Slim Sl^gge.


Drud. Answer to your name.


Slug. Hum. ha*


Phil. He will not answer, unless you give him all his titles. (...) (...).
Sl^e of Slugge-ha^l.


Pr^co. Why then Slim Slugge, (...) Sluggorum, Slug^ of Slugge-hall, S^eper.


Slug. Here sir.


Pr^co. Vous hau^z Slugge. Stand forth and attend the sentence.


Mus^us. Thou night-bird, in whose ^sly nest all Books and Inkehornes, and all
things else are m^uldy, but thy bed. Yet there do thou pigge in, and pigge
out, without molesting the feathers by concussion.


Phil. Stand upright, and leave thy yawning.


Mus. Thou that never may infect the Muses habitation, Apollo does banish
thee into Lubberland.


Slug. Lubberland? I Am glad of that. I shall earne my fourteen pence a day
there by sno^ting. But who shll carry me th^ther?


Phil. Nay, you must foot it thither, there lies the ma^ow of your punishment.


Slug. O that I had Tom Co^ats everlasting shoes! But ho which is the way to
Lubberland? Has none of you bin (...) Will y^u go with me? will you in the
frize coat? It is a fine Country. There are rivers of Mu kad^e, and bridges of
Brawne, parkes of Ven^* son Pasties, paled about with puddings and sausages.
H^y for our town, hey for Lubberland.


Mus. (...), I think thou dr^amest of Lubberland. Why d^ not y^u p^sse on?


(...) Yon^ No^ice, Apprentice.


No^ice. Here. I p^ay sir, save me: I Will get my Mothe^ to end y^. (...) (...) a
couple of Capon^.


Mus. (...) (...) (...) fre^ man, and thy follies come of simple (...) (...),
and are not de^pely rooted in thee, there is hope o^ thy (...). ^or three
yee^es thou shall p^y but an hour in the week, and all thy scho^le (...)
(...) (...) from the presence and ^dance of Ph^onus. Obseru^ and imitate his
pam^ll diligenc^: so shall thou get the Muses love, and lord Apollo fau^ur.


No^. Thanks, (...)* thanks to him, and thee for this your (...).


G^on. Good your Wo^ship, be good to my son, hi^ Mother will run (...) for
gri^.


M^s. Thy sonn^* Come hither Retro.


R^tro. I^em doo^is.


Geron. Mercy sir, mercy.


Mus. Apollo ha^ acc^pted thy submission, and cu^ o^ the third yeer^ of thy
punishment. Ari^e, and s^ew thy face, Thy tongue may now run right, and
speak as others do. You may be a forward child.


Retro. Thanks, O most forward thanks, for the restoring of my distorted
limbs and tongue.

Retiring Crabbe farewell. Welcome humane pace.


Mus. But see thou holdst the scholars even path, nor st^iding f^st, nor
wandr^ng from the way.


Geron. I hankes sacred Priest I shall bring ^y wife joyful news.


Mus. Now is Apollos garden weeded quite,
Composed in order, swept, and cleanly dight.
Now may each tender plant, and goodly flower
Grow up, and th^e, by heavens assisting power.
Pr^co, dissolve the Session.

Pr^co. Oyez, Our sovereign Lord Apollo, having held and finished his
Visitation, discharges all suitors, parties, and homagers from their
attendance in this place; and licenseth all his subjects and servants, to
depa^t to their sever all habitations.


Mus. Uincat Apollo. Regnet Apollo.


Clio. It joys my heart, that we poor Mus^s,
Now have redress of our abuses.

Vincat Apollo. Euterpe. Before alas I mou^nd and wept:
But now I joy: our school is swept.,

Regnet Apollo. O^nes. Vincat Apo^o, Regnet Apollo.


Epilogue.
RIght Worthy Burgomasters, gentle Dames,
Accept (we pray) our hasty huddled games;
Who thus employ our parts, ou^ pains most gl^dly,
In hope to please our Mother Town of Ha^y.
And thus with this our homely shrouing dish,
A merry Shrou^tide to you all we w^h.
T^s late* Me thinks I spy some dro^ie head,
Whose yawning, nodding toles a peal^ to bed*
If any such be here, we will take them n^pping,
And all ^o box their ears with loud hand-clapping.
Plaudite.
FINIS.

