MAJESTY THE LIFE* AND REIGN OF KING EDWARD THE SIXTH* Written by S^. John
Hayward (...) Dr. of Law. London ^inted for John Partridge* and are to (...)
sold at the sign of the Sun in Paul's Churchyard. POWER


Courteous Reader,
THis noble Prince, whose Story is here delivered, seems to have had the same
adversity of fortune in his life and death, which he had at his birth. For as
he was destituted of the helps of nature at his entrance, and was feign to
have his way made into the world with a knife; so in his life was there
continual employment of either Sword or Axe; of that, either at home against
his Rebels, or against his enemies abroad; of this, upon his Nobles, and
particularly upon his own uncles by the mothers side; of which the Duke of
Somerset's case is very remarkable. As his birth was violent, and his reign
troublesome, so was his death praemature, and not without suspicion of some
practice; of which, (besides vulgar rumor,) Cardan in calculating his scheme,
seems to have some jealous conjecture. For whether he diuined it by his art in
Astrology, or apprehended it by the course and carriage of business, he made
a dangerous praediction: when he foresaw, that the King should shortly dye a
violent death, and (as he reports) fled out of the kingdom, for fear of
further danger. Howsoever, he was as noble a branch as ever sprung out of the
Royal stock, worthy (if so it had seemed good to God) of a more favorable
birth, a quieter reign, and a longer life. But as the notable accidents in his
tumultuous times do deserve to be recorded; so does the King himself for his
sweet condition, for his mind as innocent as his years, for his rare
endowments well deserve to be commended to everlasting memory; that he may be
permanent so much the longer in the life of an history, by how much the thread
of his natural life was cut shorter by the Fates. And indeed as he had the
birth of Caesar, so had he been worthy to have had the fortune and fame of
Caesar; but a better conclusion* This history is left us from the pen of a
worthy Author, of whom we have another essay in Henry the fourth* This comes
out into the world after the death of the father; a Posthumus, and is not like
to find any Patron, but the love and affection of thee, (favorable Reader) to
which I commend it, and thee to God.

THE LIFE AND REIGN OF K. EDWARD THE SIXTH.
EDWARD K. of England the sixth of that name of the Norman Race, was borne at
1537
Hampton court the 17 of October 1537. being the only surviving son of K.
Henry the 8. by Jane his third wife, daughter to Sr. John Seymer Knight. And
because K. Henry did take her to wife, after the death of Katherine his first
wife, from whom he had been divorced, no question nor conceit was cast, but
that this Issue between them had right to succeed.

All reports do constantly run, that he was not by natural passage delivered
into the world, but that his mothers body was opened for his birth, and that
she dyed of the incision the fourth day following. After which sort men
brought forth, were by the ancient Romans esteemed fortunate; and commonly
proved great enterpris^rs with happy success. For so Pliny writes:
Auspicatius enecta matre nascuntur, sicut Plin. lib. 7. cap. 9. Plin. 16. Fest.
lib. 3. Solin. ca. 4. r^r. mem. Prob. in epit. l. 10. Valerij. Live. dec. 1.
lib. 2. Sil. Ital. lib. 13. Hermo. in castig. Plin. loco cod.
Scipio Africanus prior natus. These were called Caesones and afterward
Caesares as Plime, Festus Pompeius, Solinus and Titius Probus affirm. Quia
caeso matris vtero in lucem (...).

In this manner was Caeso Fabius borne, whom Livy reports to have been thrice
Consul; first with Lucius Aemilius, next with Sp. Furius, and thirdly with T.
Uirginius. Thus also was Scipio borne, who by reason of his brave atchieuements
in Afric, was surnamed, Scipio Africanus prior. But in that Pliny affirms,
that he was the first who was called Caesar, a caeso matris vtero, he seems
to have made a slip. ^or before him and somewhat before the wars with the
Samnites, one Claudius was surnamed Caesar, because he was in that fashion
brought into the world.

In ancient times these births were esteemed sacred to Apollo, as Servius
notes out of these words in Uirgill. Lib. 10*


I^de Lycham ferit exectum cum matre perempta, and tibi Phoebe sacrum. And
therefore Aesculapius because he was ripped from his mothers womb, was feigned
to be the son of Apollo; as Servius upon another place of Uirgill has
observed. For this cause also in the ancient state of Rome, things consecrated
to Lib. 7.
Apollo, were kept by the family of the Caesar's. That Julius Caesar was so
borne it is an uncontrolled Report. But that he was the first of the family of
Caesar's, who was so either named or borne. It is a thick mistie error
supported chiefly by some men of excellent judgment in their own professions,
but childishly unskillful in anything besides. Pliny writes Lib. 7. c. 53.
that his Father was surnamed Caesar; who having borne the office of Praetor,
determined his life by sudden death.

What would have been either the fortunes or endeavors of K. EDWARD he never
attained to years of proof. Assuredly both for the time of his age and
reign, he is rather to be admired then commended, whereby he raised an high
expectation for times to ensue. In one point he was like the like borne Julius
Caesar. For as Caesar in the midst of his greatest actions, wrote an exact
and curious Commentary of all his notable enterprises by Arms. So this Edward
during all the time of his Reign, but most especially toward the end, kept a
most judicious Iournall of all the most principal passages of the affairs of
his estate. These memorialls written with K. Edwards hand (which now shall be
the ground of this history) were imparted unto me by the great Treaserer of
English antiquities, S. Robert Cotton Knight Baronet, who as he has been a
most industrious, both collector and conseruer of choice pieces in that kind,
so is he most ingenuously free, to communicate the use of them to others.

This young Prince was brought up among nurses, until he arrived to the age of
six years, when he had passed this weak and sappi^ age, he was committed to
Dr Cox^, who after was his Almoner, and M. John Cheek men of mean birth, But
so well esteemed for virtue and learning by reason of the place of their
employment that they might well besaid to be borne of themselves. These having
equal authority for instruction of the young Prince and well agreeing bare
equal stroke in diverse faculties. Dr Coxe for knowledge of Divinity,
Philosophy and gravitie of manners; M^ Cheek for eloquence in the Latin and
Greek tongues. But for other sufficiencies (so far as it appears by the
books which he wrote) Pedantique enough. Others also were appointed to
acquaint him with the use of the most respected foreign languages, all
jointly endeavoring to infuse into him knowledge and virtue by some mixture of
honest delight.

Under these teachers the Prince thrived so well that in short time he spoke
the French tongue perfectly. In the (...) tongue he could declaime upon the
sudden no less both readily and purely then many who were reputed amongst
the most learned of these times. He attained not only commendable knowledge but
speech in the Greek, Spanish and Italian languages: having always great
judgment in measuring his words by his matter: his speech being alike both
fluent and weighty, such as best beseemed a Prince, as for natural
Philosophy, for Logic, Music, Astronomy, and other liberal sciences his
perfections were such that the great Italian Philosopher Cardane, having tasted
him by many conferences and finding him most strongly to encounter his new
devised paradoxes in Philosophy, seemed to be astonished between admiration
and delight, and divulged his abilities to be miraculous. These his
acquirements by industry were exceedingly both enriched and enlarged by many
excellent endowments of nature. For in disposition he was mild, gracious and
pleasant of an heavenly wit, in body beautiful, but especially in his eyes,
which seemed to have a starrie liuelynes and luster in them, generally he
seemed to be as Cardane reported of him A MIRACL'E OF NATVRE.

When he was a few months above nine years of his age, great preparation was
made either for creating or for declaring him to be Prince of Wales, Duke of
Cornwall, and Count Palatine of Chester. In the midst whereof K. Henry his
Father ended his life of a dropsy accompanied with a spreading sca^e of his
thigh. Hereupon Edward Earl of Hartford and Sr Anthony Brown knight of the
order and Master of the horse were forthwith dispatched, by the residue of the
couns^ile, to the young King then lying at Hartford. These came unto him and
the next day brought him to Enfield, neither with preparation nor train any
more then ordinary. Here they first declared unto him and to the Lady
Elizabeth his sister, the death of K. Henry their father. Upon which tidings
they both brake forth into such unforced and unfeigned passions, as it plainly
appeared that good nature did work in them, beyond all other respects. Never
was sorrow more sweetly set forth, their faces seeming rather to beautify
their sorrow, then their sorrow to cloud the beauty of their faces. Their
young years their excellent beauties, their lovely and lively enterchange of
complaints in such sort graced their grief: as the most iron eyes at that time
present were drawn thereby into society of their Tears.

The next day following being the last of January the young king advanced
toward London. The Earl of Hartford riding next before him and Sr Anthony
Brown behind. The same day he was proclaimed King and his lodging was
prepared within the Tower. He there was received by the Constable and
Lieuetenant on horse back without the gates, and upon the bridge next the
Ward-gate by all the chief Lords ^o his counsailo. These attended him to his
chamber of presence and there swear allegiance unto him.

Here he remained about three weeks, and in the mean time the counsel
appointed unto him by his Fathers will daily sat for ordering the affairs of
the Kingdom. Among these the Earl of Hartford was elected and forthwith
proclaimed protector of the Realm, and governor of the kings person until he
should accomplish the age of eighteen years. To this office he was deemed
most fit, for that he was the kings uncle by the Mothers side, very near unto
him in blood, but yet of no capacity to succeed; by reason whereof his
natural affection and duty was less easy to be over-carryed by Ambition. A
few days after the Lord Protector knighted the king within the Tower, and
immediately the king stood up under his cloth of estate, took the sword from
the Lord Protector and dubbed the Lord Mayor of London knight. Herehence ensued
diverse other advancements in honor. For Sr Edward Seymer Lord Protector and
Earl of Hartford, was created Duke of Somerset. The Lord William Parre Earl
of Essex was proclaimed Marquis of Northampton. S^ Thomas* Seymer the kings
uncle was made Lord of Sudley and high Admiral of England. St Richard Rich
was made Lord Rich* S^ William Willoughby Lord Willoughby of Parreham, and Sir
Edmund Sheffield, Lord Sheffield of Buterwike. And because high titles of
honor were in that time of the Kings minority sparingly granted because
dignity then waited upon desert, which caused it again to be waited on by
respect, every of these testified for others, that it was the pleasure of the
Kings Father before his death, that these titles should thus be conferred.

During this time the body of King Henry was with honorable solemnities
conveyed from London to Sheene and thence to Windsore and there buried within
the College. All his officers brake their staves and threw them into the
grave, but at their return to the tower, new staves were delivered unto them,
this solemnity being finished the King upon the nineteenth of Febr. 1547. rode
in great state from the Tower to the Palace of Westminster, and the day
following was crowned by the Archbishop of Canterbury assisted with other
Bishops and all the chief nobility of the Realm. About the twenty-ninth
year of the Empire of Charles the fifth and the 33 of the Reign of Francis
the first of France and in the fifth year both of the reign and age of Marie
Queen of Scotland.

The same day a general pardon was granted to all persons as it has been
usual at coronations. But by some envious oppositions or for some other causes
unknown fix only were excepted. The Duke of Northfolke, Cardinal Poole,
Edward ^e Courtney eldest son to the Marquess of Exceter. Doctor Pates,
Master Fortescue and Master Throgmorton. But they overlived that envy and had
their pardons afterward in the first year of the Reign of Queen Marie. A
few days after the Earl of Southampton Lord Chancellor of England* for being
opinatiue (as it was reported, and obstinately opposite to the rest of the
Lords in matters of counsel, was removed both from his office of being
Chancellor, and from his place and authority in counsel, and the great seal
was delivered to Sir William Pawlet Lord S^ John, who was Lord great Master of
the Kings household. But this wound of disgrace never left bleeding, until it
was stopped by the Protectors fall.

It is certain that from the first entrance of this King, to his reign never
was King either more loving to others, or better beloved generally of all. The
one whereof proceeded from the goodness of his disposition, the other from many
graces and virtues illustrious in him, for besides his excellent beauty and
modesty beseeming a Prince, besides his sweet humanity the very life of
mortal condition, besides a natural disposition to all literature, whereto he
seemed rather borne then instructed, many noble and high virtues sparckled in
him, especially Clemency, Courage, Care, and knowledge in affairs of state.

To Clemency he was much inclined, especially in matters of blood, and most
especially if it were for Religion, a virtue so much the more esteemed, by how
much it had been less used before, insomuch that albeit he was most
earnestly affected to that religion wherein he had been brought up, yet none
were executed in his time for other religion, but only two blasphemous
Heretics, Ioane Butcher and George a Dutchman.

And when Ioane Butcher was to be burned, all the counsel could not procure
him to set his hand to the warrant. Wherefore they employed Thomas Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury to deal privately with him for his subscription. But
the King remained firm both in reason and resolution, affirming that he would
not drive her headlong to the Devil, but because Heretics for the most part
have a strain of madness, he thought it best to apply her with some corporal
chastisem^nts which with respit of time might happily reduce her to good order.
The Archbishop was violent both by persuasions and entreaties, and when with
mere importunity he had prevailed. The King in subscribing his name said, that
he would lay all the charge thereof upon the Archbishop before God. Not many
years passed, but this Archbishop also felt the smart of the fire, and it may
be that by his importunity for blood, he did offend, for a good thing is not
good if it be immoderatelie desired or done.

His courage did appear in the great delight he took in representations of
Battles, Skirmishes, Assaults, and of all kind of military exercises, his
judgment was great either for errors or fine contriuances in the field. And no
actions of Arms were executed in his time, but he would perfectly understand,
by what advantages on the one side or ouersights on the other the event
succeeded. He took great pleasure in exercises of actiuity whereto he much
trained his servants. And to that end he often appointed challenges among them
for wrestling, leaping, running, riding, shooting at roues, and at rounds and
such like games, and at riding and shooting, would sometimes be of one of the
sides. He had 100 archers of his ordinary guard, who once mustering before him
shot two arrows every man together against an inch board of well seasoned
timber. All stroke through the board, and their arrows stuck in another board
behind, and diverse pierced both the boards; generally none might be of his
guard, but besides of tall and comely stature, such as were either good archers
or wrastlers or easters of the bar or leapers or runners or of some other
man-like quality. He was exceeding skillful in fortifications, and bestowed
great cost in strengthening Calleis, Berwicke, and other parts thereabout, He
knew all the principal ports in England, Scotland, Ireland, France, and other
countries not far distant, how they ^ay, when the tide served, what vessels
of burden they could receive and what winds served for entrance.

Touching his care and knowledge in affairs of state, nothing was more
conspicuous in him. He was much conversant amongst his counsel, and would
well understand what matters passed their judgments, and upon what grounds. In
matters discoursed by them, he would often encounter their reasons, and add
most lively reasons of his own. In so much that at last they made an order
that no matters of weight, should be debated unless he were present. Admirable
he was to collect the speeches and opinions of many, and to draw their
differences to a true head, always bending himself rather iudiciously to
resolve, then by doubts and distinctions to perplex a business, he had a chest
whereof he always carried the key about him, for keeping record of such
matters as were concluded by his counsel. And embracing business for part of
his solace, he appointed set times with Doctor Coxe Master of his Requests for
speeding poor men's causes without tedious attendance or delay. Of all the
Magistrates Justices and Gentlemen of sort within his realm, he (...) their
names, their housekeeping, their religion and manner of life. He was skillful
in the exchange beyond the seas, and in all the circumstances and practices
thereof. And so was he both skillful and provident in matters of the Mint at
home. To Ambassadors he would give answer upon the sudden and touch both
orderly and fully upon every part of their orations, to the delight and
admiration of all the hearers. He much frequented sermons and penned notes with
his own hand, his notes he ^yphered with greek characters to the end that
they who waited on him should not read them. His disports were ingenuous and
man-like whereby he always learned somewhat. And yet as well from these as
from his businesses of state, he daily reserved some hours for his private
studies and exercises with his Teachers. These endeavors fell upon so
excellent a capacity that in every short distance of time, he made incredible
increase both in learning and experience of affairs and consequently in love
of all men.

Presently after that he was settled in his government, D^ Wotton the kings
Ambassador resident with the Queen Dowager of Hungary, regent of the Low
Countries under the Emperor was discharged of that attendance and addressed to
the Emperors court, there to reside Ambassador for the king instead of Doctor
Bonner Bishop of London, and of Sir Francis Bryan who were called home. He was
furnished with instructions that being first informed from the former
Ambassadors as well of the general state of the Emperors court as of such
particular intellige^ces as might serve to adva^ce the kings intentio^s he
should deal with the Emperor to declare al Scots for his enemies, except such
as should be friends to the King, which should appear by his safe conduct.
That because it had bin agreed between the Emperor and the late K. of England,
that the year next ensuing they should withioyne forces, invade the
Territories of the French King, he should move the Emperor to advise of some
order and form for those proceedings. That whereas the Duke of Lorraine had
bin late before at the Emperors court, and made (...) ouerture for peace or
truce, between the Emperor and the French King, he should be informed by Sr
Francis Bryan of the whole estate of that business and awaite opportunity to
put the Emperor in remembrance, that it had been couenanted between him and
the King of England, that neither of them should treat of peace or truce with
the French King, or any other common enemy without consent of the other, and
that the King of England had well observed that article in refusing to give
ear to the French ambassador making overture for such a treatise, That whereas
it had been agreed between him and the King of England, that either of them
should send certain ships to sea well manned and apparelled for fight, which
all that year had been performed by the king, whereas the Emperor shifted
the default upon his officers, in case he should not cause the said Navy to be
forthwith furnished, he should awaite occasion to solicit the same. Lastly
that he should carry a nimble ear as well touching any variation in all these
^atters, as for other occurrences in France, Spain, Italy, Almaine, and
thereof advertise the king.

But notwithstanding all these cautions and preventions of peace, or truce
between the Emperor and the French, the king of England finding the Emperor
slow in his performances and much suspecting his secret ends entertained a
treaty of peace with France, but secretly and a far off, and to be governed
as occasions should v^ry, and in reg^rd h^reof agreement was made, that all
ships and goods which had bin surprised at sea by the English upon the French,
or by the French upon the English since the beginning of that treaty should be
freely discharged. And albeit the English had great adu^ntage in value of
reprisalls, as being always both more strong and active at sea, yet the king
by his proclamation commanded that forthwith restitution should be made.

Hostility being thus suspended with France, preparation was made for wars
against Scotland, the occasion whereof did thus arise.

MARY STYWARD sole daughter and heir to James the 5. King of Scots began her
reign over the Realm of Scotland upon the 18 of December 1542, being then not
above 7 days old, so as the Sun no sooner almost saw her an infant then a
Queen and no sooner was sh^e a Queen, but she was desired of Henry then King
of England, to be assured in marriage to Prince Edward his only son, being
then not much above 6 years of age. Upon this ouerture the governor of
Scotland assembled the nobility of the Realm at Edinburgh, where after much
debatement of the commodities or discommodities like to ensue, they concluded
in the end that in March then next ensuing a Parliament should be held to give
perfection and form to that business.

In the mean time S. Ralph Sadler knight was sent ambassador from England to
the Governor and other Lords of Scotland, who followed his charge with so good
diligence and advice that in the same parliamen^, authority was given to
William Earl of Glancorne, S. George 'Douglasse, S. William Hamilton, S. James
Leirmouth, knights, and to one of the secretaries of state *to conclude this
marryage. These commissioners came into England with whom before the end of
Iulie, the same year all covenants were concluded, instruments of the contract
of marriage interchangeably sealed and sworn, and a peace established for ten
years, which time expyred both the Prince and the Queen should be of age to
consent.

The French King all this ti^e was so enteartined with wars against the
Emperor that he had no sense of these proceedings, but when he understood that
these agreements were passed as well for marriage as for peace he b^nt his best
endeavor to dissolve them both. First with intention to impeach both the
greatness and strength of the English nation; after with desire to win this
marriage for Francis who afterward was King of France. To this purpose the
French K. sent for Matthew Earl of Levenoxe, who then served under his pay in
Italy and furnished him with money, forces, and friends, and above all with
many encouragements to take upon him bravely the honor of his house, and
Ancestors, to remove the Earl of Arraine from the Regency of Scotland, and to
reverse such pactions as he had made. The Earl at his first arrival in
Scotland was joyfully received, as a man most engaged in domestical factions,
He always used courtesy and modesty disliked of none, sometimes sociablenes
and fellowship well liked by many, generally he was honored by his nation and
well reputed by strangers, in favor of him the Pope s^nt the Patriarch of
Apulia his Legate into Scotland, who in the Popes n^me did faithfully assure,
that both forces and money should be sent into Scotland to resist the English.
He^ drew the greatest of the Clergy on his side who were most powerful to
draw on others. On the other side the king was not negligent to support his
party with supplies, where by great troubles ensued in Scotland, which fell not
within the times that I hau^ in hand.

In the end the Earl of Arraine abandoned the king of England, and applied
himself only to the French by reason whereof, the Regencie was confirmed to
him which otherwise he had bin upon adventure to loose. And as the Earl of
(...) did forsake the English and adioine to the French, so the Earl of
Levenoxe, being forsaken by the French applied his service wholly to the
English, which did not only continue but much increase the calamities of
Scotland, during the time of king Henry's reign.

King Henry at the time of his death g^ue a sp^ciall charge to the Lords of
his counsel, that they should omit no ^ndevours whereby the said marri^ge
might be procured to take effect, Hereupon they pursued this quarrel in the
same st^te the king left it. But before they attempted any thing by Arms, the
Lord Protector assailed the Scottish nobility with a friendly letter, Herein he
rem^mbred them of the promises, sea^es, and oaths, which by public authority
had passed for concluding this marriage, that these being religious bonds
betwixt God and their souls, could not by any politic act of state be
dissolved, until their Queen should attain unto years of dissent. He
farther added that the providence of God did then manifestly declare it self,
in that the male princes of Scotland failing the kingdom was left to a
daughter, and in that King Henry left only one son to succeed. That these two
princes were agreeable both for years and princely qualities, to be joined in
marri^ge, and th^reby to knit both Realms into one. That this union as it was
like to be both easily done, and of firm continuance, so would it be both
profitable and honorable to both the Realms. That both the easiness and
firmn^s might be coniectured, for that both people are of the same language, of
like habit and fashion, of like quality and condition of life, of one climate,
not only annexed entirely together* but sev^red from all the world (...). For
as these are sure arguments that both des^ended from one original, and had bin
under one government, so (by reason that likeness is a great cause of liking
and of love,) they would be most forceable means both to join and to hold
them in one body again* that the profit would rise by extinguishing wars
betwe^ne the two nations, by reason whereof in former times victori sabroad
have bin impeach^d invasions and seditions occasioned, the confines of both
Realms laid w^st or else made a nurserie of rapines, robberies, and murders,
the inner parts often deeply pierced, and made a wretched spectacl to all eyes
of humanity and pity. That the honor of both Realms would enerease as well
in regard of the countries sufficient to furnish not only the necessities but
the moderate pleasures of this life: as also of the people great in multitude,
in bodies able, assured in mind not only for the safety, but the glory of
their common state. That hereby would follow assurance of desence, strength to
enterprise, ease in sustaining public burdens and charge. That herein the
English desired no pre-eminence, but offered equality both in liberty and
privilege, and in capacity of offices and employments, and to that end the
name of Britains should be assumed indifferent to both nations. That this
would be the accomplishment of their common felieitie, in ease by their evil
either destiny or advice they suffered not the occasion to be lost.

The authority and reasons of this letter weighed much with persons of most
weighty judgments, but others more powerful in that state partly upon vain
hope in regard of the young years of the king, partly upon fear of alteration
in religion, and partly in favor of their ancient amity with the French, and
doubting to be brought under by the English, were altogether carried another
way, yet they dispatched an Ambassador into England, but neither was any thing
done, neither do I find what was propounded to have bin done.

Hereupon diverse hostilities began to be practiced. And first a small ship of
the kings called the Pensie hovering at sea, was assailed by the Lion a
principal ship of Scotland. The sight began far off and slow, but when
they approached, it grew very furious, wherein the ' Pensie so applied her
shot, that therewith the Lions or^ loope was broken, her sails and tacklings
torn: and lastly, she was boarded and taken. But as she was brought for
England, she was cast away by tempest and negligence near Harewich haven, and
most of her men perished with her. I would not have staide upon this small
adventure, but that it seemed a presage to the succeeding war, wherein the
English acquired a glorious victory, but lost the fruit thereof, by reason of
their stormy disorders at home.

Many such small actions were enterprised daily, which were but scattering
drops in regard of the great tempest which did ensue. For in the mean season
an army was prepared for invasion of Scotland, under the fortune and command
of the Lord Protector. The soldiers first assembled at Newcastle and were
there mustred by the Earl of Warwick. Here they so^ourned three days in
which time the kings fleet arrived, consisting of 65. Bottomes, whereof one
galley and 34. tall ships were well appointed for fight, the residue served for
carriage of munition and victuals. Of this sleete Edward Lord Clinton was
Admiral, and Sir William UUoodhouse his Uiceadmirall, in this time also a
general muster was taken and order appointed for the March.

In the whole army were between 12. and 1300 thousand foot, 1300 men at
Arms, 2800 light horse, being such men for their goodly personages, their
ready horses their brave apparel, their armor and weapons, as never before
was an army set forth into those parts in all points better appointed. The
Lord Protector being General, represented the person and Majesty of the king.
The Earl of Warwick was Lieutenant general. The Lord Gray of UUilton was
Marshall of the field, and captain general of the horsemen. Sir Ralph Uane
Lieutenant of all the men at Arms and Dimilances, Sir Ralph Sadler was
general Treasurer, other gentlemen had their particular charges. But upon the
General and the Earl of Warwick both the hopes and hazards of the maine
adventure did wholly turn. And because much shall be said of these two hereafter,
because during the reign of king Edward, they were the principal actors in
every scene, I will briefly declare both what persons, and of what demerits at
that time they were.

Edward Seymer Duke of Somerset, Lord General was a man little esteemed either
for wisdom or personage, or courage in arms. But being in favor with king
Henry and by him much employed, was always observed to be both faithful and
fortunate as well in giving advise, as in managing a charge. About five years
before he being Warden of the Marches against Scotland, the invasion of James
the 5. was by his direction encountered, and broken at Solome Moss, whereof
diverse of the Scottish nobility were taken prisoners. The year next after,
he and the Earl of Warwick with a handful of men to speak of, fired Lies
and Edinburgh, and returned by a leasurely march 44 miles through the body of
Scotland. The year next ensuing he invaded the Scottish borders, was^ed
T^uedale and the marches and deformed the country with ruin and spoil. The
year then next following, being appointed to view the fortifications upon the
marches of Cale^s, he not only did that, but with the hardy approach of 7000
English men raised an army of 21000 French, encamped over the River before
Bulloine, wanne their ordinance, carriage, treasure and tents, with the loss
only of one man, and returned from thence by land to Guisnes, wan in his way
within shot and rescue of Arde the castle of Outing, commonly called the
redpile. The year next ensuing this, he invaded and spoiled Picardy, began the
forces of Newhaven, Blackness and Bullingberge, and so well applied his
endeavors, that in a few weeks and before his departure they were made
tenible, upon these and other like successes, his succeeding fortunes were
esteemed always rather new, then strange, and his only presence was reputed a
susticient surety for an army, and yet did he never rise hereby, either into
haughtines in himself, or contempt of others, but remained courteous and
affable, choosing a course least subject to envy, between stiff slubbornes
and filthy slattery, never aspiring higher then to be the second person in
state.

John 'Dudley Earl of Warwick was a man of ancient nobility, comely in
stature and countenance, but of little gravitie or abstinence in pleasures, yea
sometimes almost dissolute, which was not much regarded, if in a time when
vices began to grow into fashion, a great man was not over severe. He was of a
great spirit and highly aspiring, not forbearing to make any mischief the
means for attaining his ambitious ends. Hereto his good wit and pleasant
speeches were altogether serviceable, having the art also by empty promises
and threats to draw others to his purpose, in matters of arms he was both
skillful and industrious, and as well in foresight as resolution present and
great. Being made L. Lieutenant of Bulloine, when it was first taken by the
English, the walls sore beaten and shaken, and in very truth searce
mainetaineable, he defended the place against the Dolphine whose army was
accounted to consist of 52000 men. And when the Dolphine had entered the base
town, not without slaughter of diverse of the English, by a brave sally he cast
out the French again with the loss of above 800 of their men esteemed the
best soldiers in France. The year next ensuing when the French had a great
^leete at sea for invasion of England, he was appointed Admiral and presented
battle to the French Navy, which they refused and returned home with all
their threats and cost in vain. Hereupon he landed 5000 men in France, fired
Treport, and diverse villages there abouts and returned to his ships with the
loss only of one man. To say truth for enterprises by arms, he was the Minion
of that time, so as few things he attempted, but he achieved with honor,
which made him more proud and ambitious when he had done. Generally he always
increased both in estimation with the king, and authority among the Nobility,
doubtful whether by fatal destiny to the state, or whether by his virtues,
or at least by his appearances of virtues.

Now the General in this voyage was diligent and careful, and to perfect all
practices which might serve to advance the adventure, as to give good
contentment to all the Soldiers. These also were of good confidence and
cheer, as well out of their own courage, as for the skill, valor, and
fortune of their commanders. And first every soldier was commanded to take
with him provision for four days, and so were let out of Berwicke and
encamped about two slight shootes off the town upon the sea side toward
Scotland. The Lord Clynton also put to sea with his fleet, always holding his
course With the army to relieve them if need should require. Here proclamation
was made in three parts of the field, declaring the causes of this journey, and
offering not only peace, but love and rewards to all such as would either
advance or favor the marriage between the two princes. Hereof it was
conceived that the Scots had good intelligence, having some factors doubtless
at this mart, albeit, (as wisdom was) they did not openly trade.

The next day they began to march, wherein the Lord Gray and Sir Francis Bryan
led above 800 lighthorsemen as a scout a mile or two before the army, as well to
give advertisement of appearance or approach of enemies as to provide lodging
both commodious and safe, St Francis Bryan was so regardfull of his charge as
he never disposed any matter of weight but first he acquainted the General
therewith, neither did he at any time forsake his saddle, until the army were
quartered, and seated in such order, as if any alarm should be given, the
horsemen might issue forth without disturbance of the foot, and the
Avauntguard without shufling with the battle or Arriere, next to the light
horsemen followed the Auantguard, in number between 3 and 4000 foot, 100 men
at arms and 600 light horsemen led by the Earl of Warwick. The Battle
followed consisting of about 6000 foot, 600 men at arms, and about 1000 light
horsemen conducted, by the Lord General himself. Lastly followed the Arrier
wherein were between 3 and 4000 foot, 100 men at arms and 600 light horse
under the conduct of the Lord Dacres aliuely aged gentleman no less settled in
experience then in years* upon one wing the Artillery was drawn being 16
pieces, every piece having his guard of pioners to plain the ways, the other
wing was made by men at arms and demilances for the Avantguard and half the
battle ridingabout two flight shoot from their side. The other half of the
battle and the whole flancke of the Arrier was cloased by the carriages being
900 carts, besides wagons. The residue of the men at arms and Demilances
marched behind.

In this order both beautiful and firm they marched two days using no
hostility, least peace thereby might happily be hindered. The second day they
arrived at a place called the Peathes, a valley stretching toward the sea 6
miles in length, about 20 score in breadth above, and 5 score in the bottom
wherein runs a little river. The banks are so steep on either side, that
the passage is not direct, but by paths leading sloopewise, which being many
the Place is thereupon called the Peathes. It was given forth in the army that
here the Scots prepared to resist them, howbeit no forces appeared. Only the
Paths were cut in diverse places with trauerse trenches, which much encumbred
the carriages until the Pioners had leveld them again, Assuredly a small
power joined to the advantage of the place might have troubled the English very
much. For albeit no resistance was made yet the English had much to do in
surmounting the natural difficulties of the place, the greatest part of one
day.

Passage being made the general summoned three castles that were near. One
desperate of succor and not desirous to dispute the defense presently yielded,
but two stood upon their adventure. So the Cannon was planted a breach made and
the place entered, but, then the moderation of the General was both unusual
and unexpected, in sparing the Defendants lives, for it has bin a long
observed law of the field. That if a small company of better courage then
judgment, will contrary to all military discipline maintain a feeble place
against royal forces, if they will offer to impeach the purposes of an army,
which they have no reason to think themselves able to resist, after battery
presented they put themselves out of all ordinary expectation of mercy and so
Caesar answered the Adviatici, Civitatem conservat^rum, ^i Caes. 2. Gallic.
Conest. 6.
privsqua^ aries murum attigisset se dedissent. And so the Duke d^ Alua much
blamed Prosper Columnus for receiving a castle upon conditions after he had
beaten it with the Cannon. And in this case I conceive the law of God to be
understood; which spares not those cities that will not yield until they be
beseiged, meaning doubtless when the defendants have little reason to think
themselves able to Deuteronomy. 20.
make defense, I will not involue in silence with what a sudden statagem of
wit, the defendants of one of these pieces escaped extremities, when they
understood both that they were not able to defend themselves, and that their
obstinaey had excluded all hope of pardon. They made petition that they might
not presently be slain; but have some time to recommend their souls to God,
and afterward be hanged, this respite being first obtained their pardon did
more easily ensue.

Upon the first news of the approaches of the English and all truths enlarged
by report. The Governor of Scotland was somewhat appalled, as neither furnished
at that time with foreign aid, nor much trusting his forces at home yet
resuming his accustomed courage well acquainted with both fortunes, he sent his
heralds through all parts of the realm, and commanded the firecrosse to be
carried (an ancient custom in cases of importance) namely two firebrands set
in fashion of a cross, and pitched upon the point of a spear, therewith
proclamation to be made that all men above 16 years of age, and under 60
should resort forthwith to Muscleborough with convenient provision of victuals
with them.

Hereupon they flocked to the place in so great multitudes that it was thought
sit not only to stay further resort, but making choice of the most serviceable,
to discharge diverse of the rest.

Now as the English directed their way toward the place where they understood
the Scots assembled, they came to a river called Lynne crossed with a bridge of
stone. The horsemen and carriages passed through the water, the foot men over
the bridge, which because it was narrow the army was long in setting over, The
Avantguard marched forth and the battle followed, but as the Arriere was
passing over, a very thick mist did arise. The Earl of Warwick having before
espied certain plumpes of Scottish horsemen ranging the field rerurned toward
the Arriere to prevent such danger as the thickness of the mist, the neerenes
of the enemy, and the disarray occasioned by the narrownes of the bridge might
cast upon them. The Scots coniecturing (as it was) that some personage of honor
stayed to have a view of the Arriere, called to the english to know if any
noble man were near, for that one whom they named (well known to be of
honorable condition) would present himself to the General in case he might
safely be conducted. Certain young soldiers not used to such trains made
rash and sudden answer that the Earl of Warwick was near, under whose
protection he might be assured. Hereupon they passed the water placed 200 of
their prickers behind a hillocke, and with 40 more cast about to find the
Earl. Now the Earl espying 6. or 7. of them seattered near the army and
taking them to be of the English sent one to command them to their Arra^e, and
to that end himself rode an easy pace toward them followed only with 10 or 12
on horseback. He that had been sent before was so heedlesse either to
observe, or to advertise what they were, that the Earl did not discover them
to be enemies until he was in the midst among them.

Certainly a commander should not carelessly cast himself into danger, but
when either upon necessity or misadventure he falls into it, it much
aduanceth both his reputation and enterprise if bravely he behave himself. Now
the Earl espying where he was gave so rude a charge upon a captain of the
Scots named ' Dandy Care, that he forced him to turn, and chased him above 12
score at the lances point. Herewith the residue retired deceitfully toward the
place of their Ambush, from whence issued about 60 more. Then the Earl
gathered his small company about him, and with good countenance maintained the
fight. But the enemy in the end whether perceiving some succors advancing from
the army where the Alarm was then taken, or whether intending to draw the
English further into their Ambush, turned away an easy pace. The Earl forbad
his men from following, fearing a greater ambush behind the hill as in truth
there was. At his return he was received with great applause by the English
soldiers, for that he did so well acquit himself in the danger, whereinto by
error and not by rashness he had bin carried. One of his men was slain, another
hurt in the buttocke, a third named Uane so grievously hewne that many
thousands have dyed of less then half his hurts, whereof notwithstanding, he
was cured afterward; of the Scots 3 were taken prisoners and presented to the
general by the Earl, of whom one had received many great entertainments and
courtesies in England.

I may happily be thought tedious in setting down these occurrences which may
seem small. But besides that in actions of arms small matters are many times
of very great moment, especially when they serve to raise an opinion of
commanders, I intend to describe this battle fully, not to derogate thereby
any thing from the one nation, or to arrogate to the other. For what honor
rises upon event of a battle, when oftentimes the smallest accident
overthrows a side? And when victory does more often fall, by error of the
vanquished then by valor of the victorious. But my purpose is to make it
appear what myseries both nations have avoided, and what quietness and
security they have attained by their peaceable union, when as either of them
being able to bring such forces into the field for then mutual ruin, they may
now do the like for their common either glory or necessity. Again this
battle being partially described heretofore by the writers of either nation
and not without uncivil terms, I will now set it forth so indifferently and
fairly as I can. Lastly this battle is not slightly to be slipped over,
being the last (wherein I pray that I may prophecy truly) that was or ever
shall be struck between the two nations. But I return to my purpose.

Now the Scottish horsemen began to houer much upon the English army, and to
come pricking about them sometimes within the length of their staves, using
some liberty of language to draw the English from their strength. But the
General of the English knowing right well, that the Scots were expert in
tumultuous fights, restrained his horse from falling forth, and maintained a
close march until they came to Salt Preston by the Frith. Here they encamped
within view of the Scottish army, little more then two miles distant from them.
About a mile from the English another way, the Scottish horsemen were very
busy, upon a hill, and emboldened much partly upon their former approaches, and
partly by the neerenesse of their army, but chiefly upon an opinion which they
conceived, that the English horsemen were young and unskillful, and easy to be
dealt with, came upon the English with enereased troops, to the number of 1200
besides 500 foot which lay in ambush behind the hill. The Lord Gray and Sir
Francis Bryan impatient of braueries obtained leave of the General a little to
assay them, and so as they came seattered upon the spur within a stones cast
of the English and were beginning to wheel about, the Lord Gray with some
troops of lighthorsemen charged them home. These were forthwith seconded by
certain numbers of dimilances and both backed with about 1000 men at arms.
The Scots meant not to depart before they had done their errand, wherefore
turning their faces boldly maintained the fight, three hours and more. In the
end ouerlaied with numbers they were put to slight and chased almost to the
edge of their camp, in this fight the chiefest force of the Scottish horsemen
was defeated, to their great disadvantage afterward. The Lord Hume by a fall
from his horse lost his life. His son and heir with two Priests and 6
gentlemen were taken prisoners, and about 1300 slain. Of the English one
Spanish hackbutter was hurt, and three captains of the light horse, by
unadvised pursuit were taken prisoners.

The day next following the Lord General and the Earl of Warwick rode
toward the place where the Scottish army lay to view the manner of their
eneamping, as they were returned an herald and a trumpeter from the Scots
overtooke them, and having obtained audience the Herald began, That he was
sent from the Lord Governor of Scotland partly to enquire of prisoners, but
chiefly to make offer, that because he was desirous to avoid not only
profusion but the least effusion of Christian blood, and for that the English
had not done any vnmanlike outrage or spoil, he was content they might
return, and should have his safe conduct for their peaceable passage.

Then the Trumpeter, that the Lord Huntly his master sent message by him, that
as well for brief expedition, as to spare expense of christian blood, he would
fight upon the whole quarrel either with 20 against 20 or with 10 against 10
or more particularly by single combat between the Lord General and himself,
which in regard the Scots had advantage both for number and freshness of men,
in regard also that for supply, both for provision and succors they were at
home, he esteemed an honorable and charitable offer.

To the Herald the Lord General answered that as his coming was not with
purpose or desire to endammage their Realm, as he was there, he would neither
entreat nor accept of him leave to depart, but would measure his marches in
advancing or retiring, as his own judgment, guided by advice of his counsel
should deem expedient.

To the Trumpeter he returned answer, that the L. Huntley his master was a
young gentleman full of free courage, but more desirous of glory then
judicious, as it seemed, how to win it. That for number of Combatants it was
not in his power to conclude a bargain, but was to employ all the forces put
under his charge to the best advantage that he could, that in case this were a
particular quarrel between the Governor and him, he would not refuse a
particular combat, but being a difference between the 2 kingdoms, it was
neither fit, nor in his power either to undertake the adventure upon his own
fortune, or bearing a public charge to hazard himself against a man of
private condition.

Then the Earl of Warwick said, I marvel Trumpeter that thy master would
make his challenge so fond, as he might well know it could not be accepted.
For tell me Trumpeter, can he think it fit, that he, to whose charge is
committed the command of all this Army abroad, and at home the Kings person and
protection of all his Realms, should undertake a combat with a particular
man. But he might have found others his equals amongst us, by whom he might
have been assured that he should be answered? And (therewith turning his
speech to the L. General) under your Graces favor, I accept the challenge.
And bring me word Trumpeter that thy master will perform with me as thou have
said, and thou shall have 100 crowns for thy travail.

Nay, answered the L. General, you have a great charge in the Army, which upon
a private man's challenge you must not abandon. But Herault tell the L.
Governor, and the L. Huntley, That we have entered your country with a sober
company (for so the Scots term a thing that is mean) your army is both great
and fresh, but let them appear upon indifferent ground, and assuredly they
shall have fighting enough. And bring me word Herault that they will so do,
and I will reward thee with 1000 crowns.

This Earl of Huntley was a man young, bold, adventerous, of very good
resolution and skill in Arms. But this challenge was so far beyond the point
both of discretion and honor, that the English that knew his noble spirit, did
believe that his name was therein abused, which he manifested to be true by
disavowing it openly afterward. For it is not fit that a man should abandon
his public charge to undertake both the office and danger of a private
Soldier. And therefore the like challenge of Tullus was refused by the
commander of the Albanes. For that the contention was not between their
persons, but between the Cities of Alba and Rome. So Sertorius was refused by
Metellus, Antonius by Augustus, and John Emperor of Constantinople by a king of
Scythia, So Antonius Caracalla by reason of his often challenges, was esteemed
not to be so valiant as vain. And hereupon the histories of our times forbear
not to blame Charles the fifth, Emperor, Henry the eight, king of England, and
Francis the first, king of France, for that they often adventured rather as
Soldiers then as Commanders.

But doubtless the L. Governor made a most honorable offer, and the rather
for that it was conceived by the English, that he held himself no less
assured of victory then he was of his own resolution to fight, whereto it
seemed that he wanted not good reason, chiefly upon confidence of his own
forces, and partly upon expectation of 12 Galleys and 50 ships well appointed
out of France to assail the English at their backs. All the chief Captains
yielded to the same advice of giving battle, as out of their own judgments,
because they saw it agreeable to that which the L: Governor had determined. To
these the residue attributed so much, that albeit diverse were of a different
opinion, yet they chose rather to condemn their own understanding then to
question theirs.

During this enterparlance the Scots discharged 4 great shots against the
English camp, without harm as it happened, but not without breach of the Laws
of the field, whereby not only public messengers are privileged to pass
without either danger or scorn, but until they have discharged their message
all hostility should surcease. Howsoever this happened the General of the
English army unwilling to be behind in any equal or honorable offer, sent
letters to the L. Governor of Scotland. Wherein he desired him and theresidue
of the Scottish nobility to consider, That both armies consisted of Christians,
to whom nothing should be more dear then peace, nothing more detestable then
effusion of humane blood. That the cause of this war did not proceed from
ambition, avarice, or hate, but from desire of perpetual peace between their
people and nations, which could no way so firmly be knit as by knitting their
Princes together in marriage. That many other respects, set aside their King
for his birth, his years, his royal estate, his princely personage,
education, and qualities was such a marriage for their Queen, that a more
convenient could not be found, that in case all the Nobility of Scotland were
not of one mind. The English would be content that their Queen should be
brought up amongst them, until she should be of age to make her own choice.
Provided that in the mean time she should not be transported to any foreign
country, or any agreement made for any other marriage. That upon this condition
there should be an abstinence of hostility* for all that time, and they would
in quiet manner withdraw their army, and repair all damages which indifferent
Commissioners should adiudge.

No answer was hereto returned, but rumors ran freshly among the Scottish
soldiers, that the intention of the English was to take away their Queen by
force, and under pretense of marriage to reduce the kingdom under their
dominion, and verily it may seem almost incredible that all these fair
ouertures, made by men well esteemed for honest dealing, could take no place,
that nothing could move the Scots to forsake their distant and heavy helps, and
to embrace friends, both ready and at hand. But besides that, the long
continued wars between the English and the Scots, had then raised invincible
iealousies and hate, which long continued peace has since abolished, I do
herein admire the unsearchable working and will of God, by whose inflexible
decree the union between the two Realms did not then take effect, when by the
death of K. Edward it should have been of short continuance, (as by the death
of Francis the second, the union between France and Scotland did suddenly
dissolve) but was reserved unto a more peaceable and friendly time, so for a
person in whose progeny it has taken deep and durable root. And so for that
time no conditions of peace being regarded, both sides addressed themselves to
their adventure.

The places where the two Armies lay encamped, were divided by the river Eske,
the banks whereof were almost so deep as the banks of the Peathes mentioned
before. The Scots lay somewhat near the one side* and the English about two
miles from the other. The English first raised their Camp, and began to march
toward the river Eske, intending to possess a hill called Vnder-Eske, which
commanded the place where their enemies lay. The Scots coniecturing so much,
cast their Tents flat upon the ground, passed the River and mounted the Hill
before the English could come near. Hereupon the English turned aside to
another hill called Pinkenclench, which afterward fell much to their
Advantage, as well for that they were then in place to be aided by their ships
which rode near in Edinburgh Frith, as also for that they gained thereby the
advantage both of wind and Sun, a great part of the strength of an Army, and
lastly for that their enemies were thereby cast into a cruel error.

For no sooner did they espy the Eenglish turning from them, but forthwith they
were of opinion that they fled toward their shipping, This surmise was first
occasioned for that the English ships removed the day before from Lies to
Muscleborough Frith, which was conceived to be for taking in their foot and
carriages, that the horsemen might with less encumbrance and more have return
back upon the spur. Hereupon they had appointed the same night, (whose
darkness would have increased the fear) to have given a camisado upon the
English. But understanding that they were well entrenched having good es^out
abroad and sure watch within, they brake that purpose, but upon this declining
of the English from them, the conceit did again revive, not only as a thing
desired, but because the English were inferior unto them in number, and had
travailed far, and were well known to grow short in their provisions. Yea
when they were discerned to make stand upon the first ascent of Pinkenclench
hill, the conjecture ran that their flight, was only deferred until they might
cover their disorders by the dead darkness of the night. Maruailous security
and always dangerous, when men will not believe any bees to be in a hiue
until they have a sharp sense of their stings.

And thus the Scots heaued up into high hope of victory, took the English
fallen for foolish birds fallen into their net, and seeming to fe^re nothing
more then that they should escape, forlooke their hill and marched into the
plain directly toward the English. Here the Lord Governor put them in
remembrance, how they could never yet be brought under by the English, but were
always able either to beat them back, or to weary them away. He bad them
look upon themselves and upon their enemies, themselves dreadful, their
enemies gorgeous and brave, on their side men, on the other spoil, in case
either through slownesse or cowardice they did not permit them to escape, who
(lo now) already have began their sight.

The whole army consisted of 35 or 36000 men of whom they made three
battaillons. In the Auantgard commanded by the Earl of Angus about 15000 were
placed about 10000 in the battle, over whom was the Lord Governor and so many
in the Arriere, led by the valiant Gordone Earl of Huntley. Hackbutters they
had none, no men at arms but about 2000 horsemen, prickers as they are termed,
fitter to make excursions and to chase then to sustain any strong charge. The
residue were on foot well furnished With Jack and skull, pike, dagger,
bucklers made of boorde, and sliceing swords, broad, thin and of an excellent
temper. Every man had a large kerchiefe folded twice or thrice about the neck,
and many of them had chains of latten drawn three or four times along their
hoses and doublet sleeves, they had also to affright the enemies horses, big
rattles covered with parchment or paper, and small stones within, put upon
staves about three else long. But doubtless the rattling of shot might have done
better service.

The Earl of Angus led the Avantguard with a well measured march, whereupon
the Lord Governor commanded him by a messenger to double his pace, thereby to
strike some terror unto the enemy. Himself followed with the battle a good
distance behind, and after came the Arrier well nigh even with the battle on
the left side, the avauntguard was slanked on the right side with 4 or 5 pieces
of Artellery drawn by men, and with 400 horsemen prickers on the left. The
battle and Arriere were likewise guarded with Artillery in like sort drawn,
and about 4000 Irish Archers brought by the Earl of Argile, served as a wing
to them both, rightly so termed as being the first who began the flight,

The General of the English and the Earl of Warwick were together when the
Scots thus abandoned the hill, which they espying gave thanks to God, holding
themselves in good hope of the event, forthwith they ordered the artillery, and
taking a loving leave departed to their several charge, the General to the
battle, where the Kings standard was borne, the Earl to the Avantguard, both
on foot, protesting that they would live or die with the soldiers, whom also
with bold countenance and speech (which serve soldiers for the best eloquence)
they put in mind of the honor, their ancestors had acquired, of their own
extreme disgrace and danger if they fought not well, that the justice of their
quarrel should not so much encourage as enrage them, being to revenge the
dishonor done to their King, and to chastise the deceitful dealings of their
enemies, that the multitude of their enemies should nothing dismay them,
because they Who come to maintain their own breach of faith, besides that the
check of their consciences much breaks their spirit, have the omnipotent
arm of God most furious against them.

Herewith arose a buzzing noise among them as if it had bin the rustling sound
of the sea a far of, every man addressing himself to his office, and
encouraging those who were nearest unto them. The Earl ranged his Avauntguard
in Array upon the side of the hill, expecting until the enemy should more
nearly approach. The general after he had ordered his Battle, part upon
the hill, and part upon the plain, somewhat distant from the Avantguard on
the right side, mounted the hill to the great artillery, to take a view of
both the Armies, and to give directions as occasions should change. The Arrier
stood wide of the battle upon the same side, but altogether upon the plain.
The L. Gray Captain of the men at Arms, was appointed to stand somewhat
distant from the Avantguard on the left side, in such sort as he might take the
flank of the enemy, but was forbidden to charge, until the foot of the
Avantguard were buckled with them in front, and until the battle should be
near enough for his relief.

Now after that the Scots were well advaunced in the field, marching more then
an ordinary pace, the great shot from the English ships, and especially from
the galley began furiously to scour among them, whereby the M^ of Grime and
diverse others about were torn in pieces; especially the wing of the Irish was
so grievously either galled or fearred there with, that (being strangers and in
a manner neutralls) they had neither good heart to go forward, nor good
likeing to stand still, nor good assurance to run away. The Lord Gray perceived
this amazement, and conceived thereby occasion to be ripe, whereupon when the
enemy was not about two slight shot from the English avantguard, suddenly and
against direction with his men at arms, he charged them on head.

The Scots were then in a fallow field, whereinto the English could not enter,
but over a cross ditch and a slough, in passing whereof many of the English
horse were plunged and some mired, when with some difficulty and much disorder
they had passed this ditch, the ridges of the fallow field lay trauerse, so as
the English must cross them in presenting the charge. Two other disadvantages
they had, the enemies pikes were longer then their staves, and their horses
were naked without any barbs. For albeit many brought barbes out of England,
yet because they expected not in the morning to fight that day, few regarded to
put them on.

The Scots confident both in their number, order, and good appointment, did not
only abide the English, but with some biteing terms provoked them to charge.
They cloased and in a manner locked themselves together, shoulder to shoulder,
so near as possibly they could, their pikes they strained in both hands and
therewith their buckler in the left, the one end of the pike against the right
foot, the other breast high against the enemy. The fore rank stooped so low
as they seemed to kneel, the second rank close at their backs, crossed their
pikes over their shoulders, and so did the third and the rest in their order,
so as they appeared like the thornie skin of a hedghogge, and it might be
thought impossible to break them. Notwithstanding the charge was given with so
well governed fury, that the left corner of the Scots battaillon was enforced
to give in, But the Scots did so bravely recover and acquit themselves, that
diverse of the English horsemen were overthrown, and the residue so disordered
as they could not conveniently fight or fly, and not only iustled and bare
down one another, but in their confused tumbling back brake a part of the
Avantguard on foot. In this encounter 26 of the English were slain most part
Gentlemen of the best esteem. Diverse others lost their horses, and carried away
marks that they had been there. The L. Gray was dangerously hurt with a pike
in the mouth, which struck two inches into his neck. The L. Edward Seymer
son to the L. General lost his horse, and the English Standard was almost.
lost*

Assuredly albeit encounters between horsemen on the one side, and foot on the
other are seildome with the extremity of danger, because as horsemen can hardly
break a battle on foot, so me^ on foot cannot possibly chase horsemen. Yet
hearevpon so great was the tumult and fear a mong the English, that, had not
the commanders bin men both of approved courag and skill, or happily had the
Scots bine well fonrnished with men at Armas the army had that day been
utterly undone. For an army is commonly like a flock of fowls when some
begine to fly all will follow. But the Lord Gray to repair his error
endeavored with all industry to vallye his horse: The Lord General also
mounted on horseback and came amongst them both by his presence and advice to
reduce the^ into order. Sr. Ralph Vane and Sr Ralph Sadler did memorable
service. But espcially the Earl of Warwick who was in greatest danger
declared his resolution and judgment to be most present in reteyning his men
both in order and in heart. And having cleared his foot from disturbance by the
horsemen, he sent forth before the front of his Avantgard Sr Peter Mewcas
Captain of all the Hackbutters on foot, and Sr Peter Gamboa, a Spaniard
Captain of 200 Hackbutters Spanish and Italians on horse. These brought their
men to the slough mentioned before, who discharging lively almost close to the
face of the enemy did much amaze them, being also disordered by the late
pursuit of the English horsemen, and by spoiling such as they had overthrown.
At the backs of these the Archers were placed, who before had marched on the
right wing of the Avantguard, and then sent such showers of shot over the
Hackbutters heads, that many bodies of their enemies being but half armed,
were beaten down and buried therewith. And besides the Master of the Artillery
did visit them sharply with murdering haileshot from the pieces mounted
toward the top of the hill, also the Artillery which slanked the Arriere
executed hotly. Lastly the ships were not idle, but especially the galley did
play upon them and plague them very sore.

The Scots being thus applied with shot, and perceiving the Avantguard of the
English to be in good order, nearly to approach, and the men at arms to have
recovered their Array, turned their Avantguard somewhat toward the South, to
win, as it was thought, some advantage of ground. By this means they fell
directly on head on the English battle, whereupon the Earl of Warwick
addressed his men to take the slanke. The Avantguard of the Scots being thus
upon, and beset with enemies, began a little to retire toward their great
battle, either to be in place to be relieved by them, or happily to draw the
English more separate and apart. The Irish Archers espying this and surmising
the danger to be greater then it was, suddenly brake up and committed the
saftie of their lives to their nimble footmanship. After whose example all the
rest threw away their weapons, and in headlong have abandoned the field, not
one stroke having been given by the English on soot. But then the horsemen
coming furiously forward had them very cheap.

The slight was made three ways, some running to Edinburgh, some along the
sands toward Lies, but the most toward Dake^th, which way by reason of the
marish the English horse were least able to pursue. The chase was given from
one of the clock in the afternoon till almost six. It reached five miles in
length, and four in breadth, all which ways the Scots scattered* in their
flight Iackes, Swords, Bucklers, Daggers, or whatsoever was either cumbersome,
or of weight to impeach their have, yea some cast off their shoes and dublets
and fled in their shirts. Diverse other devises were practiced to avoid or
defer the present danger. Some entreated and offered large ransomes, some
being pursued only by one, suddenly turned head and made resistance, by whom
many horses were disabled, and some of their horses either slain or hurt. The
Earl of Angus a man of assured both hardiness and understanding, couched in a
furrow and was passed over for dead until a horse was brought for his escape.
2000 others lying all the day as dead departed in the night, Diverse others
plunged into the river Eske, and covered themselves under roots and branches of
trees, many so streined themsesues in their race that they fell down
breathless and dead, whereby they seemed in running from their deaths to run
unto it.

The English discerned in their retreit that the execution had been too
cruel, and far exceeding the bounds of ordinary hostility, which happily was
a cause in the secret judgment of God, that they had no better fruit of their
victory. The dead bodies l^y all the way scattered so thick as a man may see
sheep grazing in a well stored pasture, most slain in the head or neck for
that the horsemen could not well touch lower with their swords, and scarce
credible it is how soon they were stripped and laid naked upon the ground. But
then again the eyes of all men were fastened upon them with pity and
admiration, to behold so many naked bodies, as for tallness of stature,
witness of skin, largeness and due proportion of limbs, could hardly be
equalled in any one country. The ground where their several battailons first
brake, lay strewed with pikes so thick as a sloore is usually strewed with
rushes, whereby the pl^ces could hardly be passed over either by horse or by
foot* the river Eske ran red with blood, so as they who perished therein might
almost be said to be drowned in their fellows blood.

On the otherside when they came to the place where the English men at Arms
had been defeated, many of their horses were found grievously gashed or goared
to death. The English who there perished were so deeply wounded, especially on
the head that not one could be discerned by his face. Brave Edward Shellie, who
was the first man that charged, was known only by his beard, Little Preston
for that both his hands were cut off being known to have worn bracelets of
gold about his wrests, others were brought to knowledge by some such particular
marks. Hereby appears (as I said before) what blessing is grown to both
nations by their late happy union when before they were like two rude
encountering Rams, whereof he that escapes best is sure of a blow.

Diverse of the Nobility of Scotland were here slain, and many Gentlemen both
of worth and noble birth, of the inferior sort about 10000, and as some say
14000 lost their lives. Of the English were slain 51 horsemen and one footman,
but a far greater number hurt. The Scottish prisoners accounted by the
Marshals book, were about 1500. The chief whereof were the Earl of Huntley,
the Lords Yester Hoblie, and Hamilton, the Mr of Sampoole, and the L. of
Wimmes. A Herault was also taken but discharged forthwith. The execution was
much maintained by the Scots own swords, scattered in every place. For no
sooner had an English horseman brake his sword, but forthwith he might take up
another. Insomuch that many of them brake three or four before their return.
So apparent is the hand of God against violation of faith, that it is often
chastised by the means appointed to defend it.

Of all other the English men were least favorable to the Priests and Monks*
by the Scots called Kirkmen, who had been equally troublesome in peace and
unprofitable in war. To whom many as well English as Scots imputed the
calamity of that day these made a band of 3 or 4000, as it was said, but they
w'ere not altogether so many, howbeit many Bishops and Abbots were amongst
them, from these diverse Scots feared more harm by victory, then they found
among their enemies by their overthrow. After the field a banner was found of
white sarc^net, whereon a woman was painted, her hair about her shoulders
kneeling before a crucifix, on her right hand a church, and along the banner in
fair letters written Afflictae ecclesiae ne obliuiscaris. This was supposed to
have been the Kirkemens banner. But could this crucifix have spoken, as one is
said to have spoken to St Francis and another to St Thomas, it might happily
have told them, that neither religious persons are fit men for arms, nor arms
fit means either to establish or advance Religion.

I must not forget the fidelity of a Scottish soldier toward the Earl of
Huntly. He finding the Earl assaulted by the English, and without his helmet,
took of his own headpeece and put it on the Earls head. The Earl was
therewith taken prisoner but the soldier for want thereof was presently stroke
down. This Earl was of great courage and for this cause much loved of his
soldiers, to whom he was no less loving again. This he manifested by his
great care for such Scottish prisoners as were either wounded or poor,
providing at his proper charge, cure for the one and releife for the other.
This Earl being asked whilst he was prisoner, how he stood affected to the
marriage, answered that he was well affected to favor the marriage but he
nothing liked that kind of wooing.

Certain of those who escaped by slight excused their dishonor, not without a
sharp jest against some of their leaders, affirming that as they had followed
them into the field, so it was good reason they should follow them out. Those
bitter tests the more truth they carry, the more biting memory they leave
behind.

The day of this fight being the 10th of September seems to be a most
disastious day to the Scot^, not only in regard of this overthrow, but for that
upon the same day 34 years before they were in like sort defeated by the
English at Flodden field. The victory raised exceeding joy among the English
partly because it came so cheap, and partly by reason of the great danger and
greater terror that had bin cast upon them by reason of the repulse and
disarray of their men at Arms.

Now as se^ldome one accident either prosperous or adverse, comes
unaccompanied with the like, so this calamity happened not to the Scots alone.
For whilst the English army had thus drawn both the preparations and
intentions of the Scots wholly upon them. The Lord Wharton and the Earl of
Leuenoxe entered Scotland on the west marches with 5000 men, and having marched
two miles they won the church of Anan, a strong place and always much
annoying the English, there they took 62 prisoners, fired most part of the
spoil, and overthrew the fort with powder, passing 16 miles further they took
the castle of Milk, which they fortified strongly and planted a garrison
therein, and after much spoil and wast of the country returned safely into
England.

These successes did strike such a terror into many of the Scots that the Earl
Bothwell and diverse chief gentlemen of (...) and Meers supposing to find
more easy conditions by yielding then by striving, submitted themselves to the
King of England, and were received by the Lord General into protection. But it
is most cerraine that the English made not their best improuements of these
fortunate events, and that especially by two miserable errors, ^unctation in
prosecuting, and haste in departure. But doubtless the union of these two
realms was a work most proper to Gods omnipotent arm, which afterward
effected the same, as by milder means, so in a more durable manner then they
could have bin united by Arms. This high appointment of God we must reverence
and admire, but not omit to observe the errors committed.

First therefore after the retreit, the English lodged the same night in the
place where the battle had bin fought. Where and in the villages not far
distant they soiourned five days, without doing any thing, in the mean time
the English searched the rivers and havens whether the Scottish ships were
retired, in such sort as they left few ships of war vnspoiled or untaken, the
army also gathered the spoil of the field, whereof 30000 iacks and swords, and
30 pieces of great artillery were shipped for England.

The English having thus long breathed and thereby given breathing to their
enemies fired Lies took St Colmes. Broughticragge, Rockesborough, Humes
castle, Aymouth, Fial castle, Dunglasse, Kilnecombe, and diverse other small
pieces, whereof part they ruined, part they enlarged and fortified and
furnished them with able soldiers, accustomed with often and prosperous
success. Herewith as if they had been weary of their fair fortunes, they
suddenly brake off the enterprise and returned another way into England,
having staid not above 25 days in Scotland, and lost under 60 men. The
pretense of their departure was worse then the departure it self, namely for
that the year and their provisions were far spent, and the country afforded
little forage. Assuredly as nature takes least care for those things which
she forms in have, so violent and stormlike fortunes how terrible so ever,
are seldom durable.

Now the Lord Governor of Scotland being of great courage and sober judgment,
as a man might well read in his face, as he had amply performed his duty both
before the battle and in the field, so especially after the fight he declared
himself to be of a stout and unbroken spirir. For first he assembled the
dispersed forces of the Scottish army, albeit not in sufficient manner to give
a fresh battle, by reason that much of their armor was lost, yet able to
keep the English from ranging at larg^. Then he presented the English with
diverse offers of ^reaty touching matters in difference, until the country was
discharg^d of them, last^y knowing right well that counsels are commonly
censured by events, and that in matters of arms, albeit the praise of
prosperous success is shared amongst many, yet the blame of misadventures is
charged upon one. And fearing hereby mutinies amongst his own people, and
contempt of others, having first assured the young Queen in place of good
defense, he assembled the Scottis nobility and used words to this effect.

I assure my self that many of you my Lords and more of the vulger are much
displeased with me for that I have advised this war whereof so sad events
have followed, for this cause I have assembled you together to reduce you to a
better opinion* or to blame you deeply, either if you remain offended, or if
you cast down your courage throw fear, the betrayer of all succors which
reason can afforde, for tell me if you are discontented with me for aduising
this war, do you not condemn your selves for following the advice? It is
certain that at the first you were all of my opinion, and that I did nothing
without your approuement. If now upon one misadventure you change your
judgments, and charge the fault only upon me, you do me wrong and discover
your own weakness, in being unable to endure those things which you knew were
casual, and which you were resolved to endure. But I make no doubt but the
same reasons which induced you to entertain this war, will induce you also
to prosecute the same, howsoever sudden and unexpected events dismay your
judgments, for the present.

Touching my self I was always of opinion, and shall never change, that it is
better the kingdom should be in good estate, with particular loss to many of
the people, then that all the people should be well and the state of the
kingdom altogether lost or dishonourably impaired, even as it is better that a
ship should be preserved with some discommodity to the sailers, then that the
sailers being in health the ship should perish, or as it is less dangerous
when diverse parts of a tower are decayed and the foundation firm, then when
the foundation is ruinous, albeit the parts remain entire. For the common
estate is but weakened by calamities of particular persons, but the ruin of the
state in^olueth all in a general destruction. And therefore they are to be
blamed alike, both who move and who decline war upon particular respects, the
comeither honor or necessity must be the true measure of both.

But the cause of this war is no other then that we will not incontinently
submit our selves to do what our neighbors require. That is because at the
first word we are not forward to thrust our necks under the girdles of our
enemies, yea our old enemies, yea our only enemies of any account for many
years, who in their gluttenous hope have devoured our kingdom, who by the
bloody execution of their late victories have shown what courtesy we may
expect at their hands. In doing whereof we shall abandon our ancient and
approved friends, who as they never failed us in our extremities, so are they
now prepared with large aides to relieve us, who will not fear or pause at the
least, before he leap upon this sudden change^, who will forsake long tried
friends to rely upon those, who always have been ready by Arms to infest us.
Not at all times upon desire either of revenge or spoil, but to bring us under
their ambitious dominion, which of us had not rather dye, this day then see our
enemies in our strongest castles and yoakes of garrisons cast upon our necks?
Who will not prefer a death for liberty before a life without it?

Their promises are fair and large indeed I must say but of what assurance?
What assurance can we have but that when we have lif^ed them into the chair of
state, we shall not be compelled to be their footmen? If our prince were a
man and should marry an inheretrix of England, we should happily have no cause
to fear, but that he would maintain the liberty of his native country, but
being a woman and desired in marriage of a King of England, under whose power
and custody she must abide, how shall we be able against his mind either to
benefit or preserve us, verily as men hate those that affect that honor by
ambition which pertains not to them, so are they much more odious who either
through negligence or through fear will betray the glory and liberty which
they have.

Now my Lords if any surmise either that this war will be long, or that we
shall have the worst in the end, his error is great, for removing whereof, I
must tell you, that which many of you seem either little to remember or never
to have known; do you suppose the state of this realm, (of the val^ur
whereof the enemy has often found woeful proof) to be now so feeble that it
cannot bear off a greater blow then this? It has often done it and is able of
it self to do it again, if our endeavors be answerable to our means, Our
Ancestors have sustained many greater dangers, and yet retaining their liberty
have left both it and their honor entire to us, what are we of l^sse heart
then they? For of less ability we are not, shall we show our selves unworthy
of our succession from them? Assuredly it is more shame for a man to loose that
which he holds, then to fail in getting that which he never had.

But suppose our forces to be nearer driven then they are our ancient allies
the French are upon the seas and near approaching for our relief, also our
friends in Italy and other parts have sent us money to supply our wants,
wherefore Lords it is meet that we resume our ancient courage, and address our
selves for new preparation not only upon those hopes both from our selves and
our friends, but in contempt of our enemies. For often it happens that a
prosperity unexpected makes men careless and remiss if they be not very
wise, whereas they who have received that wound become more vigilant and
collected, especially when they see not only the common honor and liberty but
their particular both seignories and safeties to be at the stake.

And albeit the enemy has done that which it was to be believed they would
endeavor to do, in case we would not yield unto them, yet as those things
must be endured upon necessity, which happen by the hand of God. So those which
come from enemies must be borne by virtue. And since it is a custom of our
country so to do, since our people are famous for being nothing abashed at
cross events, take we heed this virtue fail not in us. If it does? If we
show our selves heartlesse and faint, we shall utterly overthrow not only the
glory but the memory, both of our ancestors and of our state.

As for those who have yielded to our enemies let us esteem them as fugitives
and traitors, who endeavor to cast themselves and their country into
subjection but let us stand assured, that they who least shrink at the storms
of fortune, whether in public or private affairs are always most virtuous
and victorious in the end.

On the other side K: Edward added to his glory, courtesy and liberality;
showing himself most gracious in countenance to all, and giving rewards
suitable to every man's performance or place. The L: Protector he rewarded with
lands of the yearly value of 500l, and certain it is that these first
fortunes raised unto him a great respect both in other countries and among his
own people, and the rather because he was discerned to be much searching both
into the Counsels and after the events of all his affairs, and likewise into
the condition and state both of his own strength and of the countries near
unto him.

But these prosperous proceedings were not only hindered, in their fairest
course, but altogether stayed, and in some measure turned back by reason of the
unadvised forwardness of diverse chief counsailors, in making both sudden and
unseasonable alterations in matters of state, whose greedy desires of having
their wills in all they liked, bred both trouble to the realm and to
themselves danger, for great and sudden changes are never without danger,
unless the Prince be both well settled in government and able to bear out his
actions by power, but whilst K. Edward was both unripe in years and new in
government to attempt a change both sudden and great, could not be accompanied
with many mischiefs. The great matters wherein alteration was wrought were
especially two, religion and enclosures.

Now for that Religion is of so high and noble a nature, of so absolute
necessity in a common wealth; that it is esteemed the foundation of Laws, and
the common band of humane society, no sodeyne alteration can almost be made
therein, but many will be induced thereby to attempt some alteration in rule,
whence (says Dio) conspiracies and seditions are often occasioned. For
Religion being seated in the high throne of conscience is a most powerful
ruler of the soul and far preferred before estimation of life, or any other
worldly respect, for this advances man to the highest happiness, It leads
him to his last end, all other things are but instruments, this is the hand,
all other things are but accessaries this is the principal. And therefore as
all men are naturally moved by religion, so when they are violently thrusted
forward by those who (as Liuie speaks) make it their purpose to possess
souls by superstition, then do they break all bands of reason and of rule,
no persuasion of the one, no command of the other can then restrame them.
Multitudo vbi religione capta est melius vatibus quam ducibus suis paret, Curt.
lib. 40.

I will not deny but that some change in religion is often expedient and
sometimes necessary because more in that then in any other thing, it is hard to
contain men from running into one of these extremes either of vain
superstition or of careless contempt, but this must be done with a lost and
tender hand, and as Cicero speaks, vt quum minimo sonitu orbis in republica
convertatur. Some respect should also have been given to those green times, to
the monstrous multitude muffled with 2 great plagues and corruptions of
judgment, custom and ignorance, whereto may be added grief at their own
wants, and envy at the prosperity of others, especially for that many bold
spirits were busied, not only to incense but to lead them into much variety of
mischief. And if it be said that K. Henry the 8th had quietly passed the like
change before, I answer the example was not then to be followed, the kings
were not equal either in spirit or in power. Even as it is in the ^able that
albeit an Eagle did bear away a lamb in her talents with full flight, yet a
raven endeavoring to do the like was hold entangled and fettered in the
flecce.

Touching enclosures, I am not ignorant what a profitable purchase is made
thereby, not only to particular persons, but generally to the whole
Commonwealth, in case it be without depopulation, because a company of lands
enclosed, are thereby improved in worth 2 or 3d parts at the least, hereby two
great commodities ensue, riches and multitude of people, because the more
riches are raised out of lands, the more people are thereby maintained. This
does plainly appear by two shires almost, equal both in greatness and in
goodness of soil. Northampton much champion, and Somerset altogether
enclosed, for if estimation may be made by musters, and by subsidies, tenths
and fif^eens enclosure has made the one county more then double to exceed the
other both in people and in wealth.

Notwithstanding the Lord Protector gaping after the fruitless breath of the
multitude, and more desirous to please the most then the best causing a
proclamation to be set forth against enclosures, commanding that they who had
enclosed any lands accustomed to lie open should upon a certain pain before a
day assigned lay them open again. This Proclamation whilst few were forward
to obey gave occasion to the mutinous multitude instable in judgment and
intempestuous when they are stirred all carried with a headlong rashness, and
one following another as wiser then himself immoderatly both in desire and
hope to be easily drawn by others who had d^per reaches then themselves to
matters which at the first they least int^nded.

And again soon after the beginning of the young kings reign, certain
iniunc^ions were set forth for removing images out of Churches which had been
highly, not only esteemed but honored before, and for abolishing or altering
some other ancient observations in the Church. Hereupon commissioners were
dispatched into all parts of the realm to see those injunctions to be
executed, with those diverse preachers were sent furnished with instructions to
persuade the people from praying to Saints as for the dead, for adoring Images,
from use of beads, ashes and processions, from mass, dirges, praying in
unknown languages, and from some other like things whereunto long custom had
wrought a religious observation and for defect of preachers, (...) were
appointed to be publicly read in Churches, aiming to the very same end.

Some other offering to maintain these ceremonies were either punished or
forced to (...), Edmund Bonner Bishop of London was committed prisoner to the
Fleet, for refusing to receive these injunctions. Stephan Gardener was likewise
committed first to the Fleet, afterward to the Tower, for that he had openly
preached that it were well these changes in religion should be stayed, until
the King were of years to govern by himself. This the people apprehending
worse then it was either spoken or meant, a question began to be raised among
them, whether during the Kings minority such alterations might lawfully be
made or no for the like causes Tonstall Bp of Duresme, and Heath Bp of
Rochester, were in like committed to prison, all these being then and still
continuing famous for learning and judgment were dispossessed of their
Bishoppricks, but no man was touched in life.

Hereupon a Parliament was held in the first year of the King: and by
prorogation in the second, wherein diverse Colleges* Cha^tries, free Chappells,
Fraternities, Guildes, etc. with all their lands and goods were put into the
actual possession of the King: part of the goods and lands being sold at a low
value, enriched many, and enabled some, and thereby made them firm in
maintaining the change, also that no m^ should speak against receiving the
Eucharist under both kinds* which had been restrained in times before, and
that Bishops should be placed by collation of the King under his Letters
Patents, without any precedent election or confirmation ensuing, and that all
processes ecclesiastical should be made in the Kings name, is in writs at the
common Law, and that all persons exercising Ecclesiastical jurisdiction should
have the Kings arms in their seals of office, and further the Statute of the
6 Articles, and other statutes concerning punishment of Loll^rds were repealed,
and so was another statute restreining the use of Scriptures in the English
tongue, and the Kings supremacy over the Church of England was confirmed.
Herewith a book was set forth for public prayers by proclamation, and for
administration of the Sacraments, and other rights and offices of the Church,
and diverse punishments were appointed by proclamation, either for not using
the forms prescribed in that book, or for depraving any thing therein
contained.

I forbear to rehearse other acts of this Parliament, albeit a noble writer in
our time esteems it to be a mayme in history that the acts of Parliament
should not be recited, which I conceive so far to be true as they occasion
tumults or division, or some remarkable alteration in state, otherwise as I
find them not regarded by most imitable writers, so I account the relation of
them both fruitless and improper for a true carried history.

Now in this mean time the commissioners before mentioned were earnest in
executing their authority. And either pulled down or defaced all images in
Churches, and that in such unseasonable and unseasoned fashion as if it had
been done in hostility against them, hereat many did express a sense of
distaste, some for religious respects, others in regard of the excellent
artifice of some of their pieces, affirming that albeit religious reverence
migh happily have been either taken away or moderated, yet the civil regard
which all men do not only afford but affect, in maintaining the memory of
those whom they honor or love, night be endured without offense.

Certainly albeit the religion of the Romans endured 170 years according to a
law of Numa Pompilius without any images, albeit the Persians had neither
images nor temples nor altars, being of opinion that God could be represented
by no device that he had no temple but the world, no Altar but the heart of
man, albeit Eus^bius writes that the people of Asia called Seres by express
law forbad adoration of images, albeit that images were forbidden of Ly^urgus
as drawing men from the true worship of that which cannot be seen. Albeit the
ancient Germans and from the Britains, and the Gauls had neither Images nor
Temples, albeit the Jews, and in imitation of them, the Saracens and Turks
abhor nothing more then Images, either in their temples, or in their houses,
because the law of God forbids not only to adore but to make any image.
Albeit the Christians continued a long time without Images in their Churches,
yet were they never entertained into any religion, but presently they took
deep root in the hearts and consciences of the common people. When Leo
Isauricus surnamed Iconomadius assembled a counsel at Constantinople, wherein
it was decreed that Images should be cast out of Churches and burnt, the West
part of his Empire did thereupon first rebel, and afterward revolt.

And yet while these proceedings were but in the bud, affairs of state without
the Realm were maintained in good condition of honor, but seemed rather to
stand at a stay, then either to advance or decline. In Scotland the wars were
maintained by the L. Gray of Wilton, Lieutenant of the North, with variable
success, he fortified Haddington, fired Dawkeith, and won the Castle where
fourteen Scots were slain, and 300 taken prisoners, he spoiled much of the
country about Edinburgh, Lowthum, and Meers, fired Muscleborough, and fortified
Louder, and took Yester, at the yielding whereof he granted life to all except
to one who had used vild speeches against K. Edward. Those speeches were
commonly cast upon one Newton but he charged them upon one Hamilton, Hereupon
Hamilton challenged Newton to the combat, which he did readily accept and the
L. Gray consented to the trial, to this purpose Lists were erected in the
market place at Haddington whereinto at the time appointed, both the combatants
entered, apparelled only in their doublets and hoses, and weapned with sword,
buckler, and dagger. At the first encounter Hamilton drove Newton almost to the
end of the lists, which if he had fully done he had thereby remained
victorious, but Newton on the sudden gave him such a gash on the leg that
therewith he fell to the ground, and Newton forthwith dispatched him with his
dagger, certain gentlemen then present offered to have fought with Newton upon
the same point, but this was adjudged to be against the laws of combat,
wherefore Newton was not only acquitted but rewarded with a chain of gold, and
with the gown which the Lord Gray did then wear, howbeit many were persuaded
that he was saulty and happily neither of them was free, but he enjoyed neither
his escape nor his honor long, for soon after he was hewn in pieces by
Hamiltons friends.

On the other side the Scots became before Broughticragge, with 8000 men and 8
pieces of Artillery, but it was for that time well defended by the English who
by often sallies enforced their enemies with loss of their Artillerio to
abandon the attempt, after this diverse other enterprises were made upon that
fort; at the last it was taken where the Scots slew all except Sir John
Latterel the captain who was taken prisoner.

And now Henry the 2d of France having newly succeeded Francis the first, who
dyed the last of March 1547. sent Mounsieur D^ssie his Li^utenant into Scotland
with an army of about 10000 French and Almaines who ioining with the Scots
besieged Haddington and that with so good earnest* as six pieces of artillery
discharged 340. shot in one day and in another ^00 within 60 p^ees of the wall,
they lodged so near within the very ditches that the English (...) diverse of
them with plummers of lead tied to a trun^ or (...) by a cord, the place was
but weak and the (...) fair but the defendants by resolution supplied all the
defects, making diverse fallies with such lively spirit that the Assayl^nts were
thereby discouraged from making assault. The English from Barwicke with about
1500 horse did often relieve the defendants by breaking through the the midst
of their enemies, but at the last they were so strongly both encountered and
encloased between the French Almaines and Scots, and that Sir Thomas Palmer
the chief leader and about 400 were taken prisoners and diverse slain.
Hereupon the Earl of Shrewsbury was sent with an army of about 15000 men
whereof 3000 were Almaines, but upon notice of his approach the French raised
the field, retired so far as Mus^leborough and there encamped, attributing
much honor to the English for their vasour in regard of the small strength of
the place which they defended, when the Earl (...) vi^uilled and reenforced
the town, he marched (...) ^ard, the enemies and encamped near unto them, and
first a few of the English horse aproached near the army of the French, who
sent forth some troops of their horse to encounter them, but the English
retired until they had drawn the French into an ambush laid for the purpose
and then charging together they had them cheap, amongst which two captains of
account were taken prisoners. The next day the Earl presented his army in
plain field before the enemies camp cloased in three bodies and ranged ready
to abide battle. The French had newly received supply of 14 or 15000 Scots
but yet remained within their strength holding it no wisdom to venture on men
resolud to fight, who being forthwith to depart the realm and could neither
long endanger nor indamage them much. So the Earl after that he had remained
about an hour and perceiving that the French intended not to forsake their
strength, returned unto his camp and afterward to England, destroying Donbarr
and some other which stood near his passage, the Army being dissolud, and the
Scots thought secure, the Lord Gray with his horsemen entered Scotland did great
wast in T^uedale and Liddesdale for the space of 20 miles, and returned without
encounter, Also a navy was appointed to coast along with the army before
mentioned, This fleet coming to Brent Island fired 4 ships then atempting upon
S. Minees were repulsed by the Lord Dun, and so without either glory or gain
returned into England.

Not long after the departure of the English army Mr Dassie with his French and
Almaines attempted suddenly to surprise Haddington, the enterprise was governed
in so secret manner that the French had slain the English escouts and entered
the base court and aproached the maine gates before any alarm was taken, but
then the Townsmen came forth many in their shirts, who with the help of the
watch sustained the assault, until the Soldiers in better apointment came to
their aid. These issued into the base court, through a pryuie posterne, and
sharply visited the Assailants with Halbeards and swords. Here the fight grew
hot, the darkness and danger terrifying some and animating others. Blows flew
at all adventures, wounds and deaths given and taken unexpected, many scarce
knowing their enemies from their friends: But shame wrought such life and
courage in the English, as very few of the enemies who entered the court
escaped alive, leaving their fellows bleeding in their deadly wounds, yet Mr
Dassie not discouraged herewith gave 3 lively assaults more that morning, but
was repelled with so great loss, that 16 Carts and Wagons were charged with
carrying away their dead and dying bodies, besides 300 left in the base court.

After diverse like adventures the English perceiving that the town could not
be kept without danger, nor lost without dishonor, The Earl of Rutland was
sent with 3000 Almaines and as many borderers to demolish the town and to
bring the artillery a way to Barwicke, The Earl not only accomplished his
Charge but made wide wast in his passage by ruin and spoil, Herewith the
castle of Hame was suddenly surprised by the Scots and all the English therein
either taken or ^laine. This was effected by means of certain Scots who used
to bring victuals to the English and were reputed their assured frindes, these
both observing the weakness of the place and orders of the garrison, discovered
them to their fellows and gave entertainment for the surprise Giueing also
warning to others never to trust either the cur^syes or services of those whom
they have provoked to be their enemies.

About these times Sr Edward Bellingham Lo: Deputy of Ireland first with great
diligence and care, then credit and ^eputation especially gained by that
service, took Ocanor and Omor and reduced the other seditious Lords to good
subjection Ocanor and Omor guided by overlate counsel of necessity left their
Lordships and had a yearly pension of 100l assigned to either of them.

And now the French supposing that by reason partly of suspense of hostility
between England and France, and partly of the English affairs in other
places, matters with them would be neglected, determined to attempt a sudden
surprise of the fortress of Bullingberge, to this end 7000 men were appointed
under the conduct of Mr Chastilion furnished with ladders and other
preparations for the surprise. They marched secretly in the dead time of the
night, and when they approached within a quarter of a league. On Carter who had
been discharged of his pay by the English for taking a French woman to wife,
and then served under the French ran privily before, and gave the Alarm to
those in the Forte. The English drew him up the walls between two pikes and
understanding the danger addressed the^ selves to their defense by reason
whereof the French at their approach had so warm a welcome, every of the
English contending that his valor might be noted for some help in the fight,
that at their departure they laded 15 wagons with their dead. Carter himself
adventured bravely in places of greatest danger, and received two great hurts
in his body, Sr Nicholas Arnault the captain was likewise hurt with a pike in
the face, diverse others were wounded and about 25 slain The assault continued
with great obstinacy from midnight until somewhat after the break of day.

Shortly after 300 English on foot and 25 horsemen were appointed to go to a
wood, about 2 leagues from Bullingberge, having carriages with them, for
bringing certain timber for mounting great Artillery, and some other uses when
they approached nearer the edge of the wood, about 500 French horsemen issued
forth and gave three sharp charges upon them, the English empaled themselves
with their pikes, and therewith bare off their enemies, and being lined with
shot (the cruel plague of horsemen) the French were in such sort galled with
arrows that many were wounded Mr Ca^ret and diverse others slain, 70 great
horses lay dead in the field and one Cornet was taken. The English fearing
greater forces began to retire, and therewith appeared about 2000 French and
Almaines on foot. But the English maintained an orderly retreat, until they
came within favor of the shot of Bullingberge and then the enemy adventured no
further, and in this manner the old wounds of war began freshly to open and
bleed between England and France.

But in this mean time such tempests of sedition tumbled in England more by
default of governors then the peoples impatience to live in subjection, that
not only the honor but the safety of the state was thereby endangered. For as
the commissioners before mentioned passed to diverse places for establishing of
their new injunctions, many unsavory scorns were cast upon the^, and ^he
further they wenr from London as the people were more uncivil so did they more
rise into insolency and contempt. At the last as one Mr Body a commissioner
was pulling down images in Cornwall, he was suddenly stabbed into the body by
a Priest with a knife.

Hereupon the people more regarding commotioners then commissioners, slocked
together in diverse parts of the shire as clouds cluster against a storm, and
albeit justice was afterward done upon the offenders, the Principal being
hanged and quartered in Smithfield, and diverse of his chief accomplices executed
in diverse parts of the Realm, albeit so ample a pardon was proclaimed for all
others within that shire touching any action or speech tending to treason, yet
could not the boldness be beaten down either with that severity or with this
lenity be abated. For the mischief forthwith spread into Wiltshire and
Somersetsoire, where the people supposing that a common wealth could not stand
without Commons, beat down enclosures, laid parkes and fields champaine. But
Sr William Herbert afterward Earl of Pembroke with a well armed and ordered
company set sharply upon them, and oppressing some of the forwardest of them
by death, suppressed all the residue by fear. But their duty depending upon
fear the one was of no greater continuance then the other.

The like motions followed in Sussex, Hampshire, Kent, Glocestershire,
Warwickeshire, Essex, Hartfordshire, Leicestershire, Worcestershire and
Rutlandshire. But being neither in numbers nor in courage great, partly by
authority of Gentlemen, and partly by entreaty and advice of honest persons
they were reduced to some good appeasement, as with people more guided by ^age
then by right, yet not altogether mad, it was not uneasy. But herein happily
some error was committed, that being only brought to a countenanc^ of quiet,
regard was not had to distinguish the rebellion fully. For soon after they
brake forth more dangerously then before for no part could content them who
aimed at all. After this the people in Oxfordshire, 'Devonshire, Northfolke and
Yorkshire fell into the same madness, incensed by such who being in themselves
base and degenerate, and dangerous to the state had no hope but in troblesome
times. To Oxfordshire the Lord Gray of Wilton, was sent with 1500 horse and
soote, to who^ the gentlmen of the country resorted, drawing many followers
with them, the very name of the Lord Gray being known to be a man of great
valor and fortune* so terrified the seditious, that upon the very report of
his approach, more then half fell away and dispersed of the residue, who being
either more desperate or more sottish did abide in the field, many were
presently slain, many taken, and forthwith executed. To Devonshire was sent
John Lord Russell, Lord of the privy seal, whose forces being indeed, or being
by him distrusted to be inferior to the importance of the service, he sat
down at Honington, whilst the seditious did almost what they would, upon this
heavines of the kings forces going forward interpr^ted to be fear and want of
mettle, diverse either of the most audacious or such as poverty or fear of
punishment might easily plunge into any mischi^fe, resorted to the seditious
daily from Cornwall and other parts, as bad humors gather to a bile, or as
diverse kenn^ls slow to one sink, so in short time their numbers increased to
10000 tall and able bodies. They were chiefly guided by H^mphery Arundell a man
well esteemed for military services. About 6 others of inferior note were bold
actors with him. Many priests unworthy to be named were also impetuous and
importunate incensors of the rage, men of some academicall learning in
discourse, but their minds not seasoned with any virtuous or religious
thoughts.

Assuredly the vulgar multitude is not vnfirly termed a beast, with many heads
not guided* I will not say with any proportion but portion of reason, violence
and obstinacy like two untamed horses, draw their desire in a blindefo^de
Carriere. They intend most foolishly what they never put in action, and often
act most madly what they never intended, all that they know to do, is that
they know not what to do, all that they mean to determine proves a
determination and meaning to do nothing. They attribute more to others
judgment then to their own, esteeming bold obstinacy for bravest courage and
impudent prating for soundest wisdom, and now being assembled into one company
rather without a Lord then at liberty, to accomplish their misery they fall to
division of all calamities the worst, and so broken in their desires that many
could not learn either wherefore they came, or what they would have done. Some
were commonwealth mutiners, and some did mutiny for religion. They who were for
the common wealth could agree upon no certain thing, but it was certain they
could agree upon nothing, some would have no justices, so ne no gentlemen, some
no laiers nor ordinary courts of justice, and above all enclosures must down,
but whether all or which or how to be employed none could tell, every man
regarding what he followed but not what might follow thereof. All would have
the state transformed, but Whether reformed or deformed they neither cared nor
knew. They concurred only in confused clamors, every man thinking it no less
reasonable that his opinion should be heard, then that his body should be
adventured.

The religious mutiners were not altogether so various in their voices, as
having some few spirits among them by whom they were both stirred and guided,
these in the name of the people hammered up the Articles following, and sent
them to the King, upon granting of which they professed that both their bodies
and their goods should be absolutely at the kings devotion.

1 that carats should administer baptism at all times of necessity as well on
weekedaies as on holidates. 2 That their chilaren might be confirmed by the
Bishop whenever they should within the d^oces resort unto him. 3 Forasmuch as
they believed that after the words of consecration no^ substance of bread
remaining but the real body and blood of Christ, that the mass should be
c^lebrated without any man communicating with the priest, for that many put noe
differenc^ between the Lords body and other m^at, soms saying that it is bread
before and after, some saying that it is profitable to none except he receives
it. 4 That they might have reservation of the Lords body in their Churches. 5
That they might have holy bread and holy water in remembrance of Christ's
precious body and blood. 6 That Gods service might be said or sang with an
audible voice in the Quire and not forth like a Christmas play. 7 That Priests
live chaste (as St Paul did) without marriage, who said to all honest Priests,
be ye followers of me. 8 That the 6 Articles set forth by K. Henry the 8th, be
so used as they were in his time, at least until the K. should accomplish his
full age.
Now albeit the King knew right well that no reasons would serve for denial,
and that they yielding to them in any thing would profit him nothing, but
rather make them rise to more insolent demands, yet he returned an answer in
writing and therewith his general pardon, in ease they would desist and open
their eyes to diseerne how their uncircumspect simplicity had been abused
especially in matters of religion, for that as some virtues resemble some vices
so near, as the one is often taken for the other, so religion and supe^stition
do so nearly resemble, that it was easy for men to disguise the one under
the mask of the other, First therefore he reproved them fairly for their
disorderly assemblies, against the peaceable people of the Realm and against
the honor of his estate, fearing much that by reason of their disobedience,
his lenity should appear to be less then he would have it, al^o for that
they used his name in all their writings, not only without his authority but
even against himself, abusing thereby the weakness of many, and drawing them
into society of their evil. Then he pitied their ignorance and the errors
thence arising, whereby they were allured to new hopes by some, who could not
th^iue so well by their honest e^deavours, as by rapine and spoil, who stopped
all course of law and discourse of reason to open the full sloudgate of their
unmeasurable madness, who to overthrowe th^state pretend liberty, but if they
should overthrow it all liberty were lost.

For says he who has borne you in hand that children even in cas^ of
necessity cannot be baptized but upon holidaies, whereas there is no day no^
hour wherein the Minister is not only permitted but commanded to baptize. By
like abuse you are persuaded that many hold that the blessed Sacrament of
Christ's body does nothing differ from common bread, whereas Laws, Statutes,
Proclamations, common practice agree, that common bread is only to sustain the
body but this blessed bread is food for the soul. Touching confirmation, does
any believe that a child baptized is damned unless it be confirmed? If it be
baptized and also confirmed, is it saved only by confirmation, and not by
baptism? Or is it the more saved by confirmation? children are confirmed at
the age of discretion to teach them what they received in their infancy, they
are taught by confirmation to continue in that whereto they were baptized, oh
how much do they need who will never be content? What may satisfy those who
have no limits to their desires.

As for the order of service and use thereof in the English tongue, which you
esteem new it is no other then the old, that same words in English which were
in Latin, except a few things omitted so fond, that it had bin a shame to have
heard them in English, and how can any reasonable man be offended to understand
what God by his word speaks unto them, what they by their prayers speak unto
God: If the service were good in latin, it remains so in English, for nothing
is altered but to make you understand what is said, In like sort the mass with
great judgment and care was reduced to the same manner as Christ left it, as
the Apostles used it, as the ancient Fathers received, practiced and left it.

But you would in sober earnest have the six Articles again reviued, Do you
understand what you would have, or ate you masters of your own judgment. If
you understand them and yet desire them, it is not long since they were
enacted, and have since drawn much blood from the subjects, as would you have
bloody laws again in life, or would they any long time be endured? Upon pity
they were taken away, upon ignorance they are again demanded, Verily that in
the Gospel may truly be said of you, ye ask ye know not what, for you
neither know what good you shall have by receiving them, nor what evil you
have lost by their abolishing, our intention is to have our laws written with
milk, but you would have them written with blood. They were established by law
and so observed, although with much expense of blood, they are abolished by law
with sparing of blood, and that also must be observed, for unless laws be
duly observed, neither the authority of the Prince, nor safety of the people
can be preserved.

And whereas you would have them remain in force until our full age, if you
had known what you speak, you never would have given breath to such an
unseasoned thought, for what is our authority the less for our age, or shall
we be more King hereafter then now? or are you less subjects now then in
future times you shall be? Verily as a natural man we have now youth, and by
Gods sufferance expect age; but as a King we have no difference in years, we
are rightful king by Gods ordinance, and by descent from our roi^ll ancestors,
and not by any set number of years, and much it is to be feared, that they
who moved you to require this suspense of time, would absolutely deny our
royal power, if they durst so plainly express themselves.

The seditious as men always dangerous when they have once broken awe,
interpreted this or any other mild dealing to proceed from some faining or
fainting disposition either doubting or daring most when they are most fairly
entreated, and the more to enslame the popular rage, fresh rumors were devised
and divulged, that the people should be constrained to pay a ratable tax for
their sheep and other cattle, and an excise for every thing which they should
eat or drink, by which and other like reports the simple were blinded, the
malicious edged, all hardened from applying to any peaceable persuasion.

And now unable to support themselves either with their own estate or by wast
of villages, they aspired to the spoil and subjection of cities, and first
they came to Ex^ter and demanded entrance, but the citizens as they were both
civil and rich, so were they better advised, and therefore closed their gates,
and refused to have any intercourse with the seditious, but either by common
obedience, or else by hostility and arms; the popular fury being thus stopped,
swelled the more. Whereupon they resolved to apply their endeauours for taking
the city, and either by destroying it to increase terror, or else by sparing
it to win an opinion of moderation, they had no great artillery to open a
breach, and yet without reason they gave an assault, and used diverse means to
mount the walls, but the more madness they showed in their attempt, with the
greater loss they were driven b^cke, then they fired the gates at two several
times, but the citizens at both times by casting in wood maintained the fire,
until they had cast up a half moon within, upon which when the seditious
attempted to enter they were slain from the corners like dogs. After this
they mined the walls, laid the powder and rammed the mouth, but the citizens
made a countermine, whereinto they powered such plenty of water, that the wet
powder could not be fired.

In the mean time the L. Privy Seal lay at Hunnington expecting more
strength, and knowing right well that as the multitude are slow to danger, so
are they most desperate when they are stirred, but whilst he expected more
company, many of those he had slipped away from him. Hereupon he resolved for
retaining the rest to entertain some present enterprise, and first he assailed
by a by way to enter and relieve the city, but the seditious for prevention
hereof had f^led all the trees between S. Mary Outry and Exeter, and laid them
cross the way in such sort as they impeached his passage, hereupon firing
such places as he thought might serve either for use or ease to the seditious,
he determined to return to Hunnington. But the seditious forelaied a bridge,
over which he should pass, called Fennington bridge, and in a great fair
meddow behind the bridge placed a great number under banners displaid. The
Lord privy seal had but a small company in regard of the seditious. Yet with
good order and courage he attempted the bridge but could not force it, at the
last finding the river to be fordeable at the foot of the bridge, he there set
over his horse, whereupon the guardes appointed to defend the bridge forsook
their charge, and retired to their strength in the meddow. Then the kings
forces charged lively upon them, and they again as stoutly received the
charge, but being an untrained multitude without either soldier or guide, they
were soon broken and put to slight, yet they valued themselves and
tumultuously charged upon the kings forces, but were presently rowted and cast
out of the field, the ch^se was not far pursued for fear of fresh succors
from before the city. Notwithstanding the seditious lost 600 of their men, and
the Lord Privy seal returned without loss to Hunington.

At this time the seditious lived by rapine and ruin of all the country,
omitting nothing of that which savages enraged in the height of their unruly
beh^viour do commit, but the Citizens driven to great distress for want of
victuales, bread they made of coursest branne molded in clothes, for that
otherwise it would not cleave together. Their finest flesh was of their own
horses, especially for 12 days they endured most extreme famine. During this
time they were much encouraged by an aged citizen, who brought forth all his
provisions and said, that as he did communicate unto them his store, so would
he participate of their wants. And that for his part he would feed on the one
arm and fight with the other before he would consent to put the city into the
seditious hands. Herewith the Lord privy Seal for want of power to perform
any services, was about to rise and return to London. But in good time the
Lord Gray came to him with supply of forces most Almane horsemen, and with him
came Spinola with his band of Italians consisting of 300 shot, purposed for
Scotland, also 200 men were sent unto him from Reading, so being in all not
much above 1000 strong, he made head against the seditious. So departing from
Honington he came to a little village from whence lay 2 ways toward Exeter,
both which were blocked up with 2 bulwarks of earth, made by the seditious,
hither they had driven 2000 men from before Exeter whom they divided into 4
companies. In either of the Bulwarks they lodged one, at the bridge near the
back of one of the fortes* a third company was placed, the 4th was laid in
ambush behind a hedge on the high way, at the back of the other fortress,
the Arricre of the kings forces led by captain Wauers set upon one of the
sorts, the vaward and battle upon the other, Spinola with his shot did bear
upon those within, who offered to appear upon the walls. At length Captain
Wavers wonn the sort which he assailed, and drove the defendands to the bridge
where one of their companies made stand, Herewith the other two companies did
forthwith resort unto them, one from the second sort, the other from the (...).
These casting a strong guard upon the bridge, marsha^ed the residue upon a
plain ground behind the bridge. The Kings forces coming forward drove the
guard from the bridge and making profit of the fresh terror set upon those who
were upon the plain. The kings footmen were firmly (...)* the troops of
horse in good array, whereas the (...) had neither weapons, order nor
counsel, but being in all things unprovided were slain like beasts. They
took their slight toward St Mary cl^sse but the soldiers upon disdain of
their unworthy actions filled themselves with revenge and blood, and slew of
them above 900 not sparing one.

This sad blow abated much the courage and hope of the seditious, and yet the
next day about 2000 of them affronted the Kings forces at the entrance of a
high way, whom when they found both ready and resolute to fight, they desired
enterparlance, and in the mean time began to fortify. But understanding that
their intention was understood* more like slaves then soldiers they furiously
ran away. The same night the seditious before Exeter raised theirseige, and
therewith discharged the city from many miseries and dispaires. The King
afterward enlarged the constant obedience of the city with enlargement both
of liberties and of revenews, he gave unto them the manor of Eu^land for a
perpetual remembrance both of their loialty and of his love.

Now the seditious driven almost to a dead despair and supported only by the
vehemence of desire, brought forth their forces to Cli^on heath, to whom many
of the most vile vulgars resorted hourly, which much enlarged their numbers
but nothing their strength, but what measure have men in the increase of
madness, if they keep not themselves from falling into it, they brought with
them a crucifix upon a carte covered with a canopie, and beset with crosses,
tapers, banners, holy bread and holy water as a representation of those things
for which they fought. The Lord Gray encouraged his men to set sharply upon
the vague villains good neither to live peaceably nor to fight, and to win at
once both quiet to the Realm and to themselves glory, so he brought the Kings
forces upon them rather as to a carnage then to a fight, insomuch as without
any great either loss or danger to themselves, the greatest part of the
seditious were slain, diverse also were taken, of whom the common sort were
forthwith executed by martial law, the chiefest leaders were sent to receive
justice at London, Some escaped and sailed to Bridgewater, who taking dangers
to be the only remedy against dangers, endeavored to set up the sedition
again, but they were speedily repressed, and thereby the sedition suppressed
wholly.

The sedition thus broken and beaten down Sir Anthony Kingston provost
marshall of the kings army was deemed by many not only cruel but vneivill, and
inhumane in his executions. One Boyer mayor of Bodmin in Cornwall was observed
to have been among the seditious, but by absolute enforcement as many others
were. The Martial wrote to him a letter that he would dine at his house upon a
day which he appointed, the mayor seemed glad, and made for him the best
provision that he could, upon the day he came and a large company with him, and
was received with many ceremonies of entertainment. A little before dinner he
took the mayor aside and whispered him in the ^are, that execution must that
day be done in the town, and therefore required him that a pair of gallows
should be framed and erected against the time that dinner should end; the mayor
was diligent to accomplish his demand, and no sooner was dinner ended, but he
demanded of the Mayor whether the work were finished, the Mayor answered that
all was ready, I pray you said the provost bring me to the place, and therewith
he took him friendly by the hand, here beholding the gallows he asked the
Mayor whether he thought them to be strong enough, yes said the Mayor
doubtless they are, well then said the provost get you up speedily for they
are prepared for you, I hope answered the Mayor you mean not as you speak, in
faith said the provost there is no remedy, for you have been a busy rebel,
and so without respite or defense he strangled to death.

Near the said place dwelled a Miller who had been a busy actor in that
rebellion, and fearing the approach of the provost martial, told a sturdy tall
fellow his servant that he had occasion to go from home, and therefore gave
directions that if any one should enquire after the miller, he should not
speak of him but affirm that himself was the miller, and that so he had bin
for three years before, So the provost came and called for the miller, his
servant came forth and said he was the man. The provost demanded how long he
had kept the mill, these three years answered the servant, then the provost
commanded his men to lay hold on him, and to hang him on the nearest tree, then
the fellow cried out that he was not the miller but the millers man, nay Sr
answered the provost I will take thee at thy word, and if thou be the miller
thou art a busy knave, if thou be not, thou art a false lying knave,
whatsoever thou art thou shall be hanged, when others also told him that the
fellow was but the millers man, and what then said he? could he ever have done
his master a better service then to hang for him, and so without more to do he
was dispatched. Assuredly this might have passed for a tolerable jest if it
had not been in a case of life.

Diverse others were executed by martial law, and a great part of the country
was abandoned to the spoil of the soldiers, who not troubling themselves to
discern between a subject and a rebel, whilst their liberty lasted made
indifferently profit of both.

The seditious in Northfolke were somewhat dangerous, both because their
strength was greater, as also because the city of Norwich was a friend unto
them, or at least wished them no great harm, and being faithful to neither
side, was always ready to entertain the stronger, their first attempt was
made at Attleborough where they threw down the fences of one Green of Wilbie,
who was supposed to have enclosed a part of Attleborough common adioining to
the common pasture of Harsham. Afterward they assembled at a play accustomed
yearly to be kept at Wimondham, and from thence went to Morley a mile distant,
and there cast down the ditches of one Hubbarde, next by incitement of John
Flowerdew of Netheset, a gentleman of good estate, but never expressing desire
of quiet, they did the like to certain enclosures of Robert Ket a tanner in
Wimondham, and received of him 38s 4d for their labor, this Ket who has made
his obscure beginning well known by his mischievous attempts to require
Flowerdew carried them to Netheset, where they cast down all the enclosed
pasture of Flowerdew, and not staying there he led them indifferently to diverse
other places, laying all enclosures where he came rather wast then open.

And the rather to train them to his allure, he told them both often and with
vehement voice, how they were over topped and trodden down by gentlemen, and
other their good masters, and put out of possibility ever to recover foot, how
whilst rivers of riches ran into their landlords coffers, they were pared to
the quick, and sed upon pease and oats like beasts, how being sleeced by these
for private benefit, they were slayed by public burdens of state, wherein
whilst the richer sort favored themselves, they were gnawen to the very
bones, how the more to terrify and torture them to their minds, and wind
their necks more surely under their arm, their tyrannous masters did often
implead arrest, cast them into prison, and thereby consume them to worse then
nothing, how they did palliat these pillaries with the fair pretense of
authority and of law, fine workmen I warrant you, who can so closely carry
their dealings, that then men only discover them, how harmless counsels
were fit for tame fools, but for them who had already stirred there was no
hope but in adventuring boldly.

The likeness of affection and the masking of vices under pleasant terms,
procured not only assent, but applause to all that he said, and so by often and
earnest repeating of these and the like speeches, and by bearing a confident
countenance in all his actions, the vulgars took him to be both valiant and
wise, and a fit man to be their commander, being glad they had found any
captain to follow.

Their numbers increased daily, and therewith their boldness and power to do
harm, they were largely supplied at the first both with victuals and arms,
albeit not with open consent of the places adioining, yet with much private
goodwill, for many did not only secretly favor but openly approve their
designs. Generally every good man was much grieved, many upon some dislikes
before reioiced in their greater harms, and not regarding in what liberty they
stood, were ready to run into any bondage. The Sheriff of Northfolke
resorted unto them, and made proclamation in the Kings name, that forthwith
they should peaceably depart, and had he not been ready and his horse swift to
depart in time, he should hardly have departed from them alive.

After this they drew toward Norwich and seated themselves at Monshold near
Mount Surrey and upon S. Leonhards which hangs over Norwich, another company
seated at Rising near Lynne, but they were dislodged by the gentlemen of the
country, and forced to draw to their fellows at Monsholde. Here the maine
body encamped and sent diverse light companies forth to terrify and roue. To
this place many resorted out of Suffolk, and from all places of Norfolk, many
for want, but most upon a turbulent mind, and in all places thereabout beacons
were fired, and bells rung, as a roaring furtherance to his vproare, so as in
short time the multitude increased to 16000, and yet rather to be esteemed a
number then an army.

Their actions were covered and disguised with mantles very usual in time of
disorder of religion and justice, for they had one Coniers for their chaplain,
a man brought up in idle and dead studies, who both morning and evening read
solemn prayers, many sermons they also had either by entreatie or enforcement.
But Dr Parker afterward Archbishop of Canterbury in his sermon before them
touched them for their living so near, that they went near to touch him for
his life, as for Justice they had a bench under a tree where Ket usually sat,
and with him two of every hundred whence their companies had been raised, here
complaints were exhibited and examined as well against those of their own
company, who received judgment for their offenses as against any gentleman or
other in the country, by commandment from hence many were very violently pulled
from their houses, of who^ some were enforced to follow them, others were cast
into prison, and happily fettered with irons, and not a few rudely and
dangerously entreated, from hence also warrants were sent forth in the kings
name, whereby ordinance, powder and shot were commanded out of ships and any
other furniture of war out of houses where it could be found. This tree was
ever since termed the oak of reformation.

And now the seditious being advanced unto the height both of their power and
of their pride, presented certain complaints to the King, and desired that a
herald or some other messenger of credit may be sent unto them to receive
articles of all those matters wherewith they concerned themselves to de
grieved. The King took it for a great indignity that base traitors and thieves
should offer to capitulate with him as enemies law: fully holding the field,
and yet knowing right well, that as good counsels gather strength by time, so
upon a little respite evil advices either vanish or grow weaker to win some
advantage of time, returned an answer. That seeing he was ready always to
receive and relieve the quiet complaints of any of his subjects, he marvailed
much either upon what opinion of necessity in themselves or of injustice in
him, they should first put themselves into arms, as a party against him, and
then present him with their bold petitions, especially at such a time when
having fully reformed many other matters, he had lately set forth a
proclamation against excessive prices of victuals, and had also appointed
commissioners with ample authority for diverse other things, whereof many
doubtless had been by that time redressed, had not these disordes given
impediment to his designs, generally when they might well discern both his
care and endeavors to set all matters in a right frame of reformation, as
might best stand both with his honor and their sureties, and with justice and
providence toward all. Touching their particular complaint for reducing lands
and farms to their ancient r^nts although it could not be done by his ordinary
power without a parliament, yet he would so far extend his authority royal
and absolute as to give charge to his commissioners to travail with all
persons within their counties, to reduce lands to their former rents where at
they were farmed 40 years before, and that rents should be paid at Michelmas
then next ensuing according to that rate, and that such as would not presently
yield to his commissioners for that redress, should at the parliament which he
would forthwith summon be overruled.

Concerning their complaint for price of wolles he would forthwith give order
that his commissioners should cause clothiers take wolles paying only two
parts of the price, whereat they were commonly sold the year next before, and
for the other third part, the owner and the buyer should stand to such order as
the parliament should appoint. At which time also he would give order that
landed men to a certain proportion should be neither clothiers nor farmers,
and farther that one man should not use diverse occupations, nor have plurality
of benefices, nor of farms and generally that he would the^ give order for all
the residue of their requests, in such sort as they should have good cause not
only to remain quiet, but to pray for him, and to adventure their lives in his
service.

This parliament he promised should begin in the beginning of October then
next ensuing, against which time they should appoint 4 or 6 of their countey,
to present bills of their desires, and in the mean season apply themselves to
their harvest and other peaceable business at home, and not to drive him to
necessity (whereof he would be sorry) by sharper means to maintain both his
own dignity and the common quiet.

These letters carrying the Kings name in the front, and the protectors with
the kings signature at the foot, were sent by a heralde to Monsholde, a place
guarded with great, but confused and disordered strength of the seditious,
herewith also the King sent his general pardon, in case they would quietly
desist and dissolve. But the seditious were so far from accepting these of
any other offers of accord that hereupon they discharged the first shot against
the city, and because their Artillery being planted on a hill could little or
nothing endammage the walls, they removed their battery to a lower ground, but
because their city was weak, and the citizens but weakly disposed against
them, with no danger and little travail they made themselves masters thereof.
Here they imprisoned the Mayor and many other of the chief citizens, and
ordered all things at their pleasure, but maintained the chief seat at
Mansholde, where it was before. The Mayor of Norwitch and some other gentlemen
of credit they constrained to be present at all their counsels, with
intention to countenance their actions with some authority, but in no sort to
be guided by them, All this time the Kings forces advanced but slowly, being
employed in appeasing the like disorders more near the heart of the kingdom.
So that it is most certain, that had these seditious been so mischievously
bent as in number they were great, they might have proved more dangerous then
they were, but they aimed not at ambitious ends, their rude earthly spirits
were never seasoned with any manly adventurous thought, and therefore they were
content with a licentious and idle life, wherein they might fill their bellies
by spoil rather then by labor, to this side their companies ranged in all
parts thereabouts, and took away for their use much housholdstuffe and goods,
but especially they brought to their stations many droues of cattle, for
besides dear out of parkes, besides beeues, besides fowls of all kinds within
a few days were brought out of the country 2000 muttons, such numbers of
sheep were daily brought in, that a fat weather was sold for 4d. This was
interpreted for a present plenty but it made such scarcity afterward, as
could not in many years be repaired, Sr Edmond Kneuet Knight with such company
as he could assemble, charged upon one of their watches by night, but he was so
far inferior unto them, that it was esteemed a great fortune that he departed
from them with his life.

But soon after the Lord William Parre Marquis of Northampton was sent against
them with 1500 horsemen, and a small band of Italians under a Captain named
Malatesta, he was accompanied with the Lord sheffield, the L. Wentworth with
diverse knights and gentlemen of principal estimation, when he approached
within a mile of the city, the magistrates and chief citizens upon summons,
resorted to his standard, yielded unto him the city sword, and professed their
own loialty, and excused others of inferior force, who neither by ignorance
favored the seditious, or through fear durst not declare against them; with
these the Lord Marquis entered the city at Saint Stephens gate, the city sword
being borne before him, and therewith caused the chief citizens to assemble
in the market place, both to give advice and to take direction how the city
might best be defended.

In the mean time the strangers who came with him whether by appointment or by
adventure, issued forth of the city, to view both the numbers and orders of
the seditious. They again first put forth their Archers, then their horsemen,
lastly a company ran furiously forth without either direction of others or
judgment in themselves, intending to have enclosed the Italians, but here
might have been a great difference between men practiced to fight, and men
accustomed only to spoil. For the Italians in so well advised order received
the seditious coming rashly upon them without either fear or skill, that
diverse of the tumultuous numbers were slain, at the last the Italians
perceiving themselves almost environed, cast themselves into a ring and retired
back into the city. But they left one gentleman of their company behind, who
being overthrown from his horse fell into the hands of the seditious, who like
savages spoiled him of his armor and of his apparel, and hanged him over the
walls of Mount Surrey.

This caused the seditious to remain the first part of the night within their
station, which by reason of the nastines of the beastly multitude, might more
fitly be termed a kennell then a camp. Within the city diligent watch was
kept, which was often visited and relieved. The soldiers remained in their
armor all night, and kept so great a fire in the market place that all parts of
the city were lighted therewith. The seditious about midnight began to shoot
off their great artillery very lively and thick, hereupon the Lord Marquis
directed part of his forces to rampart the gates and ruinous places of the
walls, which the seditious espying, with a hideous roaring and rage they powered
themselves upon the city, some endeavored to fire the gates, some to mount
over the walls, and some to pass the river, the fight continued three hours,
and it is almost incredible with what rude rage the seditious maintained their
assault, some being almost disable to hold up their weapons would strive what
they could to strike their enemies, others being thrust through the body with a
spear, would run themselves further to reach those who gave them that deadly
wound, at the last their obstinacy was overcome, and they returned to their
cabbines with loss of 300 of their company,

The residue of the night which was not much, the soldiers within the city
applied in refreshing themselves, but the next morning the seditious both with
greater strength and better order entered the city by the hospital and began
a most desperate surprise, the forces of the Marquis albeit inferior in
numbers, yet by reason of the freshnes of the place might have been
sufficient, if they had charged in order, and together, but being scattered in
the streets, they were not able to make resistance, herewith they were much
endammaged by the citizens from their houses, so as 100 of them perished, many
were hurt, and the residue driven to forsake the city, the Lord Shiffields
horse fell with him into a ditch, wereby he fell into the power of the
seditious, and as he pulled off his helmet to show them who he was, a butcher
slew him with the stroke of a club. Diverse gentlemen to the number of 30 were
taken and committed to straight prison, where they were vexed alike with
scarcity and scorn. The seditious lost a bout seven schoore of their company,
and yet much sleshed with this success, they spoiled many parts of the city,
and fired the houses of those whom they esteemed not to be their friends, but
the rage of the fire was at first hindered and then appeased by fall of a
sudden shower of rain, whereupon many presaged that the flames of this
sedition should neither spread far nor long endure. The report of this
repulse flying to London, the most made of that which was true, and many
falsities added thereto. The Earl of Warwick was sent with such forces both
English and strangers, wherewith he had appointed for service in Scotland*
when he came to Cambridge the Lord Marquis resorted unto him, and also the Lord
Willoughby, Powes and Bray, his two sons Ambrose and Robert and many knights
and gentlemen of name, with these he marched somewhat leasurely because the
importance of the danger might make the service the more esteemed, At length
h^e presented his forces consisting of 6000 foot and 1500 horse before the
city upon the plain, and forthwith sent to summon the seditious and to offer
pardon if it would be accepted, but neither summons nor pardon was any thing
regarded. Insomuch as when the Kings pardon was offered by a herault, a lewd boy
turned toward him his naked britch, and used words suitable to that gesture,
one standing by and moved with this barbarous behavior discharged a harquebur
upon the boy, and stroke him with the shot a little above the reins. Hereat
those seditious that seemed moderate before became desperate, and those who
were desperate seemed stark mad, whence such tumults, such confused hollowings
and howlings ensued, that the heralde was glad to withdraw himself.

Then the Earl planted his cannon against St Stephens gate, and se^ pioners to
work against the brazen gate. The cannon against S. Stephens gate executed so
well, that in short time the Port^ullis and gate were broken, and entry opened
into the city. Others entered at the brazen gate but in that entrance some were
slain. Also the Majors deputy opened Westwicke gate where the Earl himself
entered without resistance and possessed himself of the market place, at these
entrances 130 of the seditious were slain 60 were taken and forthwith executed
by martial law. As the Earls carriages were brought into the city neither
guarded norregarded as they should, diverse of them were surprised by the
seditious and driven to Monsholde. At this booty they were more joyful then
grieved at the loss, either of the city or of their companions, especially
for that they were supplied thereby with good store of powder and shot, wherein
their want did most consist.

The Earl being in possession of the city rampared all the gates except those
who opened toward Monsholde, wherein he planted good artillery. But the
seditious the more terrible by reason of their more desperate fury fell upon
those gates albeit without order, yet with such rude and careless courage and
cries, that they beat back the guardes, slew the principal gunners, carried
away their artillery and therewith certain carts laden with munition, here
were boys observed to be so desperately resolved as to pull arrows out of
their own flesh, and deliver them to be shot again by the archers on their
side, hereupon the Earl was enforced to block up those gates as he had done
the rest, but the city was so weak that it could hardly be defended.

For the seditious being now furnished with artillery powder and shot battered
Bishopsgate, and cast down agreat part of the walls upon that side of the
city. They afterward passed the river likewise and assailed the Earls men
upon advantage in the streets, of whom many they slew, and fired diverse places
prostrating two parishes almost entirely, so they did mischief they little
cared what they did or to what end, and in such sort the danger increased that
many persuaded the Earl to submit courage to rage, and for a time to abandon
the city. But he not easily vincible in spirit, and well assured that having
stopped all passages for relief, shortness of provision would in very short
time draw the obstinacy of the seditious to shorter limits, drew his sword and
caused others to do the like, and (according to a soldiery custom in cases
of extremity by enterchange of a kiss by every of them upon the swords of
others, sealed a resolution to maintain the place.

Assuredly as it is advantageable to a physician to be called to the cure of a
declining disease, so it is for a commander to suppress a sedition which has
passed the height, for in both alike the noxious humor does first weaken and
afterward wast and wear to nothing, and besides it is scarce possible that a
rude and ruinous multitude should continue long together, if any pr^uention be
applied, but they will fall into irrepairable wants, and so it happened to these
seditious, who after three days, finding their provision to fail, fired their
cabbines built of timber and covered with bushes, and with a broken noise
between certain questions and doubtful answers dislodged from their hill,
and entrenched them at the foot thereof in a valley called Dussendale where
they invited the Earl to a present encounter, and as there has seldom happened
any sedition within this realm, but the chief actors therein have been
abused with some *prophecies of doubtful construction, so the seditious were
moved to remove to this place upon a prophecy much credited among them, that
they should fill it with slaughtered bodies, but whether of their enemies or of
their own it was left uncertain, the words of the prophecy were these.

The country Knuffes Hob, Dicke and Hick,
with clubbes and clou^ed shoone*
Shall fill up Dussendale,
with slaughtered bodies soon.
The Earl being newly supplied with 1400 horse was glad that the seditious had
forsaked their hill, for that his horsemen in whom consisted his greatest
strength, could there perform but little service, so the next morning he sent
forth all his horsemen of whom 1000 were Almaines, as accustomed so aduentrous
in arms, his foot he retained within the town. The seditious ranged
themselves for the sight, placing all the gentlemen whom they had taken in
front every two couple together to make them sure from starting away. The Earl
before he would charge sent to them an offer of a general pardon, one or two
of the principal excepted. But this more chafed the rage of those who were
resolved either to live or dye together and what cared they for pardon, who
have nothing but a vile and servile life to loose. For no more could be gotten
from their estates, then from the shauing of an egg, wherefore in a proud
scorn they answered this offer with a great shot, that stroke the kings
standard bearer on the thigh, and his horse on the shoulder, Hereupon the Earl
commanded his artillery to be applied, the Almaines also and captain Drury
with his troops gave a resolute charge, and yet with such discretion that most
of the captive gentlemen who were placed in the front escaped without harm,
these were so well seconded by the light horse, that in short time they brake
the seditious, chased them above three miles, and silled themselves with blood
until night, there dyed of them 2000 as K. Edward took the number, but our
histories report more then 3500.

In the mean time they who guarded the artillery and baggage, encloased
themselves with carriage and a trench, and pitched stakes to bear of the
approach of horses, determining to stand stiffly upon their desence. The Earl
returning from the execution, did certify them by message, that because the
King his master was desirous to establish peace rather by benignity then by
blood, he did assure them their pardon if they would submit, otherwise they
might expect nothing but death. Answer was made that they expected nothing but
death, and that they respected nothing at all, but it was by the sword if they
stood upon defense, and by the halter if they should yield, wherefore they
made choice to dye rather as soldiers then as dogs. The Earl sent again to
know if they would entertain their pardon in case he should come in person and
assure it, they answered, they did conceive him to be so honorable, that from
himself they would most thankfully embrace it; So he road and caused their*
pardon to be read to them, and engaged his honor that it should be performed.
Then seeming to respect life more then any other thing, threw away their
weapons and disloialty together, and with voices so loud as before they were
lewd wished all joy and prosperity to the King.

The commander Ket. having a good horse sled away with the first, and the next
day was taken with his brother William in a barn, and brought with a guard of
20 horsemen to Norwich both of them having made good proof that they were no
less peaceable to guide an army in war, then they were to govern themselves
in peace. Nine of the principal were hanged upon the tree of Refomation, of
whom two were sedueing prophets, a third was a most excellent cannonier, whose
good skill euelly employed did much endammage the forces of the King. Robert
Ket and his brother were sent to London, and from thence returned to be
executed in Northfolke. Robert Ket was hanged in chains upon Norwich castle,
his brother William was in like sort executed upon Wimondham steeple, but not
without some murmuring. For that church dedicated to the service of God, and
which is polluted by violent death, should be made a place of public
execution. The day of this defate of the seditious was a long time after
yearly observed for a festival day by the inhabitants of Norwitch, as well by
cessation from labor, as by resorting to Church to give public thanks for
their deliverance,

About the same time another sedition was raised at Semor in the Northriding of
Yorkshire where of the chief mouers were William Ombler a gentleman, Thomas*
Dale a patish clarke, and Steuenson a post. They took encouragement from a
clarke and deceivable prophecy, a. common law both of obedience and peace,
which did foretell that the time should arrive when there should be n^ King,
when the nobility and gentry should be destroyed, when the Realm should be
ruled by four governors elected by the commons holding a parliament in
commotion, which should begin at the South and North seas of England, and
that present they understood to be the time, and that the rebellions in
Devonshire Norfolk and Yorkshire should draw together to accomplish this
prophecy. The pretenses were to restore the church to her ancient Rights (for
that was always one note in their music) to relieve the poor, to abate the
rich, and generally to disburthen the Realm of all grieuances, a seemly task
for such undertakers.

And now for execution hereof, first by firing of beacons and ringing of bells
(as if the coast had been assailed by enemies) they assembled about 3000 in
arms, whom they drew to be appliable to their purpose. Then to begin their
great work of refomation they slew one White a Gentleman, Savage a Merchant
and two others of mea* ner quality, and left their bodies naked upon the wild
near Semor. After this they passed to the Eastriding in Yorkshire, their
company daily increasing like a snowball in rolling, and many they took with
them much against their minds. But no sooner was the kings pardon presented,
but most of them sell off and dispersed, leaving Ombler and Dale almost alone.
These as they were riding like mad men from town to town charging people in
the Kings name to assemble at Hummanby were apprehended, and with four others
of the most tumultuous* soon after executed at York whose speedy punishment
staid others who were thought to waver between obedience and revolt.

Now the French king supposing to make his hand by these rude rauages in
England brake of his treaty of peace proclaimed hostility and denounced the
same by his Ambassador to the King. Hereupon all French men in England not
Denizens were taken prisoners, and all their goods seized for the King. The
French King understanding that certain English ships lay at Iersey set forth
a sleete of galleys and ships intending to surprise them as they lay at
Anchore. But the English being both vigilant and well appointed in such sort
did entertain them, that their ships departed terribly torn with loss of 1000
men at the least, The French King fearing least that the bad success of this
first enterprise, might both discourage his peope and bring di^reputation to
himself, forbad any report to be made not only of the event, but of the
journey.

After this the French King levied an army by land wherewith marching toward
Bulloine, he took Blackenesse and Newhauen two fortes of the English near
unto Bulloine. This he did effect chiefly by the treason of one Sturton a
bastard son of Lord Sturtons, and by revolt of diverse Almaines, who served in
the garrisons, who being merely mercenarie did easily incline to the strongest.

From whence the French King marched toward Bullaine upon whose approach St
Nicholas Arnault captain of Bullingberge holding the place not of strength to
be held withdrew all the ordinance and matters of worth into high Boullaine and
with gunpowder blew up the Forte. So the French King brought his army before
Boulline, but because the plague raged amongst his soldiers and the weather
was unseasonable by reason of much fall of rain, he departed from his army and
left Chastilion governor in his steed.

Chastilion bent his siege against the Pierre, which was erected in Boulline
haven and after battery of 20000 shot or more the breach was thought
reasonable and thereupon the assault was given. But the same was so well
encountered by the valor of the defendants, helped with advantage of place,
that the obstinacy of the assaila^ts did nothing but increase their loss, so
as the first fury being broken and spent, The French resolved to attempt the
piece no more by assault, notwithstanding they continued the seige, presented
diverse skermishes and false attempts, but they spent both their labor and shot
without putting the defendants in any fear. Then they planted their artillery
against the mouth of the haven, to impeach supply of victuals to the town.
Yet the English victualers surceased not at the Kings adventure to bring all
things necessary, until the end the soldiers of the town set upon the French
suddenly by night, slew many of them and dismounted their pieces.

Then the French applied their battery again, wherein they sometimes spent
1500 shot in one day. But finding this to be a fruitless fury they afterward
used it more sparingly and rather upon a show of hostility then upon any hope
thereby to prevail. In the mean season they charged a galley with grauel and
stones, and prepared to sink it in the midst of the haven. But the English
took the galley before it sunk and drew it to the shore, and used the stones
to reenforce the Pierre. After this they made faggots of light matter, mixed
with pitch, tar, tallow, rosin, powder, and wildfire, with intention to fire
the ships in the haven, but that enterprise was defeated by the Bullenois, and
their fagots taken from the French. During these enterfeits diverse skirmishes
passed between the English and the French about the frontires of Calleis,
which as they were but light, so most of them ended with disadvantage to the
French.

And now if all these troubles had not been sufficient to travail the realm
of England, at once a great division fell among the nobility, so much the more
dangerous, by how much the spirits were more active and high. And albeit the
heat thereof was much appeased for a tim^ by the great judgment and moderation
of the King, ye^ did it break forth in the end to tragical events, not upon
particular persons only, but did much ouerslow and (...) ouerwhelme the whole
realm with disquiet, and here of the most apparent original was this.

The King had two uncles brothers to Queen Iaue his deceased mother, Edward D.
of Somerset Lord Protector, and Thomas Lord Seymer Baron of Sudley, high
Admiral of England, as the Duke was elder in years, so was he more stayed in
behavior. The Lord Sudley was fierce in courage, courtly in fashion, in
personage stately, in voice magnificent, but somewhat empty of matter, both
were so faithfully affected to the King that the one might well be termed his
sword, the other his target. The Duke was greatest in favor with the people,
the Lord Sudley most respected by the nobility, both highly esteemed by the
King, both fortunate alike in their advancements, both ruined alike by their
own vanity and folly, whilst these two brothers held in amity, they were like
two arms, the one defending the other, and both of them the King, but many
things did move together to dissolve their love and bring them to ruin. First
their contrary disposition, the one being tractable and mild, the other stiff
and impatient of a superior, whereby they lived but in cunning concord as
brothers glued together but not united in grain, then much secret envy was
borne against them, for that their new luster did dim the light of men
honored with ancient nobility. Lastly they where openly minded, as hasty and
soon moved, so uncircumspect and easy to be minded. By these the knot not only
of love but of nature between them was dissolved, so much the more pity for
that the first cause proceeded from the pride, the haughty hate, the unquiet
vanity of a mannish or rather of a devilish woman.

For the Lord Sudley had taken to wife Katharine Parre Queen Dowager last wife
to King Henry the 8th, A woman beautified with many excellent virtues,
especially with humility the beauty of all other virtues. The Duke had taken to
wife Anne Stanhope a woman for many imperfections intolerable, but for pride
monstrous, she was exceeding both subtle and violent in accomplishing her ends,
for which she spurned over all respects both of conscience and of shame. This
woman did bear such invincible hate, first against the Q. Dowager for light
causes and woman's quarrels, especially for that she had precedence of place
before her, being wife to the greatest Peer in the land, then to the Lord
Sudley for her sake. That albeit the Q. Dowager dyed by childbirth, yet would
not her malice either dye or decrease. But continually she rubbed into the
Dukes dull capacity, that the Lord Sudley dissenting from him in opinion of
religion, sought nothing more then to take away his life, as well in regard of
the common cause of Religion, as thereby happily to attain his place. Many
other things she boldly fained being assured of easy belief in her heedlesse
hearer, always fearful and suspicious (as of feeble spirit) but then more
then ever by reason of some late opposition against him. Her persuasions she
cunningly intermixed with tears, affirming that she would depart from him, as
willing rather to hear both of his disgraces and dangers, then either to see
the one or participate of the other.

The Duke embracing this woman's counsel (a woman's counsel indeed and
nothing the better) yielded himself both to advise and devise for destruction
of his brother. The Earl of Warwick had his finger in the business and drew
others also to give either furtherance or way to her violent desires. Being
well content she should have her mind, so as the Duke might thereby incur
infamy and hate. Hereupon the Lord Sudley was arrested and sent to the tower,
and in very short time after condemned by act of parliament. And within few
days after his condemnation a warrant was sent under the hand of his brother
the Duke, whereby his head was delivered to the Axe. His own fierce courage
hastened his death, because equally balanced between doubt and disdain, he
was desirous rather to dye at once, then to linger long upon courtesy and in
fear.

The accusations against him contained much frivolous matter, or term them
pitiful if you please. The act of parliament expresses these causes of his
attaindor. For attempting to get into his custody the person of the King, and
government of the realm. For making much provision of money and of victuals,
for endeavoring to marry the Lady Elizabeth the Kings sister, for persuadinge
the King in his tender age to take upon him the Rule and order of himself:
The proofs might easily be made because he was never called to his answer.
But as well the protestations at the point of his death, as the open course and
carriage of his life cleared him in opinion of many. So doubtful are all
weighty matters whilst some take all they hear for certain, others making
question of any truths, posterity enlarging both Dr Latymer pretending all the
gravity and sincerity of a professed divine, yet content to be serviceable to
great men's ends, declared in a sermon before the King that whilst the Lord
Sudley was a prisoner in the Tower he wrote to the Lady Mary and the Lady
Elizabeth the Kings sisters, that they should revenge his death, which indeed
the Lady Mary afterward more truly did by ^ting the Earl of Warwick, then
either she was or at that time could in particular be required. Many other
imputations he cast forth, besides most doubted many known to be untrue, and
so whereas Papinian a civil lawyer but a heathen chose rather to dye then to
defend the murth^r which the Emperor Caracalla had done upon his brother Geta,
some theologians have been imploi^d to defile places erected only for religion
and truth by defending oppressions and factions, deste^ning their professions,
and the good arts which they had learned by publishing odious untruths upon
report and credit of others.

O wives! The most sweet poison* the most desired evil in the world.
Certainly as it is true as Syracides says, that Cap. 25.
there is no malice to the malice of a woman, so no mischief wants where a
malicious woman bears sway, a woman was first given to man for a comforter
but not for a counsailor, much less a controler and directer, and therefore in
the first sentence against man this cause is expressed because thou obeyedst
the voice of thy wife. And doubtless the protector Genesis 3. 17.
by being thus ruled to the death of his brother seemed with his left hand to
have cut off his right. For hereupon many of the nobility cried out upon him
that he was a bloodsucker, a murderer, a parricide, a villain, and that it
was not sit the K. should be under the protection of such a rauenons wolf.
Soon after it was given forth and believed by many that the King was dead,
whereupon he passed in great estate through the city of London to manifest
that he was both alive and in good health, whether this speech were spread
either by adventure or by art, it is uncertain, certain it is it did
something shake the strength of the Kings affection toward the Protector.

Besides many well d^sposed minds conceived a hard opinion of him, for that a
church by strand-bridge and two Bishops houses were pulled down to make a seat
for his new building in digging the foundation whereof, the ^ones of many who
had been there buried were cast up and carried into the fields, and because
the stones of those houses and the church did nothing suffice for his work, the
sle^ple and most part of the church of Saint John of Ierusal^m near Smithfield
most beautifully erected and adorned not long before by Docray Priour of that
church was mined and overthrown with powder, and the stones applied to this
spacious building. And because the work could not be there with finished, the
cloister of Paul's on the north side of the church in a place called Pardonne
churchyearde and the dance of death, very curiously wrought about the cloister,
and a chapel that stood in the midst of the church-yeard, also the charnell
house that stood upon the south side of Paul's (now a carpenters yeard) with
the chapel tombs and monuments therein were beaten down, the bones of the
dead carried into Finsbury fields and the stones converted to his building. It
is constantly affirmed that for the same purpose he intended to pull down the
church of S, Margaret in Westminster, and that the standing thereof was
preserved only by his fall, assuredly as these actions were in an high degree
impious, so did they draw with them both open dislike from men and much secret
revenge from God.

And now has the Lord Protector played the first act of the tragedy of his
life, namely his high and prosperous estate, he is now stopping into the second
act, wherein he begins mainly to decline.

For the Earl of Warwick espying opportunity showing him self and knowing
that in troublesome times the obedience of great persons is most easily shaken,
drew about 18 of the privy counsel to knit with him against the Lord
Protector. These he did so wind up to his purpose that they withdrew from the
court, fell to secret consultations, and walked in the city with many
servants weaponed and in new liueries, the causes thereof many coniectured but
few knew. They were all desirous that the Protectors greatness should be taken
lower, but none conceived that the Earls malice did extend unto death. But the
Lord Protector as humble then as he had been haughty before sent secretary
Peeter to them in the Kings name to understand the causes of their assembly,
and to declare unto them that he would thank them for hating him in case they
did it in love to the King, entreating them for the Kings sake if not for his
safety yet for his quiet, that they would forbear open show of hostility and
resort unto him peaceably that they might commune together as friends. In the
mean time he armed 500 men part of the kings and part his own, the court
gates were rampard and people raised both by letters and proclamation to aid
the King, and the more to increase the present terror he removed the king by
mightfro^ Hampton court to Windosor with a company more resembling an army
then a train.

On the other side the Lords at London first taking possession of the tower
sent for the Mayor and Aldermen of the city to the Earl of Warwicks lodging
at Ely house in Holborne, here they presented themselves secretly armed, and
the Lord Rich then Lord Chancellor of England, a man of quick and lively
delivery of speech, but as of mean birth so prone to thrust forwards the ruin
of great persons, in this manner spoke unto them.

I am not ignorant into what adventure I now plunge my self in speaking
against a man both high in honor and great in favor both with the King and
many of the people. But my duty prevailing against respect of danger, I will
plainly declare the discontentments of the Lords of his Majesty's counsel,
have already conceived against the actions past of the Lord Protector, as also
their fears touching matters to ensue, that with your aid they may in good
time happily remedy the one and remove the other, assuring you all that as I
will not utter any thing falsely, so will I forbear to tell many truths.

And first to touch upon his open ambition, with what good reason or purpose
think we did he being a man of many imperfections, as want of eloquence,
personage, learning, or good wit aspire to the great offices of governing all
affairs of state, sit for none but whom God has favored with fitting graces.
And albeit these defects might have been well supplied by sufficiency of
others of the counsel, yet was he so peeuishly opiniatiue and proud, that he
would neither ask nor hear the advice of any, but was absolutely ruled by the
obstinate and imperous woman his wife, whose ambitious and mischievous will so
guided him in the most weighty affairs of the realm, that albeit he was
counseled by others what was best, yet would he do quite contrary, least he
should seem to need their advice, And yet this was not enough, as avarice and
ambition have never enough, but to add dignity to authority, and to make sure
that as no man should as in power so in title surmount him, he would be
advanced to the Degree of Duke of Somerset, which has always been a title
for one of the kings sonns inheritable to the crown.

And albeit it may seem a light matter to speak of bribery and extortion
against him, yet his robberies and oppressions have been such, that no man
would willingly have adventured to commit them, unless he thought by treason
so to assure himself as he could not be called to answer for them. For he
has laid his ravenous hands upon the Kings treasure and Jewels left by his
Father, which were known to be of an inestimable value, that it might well be
said even as he had given forth, that K. Henry died a very poor prince, and
had been utterly shamed in case he had lived one quarter of a year longer.

Then also what havoc has he made of the Kings lands and inheritance? What
sales and exchanges upon pretense of necessity? And yet what a high deal has
he transported to himself? Without regard of others who have employed their
travails and estates in service of the King and of his deceased Father? What
arts has he used to spend those and spare himself against the time of his
mischievous purpose. How greedily, how insatiably has he never ceased the
whilst to rake and gleane money together? What shameful sale of offices and
preferments has he made, nothing regarding the worthiness of the person, but
the worth and weight of the gift. Betraying thereby the administration of the
realm into the hands both of worthless and corrupt men. To speak nothing the
whilst of his minte at Duresme place erected and used for his private profit.
To speak nothing of the great Boutisale of colleges and chantries, to speak
nothing of all his other particular pillages, all which were so far from
satisfying his bottomless desires that he proceeded to fleece the whole
Commonwealth, to cut and pare it to the very quick.

For under color of war, which either his negligence drew on or his false
practices procured, he levied such a subsidy upon the whole realm as never
was asked a greater at once, which should not have needed, albeit the wars
had been just, in case he had not imbereled the Kings treasure as he did, for
besides he extorted money by way of loan from all men who were supposed to
have it, and yet left the Kings soldiers and servants unpaid. But in all these
pretended necessities, how profuse was he in his private expenses? Carrying
himself rather as fitting his own greatness then the common good* How did he
riot surfeit upon vain hopes, as if new supply for wast would never want? What
treasures did he bury in his sumptuous buildings? And how foolish and fancifull
were they? A fit man forsooth to govern a realm, who had so goodly government
in his own estate. All these things as there are but few but know, so we may
be assured that he never durst have committed half of them with a mind to
have remained a subject under the law, and to be answerable for his actions
afterward, but did manifestly intend to heap his mischiefs with so high a
treason as he might climb above his sovereign and stand sure beyond reach of
law.

And for inducement to this his traitorous design he suborned his servants and
certain preachers to spread abroad the praises of his government, with as much
abasing the noble King Henry as without impudence they could devise. Following
therein the practices of K. Richard the tyrant, by deprauing the Father to
honor the son, to extinguish the love of the people to the young King, by
remembering some imperfections of his Father; which example both traitorous and
unnatural who doubts but his heart was ready to follow, whose heart was ready
to defame his father, and set naught by his mother (as it is well known) and
to procure, yea labor the death of his brother, whom albeit the law and
consent of many had condemned upon his own speeches yet his earnest endeavor
therein did well declare what thoughts can sink into his unnatural breast,
and what foul shifts he would have made, rather the^ that his brother should
have escaped death, to that end that he might remove at once both an
impeachment to his poysenous purposes and a surety to the Kings life and
estate. To this end he also practiced to dispatch such of the nobility as were
like to oppose against his mischeiuous drift, and in such sort either to
encumber and weaken the rest, that they should be noe impediments to him. In
the mean time he endeauored to win the common people both by strayned
curtesy and by loosenes of life, whereto he gave not only license, but
encouragement and means.

And the better to advance his intents he devises to entangle the realm not
only with outward war that with rumor thereof his dangerous diuices might be
obscured, bu^ but with inward sedition by stirring and nourishing
discontentments among the nobility gentry and commons of the realm. This he
did under pretense of such matters as all men desired might be redressed more
gladly then he, but in a more quiet and settled time. But the time seemed most
convenient for him when under the sweet pretense of release and liberty to
the people might have destroyed the Nobility and gentry, who are the defense
and safety of the people, and so at pleasure have reduced all under his
tyrannous subjection.

Which how insupportable it would have been may well be coniectured by his
actions already past, what pride and insolency of his men made up of naught?
What instruments had he in every shire to work his purposes, to spread his
rumors, to harken and to carry tales? And those what flatterers? What liars?
How greedily gaping for other men's livings? How vigilant to grope men's
thoughts, and to pick out somewhat whereof they might complain? and such vile
vermin how dear were they to him? and namely John Bonham his one hand in
Wiltshire, Sir Gyles Partridge his other hand in Glocestershire, his customer
in Wells, Piers country, his minister in Devonshire, besides many his bad
conditioned minions in court, what monsters were they? How esteemed they his
favor above all mortal respects.

And further to accomplish his ambitious ends, he devised to make the French
king his friend, by bewraying unto him the Kings fortresses beyond the seas,
which the late noble K. Henry with great charge courage and glory, had brought
under his power, which practice was so carried, that no man but such as
discerned nothing but did perceive it. And that as well by his often private
conference with the French Ambassadors and their secretaries, as by failing to
furnish those pieces with necessary supplies, as also by the speeches which
himself and his servants cast abroad, that Bulloine and the fortresses about
it were an unprofitable burden to the realm. But for the charge no man will
conceive that he wanted money to keep them, who undertook so great a charge
as the conquest of Scotland, and wasted every day a 100^ upon his fantastical
building.

Besides it has been often heard from his own communication, how he intended
to procure a resignation of the rights of the Kings Majesty's sisters, and
others who are entitled to the possession of the Crown, and to have entailed
the same upon his own issue, which when he had effected, and having the Kings
person in his power, the chain of sovereignty could not long have tied him
short, he might have achieved all his ambitious intentions at will.

Wherefore surely he has thus put on the person not only of a robber, and of a
murderer, but of a traitor to the state, since we have evidently discovered
both his lofty and bloody mind. It behooves you to join in aid with the
Lords of his Majesty's privy counsel, as in extinguishing a raging fire, as
in repelling a cruel enemy, for assuredly we must either weakly yield to
his rule and command, or else the ambitious author must be taken away.

In the afternoon of the same day the Lord Mayor assembled a common counsel
in Guildhall, where two letters arrived almost in one instant, one from the
King and the Lord Protector for 1000 men to be armed for defense of the Kings
person, another from the Lords at London for 2000 men to aid them in defense
of the Kings person, both parties pretending alike, but both intending nothing
less. The Recorder whose voice accords commonly with the Lord Chancellor did
so well set forth the complaints of the Lords against the Protector, that many
were inclinable to favor their side. But one named George Stadlowe somewhat
better advised stepped up and spoke unto them as follows.

This business (right Honorable Lord Mayor and the residue of this court) as
it is a very high passage of state, so it is worthy of serious consideration,
and that upon sodeine advice nothing be done or determined them, least happily
by being serviceable to the designs of other men whose purposes we know not,
we cast our selves into the throat of danger which hitherto we do not see,
two things I much fear in case we afford present aid to the Lords, either of
which should cast upon us a bridle rather for stopping a while, then for
stepping or stirring too soon or too fast at their incitement. One is the
certain dangers of the city, the other the uncertain adventure of all the
realm.

First then if we adioine to the Lords, whether they prevail or not we
engulph our selves into assured danger, an example whereof I find in Fabian
whose report I entreat you all to observe. In the time of King Henry the third,
the Lords in a good cause for maintenance of diverse beneficial laws desired
aid of the city ogainst the King. Aid was granted and the quarrel brought
to the arbitrament of the sword. In this battle the King and his son ^e were
taken prisoners, and upon their enlargement free pardon was granted not only to
the Lords but the citizens of London which was afterward confirmed both by
oath and by act of Parliament. But what followed? Was the displeasure
forgotten? Noe verily, nor ever forgotten during that Kings life, for
afterward the liberties of the City were taken away, strangers were
appointed* governors, and the citizens perpetually vexed, both in their
persons and in their estates. So heavy and durable is the wrath of Kings. That
Solomon says: The indignation of the King is death. For it is natural for
princes to uphold their sovereignty, and to hold it in highest esteem, in no
case to endure their supreme authority to be forceably either oppressed or
dispressed by their subjects. Insomuch as they mortally hate such subjects as
have once attempted either to ouerrule them by power, or to cast any terror
upon them. And howsoever they may be either constrained or content to bear
sail for a time, yet are they so sure paymasters in the end, that few have
held out their lives, I will not say prosperously but safely, who have offered
enforcements against their King.

Now touching my sear for the commonwealth, I much suspect these
considerations. I always expect from them some lurking mischief, which the
more cunningly it be kept in, the more dangerously it will break forth. For
albeit there be many hands in this action, yet one is the head who doubtless
has skille to play his own game, and albeit the pretenses given forth are
always fair, and for the public good, yet are the secret intentions
commonly ambitions, and only aim at private ends, yea many times the end is
worse then the first intent. Because when a subject has obtained the hand
against his prince, I will not say he will be loath, but doubtless it is not
safe for him to give over his advantage, wherefore I am of opinion, that for
the present if we will not be so vneurteous as to delay, and suspend our
giving aid to the Lords for a time.

Upon this advice the court resolved to arm 100 horsemen and 400 foot for
defense of the City. To the King they returned answer that they would be
ready upon any necessity to apply all their forces either for his defense or
for his honor. But they entreated him to be pleased to hear such complaints
as were objected against the Lord Protector before he assembled forces in the
field, which in those tempestuous times as it could not be done without great
danger, so without great cause it should not: To the Lords they answered that
they were ready to join with them in any dutiful petition to the King, but to
join with them in arms, they could not upon the sudden resolve.

The next day the Lords at London dispatched a letter to the Lords at
Windesore, wherein they charged the protector with many disorders both in his
private actions, and in his manner of government, requiring that he would
disperse the sorces which he had raised, and withdraw himself from the King,
and be content to be ordered by justice and reason. That this done they would
gladly commune with the rest of the counsel for the surety of the Kings
person, and for ordering of his estate, otherwise they would make no other
account of them then they might trust to find cause, and would assuredly
charge them according to their demerits.

The King all this time was so far from governing his Lords, that he was
scarce at his own liberty, and considering that the late rebellions had but
newly weared themselves into quiet, and fearing new rages among the vnstabie
people daily threatened, and upon such occasion not unlike to take slame,
conceiving also that the confederacy trenched no deeper, or that the only
remedy was to seem so to conceive, dissolved his companies except only his
guarde, but charged them upon warning to be ready, so it is most certain that
the troublesome times were a great advantage to the Lords. Had the people been
well settled in subjection, or the Protector a man of spirit or wit, they h^d
been in danger to have been undone, but the protector instead of using his
authority sent secretary Peter (who under pretense of gravity covered much
untrustiness of heart) to the Lords at London, with some secret instructions
sent especially to persuade them that for a public benefit, all either
private guardes or unkindness might be laid aside. But neither did he
return to Windesore, neither was any answer returned from the Lords. After
this he wrote two letters, one in his own name to the Earl of Warwick, the
other in the name of the Lords at Windesore to the Lords at London, in both
which he so weakly complained, expostulated, entreated, yielded under their
hand, as it was sufficient to have breathed courage into any enemy once
declared against him.

And indeed hereupon the Lords forthwith published a proclamation under the
hands of 17 persons, either for nobility or authority of office well regarded,
werein the causes of such calamities and losses as had lately before happened,
not only by inward divisions which had cost the lives of many thousands of the
Kings subjects, and threatened more, but also by the loss of diverse pieces
beyond the seas, which had been wonn by great adventure of the late Kings
person and consumption of his treasure* they perceived that the only root from
whence those mischiefs s^rung, was the evil government of the Lord Prot^ctor,
whose pride, covetousness and ambition covered only his private ends, and
therefore he was deeply busied in his spacious and specious buildings in the
hottest times of war against France and Scotland whilst the poor soldiers
and seruitors of the King were unpaid, and labored to make himself strong in
all countries, whilst within the realm laws, justice, and good order
preuerted, provisions for the forts beyond the seas neglected, and the Kings
subjects by most dangerous divisions (by his means either raised or occasioned)
much disquiet. That hereupon the Lords of the counsel for preventing as well
present dangers to the Kings person, as the utter subversion of the state of
the realm, concluded to have talked to him quietly, without disturbance to the
King, or to the people, for reducing him to live within reasonable limits, and
for putting order for safety of the kings person, and preservation of the
commonwealth of the realm, and so to have passed over his most unnatural and
trait^rous deseruings without further extremities. But he knowing that he was
unable to answer for any part of his demeanor, began forthwith to spread
false rumors, that certain Lords had conspired against the Kings person, under
pretense whereof he levied forces in a disordered vproare, albeit the treason
rested in him and some other his accomplices, wherefore seeing he troubled the
whole realm for accomplishing his traitorous ends, and used the King in his
tender age for an instrument against himself, causing him to put his hand to
many of his own devises, and to speak things tending to the destruction of
himself they desired and in the Kings name charged all subjects not to obey
any precepts, licenses or proclamations, whereunto the Protectors hand should
be set, albeit he should abuse the Kings hand and seal unto them, but to quit
themselves upon such proclamation as should proceed from the body of the
counsel, protesting therewith their faithful hearts to the King and their
loialty toward the people.

Instantly after the publishing of this proclamation the Lords directed their
letters to Windesore, and addressed to the King, another to the Protector, the
third to the household which was openly read. The letter to the Protector was
gilded over with many smooth words intimating fair promises and full of hope,
but the other two did fully and fowly set forth his obstinacy, his avarice his
ambition, his rash engagements into wars, in the Kings unsettled, both age and
estate, his negligences, his deceits, and all other insufficiences mentioned
before. Herewith Sr Robert Wingfield captain of the guarde was sent from the
Lords to Windesore who so well persuaded the King both of the loyal affection
of the Lords toward him and of their moderate desires against the protector
(who then was in presence) that partly thereby but chiefly in regard of the
turbulent times the Protector was removed from the Kings person, and a guard
set upon him until the next day, when the Lords at London were appointed to be
there.

So the next day diverse of the counsel rode from London to Windsore, but the
Earl of Warwick rode not with them, for he was a perfect Master of his craft:
he had well learned to put others before him in dangerous actions, and in
matters of mischief to be seen to do least, when in very deed all moved from
him. He had well learned of the ape to take nuts out of the fire with the pawe
of the cat. These Lords coming before the King did again run over their
complaints against the Protector, and also under color of love and duty
advises the King to beware of such as were both powerful, ambitious,
mischievous and rich. Affirming that it would be better surety unto him, if
this great authority should be committed to many, who cannot so readily knit in
will or in action, as when the whole manage resideth in one. In the end the
Duke of Somerset (for hereafter he must be no otherwise called) was committed
into their power and committed to custody in Be^uchampe tower within the castle.

The next day he was brought to London as if he had bin a captain carried in
triumph. He rode through Holborne between the Earls of Southhampton and of
Huntington, and was followed with Lords and Gentlemen to the number of 300
mounted on horseback. At Holborne bridge certain Aldermen attended on
horseback, and the cittis^ns householders stood with halberds on all sides of
the streets, through which he passed. At Sopherlane he was received by the
Mayor, Sh^riffes, Recorder and diverse Knights of especial note, who with a
great train of officers and attendants bearing halbeards carried him forthwith
to the Tower, all this was to bear in show, both that the Duke was a dangerous
man* and that the common both aid and applause concurred in his restraint.

Forthwith the King was brought to Hampton court, where all things being borne
as done well, because nothing was ill taken, seven of the Lords of the
counsel and 4 Knights were appointed by turns to attend the Kings person.
The Lords were the Marquis of Northhampton the Earls of Warwick and Arundell,
the Lords Russell, St John, and Wentworth, the knights were these Sr Andrew
Dudley, Sr Edward Rogers, Sr Thomas Darcy, and Sr Thomas Worth. As for affairs
of state the government of them was referred to the whole body of the
counsel, Soon after the King rode to his house in Southwarke, (then called
Suffolk place) and there dined all-After dinner he rode in great estate
through the city to Westminster, as if the people should be given to
understand, that nothing was d^minished either from the safety or glory of the
King by imprisonment of the Duke.

And now when the Duke had breathed a small time in the tower, certain Lords
of the counsel were sent unto him, who after a short preface in such terms
as hate and dissimulation could temper together, remembering how great the amity
had been between them, and of what continuance: Then acknowledging what
offices and services he had done for the commonwealth, and yet enterlacing some
errors and defects, wherewith they seemed to reproach him. Lastly they
presented him certain articles as from the residue of the privy counsel,
desiring his present answer, whether he would acknowledge them to be true, or
else stand upon his justification. The articles objected against him were these.

1 That he took upon him the office of Protector upon express condition, that
he should do nothing in the Kings affairs, but by assent of the late Kings
executors, or the greatest part of them. 2 That contrary to this condition he
did hinder justice, and subvert Laws of his own Authority, as well by letters,
as by other command. 3 That he caused diverse persons arrested and imprisoned
for treason, murder, manslaughter, and fello^y to be discharged against the
laws and statutes of the realm. 4 That he appointed L^euetenants for Armies
and other officers for the weighty affairs of the king under his own writing
and seal. 5 That he communed with Ambassadors of other realms alone of the
weighty matters of the realm. 6 That he would taunt and reprove diverse of the
kings most honorable counsailors for declaring their advice in the Kings
weighty affairs against his opinion, sometimes telling them that they were not
worthy to sit in counsel, and sometimes that he needed not to open weighty
matters to them, and that if they were not agreeable to his opinion, he would
discharge them. 7 That against law he held a court of request in his house and
did enforce diverse to answer there for their freeholde and goods, and did
determine of the same. 8 That being no officer without the advice of the
counsel, or most part of them, he did dispose offices of the Kings gift for
money, grant leases, and wards, and presentations of Benefices pertaining to
the King, gave Bishoprics, and made sales of the Kings lands. 9 That he
commanded Alchimie, and multiplication to be practiced, thereby to abase the
Kings coin. 10 That diverse times he openly said that the nobility and gentry
were the only cause of dearth. Whereupon the people rose to reform matters of
themselves. 11 That against the mind of the whole counsel he caused
proclamation to be made concerning enclosures, whereupon the people made diverse
insurrections and destroyed many of the Kings subjects. 12 That he sent forth a
commission with Articles annexed, concerning enclosures, commons, highwa^es,
cottages, and such like matters* giving the commishioners authority to hear
(...) determine those causes whereby the laws and statutes of the realm were
subverted and much rebellion raised. 13 That he suffered rebels to assemble
and lie armed in camp against the nobility and gentry of the realm without
speedy repressing of them. 14 That he did comfort and encourage diverse rebels
by giving them money, and by promising them fees, rewards and services. 15 That
he caused a proclamation to be made against law, and in favor of the rebels,
that none of them should be vexed or sued by any for their offenses in their
rebellion. 16 That in time of rebellion he said that he liked well the actions
of the rebels, and that the avarice of gentlemen gave occasion for the people
to rise, and that it was better for them to dye then to porish for want. 17
That he said, the Lords of the Parliament were loath to reform enclosures and
other things, therefore the people had a good cause to reform them themselves.
18 That after declaration of the defaults of Bouline and the pieces there by
such as did surview them, he would never amend the same. 19 That he would not
suffer the Kings pieces of Newhauen, and Blackness to be furnished with men
and provision, albeit he was (...) of the defaults and advised thereto by the
Kings (...), whereby the French King was emboldned to attempt upon them. 20
That he would neither give authority nor suffer noble men, and gentlemen to
suppress rebels in time convenient, but wrote to them to speak the rebels
^aire, and use them gently. 21 That upon the fifth of October the present v^ere
(...) Hampton court for defense of his own private causes, he procured
seditious bills to be written in counterfeit hands, and secretly to be
dispersed into diverse parts of the realm beginning thus, Good people,
intending thereby to raise the Kings subjects to rebellion and open war. 22
That the Kings privy counsel did consult at London to come to him, and move
him to reform his government, but he hearing of their assembly declared by his
letters in diverse places, that they were high traitors to the King. 23 That he
declared untruly as well to the King as to other young Lords attending his
person, that the Lords at London intended to destroy the King, and desired the
King never to forget, but to revenge it, and required the young Lords to put the
King in remembrance thereof with intent to make sedition, and discord between
the King and his Nobles. 24 That at diverse times and places he said, the Lords
of the counsel at London intend to kill me, but if I dye the King shall dye,
and if they famish me, they shall famish him. 25 That of his own head he
removed the King so suddenly from Hampton court to Windsore, without any
provision there made, that he was thereby not only in great fear but cast into
a dangerous disease. 26 That by his letters he caused the Kings people to
assemble in great numbers in Armor after the manner of war to his aid and
defense. 27 That he caused his servants and friends at Hampton court and
Windesore to be apparelled in the Kings armor, when the Kings servants and
guarde went unarmed. 28 That he intended to fly to Iernsey and Wales and laid
posthorses, and men, and a boat to that purpose.
Now albeit there is little doubt but that some of these articles were merely
devised, others enlarged, or wr^sted, or otherwise enforced by odious
interpretation, yet the Duke being of base gold and fearing the touch,
subscribed with his own hand, that he did acknowledge his offenses contained
in them, and humbly upon his knees submitted himself to the Kings mercy. That
in like manner he entreated the Lords to be a means to the King that he would
conceive that his offenses did proceed rather from negligence, rashness, or
other indiscretion, then from any malicious thought tending to treason, and
also that he would take some gracious way with him, his wife and children, not
according to extremity of laws, but after his great elemency and mercy.
Written with my own hand 23 December Anno 3o Edw. Regis.

To this I make no other defense, but entreat the reader not to condemn him
for perishing so weakly, and for that he who should have lost his life to
preserve his honor, cast away both his life and honor together. Assuredly he
was a man of a feeble stomach, unable to concoct any great fortune prosperous
or adverse. But as the judgment of God, and malice of a man concur often in
one act, although it be easy to discern between them; so is it little to be
maruailed, that he who thirsted after his brothers blood, should find others
to thirst after his; Notwithstanding for that present his blood was respited*
but he was stripped of his great offices of being Prote^tor, Treasurer and
Marshall, lost all his goods and near 2000 land, in which estate if he had
continued, the longer he had lived the more punishment he should endure,
herewith it was s^ossingly said that he had eaten the kings goose and did then
regorge the feathers.

After this he sent letters to the Lords of the counsel wherein he
acknowledged himself much f^oured by them, in that they had brought his cause
to be fineable which although it was to him impo^able, yet as he did never
intend to contend with them nor any action to justify himself, as well for
that he was none of the wisest and might easily err; as for that it is scarce
possible for any man in great place so to bear himself, that all his actions
in the eye of justice shall be blameless; so he did then submit himself
wholly to the Kings mercy, and their discretions for some moderation; desiring
them to conceive that what he did amiss was rather through rudenes, and for
want of judgment, then from any malicious meaning, and that he was therefore
ready both to do and suffer what they would appoint. Finally he did again
most humbly upon his knees entreat pardon, and favor, and they should ever
find him so lowly to their honors, and obedient to their orders, as he would
thereby make amends for his former follies.

These subiections, objections, deiections of the Duke made a heavenly harmony
in his enemies ears. But they wrought such compassion with the King, that
forthwith he was released out of the Tower, his fines discharged, his goods and
lands restored, except such as had been given away, either the malice of the
Lords being somewhat appeased, or their credit not of sufficient strength to
resist, within a short time after he was entertained and feasted by the King
with great show of favor, and sworn again of the privy counsel, at which
time between him and the Lords perfect amity was made, or else a dissembling
hate And that all might appear to be knit up in a comicall conclusion, the
Dukes daughter was afterward joined in marriage to the Lord L^sle son and
heir to the Earl of Warwick, and the Earl also was made Lord Admiral of
England, yet many doubted whether the Earl retained not some secret offense
against the Duke, which if he did, it was most cunningly suppressed,
doubtless of all his virtues he made best vice of dissimulation. And as this
friendship was drawn together by fear on both sides so it was not like to be
more durable then was the fear.

And thus the second act ended of the tragedy of the Duke, the third shall
follow in the proper place.

In the mean time the Earl of Warwick for what mischeiuous contriuance it
was not certainly known, but conceived to be against the Duke joined to him
the Earl of Arund^ll late Lord Chamberlain, and the Earl of Southhampton
sometimes Lord Chancellor, men of their own nature circumspect and slow, but
at the time discountenanced and discontent, whom therefore the Earl of
Warwick singled as fittest for his purpose. Many secret conferences they had
at their several houses, which often held the greatest part of the night. But
they accustomed to afford at other times either silence, or short assent to
what he did propose, did then fall off and forsake him, procuring thereby
danger to themselves without doing good to any other. For when the Earl of
Warwick could by no means draw them to his desires, he found means that both
of them were discharged from the counsel, and commanded to their houses.
Against the Earl of Arundell objections were framed that he took away bolts
and locks at Westminster, and gave away the Kings stuff. He was fined at
12000l to be paid 1000l yearly. But doubtless the Earl of Warwick had good
reason to suspect, that they who had the honesty not to approve his purpose,
would not want the heart to oppose against it.

During these combats among the nobility many popular insurrections were
assailed, One Bell was put to death at Tyborne for moving a new rebellion in
Suffolk and in Essex, he was a man nittily needy and therefore aduentrous,
esteemed but an idle fellow, until he found opportunity to show his rashness.
Diverse like attempts were made in other places, but the authors were not so
readily followed by the people as others had done before. Partly because
multitudes do not easily move, but chifly because misaduentures of others in
like attempts had taught them to be more warily advised. About this time a
Parliament was held at Westminster wherein one Act was made against spreading
of Prophecies the first motive of rebellions, and another against unlawful
assemblies, the first apparent acting of them. But for fear of new tumults,
the Parliament was untimely dissolved and gent. charged to retire to their
country habitations, being furnished with such forces and commissions as were
held sufficient to hold in bridle either the malice or rage of reasonlesse
people, yea so great grew the doubt of new insurrections that Trinity term did
not hold least gentlemen should by that occasion be drawn out of the country
where they were esteemed to do good service by keeping the Commons from
commotions. All these mouements seemed to be pretended by moving of the earth
in diverse places of Sussex.

The affairs of England beyond the seas all this time were carried with
variable success, Sr Thomas Cheynie was sent to the Emperor to treat with
him, that his forces might join with the forces of England against the common
enemies of them both according to the Articles for merly concluded. These
articles had bin well observed for a time esp^eially against the French. But
afterward the emperor being diuerted about other preparations, and therewith
much solicited by the Scots, not to be a help to ruin their kingdom fell by
degrees from the K. of England, filling his Ambassadors with empty hopes at
the first, wherein also he daily fainted and failed in the end.

In France the King placed the Rhenegra^e with diverse Regiments of Almaine,
Lancequenots, and certain ensigns of F^ench to the number of 4 or 5000 at the
town of Morguison midway between Bouline and Calais to empeach all
intercourse between those two places, whereupon the King of England caused all
the strangers that had served the year against the rebels to the number of
2000 to be transported to Calais, to them were adioined 3000 English, under the
command of Francis Earl of Hunting don, and Sr Edward Hastings his brother to
dislodge the French, or otherwise to annoy them. But the French perceiving that
the troubles in England were perfectly appeased, and that the King thereby was
much strengthened in his estate, for that the vicious humors against him were
either corrected or spent, finding also that he daily grew rather into
admiration then love, as well for that it was apparent, that he had so well
improued that little stock which his father left, as he was like to prove a
thriuer in the end, also weary in maintaining wars with Scotland, as well in
regard of the charge, as for that his people were nothing desirous of service
in that distant country. Lastly having tried as well the strength as curtesy of
the English nation, and doubtful of the estates of the empire and of Spain,
by whom not only the wings of his Kingdom had been clipped on every side, but
the whole body thereof dangerously attempted, he resolved to fasten peace with
England if he could.

Hereupon he dispatched to the English court Guidolti an Italion borne in
Florence who made many ouertures to the Lords of the counsel, but all as from
the Cunstable of France, and espying with a nimble eye that matters of consaile
were chiesly swayed by the Earl of Warwick by great gifts and gretter hopes
he wrought him to be appliable to his desires. In the end it was concluded that
four Ambassadors should be sent from the King of England into France, and
four from the French King to treat with them that the English commissioners
should come to Guisnes and the French to Arde, and that their meeting should be
chiefly at Guisnes. The English yielding to all with sincerity of mind, the
French accepting all but with intentions reserved to themselves. The Lords
appointed by the English were John Earl of Bedforde, William Lord Paget, St
William Peeter, and Sr John Mason. Secretaries of State, on the French side
were appointed Mounsier Rochpott, Mounsier Chastilion, Guillant de Mortier, and
Rochetele de Dassi^, in short time after the Earl of Warwick was made Lord
great M^ another feather to his mounting mind.

The day wherein the English Ambassadors arrived at Caluis, Guidolti resorted
unto them with a letter from Mounsier Rochpot whereby he signified that the
French intended not to come to Arde, but desired that the English would go to
Bouline, and that the meeting might be besides the Town. For this he alleged
that he was so weakly disposed in health that he could not travail far, and
that he being Governor of Picardie and Chastilion of Newhauen they might not
depart such distance from their charge, and further that there must be much
wast of time if the English should lie at Guisnes and the French at Ardes, and
that the equality would be more, and the dishonor to one of the sides less,
if the enterview should be upon the Frontires, then if one part should be
drawn into the territory of the other.

Upon this rub the English Ambassadors thought fit to demurre, and so sent
into England to receive directions from the Lords of the counsel. They again
referred the matter wholly to the judgment of the Ambassadors, affirming that
it was a circumstance not much to be stood upon in case it were not upon some
sinenesse, but for ease and commodity of them and their train, which indeed
they might better find near Bouline then at Ardes, in case also they could
discern no deep inconvenience which might hinder the good issue of the good
business in hand, which they esteemed sufficient if in substance it might be
effected, albeit in all points they had not so much of their minds, as they
then desired, and as at another time they would expect, and so the English
Commissioners went to Bouline, and the French came to one of their forts
nearest to Bouline.

Not long before the Emperor had been assailed by the King of England to aid
him in defense of Bouline against the French, which he expressly refused,
alleging that he was not bound so to do by conditions of the league. For that
Bouline was a piece of new conquest acquired by the English since the league
was made, then the King offered to yield the Town absolutely into his hands
in case he would maintain it against the French, which offer also he refused
to accept. At the arrival of the English ambassadors the soldiers were
sharply assailed with wants. There was not one drop of beer in the Town. The
bread and breadcorne sufficed not for six days. Hereupon the soldiers entered
into proportion, and to give them example the Lord Clinton being Lord Deputy
limited himself to a loaf a day. The King was indebted in those parts above
14000l besides for the Earl of Hunting dons numbers which were about 1300
foot, besides also the increases daily rising, for the monthly pay of English
and strangers amounted to 6000l besides allowance for officers. Hereof the band
of horsemen out of Germany took little less then 800l the month, and the
Almains on foot 4000l accounting the gulden at 3s 4d, but accounting it more,
as without a higher valuation little service and happily some mischief might
be expected, the monthly pay to strangers amounted higher. Hereby a great
error was discovered, in that the strangers for defense of Boulaine were of
greater strength then were the English.

Now the English commissioners having first procured some releife both for
victuals and pay, prepared a tent without the town for meeting with the
French. But they* erected a house on the further side of the water within their
own territory, in a manner half way between their forte and the town. The
English persuaded the French to surcease their building, pretending but for
their fantasies it was not necessary, because neither their treaty was like to
continue long neither was it by solemn meeting that the business in hand must
be effected. But in truth they feared least if peace should not follow, the
French might in short time either with filling or massing the house, or else by
fortifying make such a piece as might annoy the haven or the town.
Notwithstanding the French not only proceeded but refused any other place of
enteruiew.

At their first meeting much time was spent in ceremony of salutation. Then the
commissions were read, then Mr de Mortier in a sharp speech declared that the
French King their Mt had upon just grounds entered the war for recovery of his
right, and defense of his allies, yet was he well minded for an honorable
peace, so as the things for which the war began, might be brought to some
reasonable appointment; and hearing of the like disposition of the King of
England he had sent them to treat of those affairs, nothing doubting but that
the English would accord to the restitution of Bouline, and other pieces of
their late conquest, which so long as they should keep, so long they may be
assured the war would continue. He further added that Bouline was but a bare
ruinous Town, without territory or any other commodity to balance the charge
of defending it against the power of France. Lastly he said there should want
no good will in them to bring matters to good appointment, hopeing to find the
like affection in the English.

After that the English commissioners had conferred a while, the Lord Paget
answered that the causes of the war both with them and their Allies (whom he
took to be the Scots) being just and honorable. The town of Bouline and
other pieces subdued as well by their late great master against them, as by the
K. their then Mr against their Allies were acquired by just title of victory,
and therefore in keeping of them no injury was offered, either to the French
King, or to the Scots. But the further declaration he left off until their
next meeting, because both the time was spent and the tide summoned them to
depart. Touching the good inclination of the King their Mr he had declared it
well by sending them thither, in whom they should fin^e such good conformity,
that if good success ensued, not the fault should be which they expected not
in the French. Nothing else was done saving a surcease of hostility concluded
for 15 days, which was proclaimed in both the frontires.

At the next meeting the Lord Paget spent much speech in setting forth the King
of Englands title to Bulloine and to his debts and pension from the French
king, with all arrerages; together with the justice of his war against the
Scots. The French were as earnest in maintaining the contrary, wanting no words
whatsoever their reasons were. For between great Princes, the greatest
strength carries the greatest reason. At the last Mr de Mortier roundly said
that to cut off all contentions of words, he would propose two means for peace.
All that for old matters of pensions, debts and arrerages, the English should
make white books and never mention them more, but for Bulloine to set the
higher value, (or else said he) let old quarrels remain, so as your right may
be reserved to clime, and ours to defend. And let us speak frankly of some
recompense for Boulloine. As for the Scottish Queen. (For this had been also
mentioned before) our King is resolved to keep her for his son and therefore
we desire you to speak thereof no more, but of what other points you please,
so as we may draw shortly to an end.

The Lord Paget answered for the other commissioners that they had greatest
reason to desire a speedy end, but the matters whereupon they stood were of
greater importance then to be determined upon the sudden. For said he you may
make doubts as you please. But if the debt to our King be not just, being
confessed, judged, sworn, and by many treaties confirmed, we know not what
may be deemed just, neither is it a sum to be slenderly regarded being
2000000 crowns clear debt, besides 12000 crowns resting in dispute. The
justice of the wars against Scotland he maintained as well in regard of
breach of treatise with themselves as for that contrary to their comprehension
in the last treaty of France they had invaded England in these entercourses,
the whole afternoon being spent, it was agreed that both parties should advise
upon such matters as had been propounded until the next meeting.

But the French either having or supposing that they had advantage over the
English partly by reason of their firm intelligence in the English court, and
partly because they found the English commissioners much yielding to their
desires, as first in cumming into France, then to Bouline, lastly to a house of
their own erecting began to be stiff and almost intractable, sharply
pressing both for speedy resolution and short times for meetings But Guidolti
continually travailed to draw both parties to conformity, the French being
willing to be entreated by their friend to their most dissembled desires.
Guidolty in steed of the Queen of Scots propounded that the French kings
daughter should be joined in marriage to the King of England, affirming that
if it were a dry peace, it would hardly be durable, but hereto the English
gave no inclinable care. Then he delivered 17 reasons in writing, for which he
said it was necessary for the English to conclude a peace. The English
demanded how many reasons he had for the French; he answered that he had also
his reasons for them, which he intended likewise to deliver in writing.

At the next meeting the French showed themselves as before peremptory and
precise, standing stiffly upon their own ouertures, which they had they said no
commission to exceed, and therefore they refused to treat either of the
pension or debt demanded by the English, and declared themselves rather
desirous then willing to break off the treaty. The English answered that
before their coming Guidolti had declared from the French King that so as
Bulloine might be rendered, all that was owing from him to the King of England
should be paid, which Guidolti being present affirmed to be true; well said
they what our King told Guidolti we know not, but to us he has given no other
commission then you have heard, which in no case we must exceed. As for the
pension whereof you speak, think you that a King of France will be tributary
to any? No, No, assure you he will not, and touching the debt because the K. of
England gave occasion to the wars wasted the French Kings country, and
thereby caused him to expend such sums of money as exceeded the debt, he took
himself to be acquitted thereof.

Hereto the English answered that the French King might take matters as he
pleased, but in honor justice, and conscience no debt was more due, and the
wars being made for denial thereof, he could not be for that cause
acquitted. That the pension was also granted upon diverse causes both weighty
and just, and amongst other by reason of the King of Englands uncontrollable
title to Normandy Gascoine and other parts of France. Here they were
interrupted by Mr Rotchpot, who brake forth into warm words, and was again as
warmely answered, but the French would nothing move from their own ouertures
which they stood upon by way of conclusions.

At the last the English said that they might do well to report these
differences to their Masters on both sides and that their pleasures might
therein be known. Hereto the French answered that they knew their Kings
pleasures so well, that if they should send to him again, he would and might
think them of small discretion* and herewith they offered to break. The
English told them that if they would break they might, but they intended to
conclude nothing until they had further instructions from England; which they
would procure as soon as they could. To this the French did easily incline.

These matters advertised into England much troubled the counsel, and the
rather for that the Earl of Warwick was at that time retired, pretending much
infirmity in his health. Hereupon many sinister surmises began to spring up
among some of the counsel, partly probable and part happily devised, for as
they knew not whether he were more dangerous present or away; so as the nature
of all fear is they suspected that which happened to be the worst. From hence
diverse of the counsel began in this manner to murmr against him.

What said they is he never sick, but when affairs of greatest weight are in
debating? Or wherefore else does he withdraw himself from the company of
those who are not well assured of his love? Wherefore does he not now come
forth and openly ouerrule, as in other matters he is accustomed? Would he have
us imagine by his absence that he acts nothing? Or knowing that all moves
from him, shall we not think that he seeks to enjoy his own ends, which
bearing blame for any event? Go to then; let him come forth and declare
himself, for it is better that should find fault with all things whilst they
are doing, then condemn all things when they are done; with those and the like
speeches he came to counsel more ordinary then before, and at last partly by
his reasons and partly by his authority, peace with France was esteemed so
necessary, that new instructions were sent to the English Ambassadors,
according whereto peace was concluded upon these articles.

1 That all titles and climes on the one side and defenses on the other should
remain to either party as they were before. 2 That the fautle of one man
(except he were unpunished) should not break the peace. 3 That prisoners
should be delivered on both sides. 4 That Bouline and other pieces of the new
conquest, with all the ordinance except such as had been brought in the
English should be delivered to the French within 6 months after the peace
proclaimed. 5 That ships of merchandise might safely pass and ships of war
be called in. 6 That the French should pay for the same 200000 crowns of the
sum, every crown valued at six shillings 8d within three days after the
delivery of the town, and 200000 like crowns more upon the fifth day of
August then next ensuing. 7 That the English should make no new wars upon
Scotland, unless new occasions should be given. 8 That if the Scots rased
Lords and Dunglasse, the English should raze Roxborough and Aymouth, and no
fortification to be afterward made in any of those places.
To these articles the French King was sworn at Amiens, the King of England at
London; Commissioners being especially appointed to take their oaths, and for
further assurance 6 Hostages were delivered for the French at Ards and 6 for
the English at Guisnes, and it was agreed that at the delivery of Bulloine the
English hostages should be discharged, and that upon the payment of the first
200000 crowns 3 of the French hostages should be discharged, and other 3 upon
payment of the last 200000 crowns. In the peace the Emperor was comprised in
case he would consent, and further to cut off future contentions, commissioners
were appointed both by the English and French to make certain the limits
between both territories. Other commissioners were appointed summarily to
expedite and determine all matters of piracie and depredations between the
subjects of both kingdoms, whereby many had not only lived but thriued many
years before.

So the Lord Clinton governor of Bulloine having received his warrant,
discharged all his men except 1800 and with them issued out of the town, and
delivered it to Mr Chastilion having first received of him the 6 English
hostages, and an acquittance for delivery of the town, and safe conduct for
his passage to Calais. These 18000 men were afterward placed upon the
frontires between the Emperor and the English. Soon after the first payment
of money was made by the French to certain English commissioners whereupon 3
of their hostages were discharged, the other three namely Count de Anguien next
heir to the crown of France after the Kings children, the Marquis de Meaux
brother to the Scottish Queen, and Montmorencie the constables son who at
that time chiefly guided the affairs of France, came into England. They were
honorably accompanied and with great estate brought to London, where every of
them kept house by himself.

Of the moneys of the first payment 10000l was appointed for Calais 8000l for
Ireland, 10000l for the North, and 2000l for the Navy, the residue was
earefully laid up in the Tower. Likewise of the second payment (whereupon the
hostages aforenamed returned into France) 8000l was appointed for Calais 5000l
for the North* 10000l was employed for enerease toward outward paiments,
certain persons undertaking that the money should be doubled every Or happily
year.
month, the residue was safely lodged in the tower.

And now it remained that the chief actors in this peaee (whatsoever their
aims were) must be both honored and enriched with great rewards, and first
Guidolti the first mouer of the treaty was recompensed with knighthood, 1000
crowns rewards, 1000 crowns pension and 250c pensio^ to his son. The Earl
of Warwick was made general warden of the North, had 1000 marks land granted
to him and 100 horsemen of the Kings charge. Mr Herbert his chief instrument
was made president of Wales and had a grant of 500l land, and thus whether
immoderate favors breed first unthankfulness and afterward hate, and
therewith ambitious desires, or whether God so punishes immoderate affections,
it often happens that men are prone to raise those most who work their ruin
in the end. Also the Lord Clinton who had been deputy of Bulloine was made
Lord Admiral of England. The captains and officers were rewarded with lands,
leases, offices and annuities, the ordinary soldiers having all their pay, and
a months pay over were sent into their countries, and great charge given that
they should be well observed, until they were quietly settled at home. The
light horsemen and men at arms were put under the Marquis of Northhampton
captain of the Pensioners. All the guarde of Bulloine were committed to the
Lord Admiral, The chief captains with 600 ordinaries were sent to strengthen
the Frontires of Scotland. Lastly strangers were dispatched out of the realm,
who after some idle expense of their moneys and time were likest to be forward
either in beginning or in maintaining disorders.

Presently after this agreement of peace. The Duke of Brunswicke sent to the
King of England to offer his service in the Kings wars with 10000 men of his
band, and to entreat a marriage with the Lady Mary the Kings eldest sister.
Answer was made touching his offer of aid, that the Kings wars were ended.
And touching marriage with the Lady Mary that the King was in speech for her
marriage with the Infanta of Portugal, which being determined without effect,
he should favorably be heard. Upon this also the Emperors Ambassadors did
expostulate with the King that he had broken his league with the Emperor. To
this the King answered that because the Emperor failed in his performances the
King was enforced to provide for himself. The Ambassador desirous as it seemed
to make a breach, demanded boldly that the Lady Mary should have the free
exercise of the mass. This did the King not only constantly deny, but hereupon
sermons were increased at court and order taken that no man should have any
benefice from the King but first he should preach before him, and in short time
after under pretense of preparing for sea matters 5000l were sent to relieve
Protestants beyond the seas, and further because the Emperor made diverse
straight laws against those of the religion. Merchants were charged to
forbear their trade into Flanders so much as they could. So as it appears,
had some of the English nobility been either less powerful or more faithful
then they were, the King had ears enough and hands enough as well at home as
among good friends abroad, either to have maintained wars against the French
or to have reduced them to a more honorable peace.

Wars being thus at good appointment, peaceable business was more seriously
regarded, and whereas an Ambassador arrived from Gostaue King of Sweden to knit
amity with the King for intercourse of merchants. At last these articles were
concluded.

1 That if the King of Sweden sent Bullion into England he might carry away
English commodities without custom. 2 That he should carry Bullion to no other
Prince. 3 That if he sent Ozimus, steel, copper, etc. he should pay custom
for English commodities as an English man. 4 That if he sent other merchandise
he should have free intercourse paying custom as a stranger.
The mint was set to work so as it gained 24000l yearly to the King, which
should bear his charges in Ireland and bring 10000l to the treasure. 400 men
were sent into Ireland and charge given that the laws of England should there
be administered, and the mutinous be severely suppressed. Verily it may seen
strange that among all the horrible hurries in England, Ireland was then almost
quiet. But besides that the King drew much people from thence for service in
his wars, who happily would not have remained quiet at home, the governors at
that time were men of such choice, that neither the nobility disdained to
endure their command, nor the inferior sort were suppressed to supply their
wants.

Further 20000l weight was appointed to be made so much baser as the King might
gain thereby 160000l. Agreement was also made with York Mr of one of the
mints, that he should receive the profit of all the Bullion which himself
should bring, and pay the Kings debts to the value of 120000l and remain
accountable for the rest, paying six shillings 8d the ounce until the exchange
were equal in Flanders and afterward six shillings 8d and further that he
should declare his bargain to any that should be appointed to ouersee him, and
leave off when the King should please, that for this the King should give him
15000l in pressed, and license to transport 8000l beyond the seas to abase the
exchange. Herewith the base moneys formerly coined were cried down.

Now it is certain that by reason of the long hostility which England held
against Scotland and France, peace was not so hardly concluded as kept. But
albeit occasions of breach were often offered, yet the judgment and moderation
of both parts sufficed either to avoid or apease them. The Bishop of Glasco
coming into England without safe conduct was taken prisoner. The French
Ambassador made means to the King for his discharge, but answer was made that
the Scots had no such peace with the English that they might pass without safe
conduct. This was not denied by the Mr of Erskine, whereupon the Archbishop was
retained prisoner, but after a short time remitted to his liberty. After this
the Queen Dowag^r of Scotland going from France to her country, passed
through England but the French Ambassador first obtained her safe conduct, she
arrived at Portsmouth and was there encountered by diverse of the * English
nobility of highest quality and estimation as well for doing her honor as for
that having such pledges she need not fear, at London she soiourned 4 days
being lodged in the Bishops palace, and defraied at the charge of the City,
in which time she was roially feasted by the King at Whitehall. At her
departure she was attended out of the City with all ceremonies pretending to
state, the Sheriffs of every shire through which she passed received her
accompanied with the chief gentlemen of the country, as also they conveied
her from one shire to another (making always provision for her entertainment
until she came into the borders of Scotland.

The Earl of Maxwell came with a strong hand to the borders of England,
against certain families of Scots who had yielded to the King of England, and
the Lord Dacre brought his forces to their aid, in which service his valor
and discretion did equally appear. For albeit the gentlemen of those families
did often skirmish with the Earls men, and slew many of them, yet were they
never therein aided by the English, neither would they assail him upon any
advantage. But when any of these gentlemen were distressed by the Earl the
English did then encounter him by arms. Generally the English would not offer
to offend the Scots, but only in defending their friends.

About this time the French king sent Mounsier Lansat to request of the King of
England, that the fishing of Twe^de, Edrington, the debatable ground, and the
Scottish Hostages which had been sent into England in the time of King Henry
the 8th might be restored to the Scots, and that the English prisoners who were
bound to pay their ransomes, before the peace should not be comprised in the
conditions thereof. The King sent Sr William Pickering to declare to the French
King, that to the last demand he agreed without exception, and albeit he had to
the places required, yet he was content as well for them as for other demands,
to perform whatsoever should be agreed on by commissioners on both sides, so
commissioners were appointed and the matters settled in quiet agreement.

In the mean time the King sent new supply of forces and other provisions into
the North parts of the Realm, whereupon the French King sent a navy of 160
sail into Scotland, laden with grain, powder, and ordinance, of these 16 of
the greatest perished upon the coast of Ireland, two charged with Artillery and
14 with grain, the residue so shaken and torn, that it gave a maine check to
their further designs, but because many saved themselves in the harbors of
Ireland. The King sent thither 4 ships, 4 barks, 4 pinnaces, and 12
victualers. These possessed themselves of three havens, two on the south side
toward France and one toward Scotland. The Lord Cobham was appointed General
lieuetenant, who fortified those havens and drew down the chiefest forces of
the country toward the south parts thereof, and thus even in peace either of
the Kings so vigilantly observed every motion of the other, as if they had
lived upon the Alarm. The will of friends is best assured when they have no
power to do hurt.

In France a difference did rise about a place called Fines wood, whether it
pertained to the English or to the French. On the French part 800 men assembled
at arms upon this quarrel, on the English 1000. But the readiness of the
English to fight moved the French to abstain from blows, and to permit the
English to enjoy their ground. Hereupon the King fortified Calais and his other
pieces in France, in such sort as they had never been in like condition of
defense. And whereas one Styward a Scot was apprehended in England and
imprisoned in the Tower, for intending to poison the young Queen of Scots, the
King as well to manifest his justice as his love and respect toward the young
Queen, delivered him to the French King upon the frontires of Calais to be
iusticed by him at his pleasure.

And yet this advice was not approved by many, for albeit it be both honorable
and just, that they who offend against their proper prince, should be delivered
to him to be punished, yet is it grown out of common use. And for this cause
the condition is often expressed in leagues, that the subjects of one Prince
should be delivered by the other in case they be required, the contrary custom
may happily hold reasonable in ordinary offenses, in which case the Scripture
forbids to deliver a slave to his angry Lord, but in grievous and inhumane
crimes, in such as overthrow the foundation of state, in such as shake the
surety of humane society, I conceive it more fit that offenders should be
remitted to their Prince to be punished in the place where they have offended.

But of all other the Kings amity with the Emperor was least assured, being as
fullest both of practice and distrust, so in danger every hour to dissolve.
Certain ships were appointed in the Low Countries with men and furniture
suitable to the attempts to transport the Lady Mary either by violence or by
stealth out of England to Antwerpe. Diverse of her gentlemen departed thither
before, and certain shipheres as they are termed, were discovered to view the
English coast, Hereupon Sr John Gates was sent with forces into Essex where the
Lady then lay, and besides the Duke of Somerset was sent with 200 men, the Lord
Privy seal with other 200, and Mt Sentlegier with 400 men more to several
coasts upon the sea; diverse of the Kings ships were addressed to be in
readiness for the sea. Mr Chamberlain Ambassador for the Queen of Hungary in
the Low Countries advertised by his letters, that it was intended by this
means to raise an outward war to join with some sedition within doors, and
that the Queen of Hungary had openly said, that the Shipheres were toward;
who for fear of one gentleman durst not proceed in their attempt. Upon these
either dangers or fears the Lord Chancellor and Secretary Peeter were sent to
the Lady Mary, who after some conference brought her to the Lord Chancellors
house at Lies in Essex and from thence to Hunsdon. and from thence to the King
at Westminster. Here the counsel declared unto her how long he had permitted
her the use of the Mass, and perceiving by her letters how immovable she was,
he was resolved no longer to endure it, unless she would put in hope of some
conformity within short time. To this she answered that her soul was Gods, and
touching her faith as she could not change so she would not dissemble it.
Reply was made that the King intended not to constrain her faith, but to
restrain the outward profession thereof, in regard of the danger the example
might draw. After some other like enterchange of speeches the Lady was
appointed to remain with the King, but Dr Mallet her chaplain was committed
prisoner to the fleet, and almost herewith arrived an Ambassador from the
Emperor, with a menacing message of war, in case his cozen the Lady Mary
should not be admitted the free exercise of the mass. The King presently
advised with the Archbishop of Canterbury, and with the Bishops of London and
Rochester who gave their opinion that to give license to sin was sin, but
to conniue at sin might be allowed in ease it were neither to long nor
without hope of reformation. Then was answer given to the Ambassador that the
King would send to the Emperor within a month or two to give him what
satisfaction should be fit.

In the mean time the counsel considering how prejudicial it would be to
the realm if the subjects should loose their trade in Flanders, that the
Flemmings had cloth for a year in their hands, that the King had 500 quintals
of powder and much armor in Flanders, and the merchants much goods at the woll
fleet, they advised the King to send an Ambassador legier for the Emperor, as
well to satisfy him for other matters by him required, as to win time,
thereby both to prepare a mart in England and to withdraw their goods out of
Flanders. So Mr Wotton was dispatched with particular instructions to desire
the Emperor to be less violent in his requests. And to advertise him that the
Lady Mary as she was his cozen, so was she the Kings sister, and which is more
his subject, that seeing the K. was a sovereign Prince without dependancy upon
any but God, it was not reason that the Emperor should entermeddle either with
ordering his subjects, or with directing the affairs of his realm. Thus much
he offered that what favor the Kings subjects had in the Emperors dominions
for their religion, the same should the Emperors subjects receive in England.
The Emperor pereeiuing that his threats were little regarded, regarded little
to threaten any more.

About the time that the Lady Mary should have been transported unto Antwerp,
a rebellion was attempted in Essex where she then lay. For furtherance whereof
speeches were cast forth, that strangers were arrived in England, either to
rule or to spoil the natural inhabitants, upon this surmise many appointed to
assemble at Chelinsforde, and from thence to make pillage as their wants or
wanton appetites should lead, but the Principal being put to death and the
residue pardoned, all remained quiet. Many Londoners also hunting after riot
and ease, contrived to tumult upon May day, pretending grieuances and fears
from strangers, but because where many are of counsel counsel is hardly
kept, the enterprise was discovered and defeated before it was ripe, herewith
Lion, Gorran and Ireland persons of mean condition but desperate and
discontent, endeavored to raise a rebellion in Kent. They often met and had
conferences both private and long. They seemed highly busied in mind, and
their heads travailing with troubled thoughts, which they often dissembled with
impertinent speeches, this was first discovered by one of their servants,
doubtful whether before knowing the mischief, and until then secret or
ignorant before, and then first apprehending suspicions. So they were
apprehended and after conviction the danger determined by their deaths.
Herewith rumors were raised of great discord and practices among the nobility,
for this cause the Lords assembled at London, and feasted diverse days
together, giving order to apprehend the reporters of these surmises, albeit
happily not altogether untrue. For this cause gentlemen were newly commanded to
remain in the country, to govern the people easy to be dealt with whilst
they stand in fear.

The King being thus uncertain of the faith both of his subjects and of his
confederats, intended by aliance to strengthen himself. To this purpose one
Bortwicke was sent to the King of Denmark with private instructions to treat
of a marriage between the Lady Elizabeth the Kings sister and the King of
Denmarks eldest son. But this Lady albeit she was furnished with many
excellent endowments both of nature and education, yet could she never be
induced to entertain Marriage with any.

After this the Lord Marquis of Northampton was directed with a solemn
embassage to the French King, as well to present him with the order of the
garter, as to treat with him of other secret affairs, with him were joined in
commission the Bishop of Elie, Sr Phillip Hobbie, St William Pickering, Sr John
Mason knights, and Mr Smith secretary of state. The Earls of Worcester,
Rutland, and Ormond were appointed to accompany them, and likewise the Lords
Lisle, Fitswater, Bray, Abergauennie, and Yuers, with other knights and
gentlemen of note to the number of 26 and for avoiding immoderate and
burdensome train, order was given that every Earl should have four
attendants, every Lord three, every Knight and Gentleman two, The commissioners
were not limited to any number.

They arrived at Nants and were there received by Mounsier Chastilion and by
him conducted to Chasteau Bryan where the French King then lodged, they were
twice banquetted by the way, and the nearer they approached to the castle, the
more increased the resort of the French nobility to do them honor, being come
to the court they were forthwith brought to the King abiding then in his
bedchamber. Here the Marquis presented unto him the order of the garter,
wherewith he was presently invested, and thereupon gave for the garter a chain
worth 200l and his gown addressed with aglets esteemed worth 25l.

Then the Bishop of Ely in a short speech declared how desirous the King of
England was not only to continue but to increase amity with the French King.
That to this purpose he had sent the order of the garter to be both a testimony
and tie of love between them, to which purpose chiefly those societies of
honor were first devised. He further declared that they had commission to make
ouerture of some other matters, which was like to make the concord between the
Kings and their realms not only more durable, but in all expectation
perpetual desiring the King to appoint some persons enabled with authority to
treat with them.

To this speech the Cardinal of Lorraine answered that the French King was
ready to apprehend and embrace all offers tending to increase of amity, and the
rather for that long hostility had made their new friendship both more weak in
it self, and more obnoxious to ielosies and distrusts, and therefore he
promised on the Kings behalf that commissioners should be appointed to treat
with them about any matters which they had in charge, praying to God that it
might be a means not only to assure but to enlarge their late settled love, so a
commission went forth to the Cardinal of Lorraine and Chastilion the
Constable, the Duke of Guise and certain others; at the first the English
demanded that the young Queen of Scots might be sent into England for
perfection of marriage between K. Edward and her, but hereto the French
answered that they had taken too much adventure, and spent too many lives upon
any conditions to let her go, and that conclusion had been made long before
for her marriage with the Dolphine of France Then the English proposed a
marriage between their King and the Lady Elizabeth the French Kings eldest
daughter, to which the French did cheerfully incline.

So after agreement that neither party should be bound either in conscience or
in honor until the Lady should accomplish 12 years of age, they fell to
treat of the portion which should be given with her in marriage. The English
first demanded 150000 crowns, and offered that her dowry should be so great
as K. Henry the 8th had given with any of his wives. The offer of dower was not
disliked, but for the portion some of the French wondered, others smiled, that
so great a sum should be demanded The English descended to 1400000 crowns
and after by degrees fell so low as 800000, but the French as they held the
first sum to be unreasonable, so all the other they esteemed excessive. Then
the English demanded what the French would give, first they offered 100000
crowns, afterward 200000, which they said was the most and more the^ ever had
bin given with a daughter of France, they followed a stiff contention both by
reasons, and precedents, but the French in no case would rise any higher, only
they agreed that the French K. at his proper charge should send her to the K.
of England 3 months before she should accomplish her age for marriage,
sufficiently appointed with Jewels, apparel, and furniture for house, and
that bands for the performances should then be delivered at London by the K. of
England and at Paris by the French King, and that in case the Lady should not
consent after she should be of the said age for marriage, the penalty should be
150000 crowns, the French set down these offers in writing, and sent them to
the King of England.

Soon after Mounsier l^ Marshall and other commissioners were sent by the
French King into England, where they arrived at such time as the sweating
sickness was most furious, a new strange and violent disease; for if a man
were attached therewith he dyed or escaped within 9 hours, or 10 at the most*
if he took cold he dyed within 3 hours. if he slept within 6 hours (as he
should be desirous to do) he dyed rauing, albeit in other burning diseases
that distemper is commonly appeased with sleep. It raged chiefly among men of
strongest constitution and years, of whom 120 perished in some one day within
the liberties of London few aged men or children or women died thereof. Two of
Charles Brandons sons, both Dukes of Suffolk, one of the Kings Gentlemen and
one of his grooms died of this disease. For which cause the King removed to
Hampton court with very few followers.

The same day the Marshall and other French commissioners were brought by the
Lord Clinton Lord Admiral of England from Grauesend to London. They were
saluted by the way with all the shot of more then 50 of the Kings great ships,
and with a fair peale of Artillery from the Tower, and lastly were lodged in
Suffolk palace in Southwarke, and albeit they had more then 400 gentlemen in
their train, yet was not one of them nor any other stranger in England touched
with the sweating disease, and yet the English were chased therewith not only
in England, but in other countries abroad, which made them like tirants both
feared and avoided wheresoever they came.

The next day the French were removed to Richmond whence every day they
resorted to Hampton court, where the King remained, the first day after they
had performed the Ceremonies of court, and delivered to the King their letters
of credence, they were led to a chamber richly furnished for their repose, the
same day they dined with the King, and after dinner being brought into an inner
chamber, the Marshall declared that they were come not only to deliver unto him
the order of St Michaell, but therewith to manifest the entire love which the
King his Master bear him, which he desired him to conceive to be no less then
a father can bear to his natural son. That albeit diverse persons either
witless or malicious raise diverse vain rumors to draw the King as it is
thought from his (...) friendship, yet he trusted that the King would not
listen unto them. That it much concerned the common quiet, that good officers
be placed upon the Frontires, for as good may do good in moderating things
amiss, so evil will do evil albeit no bad occasion be offered. Lastly he
desired in case any new controversy should arrise it might be determined by
commissioners on both sides and not by conflicts the parent of war.

To this the King both suddenly and shortly answered, that he much thanked the
French King for his order, as for the large expression of his love, which he
would be ready in all points to requite. Touching rumors they are not always
to be credited, nor always to be contemned, it being no less vain to fear
all things, than dangerous to doubt of nothing, and in case at any time he
listened to them, it was only to provide against the worst, and never to break
into hostility: concerning officers, he appointed such as he esteemed good,
and yet preferred the ouerdoubtfull before the ouer-credulous and secure, new
controversies he would always be ready to determine by reason rather than by
force, so far as his honor should not thereby be diminished.

The French after this return to their lodging at Richmond, and the next day
resorted again to the King, invested him with garments of the order, and
accompanied him to the Chapel, the King going between the Marshall and de
Guise, both which after the Communion kissing his cheek. The residue of that
day and a few days following were passed over with pastimes and feasts. At the
last the Lord Marquis of Northampton and the residue, who had been formerly
sent with commission from the King into France, were appointed to treat with
the French Commissioners touching the great matters of their Embassage. And
because the French could be served no higher than their offer of 200000.
crowns it was accepted. The one moitie to be paid upon the day of marriage,
and the other six months after, the Dote was agreed to be 10000. marks of
English money, and not to be paid in case the King should die before marriage.
This agreement was reduced into writing, and delivered under Scale on both
sides: at the same time an Ambassador arrived out of Scotland, to demand an
exemplification of the articles of peace between England and France, under the
great Seal of England, which without any difficulty they obtained.

The Marshall, at his taking leave, declared to the (...) how kindly his Master
did conceive of the Kings (...) nesse to conclude this treaty, and also
commended his (...) sters great inclination to the agreements thereof. Then
presented Mounsier Bo^s to be Ambassador Legier for (...) French, and the
Marquis presented Mr. Pickering to Ambassador for the King of England in
France. The (...) of the Marshall was three thousand pound in gold, (...) a
Diamond taken from the Kings finger, esteemed (...) an hundred and fifty pound:
Mounsier de Guy had 100^ Mounsier Chenault 1000l. Mr. Mortuillier 500l. the
(...) cret^ry 500.l and the Bishop of P^riguer 500l. The (...) were exceeding
sumptuous, and at their return they (...) wafted over the seas by certain of
the Kings ships, reason of the wars between the Emporour and the (...) King.
The Lord Marquis reward was afterward (...) red at Paris, worth 500l. the
Bishop of Ely 200l. Sir (...) Hobbies 150l. and so were the rewards of the rest.

Now the King supposing his estate to be most safe, (...) indeed it was most
unsure. In testimony both of his (...) and of his love advanced many to new
titles of (...) The Lord Marquis Dors^t, a man for his harmless (...),
neither misliked nor much regarded, was (...) Duke of Suffolk, the Earl of
Warwick was created (...) of Northumberland, the Earl of Wiltshire was (...)
Marquis of Winchester, Sir William Herbert, (...) Cardiffe, was created Earl
of Pembroke, Sir (...) Darcie, Vice-chamberlaine, and Captain of the (...) was
created Lord Darcie; William Ce^il was made of the chief Secretaries; Master
John Cheek, the (...) Schoolmasters, and one of the guides of his (...) hope,
and with him Mr. Henry Dudley, and Mr. (...) Neuill of the Privy Chamber, were
made Knights which was the accomplishment of mischief, Sir (...) Dudley one of
the Duke of Northumberlands sons, (...) heir both of his hate against
persons of Nobility and (...) cunning to dissemble the same, was sworn one of
the six ordinary Gentlemen, he was afterward for lust and cruelty a monster of
the court, as apt to hate, so a most sure executioner of his hate, yet rather
by practice then by open dealing, as wanting rather courage then wit. After his
entertainment into a place of so near service the King enjoyed his health not
long.

The Duke of Northumberland being now inferior unto none of the nobility in
title of honor, and superior to all in authority and power could not restrain
his haughty hopes from aspiring to an absolute command. But before he would
directly leuill at his mark, the Duke of Somerset was thought fit to be taken
away, whose ^re did was so great with the common people, that although it
sufficed not to bear out any bad attempt of his own, yet was it of force to
cross the evil purposes of others.

And now to begin the third act of his tragedy, speeches were cast that he
caused himself to be proclaimed King in diverse countries, which albeit they
were known to be false, insomuch as the millers servant at Battlebridge in
Southwarke lost both his years upon a pillory for so reporting, yet the very
naming of him to be King, either as desired by himself or by others esteemed
worthy, brought with it a distasteful relish apt to apprehend suspicion to be
true.

After this he was charged to have persuaded diverse of the nobility to choose
him Protector at the next parliament. The Duke being questioned, neither held
silence as he might nor constantly deny it, but entangled himself in his
doubtful tale. One Whaly a busy headed man, and desirous to be set on work
gave first light to this appeachment, but the Earl of Rutland did stoutly
avouch it.

Herewith Sr Thomas Palmer a man neither loving the Duke of Somerset nor
beloved of him, was brought by the Duke of Northumberland to the King, being in
his garden. Here he declared that upon St George day last before, the Duke of
Somerset being upon a journey toward the North, in case Sr William Herbert Mr
of the horse had not assured him that he should receive no harm, would have
raised the people, and that he had sent the Lord Gray before to know who would
be his friends, also that the Duke of Northumberland, the Marquis of
Northampton, the Earl of Pembrooke, and other Lords should be invited to a
banquet, and if they came with a bare company to be set upon by the way, if
strongly, their heads should have been cut off at the place of their feasting,
he declared further that Sr Ralph Uane had 2000 men in a readiness, that Sr
Thomas Arundell had assured the tower, that Seymor and Hamond would wait upon
him, and that all the horse of the Gendarmorie should be slain. To this Mr
Secretary Cecill added, that the Duke had sent for him and said that he
suspected some ill meaning against him, whereto Mr Secretary answered, that if
he were not in fault, he might trust to his innocence, if he were, he had
nothing to say but to lament him.

The Duke being advertised of these informations against him by some who had
some regard of honesty did forthwith defy the Secretary by his letters. Then
he sent for Sir Thomas Palmer, to understand what he had reported of him, who
denied all that he had said, but by this hot and humorous striving he did but
draw the knots more fast.

A few days being passed the Duke either ignorant of what was intended, or
fearing if he seemed to perceive it, came to the court, but somewhat later then
he accustomed, and as too minds possessed with fear, all things unusual
seem to menace danger, so this late coming of the Duke was enforced as a
suspicion against him, and so after dinner he was apprehended. Sir Thomas
Palmer, Sir Thomas Arundell, Hamonde Nudigates: John Seymor and David Seymor
were also made prisoners, the Lord Gray being newly come out of the country was
attached. Sr Ralph Uane being twice sent for fled, upon the first message it
was reported that he said that his Lord was not stout, and that if he could get
home he cared not for any, but upon pursuit he was found in his servants stable
at Lambeth covered with straw, he was a man of a fierce spirit both sudden and
bold, of no evil disposition saving that he thought scantnesse of estate too
great an evil. All these were the same night sent to the tower except Palmer,
Arundell, and Vant, who were kept in the court well guarded in chambers apart.
The day following the Duchess of Somerset was sent to the Tower, no man
grieuing thereat because her pride and baseness of life ouerballanced all
pity, and doubtless if any mischief were then contrived, whereof many were
doubtful (every one giving forth as he believed) it was first hammered in the
forge of her wicked working brain, for she had always wicked instruments
about her, whom the more she found appliable to her purposes, the more favors
she bestowed upon them, who being engaged by her into dangers held it dangerous
to fall from her, also with her were committed one Crane and his wife, and her
own chamberwoman. After these followed Sr Thomas Holdcroft, Sr Miles Partridge,
Sir Michaell Stanhope, Wingfield, Banister, Vaughan, and some others. In diverse
of these was then neither any cause known or afterward discovered, but the
number raised the greater terror, and doubled the conceit of the danger.

Sir Thomas Palmer being again examined added to his former detection, that
the Gendarmorie upon the muster day should be assaulted by 2000 foot under Sir
Ralph Vane, and by 100 horses of the Duke of Somersets, besides his friends
which should stand by, and besides the idle people which were thought
inclineable to take his part, that this done he would run throw the city
and proclaim liberty, and in case his attempt did not succeed he would go to
the I Will of Wight or to Poole.

Crane confessed for the most part as Palmer had done and futher added that the
Lord Pagets house was the place, where the nobility being invited to a banquet
should have lost their heads, and that the Earl of Arundell was made
acquainted with the practice by Sr Michaell Stanhope, and that it had bin done
but that the greatness of the enterprise caused delays and sometimes
diversity of advice, and further said that the Duke of Somerset once faining
himself to be sick, went to London to assay what friends he could procure.
This Crane was a man who having consumed his own estate had armed himself to
any mischief.

Hamonde confessed that the Duke of Somersets chamber had been strongly
watched at Greenwich by night.

All these were sworn before the counsel, and the greatest part of the
nobility of the realm, that their confessions were true. and as favorably set
down in behalf of the Duke, as with a safe conscience they could, and
forthwith upon the information of Crane the Earl of Arundell and the Lord
Paget were sent to the Tower, so were Stradley, and St Albones servants to the
Earl of Arundell, the Lord Strange voluntarily informed, how the Duke desired
him to move the King to take to wise his third daughter the Lady ^ane, and
that he would be his especial about the King to advertise him, when any of the
counsel spoke privately with him, and to acquaint him what they said.

Hereupon to give some public satisfaction to the people, the Lord Chancellor
who had words at will and wit enough to apply them, declared openly in the
star chamber all these accusations against the Duke of Somerset, letters were
also published to all Emperors, Kings, Ambassadors, and chief men in any
state, wherein these matters were comprised. By other letters the muster of the
Gendarmorie was deferred for certain months, other letters were directed to
Sir Arthur Darcy to take charge of the tower, and to discharge Sir Arthur
Markham. For that without acquainting any of the Lords of the counsel, he
suffered the Duke of Somerset to walk abroad and permit entercourses of
letters between David Seymor and Mrs Poynes.

Whilst these matters were in trauerse, messengers arrived from Duke Mauris^
of Saxony, the Duke of Mickleburge, and John Marquis of Brandenburge, Princes
of the religion in Germany, to understand the Kings mind whether he would
agree to aid them with 400000 dollars in case any necessity should assail
them, they consenting to do the like to him in case he should be ouercharged
with war, the King gave them an uncertain answer, but gentle and full of
fair hopes, that because their message was only to know the Kings inclination,
and not to conclude he could give them no other answer then this, that he was
well inclined to join in amity with them whom he knew to agree with him in
religion, but first he was desirous to know whether they could procure such
aid from other Princes as might enable them to maintain their wars, and to
assist him if need should require, and therefore he willed them to break this
matter to the Duke of Prussia and other Princes about them, and to procure the
good will of Hamborough, Lubecke, and Breme, then he desired that the matter of
religion should be plainly set down, least under pretense thereof wars
should be made for other quarrels, lastly he willed that they should furnish
themselves with more ample instructions from their Lords to commune and
conclude of all circumstances pertaining to that business.

The Kings answer was framed with these uncertainties and delays, least if
the King had assured his consent at the first, it might have been taken as
breach of league with the Emperor, afterward they and other Princes of Germany
made a league offensive and defensive with the French King against the Emperor,
into the which the French King desired the King of England to come, but because
the French K. was the chief of the league, the King did plainly perceive that
the war was not for the cause of religion, wherefore he answered that he
could not do it with breach of his league with the Emperor, against whom
having no pretense of hostility, he was not so desirous of wars as without
just cause of his own to pull them upon him.

About the same time the Lord admiral was sent into France as the Kings
deputy to be Godfather at the baptism of the French Kings son, also a
French man who had committed a murder at Diepe, and fled into England was
remitted into France* and delivered upon the borders to receive justice by the
same laws against which he had offended.

And now the Duke of Northumberland being impatient of long working
wickedness, the 4th act of the Duke of Somersets tragedy must not be delaied,
least thereby fear abating, (as being false it could not be durable) either
the Kings gentle disposition, or the love which he had formerly borne to his
uncle might happily return to their natural working. So the Duke of Somerset
after a short abode in the tower was brought to his trial at Westminster. The
Lord William Paulet Marquis of Winchester and Lord treasurer sat as high
Steward of England, under a cloth of estate on a bench mounted three degrees,
the Peers to the number of 27 sat on a bench one step lower. These were the
Duke of Suffolk and of Northumberland, the Marquis of Northampton, the Earls
of Darby, Bedforde, Huntington, Rutland, Bath, Sussex, Worcester, Pembrooke,
and Here^orde. The Barons, Abergauenny, Aud^ly, Wharton, Euers, Latimer,
Borough, Louch, Stafford, Wentworth, Darcie, Sturton, Windesore, Cromwell,
Cobham, and Bray.

First the inditements were read in number 5 containing a charge of raising men
in the north parts of the realm, and at his house of assembling men to kill
the Duke of Northumberland, of resisting his attachment, of killing the
Gendarmorie, of raising London, of assaulting the Lords, and devising their
deaths, when the prisoner had pleaded not guilty and put himself upon trial
of his Peers, the examinations before mentioned were read, and by the Kings
learned counsel pressed against him. Hereto albeit he was both unskillful and
much appalled (causes sufficient to drive him out of matters) yet after a short
entreaty, that words either idly or angerly spoken might not be enforced to any
high crew, to the points objected he answered.

That he never intended to raise the north parts of the realm, but upon some
brutes he apprehended a scare, which moved him to send to Sr William Herbert to
remain his friend. That he determined not to kill the Duke of Northumberland
or any other Lord, but spoke of it only and determined the contrary. That it
had been a mad enterprise with his 100 men to assail the Gendarmory
consisting of 900, when in case he had prevailed, it would nothing have auailed
the pretended purpose, and therefore this being senseless and absurd, must
needs dis^redid other matters, which otherwise might have been believed. That
at London he never proiected any stir but ever held it a good place for his
surety. That for having men in his chamber at Greenwich it was manifest he
meant no harm, because when he might have done it he did not, and further
against the persons of them, whose examinations had been read against him he
objected many things, desiring they might be brought to his face, which in
regard he was a person of dignity and estate he claimed to be reasonable,
especially against Sr Thomas Palmer he spoke much evil, and yet in opinion of
many far short of the truth. Hereto no answer was made but that the worse
they were, the fitter they were to be his instruments, fit instruments indeed
(said he) but rather for others then for me.

The fast being made the Kings learned counsel avouched the law to be to
assemble men with intent to kill the Duke of Northumberland was treason, by a
statute of the 3 and 4th, or K. Edward then reigning, made against unlawful
assemblies, that to raise London or the North parts of the realm was treason,
that to mind resisting his attachment was felony, that to assault the Lords,
and to devise their deaths was felony. But under favor of their judgment the
statute alleged bears no such sense, either for treason or for felony, indeed
by a statute of K. Henry 7 it is felony for inferior persons to contriue the
death of a Lord of the counsel, but Lords are therein expressly excepted.

The Lords went together and first the Duke of Suffolk nobly said that he
held it not reasonable, that this being but a contention between private
subject, under pretention thereof, any mean action should to draw to intention
of treason. The Duke of Northumberland (in countenance bearing show of sadness
but in truth stiffly obstinate) denied that he would ever consent that any
practice against him should be either imputed or reputed to be treason, yet
this was not taken to proceed from modesty as he expected, but for that he
could not with his honor or with reason so enforce it.

The Marquis of Northampton was crossed and contentious with many, but never
replied to any answer a manifest mark of no strong spirit. Some of the rest
plainly brake forth that they held it unfit that the* Duke of Northumberland,
the Marquis of Northampton, and the Earl of Pembrooke should be of the trial,
because the prisoner was chiefly charged with practices intended against them.
But hereto answer was made that a Peer of the Realm might not be challenged.
After much variation of opinions the prisoner at the bar was acquit of
treason, but by most voices (most favoring the Duke of Northumberland) he was
sound guilty of felony. Hereupon judgment followed that he should be hanged,
but this would never have gone so hard, had they not prosecuted all under
pretense of treason.

The Duke of Somerset might have craved his clerge, but he suffered judgment
to pass, thanked the Lords for his gentle trial, craved pardon of the Duke of
Northumberland, the Marquis of Northampton, and the Earl of Pembrooke, for his
ill meaning against them, and made suit for his life, in pity to his wife,
children, and servants, and in regard of payment of his debts. As he departed
because he was acquit of treason, the axe of the tower was not openly carried,
whereupon the people supposing that he was altogether acquit, shooted half a
dozed times so loud that they were heard beyond Charing Cross. It is certain
the people favored him the more because they saw that there was much secret
hate borne against him. But as this immoderate favor of the multitude did him
no good, so will it undo so many as shall trust unto it. It was told the King
that after the Dukes return to the tower, he acknowledged to certain Lords,
that he had hired Bartuile to make them away, that Bartuile confessed so much,
and that Hamond was not ignorant thereof, which whether it were true, or
whether devised to make the King more estranged from him, of judgment could
not hold themselves assured.

About this time Cuthbert Tonstall Bishop of Durham a man famous in those times
for learning, and integrity of life, was sent to the tower for concealment of
(I know not what) treason, written to him I know not by whom, and not
discovered until (what shall I call) the party did reveal it. But the Lord
Chancellor Rich having built a fair estate, and perceiving what nimble ears
were borne to listen after treason, also for that a parliament was toward
wherein he was doubtful what questions might arise, made suit to the King that
in regard of the infirmities of his body, he might be discharged of his office,
giving good example to men sometimes by their own moderation to avoid
disgrace. So he delivered the seal at his house in great S t Bartholomewes to
the Duke of Northumberland and the Earl of Pembrooke sent by the King with
commission to receive it. The same seal was forthwith delivered to Dr Godricke
Bishop of Ely, a man if happily able to discharg the place, assuredly no more.
It was first delivered unto him only during the sickness of the Lord Rich, but
in short time after he was sworn Lord Chancellor, because as keeper of the
seal he could not then execute such matters as were to be dispatched in
parliament.

And now after judgment against Somerset the Lords were not negligent to
entertain the King with all delights they could devise, partly to win his
favor, but especially to convert his thoughts from his condemned Uncle, to
this end they often presented him with stately masks, brave challenges at
title and at barriers, and whatsoever exercises or disports they could
conjecture to be best pleasing to him, then also he first began to keep hall,
and the Christmas time was passed over with banquetings, masks, plays, and
much other variety of mirth. Often they would call him to serious affairs
wherein he took especial pleasure. Sometimes they would remember him how
dangerous the Duke of Somerset was, who having made away his only brother,
contrived the death of the chief of the nobility. And where (say they) would
his mischief have rested? Would it have raged against all and left the King
only untouched? Verily having been always both cruel and false, there would
have been no end of his mischief, and all his submissions must now be taken
for counterfeit and dissembled. But his avarice and ambition once removed, the
way will be laid open to virtue and merit.

So about two months after his judgment the 5th and last act of his tragedy
was brought upon the stage. When being so often exposed to fortunes mercy
before he was placed by a strong guard upon a seaffold at tower hill, about
eight of the clock in the morning to suffer death, and albeit straight charge
had been given the day before to every householder in the city, not to permit
any to depart out of their houses before ten of the clock that day, yet the
people the more unruly by this restraint, by such thick throngs swarmed to the
place, that before seven of the clock the hill was covered and all the
chambers which opened toward the seaffold were taken up*

Here the Duke first aduowed to the people, that his intentions had been not
only harmless in regard of particular persons, but driving to the common
benefit both of the King and of the Realm. Then he exhorted them unto
obedience, assuring them that no persons could justly avouch their faith to
God, who were not faithful to their King.

But herewith behold certain persons of a hamlet near who had been warned by
the Lieuetenant of the tower to attend that morning about seven of the clock,
coming after their hour through the posterne, and percesuing the prisoner to
be mounted upon the seaffold, began to run and to call to their fellows to
come away. The sudden of their coming, the have that they made, the weapons
they carried, but especially the word, come away, being often doubled, moved
many of the nearest to surmise that a power was come to receive the Duke,
whereupon many cried with a high voice. Away, Away, the cry of those and the
coming on of the other cast amazement upon the rest, so much the more terrible
because no man knew what he feared or wherefore, every man conceiving that
which his astonished fancy did cast in his mind, some imagined that it
thundered, others that it was an earthquake, others that the powder in the
armorie had taken fire, others that troops of horsemen approached. In which
medly of conceits they bare down one another, and iostled many into the tower
ditch, and long it was before the vain tumult could be appeased.

No sooner was the people settled in quiet, and the Duke beginning to finish his
speech, but upon another idle apprehension they fell to be no less riotous in
joy then they had been in fear. For Sr Anthony Brown coming on horseback
upon the spur gave occasion, whereby many entertained hope that he brought a
pardon, whereupon a great shout was raised, A pardon, A pardon, God save the
King. But the Duke expressed great constancy at both these times, often
desiring the people to remain quiet that he might quietly end his life. For
said he I have often looked death in the face upon great adventures in the
field, he is now no stranger to me, and among all the vain mockeries of this
world I repent me of nothing more then in esteeming life more dear then I
should I have endured the hate of great persons, so much the more dangerous
because unjust. I have incurred displeasure from inferiors, not always for any
great faults of mine own, (albeit I was never free) but for giving way to the
faults of others, and now being constantly resolved, I neither fear to die nor
desire to live, and having mastered all grief in my self* I desire no man to
sorrow for me, so having testified his faith to God, and his faithfulness to
the King, he yielded his body into the executioners hand, who with one stroke
of the axe cut off all his confused cogitations and cares, the more pitied by
the people for the known hate of Northumberland against him.

Assuredly he was a man harmless and faithful, and one who never hatched any
hopes prejudicial to the King, but always intended his safety and honor, but
hard it is for greatness to stand when it is not sustained by the proper
strength. The people whose property it is by excessive favor to bring great
men to misery, and then to be excessive in pity departed away grieved and
afraid, and yet feared to seem to be afraid, and for this cause chiefly did
never bear good mind to Northumberland afterward although in show they
dissemble the contrary, for nothing is more easy then to discern when people
observe great men from the heart, or when they do it for fashion or for fear,
and as it often happens that men oppressed work revenge after their deaths.
So the remembrance of Somerset much moved the people to fall from
Northumberland in his greatest attempt* and to leave him to his fatal fall,
whereat they openly rejoiced and presented to him handkerchiefes dipped in the
blood of Somerset, for whom they thought he deserved rather late then
undeserved punishment. So certain it is that the debts both of cruelty and
mercy go never unpaid, I omit the mean scourges of conscience. For assuredly
a body cannot be so torn with stripes, as a mind is with remembrance of
wicked actions, but of him more hereafter shall be said, and how his greatness
turned to be fortunes scorn.

But outwardly and for the present he gained a great hand over the nobility,
who soon observing that he was able to endanger the estate of the greatest,
and that the more respect they did bear to him, the more safely they lived and
the more easily advanced to honor, they all contended to creep into his
humor, to watch his words, his gestures, his looks, and to do that as of
themselves which they conceived he had a desire they should do.

But the King albeit at the first he gave no token of any ill tempered passion
as taking it not agreeable to majesty, openly to declare himself, and albeit
the Lords did much help to dispell any dampie thoughts which the remembrance
of his uncle might raise, by applying him with great variety of exercises and
disportes, yet upon speech of him afterward he would often sigh and let fall
tears, sometimes he was of opinion that he had done nothing that deserved
death, or if he had, that it was very small, and proceeded rather from his wife
then from himself. And where th^n said he was the good nature of a nephew?
where was the clemency of a Prince? Ah how unfortunate have I been to those of
my blood? My mother I slew at my very birth, and since have made away two of
her brothers, and happily to make away for the purposes of others against my
self. Was it ever known before that a Kings uncle, a Lord Protector, one
whose fortunes had much advanced the honor of the realm, did loose his head
for felony, for a felony neither clear in law and in fact weakly proved? A
less how falsely have I been abused? How weakly carried? How little was I
master over my own judgment? That both his death and the envy thereof must be
charged upon me?

Not long after the death of Somerset, because it was not thought fit that such
a person should be executed alone, who could hardly be thought to offend alone.
Sr Ralph Uane and Sr Miles Partridge were hanged on tower hill, Sr Michaell
Stanhope, and S^ Thomas Arundell were there also beheaded. All these took it
upon their last charge that they never offended against the King, nor against
any of his counsel, God knows whether obstinatly secret, or whether
innocent, and in the opinion of all men Somerset was much cleared by the death
of those who were executed to make him appear faulty.

Sr Ralph Uane was charged with conspiring with Somerset, but his bold answers
termed rude and russianlike, falling into years apt to take offense, either
only caused or much furthered his condemnation. For besides his natural
fierceness enslamed by his present disgrace, he was the more free by reason of
his great services in the field. The time has been, said he, when I was of
some esteem, but now we are in peace which reputeth the coward and courageous
alike, and so with an obstinate resolution he made choice rather not to regard
death then by any submission to entreat for life, indeed it was wellknowne that
he had been famous for service, but therewith it was well known by whose
favor he had been famous.

S Thomas Arundell was with some difficulty condemned, for his cause was
brought to trial about seven of the clock in the morning, about noone the
Jurors went together and because they could not agree, they were shut in a
house all the residue of that day, and all the night following, the next
morning they found him guilty, unhappy man, who found the doing of any thing or
of nothing dangerous alike.

Sr Miles Partridge, and Sr Michaell Stanhope were condemned as consociates in
the conspiracy of Somerset. Both reputed indifferently disposed to bad or good,
yet neither of them of that temper as to dare any dangerous fact: either
because they were so indeed, or because their favor or alliance with the
duchess of Somerset made them to be of less esteem.

Garter K. at arms was sent to the Lord Paget prisoner in the tower to take
from him the garter and the George, and to discharge him of that order. The
pretense of this dishonor was because he was said to be no gentleman of blood,
neither by Father nor by Mother. The Garter and the George were Forthwith
bestowed upon the Earl of Warwick, eldest son to the Duke of
Northumberland, about this time the order was almost wholly altered, as by the
statutes thereof then made it appears.

After these times few matters of high nature or obseruable note happened in
England during King Edwards life. Of these I will select such as I esteem most
fit for history, both as being public, and as contained matter of some
regard, not always observing the just order of time, but sometime coherence or
propinquity of matter.

Sr Philip Hobby was sent to pay 62000 pounds at Antwerp, for payment of which
sum the King stood to diverse persons engaged. This done he went to the
Regent, then lying at Brussels to declare unto her certain grieuances of the
English merchants adventures, but he received nothing but fair promises which
proved, deceiuable. Afterward Mounsier de Couriers came from the Regent to the
King to understand more particularly the complaints of the Merchants, and
therewith to desire that her subjects ships might safely take harbor in any of
the Kings havens. For the first a note of the merchants complaints was
delivered in writing, but answer was deferred for want of instructions, an
usual pretense in like affairs. Touching the second, answer was made, that
the King had given order that Flemmish ships should not be molested in any of
his havens, which appeared in that they were there always rescued from the
pursuit and chase of the French. But he thought it not fit that more should
enter his havens at once then he had power to govern. Assuredly the Merchant
adventurers have been often wronged and wringed to the quick, but were never
quick and lively in thanks to those by whose endeauours they were freed.

The same merchants exhibited a bill at the counsel table against the
Merchants of the Stilliard. After answer by those of the Stilliard, and reply
by the adventurers, it was conceived upon view of diverse Charters, that the
Merchants of the Stilliard were no sufficient corporation, and that their
number, names, and nation could not be known. Also that when they had
forfeited their liberties, King Edward the fourth restored them upon condition,
that they should cover no strangers goods which they had not observed. And
again whereas at the beginning they shipped not above 80 clothes after that
100, afterward 1000, after that 6000, at that time 44000 clothes were shipped
every year in their names, and not above 1100 by all strangers besides,
wherefore albeit certain Ambassadors from Hamborough and Lubeck spoke much in
their behalf, yet a decree was made, that they had forfeited their liberties
and were in the same condition with other strangers. And albeit they made great
moanes afterward, yet could they not procure this sentence to be reuersed.

A commission was granted to viii Bishops, viii other Divines, viii Ciuilians,
and viii common Lawyers, and in all xxxii to set forth ecclesiastical laws,
agreeable to the nature both of the people and of the religion then established
in the Church of England, but it took no effect. For neither the number of the
commissioners being many, nor the quality of them being persons both in great
offices and diverse far remote could afford meetings for so great a business.
Also the difference both of porsessions and of ends, did of necessity raise
much difference in judgment.

The King had six Chaplains in Ordinary, touching whose attendance in court
an order was made, that two should remain with the King by turns, and four
should travail in preaching abroad. The first year two in Wales, and two in
Lincolneshire, the next year two in the Marshes of Scotland and two in
Yorkshire. The third year two in Devonshire, and two in Hampshire. The fourth
year two in Northfolke, and Essex, and two in Kent and Sussex, and so throw
all the shires in England, which happily did not only serve for a spiritual
end, namely instruction in religion, but did also advance a temporal purpose
of peaceable obedience. For as rude untrained minds are not only easily drawn
but inclineable of themselves to sedition and tumult, so by learning and
religion men are especially both reduced and retained in civil quiet.

For better dispatch of business of diverse natures, the body of the counsel
was divided into several commissions. Some were appointed for hearing those
suits which were usually brought before the whole table, to send matters of
justice to their proper courts, to give full denial to such as they should not
esteem reasonable, to certify what they thought meet to be granted, and upon
allowance thereof to dispatch the parties. Others were appointed to consider of
penal laws and proclamations in force and to quicken the execution of the
most principal. These were directed first to consider what principal laws
(...) proclamations were most needful to be executed. The^ to enquire into the
countries how they were disobeyed and first to punish greatest offenders, and
afterward to proceed to the rest. Lastly that they should enquire what other
disorders were either dangerous or offensive in every shire, and either to
punish the offenders or else to report their judgment therein. Others were
appointed to attend occurrences of state at large, with whom the King did sit
once every week to hear matters of greatest moment debated, because in these
high passages nothing was thought to be done truly with majesty, nothing
agreeable to the dignity of the state, but in the presence of the King.
Generally all the counsel agreed that none of them should make suit to the
King for land or forfeitures above xxl or for reuersion of leases, or any other
extraordinary matter until the state of his Revenues should be further known.

Besides these commissions another went forth to ouersee and order the Kings
revenues, and to cut off superfluous charges, to ouersee all courts,
especially those of new erection, as the court of augmentation, and of first
fruits and tenths, and to provide that the revenues were answered every half
year, another went forth for debts owing to the King, and to take account of
paiments since the 35 of K. Henry the 8th, and in what manner the King had
been deceived, either by not accompting or accompting falsely. Another also
for taking away needless B^ulwarkes, by virtue whereof, diverse were
dimolished upon the sea coasts, in peace chargeable and little serviceable in
war. And further for more orderly and speedy dispatch of causes, the King
delivered to his counsel these Articles following.

1 That all suits 'petitions and common warrants delivered to the privy
counsel be considered by them on mundaies in the afternoon and answered o^
saturdaies in the afternoon, and that those days and no other be assigned to
that purpose. 2 That such suits and petitions as pertain to any courts of law,
be referred to those courts where properly they are triable, others to be
determined with expedition. 3 That in making warrants for money it be forseene,
that they be not for such matters as may be dispatched by warrants dormant,
least by such means accounts should be uncertain. 4 That upon Sundaies they
intend public affairs of the Realm, dispatch answers to letters for good
order of the state, and make full dispatches of all things concluded the w^cke
before. Provided that they be present at common prayer. 5 That on Sunday night
the Secretaries or one of them deliver to the King a memorial of such things
as are to be debated by the privy counsel, and he to appoint certain of them
to be debated upon several days, viz. Monday afternoon. Tuesday, wensday,
Thursday, and Friday beforenoone. 6 That on friday afternoon they shall make a
collection of such things as have been done the four days before, what they
have concluded and what the time suffered not to peruse. Also the principal
reasons which moved them to conclude of such matters as seemed doubtful. 7
That on Saturday before noone they present this collection of the King and
enquire his pleasure upon all things which they have concluded, and also upon
all private suits. 8 That none of the privy counsel depart the court for
longer time then two days, unless eight of the counsel remain behind, and
unless the King have notice thereof. 9 That they make no assembly in counsel
unless they be to the number of four at the least. 10 That if they assemble
to the number of four, and under the number of six, then they may reason or
examine the commodities or inconveniences of matters proposed, and make things
plain which seem diffused at the first opening, and if they agree then at the
next full assembly of six, a perfect conclusion thereof shall be made. 11 That
if there be under four and a matter arriseth requiring expedition, they shall
declare it to the King, but not give answer unless it requires extraordinary
have. 12 That if such matters shall arise as it shall please the King to hear
the same debated, warning shall be given that the more may be present. 13 That
if such matter arise as cannot be ended without long debating, the counsel
shall not intermeddle with other causes until they have concluded the same. 14
That no private suit be entermedled with great affairs, but shall be heard on
Mundaies only. 15 That when matters for scantnesse of time be only discussed
and not brought to an end, then it shall be noted to what point the business
is brought, and what have been the principal reasons, that when it shall be
treated again it may the sooner come to conclusion. 16 That in tedious or
difficult matters two or three or more may be appointed to prepare and report
the same, that being less cumbrous and defuse they may the more easily be
dispatched. 17 That no warrant for reward above 40l, or business, or affairs
above 100l pass but under the Kings signet. 18 That if upon aduertisements or
other occasions matters of great importance appear which require have, such
matters shall be considered and determined, notwithstanding those Articles
which appoint business for several days, so as this order be not generally
or commonly broken.
Assuredly albeit the King declared both his judgment and his diligence and
care of affairs of the realm. Yet is there one rule more (and not by him
neglected) for all great officers, which if it be not sufficient in itself to
hold matters in order, yet are no rules sufficient without it.

And this is to choose persons both for ability and integrity well reputed,
albeit happily they be not always used. For besides that these will be a rule
to themselves, it is a great satisfaction to the people, and keeps them both
from murmuring and curious enquiring into counsels of State, which is never
good and often dangerous when they know or at least suppose matters to pass
under such men's judgments,

In these times it was conceived by many that by erecting of a Mart in
England, the realm would be much enriched and made more famous, and less
obnoxious to other countries. The time was then esteemed fit by reason of the
wars between the Emperor and the French King. The places deemed most meet
were Hull for the east countries, and Southampton for the South. London was
thought no ill place, but Southampton was judged most convenient for the first
beginning. This matter detained the Lords of the counsel in a deliberation
both serious and long, with great strength and variety of reasons on both
sides, which because they may give some light to the like question, which in
times ensuing may happily again be set on foot. I will here declare them in
the same manner as they were collected by the King.

Against the Mart these octiections were made.

1 That strangers could have no access into England by land, which they had at
Antwerp where the Mart then was. 2 That the ill working of English clothes made
them less esteemed abroad. 3 That the great quantity of English clothes in
Flanders would make them less desired from hence. 4 That the Merchants had
then established their dwelling places at Antwerp. 5 That other Nations would
forbear their resort into England for a while upon commandment of the
Emperor. 6 That the denial of the requests of the Merchants of the Stilliard
would be a hindrance to the Mart if prevention were not used. 7 That the
poverty and smalnesse of Southampton would be a great impediment. 8 That the
River Rhene was more commodious for Antwerp then any river was for England.
1 Hereunto answer was made that at the time when the Mart should begin at
Southampton, the French King and the Almans would stop intercourse to Antwerp
by land, so as nothing should pass that way but in great danger. Again as
South ampton wants the commodity of access of merchandise by land, so it
has the commodity that there can be no access of enemies by land, and if
wars should be raised then the Navy of England is sufficient to defend them.
And further that trafique that comes to Antwerp by land is almost only from
the Venetians, who may with greater ease, and less danger transport their
merchandises into England by sea. That the ill making of clothes was fit to be
redressed by the Parliament, then sitting, and the matter was then reduced to
some ripeness, the upper house having one bill and the neither house another
in good forwardness. Neither were they so ill made but that the Flemmings did
easily desire them, offering rather to Pay the imposition of the Emperor then
to be without them.

That it were necessary that the passage of ships should be stayed until the
Mart should advance to some ripeness, and that clothes should be bought with
the Kings money and conveyed to Southampton to be there uttered at the Mart,
which should help the inconvenience very well. That merchants never bind
themselves to any mansion, which either to atchieue gain or to avoid danger
they will not readily forsake, for so they removed from Bruges to Antwerp only
for the English commodities. And therefore seeing they shall have a good
commodity by coming to Southampton, and be rid of great fear of danger both in
their lives and goods, in forsaking Antwerp, there is little fear that they
will be curious in making the change.

That the Emperor was then so nearly driven, that neither was he willing to
attend the impeachment of the Mart, neither could he at that time do it, for
the Flemmings and the Spaniards under him could more hardly be without the
English, then the English without them, and therefore would hardly be brought
to forbear that trafique, and besides they lived then in fear of loosing all.

That it were good that for the present the Stilliard me^ were generally
answered, and trial made whether by any gentle offer of some part of their
liberties they might be brought to ship, and their wares unto the mart. The
French also might easily be drawn over, having one trafique at that time but
with England. That these two might suffice to begin a Mart.

That the merchants would make good shift for their lodging, and it is not the
ability of the place that makes a mart, but the resort of Merchants, as
Spaniards, Almans, Italians, Flemmings, Uenetians, Danes, in exchanging their
commodities one with another. With whom also would concur the Merchants of
London, Bristowe, and other places of England, and some of the clothes which
should be carried thither at the first might be taken up with the Kings money
and there be uttered.

That Bruges where the Mart was before stands not upon the Rheene neither
does Antwerp where the Mart was then. Frankeford does and may well serve for a
fair for high Almaine, but Southampton serves better for all countries upon
the sea, for few of these resort to Frankeford.

Herewith diverse reasons were alleged for the Mart, and namely that the vent
of English clothes would hereby be open in all times of watre, that the
English merchants goods would be out of danger of strangers, and without fear
of danger of arresting upon every light cause. That it would much enrich the
Realm, because as a Market enricheth a town, so does a Mart enrich a
Kingdom. That upon occasion great sums of money might be borrowed of them
who frequent the Mart. That the King might command a great number of strangers
ships to serve in his wars. That war being made all goods should be in the
Kings danger. that the English should buy all things at the first hand of
strangers. Whereas then the strangers sold their wares to the Flemings, and the
Flemings to the English. That the towns toward the sea would hereby be made
more populous, rich, beautiful and strong. That the merchants instead of
Tapistrie, points, glasses and other laces, would then bring in bullion, and
other substantial merchandises to have the English cloth, and tin That by
this means the English should abate the power of their enemies, and not be
enforced to borrow of Merchants but when they list, and that in no great
quantity or sum.

The time was then esteemed most convenient, because the wars betwixt the
French and the Emperor caused the Italians, Genowaies, Portugals, and Spaniards
to forbear their trade to Antwerp. The Prussians also and other East countries
having 14 ships against the Emperor would not be very forward to adventure
thither. Again the French inuading Lorraine, and menacing Flanders, and the
Almaines lying on the river of Rheene, did stop the course of merchants out of
Italy, as well to Frankeford as to Antwerp. And further the putting of
soldiers into Antwerp moved the Merchants to forbear their trafique, and to
look to their safety. Also the breach which a late tempest had made, was like
to make the channel uncertain, and the haven naught. Lastly the stop of the
exchange to Lions would make many Flemmings bankrupts. And because these
nations cannot live without a vent. These things decaying the Mart of Antwerp
and Frankeford they would most willingly upon erecting a (...) Mart resort to
England.

And here the town of Southampton was esteemed most sit because the Spaniards,
Britains, Gascoins, Lombards, Genowaies, Normans, Italians, the Merchants of
the Eastland, the Prussians, Danes, Swedens and Norwegians might indifferently
resort thither, and more easy than to Antwerpe. And whereas the Flemmings
having few commodities have allured Merchants by their privileges to settle a
Mart among them, much more easily should the English do it having both
opportunity and means, as cloth, tin, seacoale lead, bellmettall and such
other commodities, as few christian countries have the like.

Lastly the means to establish this mart were contrived to be these. First
that the English merchants should forbear their resort for a mart or two
beyond the seas under pretense of the impositions there charged upon them. Then
that proclamation should be made in diverse parts of this Realm where
Merchants chiefly resort, that there shall be a free Mart kept at Southampton to
begin presently after whitsontide and to continue five weeks, so as it
should be noe hindrance to St James fair at Bristow nor to Bartholomew fair
in London. The privileges of which Mart should be expressed to be these.

That all men should have free liberty for resort and return without
arresting, except in cases of treason, murder or selony. That for the time of
the Mart all men should pay but half the custom due in other places of the
Realm. That during the time noe shipping should be made from any place
between Southwales and Essex but only to Southhampton. That in Hampshire,
Wiltshire, Sussex, Surry, Kent, Dorse^shire, and no bargain should be made for
wares during that time but only at that Mart. That a court should be erected to
punish offenders with liberties of good condition. That some one commodity as
happily some one kind of cloth should be assigned as proper to the Mart. That
some liberties must be given to the inhabitants of Southhampton and some moneys
lent to them if it might be spared to begin their Trafique. That ships should
attend the safeguard of Merchants so well as they could, and that if this Mart
took good effect, another might be erected at Hull for the Northeast
countries, to begin presently after Sturbridge fair, so as they might
return before the great Ices stopped their seas.

Thus it was concluded but the execution was for a time delaied because the
wool fleet of 60 sail, was lately before departed for Antwerp, and could not
possibly be called back. But to make the first preparation because a Mart
could not subsist without exchang* liberty was granted to the English
Merchants, to exchang and rechange money for money. As upon this occasion this
profitable purpose was first delaied, so afterward it was altogether dashed,
first by the Kings sickness, after by his death.

Now albeit the King was both deeply in debt, and had many extraordinary
occasions, yet in regard of the troublesome times he did forbear to charge his
subjects with such loanes and impositions as usually in peace breed discontent,
and in turbulent times disquiet, but he chose rather to deal with the Foulker
in the low Countries for moneys upon loan at a very high rate. And hereupon
letters were directed from the Lords of the counsel to the Foulker at Antwerp
that he had received from the King 63000 punds Flemmish in February, and 24000
in April next before, which amounted to 87000 pounds Flemmish. A fair sum
to be paid in one year, especially in that busy world when it was necessary
for Princes not to be without money. Hereupon and for that they understood that
at that time he was well able to forbear money, they advised the King to pay
to him only 5000 pounds of the 45000l which then remained unpaid, and to
continue the rest at the usual yearly interest of 14l for every hundred,
wherewith they desired him to retain good patience. Hereto the Foulker
answered that as he had found fair dealings before, so he would rest content
to defer pa^ment of 30000l so as 20000l thereof might be well assured to be
paid within some convenient time. All this was presently agreed, and no less
faithfully performed afterward. And assuredly as God is the word and cannot
but make good his word, so a Prince so much loses of his dignity as he
declineth from his word.

About this time a garrison pay of 10000l was sent to the Frontires of
Scotland, and the like to Calais, and in the same year 5000l into Ireland,
hereto if we add the Kings great charges in fortification upon both the
frontires of Scotland and France the particulars whereof I omit as matters now
altogether of no use, it may easily be be discerned that the hostility with
Scotland and France and the inciuility of Ireland were a great part of the
cause which held this frugall King thus diued in debt.

And for another means of raising of money commissions went forth for selling
chantry lands, and houses for payment of the Kings debt given forth to be
251000 pounds sterling at the least. Also to enquire of all Church goods either
remaining in Cathedral or parish Churches or embes^ed away, and namely of
Jewels of gold and silver or silver crosses, candi^sticks, censors, challicies,
ready money, coapes and other vestiments, and reserving to every Church one
Challice, and covering for the Communion ^able, the residue to be applied to
the benefit of the King. ^y their sales and enquiries the Kings wants were
(...) what relieved. And many persons, uery mean both for birth and ability of
mind, and of no l^sse place of emploiment, found means to advance themselves
to so great estate as they left their posterity ranged among the nobility of
this realm.

Of these church purchasers, I have seen many melt to nothing, and the residue
shall be observed either by riot or by improuidence to consume.

At the same time for more assured strength of the Borders upon Scotland order
was settled that no man in those parts should bear two offices at once, which
not well observed in later years has much derogated both from the dignity and
discharge of offices as well in state as in some inferior places.

Another means for raising money was practiced no less pleasing to the people
then profitable to the commonwealth, And that was by enquiring after offenses
of officers in great place, who as by unjust dealing they became most odious,
so by justice in their punishments, the Prince acquireth both love and
applause. And so one Beamont M^ of the Rolls was convinced, that in his office
of wards he had purchased lands with the Kings money, also that he had lent
above 700l of the Kings money, and forborne 11000 of the Kings debts for his
own profit. Also that being Mr of the Rolls he dealt corruptly in a case
between the Duke of Suffolk, and the Lady Powes. For he bought the Ladies
Tithe and caused an indenture to be forged from Charles Brandon the Duke a
little before deceased, purposing a grant of the lands in question from Duke
Charles to the Lady Powes. Also that he had concealed the felony of his
servant, who having stolen from him 200l he took the money to himself again.
Hereupon he surrendered to the King all his offices, lands and goods in
satisfaction as well for the moneys due by him to the King, as of the fines
which his offenses had merited, he was a man of a dull and heavy spirit, and
therefore the more senslesly devoted in his sensual avarice.

One Whalie receiver of Yorkshire acknowledged how he had lent the Kings money
for gain, how he ever paid one years revenue with the arrerages of the year
before, how he had bought the Kings land with the Kings money, how he had made
diverse false accounts, how upon fall of money he borrowed diverse sums,
whereby he gained 500l at one crying down. For these misdemeanors he
surrendered his office and submitted himself to pay such fines as the King or
his counsel should charge upon him.

The Lord Paget Chancellor of the ' Duchy was convinced that he had sold the
Kings lands and timber woods without commission, that he had taken great fines
for the Kings lands and applied them to his proper use, and that he had made
leases in reuersion for more then xxi years, for these offenses he surrendered
his office and submitted himself to be fined at the pleasure of the King. So
his fine was gessed at 6000l whereof 2000 were remitted upon condition that the
other 4000 should be paid within the compass of that year.

This he endured with a manly patience as knowing right well that he held all
the residue of his estate upon courtesy of those who hated him at the heart. It
was at the first suspected and afterward expected by all that among other
matters objected against the Lord Paget the chief or at least one should have
been for contriuing to Banquet the Lords at his house, and under pretense
thereof to take off their heads, which was the only cause for which the Duke of
Somerset lost his head. But because no mention was made thereof, because about
the same time the Lord Gray of Wilton, Bannister and Crane, and a little after
the Earl of Arundell were freely discharged having been imprisoned for this
conspiracy, the conceit was taken that the Dukes head was the only aim, and
that the residue were used but as a countenance of state to dazzle the people.

Letters were sent to the governor of Gernesey, that divine service should
there be used according to the form of the Church of England. A King of Arms
named Vlster was newly instituted for Ireland, his province was all Ireland,
and he was the first 4th King of Arms, the first herald appointed for Ireland.

Whilst these matters were in action the Emperors Ambassador in England
delivered letters to the King from the Regent in the low Countries, importing
that whereas the King was bound by a treaty between the Emperor and the Kings
Father at Lutrect in the year 1542, that if the low Countries should be
invaded the King should aid him with 5000 foot, or 70 crowns a day during 4
months and that this aid should be performed within one month after request.
For so much as the French King invaded Luxembourg, the Emperor required aid of
the King of England according to the effect of that treaty.

Hereupon order was given that if the Ambassador did move for answer to this
letter, he should be told by two of the counsel, that during the Kings
progress his counsel was dispersed, whose advice he was desirous to hear.
And further that the K. had committed the same treaty to be perused by men
whose judgments as he did much respect, so would he expect a time until their
opinions might be heard. And in case that after this the Ambassador should
again require an answer, then they should say that the King having lately
wrestled out of most dangerous wars, wherewith his young years were
ouerburthened, he hoped well that the Emperor would not desire to thrust him
into the like again. That he had sworn amity with the French King which he
could not with his honor break, and therefore if the Emperor should deem it
so meet he would mediate a peace as a friend to both, which he should best
effect by forbearing to use hostility against either. And in case the
Ambassador should still persevere to urge the treaty they were lastly directed
to answer that the King did not hold himself bound by that treaty, as both
made by his Father and evidently prejudicial to his real^* for albeit
agreements of peace are perpetual and bind the successor, yet it is not so in
agreements of society and co^sederation. And this the Emperor did right well
understand, for when the King in his last wars desired to enter a new treaty
with the Emperor, he returned answer that it should not need, for albeit the
King were discharged by his Fathers death yet the Emperor was still bound. And
again the Emperor had not for his part performed the treaty, as well in
hindering the carriage of horses, armor, and munition, which the King had
provided for his wars, as also in neglecting to send aid when the low
Country of Calais was forraged, and therefore he did not justly demand
performance thereof from the King.

I know it has been often in like sort answered, that treaties dissolve by
death of those who made them, for so the Fidenates held themselves discharged
of the league which they had made with Romulus after his death. And the Latins
did the like after the death of Tullus, and likewise after the death of Ancus.
The Etrurians affirmed the like after the death of Priscus. And the Sabines
after the death of Seruius. And again after that Tarquinius was cast out of
state. I know also that the difference is great between a league of peace and
a league of society and confederation. But I will not touch every string of
this question, which Hottoman calls a noble question, and much tossed and
debated, partly because it consists of many knotty and thorny distinctions,
wherein approved authors do not well agree, but chiefly because at this time
it fell not to be a difference between the Emperor and the King.

For when the Ambassador first came for answer to this letter Mr Wotton and Mr
Hobbie answered according to the first branch of their instructions, wherewith
he departed well satisfied for the present, and before he called for answer
again one Stukely arrived out of France and declared to the counsel how the
French King being persuaded that Stukely would never return into England
because he departed without leave upon apprehension of the Duke of Somerset,
his master bewraied to him that if he could procure peace with the Emperor, he
intended to besiege Calais and was in hope to carry the town by way of the
sand hills, and that from thence winning rice bank he might both famish the
Town, and beat the market place, how he further said that he intended to land
in some angle of Scotland about Falmouth because boulewarkes there might easily
be won, and the people were for the most part Catholics. And further how at
the same time Mounsier de Guise should enter England by the way of Scotland,
not only with good leave, but with aid and conduct from the Scots.

Upon this discovery the King assembled his counsel at Windesor, and entered
with them into deliberation, whether it were either safe from him or to no
disadvantage to rely so securely either upon the strength or faith of France,
as either to refuse or neglect to afford aid unto the Emperor, and thereby
happily incur his hostility.

Many were of opinion that the King should condescend to aid the Emperor.
First for that if the King were desirous to hold the Emperor bound by the
treaty made with the Kings father he must also be obliged thereby. Otherwise
it was a lame halting league and could not possibly go upright. Then for that
if the Emperor should not be aided the house of Burgundy was like to be
devoured by the French, whereby their greatness might grow dreadful
especi^lly to England. Then for that again the French King had drawn the
Turk into Christendom, and therefore was to be resisted as a common enemy.
And further in case the Emperor upon ext^emity should compose agreement with
the French, the danger to England would be double. First upon offense taken by
the Emperor, then upon the French Kings old disposition edged by every new
displeasure wherein the devotion of the Bishop of Rome would not be wanting.
And again the English Merchants were so ill entreated in the Empire, the
Realm was so much eng^ged in honor and in wealth as some remedy was to be
sought, and none better then by giving aid. Lastly the French Kings
proceedings were no les^e doubtful then fearful, not only in regard of
Stukelies report (not altog^ther to be neglected) but by reason of his breaking
and firing diverse English ships the ancient strength and fortresses of the
realm.

Others were of advice that the Emperors demands of aid should be denied*
First for that it would be too chargeable and almost ^mpossible for the English
to perform. Th^n for that when the Emperor should die the whole weight of the
war would r^ule upon the English. And further the German Protestants would
be offended herewith, and conceive some doubts of their own estates. Lastly
there was hope that the amity with ^rance would not long continue but a^end*
and that the ^mbassadors then lately sent would repair all harms done by the
French upon English ships.

Between both these the King stroke a mid^ing judgment, so to ai^e the Emperor
against the French King as other Christian Princes should also adioine, and
that for no other cause but as a common enemy for drawing the Turks forces
upon them.

That her^by as the cause was common so would there be more parties to it. And
this also would moderate the charge of aiding the Emperor according to the
treaty, and whenever the Emperor should die or break off, it was likely that
some of those Princes and parties should remain so as the King should not
stand alone. Moreover this friendship would much advance the Kings other
affairs in Germany, and finally it would be honorable to break with the
French King upon this common quarrel.

Against this advise of the King, two objections were made, one that the treaty
must be entertained with so many that it could not be speedily or secretly
concluded. The other that in case the purpose should be discovered and not
concluded the French might be provoked thereby to practice the like
confederation against the English.

All these the King did knit up in this conclusion, first that the treaty
should be made only with the Emperor, and by the Emperors means with other
Princes. Secondly that the Emperors acceptance should be well understood before
any treaty were either entered or entertained against the French.

Hereupon letters were dispatched to Mr Morison the Kings Ambassador with the
Emperor whereby he was directed to declare to the Emperor how the King touched
with pity at the invasion of Christian countries by the Turks, would
willingly ioin^ with him and other States of the Empire (in case the Emperor
could bring it to pass) in some league against the Turks and against their
confederats. But caution was given that he should not once mention the French
King nor answer any mention made of him, only to say that his commission
extended no further. But if the Emperor would send a messenger into England he
should happily know more.

Herewith and because time beats out truth letters were sent to Mr Pickering
the Kings Ambassador in ^rance to know whether S^ukely h^d acqu^inted hi^ with
any of those matters which he had disclosed in England. And with what
familiarity the French King used him or by what other circumstances he could
conceive his report to be true Herewith also the Lord Gray was chosen deputy of
Calais, and the Lord Wentworth removed as one whose youth and want of
experience, was held unfit to govern that ch^rge in turbulent times. On the
other side Sr Nicholas Wentworth was removed from being Porter of the town by
reason of his old age, but had an hundred pounds yea^ly pension assigned him
for his life. Also by abating needless expenses to be the better enabled
against charge the several tables for young Lor^s, for the masters of
Requests, and for Sergeants at arms (...) laid down, and diverse
extraordinary allowances we^e taken away. And further because the King was to
make payment of 48000l beyond the seas, and had but 14000l toward the sum
300 of the chief Merchants adventurers granted to him a lone of 40000l for
three months, to be levied from the clothes which they were then to transport
after the rate of 20 shillings for every cloth. But these Adventurers went not
upon any adventure because at that shipping 40000 broad clothes were by them
transported.

Whilst these matters were in action two Lawyers arrived in England with
direction from the French King to declare what matters had been determined
against the English by the French Kings counsel, and upon what reasons and
also what matters were then depending, and what care and diligence was used in
those dispatches. They were much commended by all for their modest behavior,
and their sweet eloquence much delighted the King who again in a short speech
first thanked the French King for his desire to giu^ him satisfaction, then
commended them for well performing their charge, but for the substance of their
business he referred them to London, where some of his counsel should commune
thereof fully with them. Here Mr Secretary Peeter, and Mr Watton, and Sr Thomas
Smith laid before them the grieuances of the English merchants, whose losses by
the French exceeded the sum of 50000l, To this the Ambassadors gave little
answer, but said they would make report thereof at their return into France,
affirming that they had no commission but only to declare the manner and causes
of judicial proceedings.

Presently after their return Mounsier Villandry was sent again in post to
the King to declare unto him that albeit Mr Sydneies, and Mr Winters matters
went justly against them, yet because they were the Kings servants, and one of
them in place near his person, the French King was content freely to give to
Mr Sydney his ship and all his goods in her, and to Mr Winter his ship and all
his own goods. But this offer the King refused assuming that he required
nothing freely, but expected justice and expedition. Villandry showed further
that the King his master was desirous that the ordinances and customs of
England and France touching Marine affairs might be reduced into one form,
without any difference between them. Whereto answer was made that the English
ordinances for marine affairs were no other then the civil laws and certain
aunt^ent additions of the Realm, wherein they could conceive no reason or
conueni^ncy of change, having long continued without r^proofe. After this
Uillandry brought forth two proclamations not long before published in France
and very aduantageable for the English, for the which he had a letter of
thanks to the King his master. Lastly, which was indicted the maine of his
message, and whereto all other were but insinuations he desired that certain
Frenchmen taken upon the co^st of England might be released. Hereto he received
answer that they were Pirates, and that some of them should by justice be
punished, and some might happily by (...) be spared, so with this dispatch he
returned for France.

But before it was conceiu^d he could be fully at home he came again to the
English court, and there declared to the King, how the King his master would
deliver 4 ships against which judgment had been given. And that h^e would
appoint men of good sort and sufficiency to hear the English Merchants at
Paris, and that he would alter his ordinances for marine affairs, of which
emendations he then sent a copy to the King. The King appointed his Secretaries
to consider thereof. And after some passages of time Uillandry had his answer.
That the King intended not by receiving four ships freely to prejudice his
right in the rest. That the appointing of an inferior counsel to hear
Merchants at Paris after former tedious suits in a higher court, he thought
would be but dil^tory and so to* little purpose, because the inferior counsel
would never undo that (albeit good cause should appear) which had bin judged
by a higher counsel. That the new ordinances he liked no better then he did
the old, and therefore desired no other then the customs which oflate times
had been used in France, and then continued in force between England and the
low countries. Lastly he desired no more words but deeds.

And now were letters returned from Mr Pickering out of France, whereby he
advertised the King how Stukely never discovered any of those speeches to him,
which since he had charged upon the French King. And further that he never was
either in credit or conversant with the French King or with the Constable, nor
ever resorted unto them except once when he was interpreter between the
Constable and certain English pioners, wherefore as it was very like so did he
verily believe that as the French King was always close and reserved amongst
his best known friends, so would he not be open and uncircumspect to impart a
matter of such import to a mere stranger and in a most unseasonable time.

Hereupon Stukely was examined again, and then sir ding it dangerous alike to
confess a truth or stand to a ly, he became more unconstant and variable then
he was before, wherefore he was committed to the Tower, and notice was given to
the French Kings Ambassador of all those proceedings, to the intent that he
might acquaint his master with them. Letters were also sent to the Kings
Ambassador in Frace, directing him to advertise the French King of all these
matters, and that for two special ends. One to manifest the Kings considence
in his amity with France, the other to bring the French King into suspicion
against all English fugitives who resorted daily to his court. And so because
no better person was the author, incredible fables were not believed. But
hereupon some began to discourse that the accusations against the Duke of
Somerset were no less improbable, and upon the credict of no better persons,
and therefore might happily be no less untrue. But the difference is great
between both the persons, and the facts of a sovereign Prince and of a
subject.

And now when the French K. understood as well the imputation which Stukely had
raised as his imprisonment. First he deeply protested his innocence in his
particular and his general sincere meaning for preserving amity with England.
Then he much blamed Stukelies villainy, and nolesse thanked the King as well for
that he had not afforded a credulous care to such mischeiuous devises, wherein
the tender touch of his estate might happily have excused his error as for his
Princely manner in acquainting him therewith.

On the other side when Mr Morrison the Kings Ambassador with the Emperor, had
opened the matt^rs given him in charge, touching a league against the Turk,
and against his confederats. The Emperor much thanked the King for his gentle
offer, and promised to procure the Regent to send over some persons of cred^te
to understand the Kings further meaning. Soon after Mr Thomas Grosham come
from Antwerp into England, and declared to the counsel how Mounsier Lo^gie the
Emperors Treasurer in Flanders was sent to him from the Regent with a packet of
letters which the Burgundians had intercepted in Bullonois sent as it was said
from the Dowager of Scotland, wherein she set forth how she had imprisoned
George Paris an Irishman because she understood that upon grant of his pardon
he had a meaning to come into England, and how she had sent Oconners son into
Ireland to give encouragement to the Irish Lords. Also he showed instructions
given about 4 years before upon the fall of the Admiral of France, to a
gentleman then coming from England, that if any were in England of the
Admiralls faction he should do his best to excite a trouble.

The deputy of Ireland was at that time ready to transport into England. But
upon this advertisement Sr Henry Knowles was sent in post to stay him there,
yet with caution that he should pretend to stay upon his own occasions, and
thereupon deferred his departure from week to week, least the true reason
should be discerned. Letters of thanks were also sent to the Regent for this
gentle ouerture. And the messenger was directed to use pleasing words in the
delivery of the letter, and to wish a further amity between the two states.
And further to acquaint her with the French Kings practice in waging 5000
Scottish footmen, and 500 horsemen, and how he took up 100000l by exchange at
Lubecke, whereby the conjecture was evident that he had some meaning against
the Emperor in the spring then next following. Doubtless the advertisement of
neighbor Princes are always much to be regarded, for that they receive
intelligence from b^tter Authors and surer grounds then persons of inferior
note and sort.

About this time one of the Earl of Tyrones men was committed to the tower for
making an untrue complaint against the deputy and counsel of Ireland. And for
bruting abroad how the Duke of Northumberland and the Earl of Pembrooke were
fallen into quarrel, and one of them against the other in the field.

In April in the 6th year of the reign of the King, he fell sick of the
Measles, whereof in short time he well recovered, afterward he sickned of the
small pox, which breaking kindly from him, was thought would prove a means to
cleanse his body from such unhealthful humors as commonly occasion long
sickness or death. And hereof he also so perfectly recovered that in the so^mer
next following he rode his progress with greater magnificence then ever
before. For whether it were to maintain his majesty or to manifest the fear
which had been formerly impressed, he carried with him a band of 320 men, which
made up his whole train above the number of 4000 horse. But because this
multitude was burdensome to the Country through which he passed, which did
afford little meadow or pasture, because also it seemed to bewray distrust as
if the King should think that he rather marched among dangerous rebels then
took his pleasure among faithful and quiet disposed subjects, about the
midst of his progress the greatest part was discharged. For furnishing the
charge of this progress 500 pound weight of gold was coined with 1500 pounds
sterling.

Soon after the King did complain of a continual infirmity of body, yet
rather as an indisposition in health then any set sickness.

And about that time certain prodigies were seen either as messengers or
signs of some imminent and eminent eui^l. At Middleton eleven miles from
Oxford a woman brought forth a female child which had two bodies from the
nauill upward, so united at the nauill as when they were laid in length the one
stretched directly opposite to the other, from the nauill downward it was but
one, it lived weakly 18 days, and then both bodies died together. Upon birth
of such monsters the Grecians, and after them the Romans did use diverse sorts
of expiations, and to go about their principal cities, with many solemn
ceremonies and sacrafices, supposing hereby that wrath from heaven was menaced
against them. At Quinborough three great Dolphins were taken, and a few days
following at Blackwall six, which were brought to London, the least in
bigness exceeding any horse. After this, three great fishes were taken at
Grauesend called Whirlepooles and drawn upon the Kings bridge at Westminster.
These accidents the more rarely they happen, the more ominous are they commonly
esteemed, either because they are so indeed or because they are never observed
but when sad events do ensue.

In January about the beginning of the 7th year of the Kings reign his
sickness did more apparently show it self, especially by the symptom of a
tough strong streining cough. All the medicines and diet which could be
prescribed together with the helps both of his young age, and of the rising
time of the year, were so far either from curing or abating his grief, that
it daily increased by dangerous degrees, and it was not only a violence of the
cough thad did insect him, but therewith a weakness and faintnes of spirit,
which showed plainly that his vital parts were most strongly and strangely
assaulted, and the talk hereof among the people was so much the more because
through an opinion obscurely raised but running as most absurd, that his
sickness grew by a slow working poison. Upon this cause it happened that a
Parliament beginning upon the first day of March was upon the last of the same
month d^ssolued.

And now the danger of the Kings sickness was much la^ented, not only by his
own people but by strangers abroad because his curtesy and wisdom had begot
to him such love, that he was no less honored by those who heard of him, then
of those who conversed with him. For he was famous in all places by reason of
his foresight and judgment in affairs, and did so well temper the greatness of
his estate both with modesty and with gravity, that he avoided envy by the
one, and contempt by the other. Some compared him with the greatest persons
that had been, both for war and peace, because in the like pitch of years,
none of them attained to the like perfections. Happily he did not appear in
soldiery so great, but that was because he was not so rash, being also drawn
back from his pursu^es abroad by domestical disorders and divisions, both
amongst the people and Nobility of his Realm, by reason whereof he scarce
seemed well se^led in his Chair of Estate, and yet his fortunes were always
Victorious.

It happened during his sickness that Doctor Ridley Bishop of London, preached
before him, and in his Sermon much commended works of charity, which as they
were a duty for all men to perform, so most especially for men in m^st
especial dignity and place, as well in regard of their large abi^ities, as
for that they were much obliged to give examples of goodness to others: the
same day after dinner the King sent for him privately into the Gallery at
White Hall, caused him to sit in a chair by him, would not permit him to
remain uncovered, and then after courteous thanks, he reported all the
principal points of his Sermon, and further added; I took my self to be
especially touched by your speech, as well in regard of the abilities which God
has given me, as in regard of the example, which from me he will require,
for as in the Kingdom I am next under God, so must I most nearly approach to
him in goodness and in mercy, for as our miseries stand most in need from
him, so are we the greatest debtors; debtors to all that are miserable and
shall be the greatest accomptants of our dispensation therein. And therefore,
my Lord, as you have given me (I thank you) this general exhortation, so
direct me, I entreat you, by what particular actions I may this way best
discharge my duty.

The Bishop partly astonished, and partly ouerioyed with these speeches, was
struck into a sad silence for a time, at last ^eares and words breaking forth
together, he declared to the King, so as he little expected such a question, so
was he not furnished with a present answer, for this matter had a great mixture
of a civil government, wherein he concelued that the Citizens of London had
best experience, as ouerburthened with multitudes of poor, not only of their
own, but from all parts of the Realm besides, and therefore as they best know
both the quality of such people, and the inconveniences which they occasion,
so could they best advise what remedies were fittest: wherefore, if the King
were pleased to afford his Letters to that effect, he would confer with them,
and in very short time return with answer. The King forth with caused his
Letters to be written, and would not suffer the Bishop to depart until he had
firmed them with his hand and Signet, and enjoined the Bishop to be the
messenger, imposing great charge for expedition. The Bishop hasted with his
Letters to the Lord Mayor, who presently assembled certain Aldermen, and four
and twenti^ Commissioners, by whose advice the poor were cast into three
companies and ^orts, some were poor by impotenci^ of nature, as young
fathe^lesse children, old decrepit persons, Idiots, Criples and such like;
others ar^ poor by faculty, as wounded soldiers, diseased and sick persons,
and the like; the third sort ar^ the poor^ by (...) or vnthri^itinesse, as
rioti^us spenders, vagabonds, (...), lew^ strumpe^s and their companions* that
the first of these were to be educated and maintained, the second to be cured
and relecued, and the third to be chastised and reduced to good order.

When this was (...) to the King, he gau^ to the City for education and
maintenance of the first sort of poor, the Gray-Friers Church near
Newgate-market* with all the revenues there to belonging; for cure and relief
of the second ^ort, he gave Saint Bartholomewes near (...); for correction of
the third, he appoin^ed his house at Bride^ell, the ancient Mansion of many
English King^, and which not long before had been repaired and beautified by
Henry the ^ighth, for the entertainment of the great Emperor Charles the
fifth, for increase of (...) of their places, together with the new re-edified
Hospital of Saint Thomas in Southwork, the King gave seven hundred and fifty
marks yearly out of the rents of the Hospital of Saint John Baptist, or the
Sauoy, with all the bedding and furniture at that time belonging to that place,
and when the charter of this gift was pr^sented unto him with a blanke space
for lands to be afterward received in Mortm^ine, to a yearly value without
further license, the King presently with his own hand filled up the void space
with these words (four thousand marks by year) this done with reueren^
gesture and speech, he thanked God for prolonging his life to finish that
business; and so he was the first Founder of those three pious works, which
by many additions are now grown to be the most absolute and famous of that
kind in Europe.

The Kings sickness daily increased, and so did the Duke of Northumberlands
diligence about him; for he was little absent from the King, and had always
some well assured to epsy how the state of his health changed every hour, and
the more joyful he was at the heart, the more sorrowful appearance did he
outwardly make, whether any tokens of poison did appear, reports are various,
certainly his Physicians discerned an invincible malignitie in his disease, and
the suspicion did the more increase, for that the complaint being chiefly from
the lights, a part as of no quick sense, so no seat for any sharp disease,
yet his sickness toward the end grew highly extreme; but the Duke regarded
not much the muttering multitude, knowing right well that rumors grow stale
and vanish with time, and yet somewhat either to abate or delay them for the
present, he caused speeches to be spread abroad, that the King was well
recovered in health, which was readily believed, as most desired to be true.

Hereupon all persons expressed joy in their countenance and speech, which they
enlarged by telling the news to others whom they incountred, who happily had
heard* it often before, and as the report increased, so there with increased
also the joy: Thus whilst every men believed* and no man knew, it was made
more credible by religious persons, who openly in Churches gave public thanks
for the Kings recovery.

But when the speech of his danger was again revived, and as in new; it
happens, the more stopped, the more increased to the worse, then as if the
second time he had been lost, the people did immoderatly break forth into
passions, complaining, that for this cause his two Uncles had been taken away,
for this cause the most faithful of his Nobility and of his Council were
disgraced and removed from Court; this was the reason that such were placed
next his person, who were most assuredly disposed either to commit or permit
any mischief, that then it did appear, that it was not vainly coniectured
some years before by men of judgment and foresight, that after Somersets
death the King should not long enjoy his life. To qualify these and some
broader speeches, it was thought convenient that the King sometimes should show
himself abroad, albeit, little either with his pleasure or for his health, yet
a thing which in long consuming sicknesses, even to the last period of life,
men are often able to do.

Whilst the King remained thus grievously sick, diverse notable marriages were
solemnized at once in Durham place; The Lord Guldford, fourth son to the Duke
of Northumberland, married Lady Jane, the Duke of Suffolkes eldest daughter, by
Frances daughter to Mary second sister to King Henry the eighth: also the Earl
of Pembrokes eldest son married the Lady Katherine, the Duke of Suffolkes
eldest daughter by the said Lady Frances, who then was living: and Martin
Kayes, Gentleman Porter, married Marie the third daughter of the Duke of
Suffolk, by the said Lady Frances: lastly, the Lord Hastings, son to the
Earl of Huntington, took to wife Katherine youngest daughter to the Duke of
Northumberland; hereupon the common people upon a disposition to interpret all
Northumberlands actions to the worst, left nothing unspoken which might serve
to st^rre their hatred against the Duke, or pity toward the King: but the
Duke was nothing moved herear, for being equally obstinate both in purpose and
desire, and mounting his hopes above the pitch of reason, he resolved then to
dissemble no longer, but began openly to play his game.

For albeit the Lady Jane married to his fourth son, had not right to the
succession of the Crown, for that she was excluded, first, by the two Ladies
Mary and Elizabeth, daughters of King Henry the eighth; next, by the issue of
Lady Margret married into Scotland, eldest sister to King Henry the eighth:
lastly, by her own mother, the Lady Frances, who then was living, yet
Northumberland, sottishly mad with over great fortune, procured the King by his
Letters Patents under the great Seal of England, to appoint the Lady Jane to
succeed him in the inheritance of the Crown; in this contriuance he used the
advice of two especially, Lord chief Justice Montague, who drew the Letters
Patents, and Secretary Cecil: these furnished the Patent with diverse reasons,
whereof some were of Law and some of policy in State: The pretensions of Law
were these, that albeit the Crown of the Realm, by an Act of the five and
thirtieth of King Henry the eighth, was in default of his issue of his body,
and of the body of Edward his son lawfully begotten, limited to remain to
the Lady Mary* his eldest daughter, and to the heirs of her body lawfully
begotten; and in default of such issue, the remainder thereof to the Lady
Elizabeth, his second daughter, and to the heirs of her body lawfully
begotten, under such conditions as should be limited by the said King under his
Letters Patents, under the great Seal, or by his last Will in writing, signed
with his hand; yet because the said limitations were made to persons
illegitimate, both the marriages between King Henry the eighth and their
several mothers, being undone by sentences of divorce, and the several
diuorcements ratified by authority of Parliament in the eight and thirtieth
year of King Henry the eighth, which Act remained then in force, both the Lady
Mary and the Lady Elizabeth were thereby disabled to claim the Crown, or any
honors or hereditaments as heirs to King Edward the sixth or any other person.

And again, the said two Ladies, Mary and Elizabeth, being but of the half
blood to King Edward, albeit they had been borne in lawful matrimony, yet by
the ancient Laws of the Realm they were not inheritable to him by descent,
and had no capacity in any degree to receive any inheritance from him.

The reasons or pretexts of necessity to the State were these: In case the
Lady Mary and the Lady Elizabeth should enjoy the Crown, they would assuredly
join in marriage with some stranger, who would reduce this noble and free
Realm into the servitude of the Bishop of Rome, and thereby bring in foreign
customs and Laws, abolishing those whereupon the rights of all native
subjects depend, and happily the whole body of the Realm should hereby be
annexed as a member to some other greater Kingdom, to the utter subversion of
the ancient dignity and Estate thereof, the people were not unlike to elect a
King of some private Stock, a popular and seditious man, peradventure one who
to countenance his own unworthiness and obscurity, would little regard what
contumely he cast upon the falling Family of the Kings before him; wherefore he
held it the most provident advice, that the King by his authority should
design, not only his next Successor, but others also in reuersion, that the
Crown might not be subject to risling, but remain to those whom he loved,
and who humoured him best.

These reasons did more easily sink into the Kings judgment, partly by means
of the great affection which he bare to the Religion that he had established,
of the change whereof he was assuredly persuaded in case the Lady Mary his
sister should succeed, and partly by reason of the entire love he bare to his
Cousin the Lady Jane, a woman of most rare and incomparable perfections: For
besides her excellent beauty adorned with all variety of virtues, as a clear
sky with stars, as a princely Diadem with Jewels, she was most dear to the
King in regard both of her religion and of her education in the knowledge of
the liberal Sciences, and skill in Languages, for in Theology, in
Philosophy, in all liberal Arts, in the Latin and Greek tongues, and in the
Vulgar Languages of diverse near Nations; she far exceeded all of her sex*
and any of her years, unless happily the King himself.

Hereupon the King consented that Letters Patents should be drawn, importing
that in case the King should die without issue of his body lawfully begotten,
then the Imperial Crown of England and Ireland, with his title to the Crown
of France, and all things to them belonging should remain and come to the
eldest son of the Lady Frances, daughter to the Lady Mary, youngest sister
to Henry the eighth, in case such issue should be borne into the world, during
the life of King Edward; and after to the heirs male of the said issue, and in
like sort from son to son of the said Lady Frances lawfully begotten, as
they should be in prioritie of birth, and borne during the Kings life; and in
default of such sons and of heirs male of every such son lawfully
begotten, that then the said Crown and all the pro^, should remain and come
to the Lady Jane; eldest daughter to the said Lady Frances; and the heirs
males of her lawfully begotten, and for default of such issue, the said Crown
to remain to the Lady Katherine; second daughter to the said Lady Frances,
with diverse other remainders, over which as they were vainly appointed* so are
they needless to be repeated.

These Letters were dated the one and twentieth of June, in the seventh year
of King ^dwards reign, and by him signed when he was in great debilitie of
body, and afterward passed under the great Seal of England. And albeit the
course contriuance was almost visible, first, for that such provision was made
for the Issue male of the said Lady Frances* who neither at that time had any,
and was commonly rep^ted to be past years of childbearing* secondly, for that
in case, that beyond the ordinary course of nature, she should conceive, the
hope was desperate that the King should live until the birth.

Lastly, for that her children borne, and to be borne, were so carefully and
orderly remembered, and no mention made of herself, from whom their title must
be derived, yet these Letters were subscribed by all the Priuic Counselors,
the greatest part both of number and power of the Nobility of the Realm, the
Bishops, the Kings learned Council, and all the Judges at the Common Law,
except only Sir James Holles, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, a man
well observed to be both religious and upright, who worthily refused to
subscribe, and was unworthily requited by Queen Mary afterward.

It is very like that some of these were guided with respect of their
particular interest, for that they were possessed of diverse lands which once
pertained to Monasteries, Chantries, and other religions houses not long before
dissolved, of these they held themselves in some danger to lose, in case
religion should change to the ancient form, which by succession of Queen Mary
they did evidently foresee.

Others were drawn partly by fear, and partly by obligation to the Duke of
Northumberland, who then was exceeding poten^, and almost absolute in
government of the State, and supposed able to make any title good, either by
his authority, or by his sword.

Now whether a King may lawfully dispose by his will, or otherwise, of a
Kingdom that has been long carried in one form of succession contrary to
that ancient form I have largely discoursed in my History of the three Norman
Kings, about the beginning of the reign of King William the second; but
certain it is, that when kingdoms have customably been ^ried by right of
succession, according to (...) of blood, the violation of which course has
always been either very vain, or with dangerous consequence, it has always
been like the breaking of a ban^ which holds a sheafe of arrows together,
like a rupture in banks, which binds a river within its proper channel, or
like a casting down of a pale, wherewith dear o^ other beasts are enclosed:
It was never done, but either no effect ensued, or bloudle disorders, or happily
both, and the Duke by piercing his ambitious purposes with his unjust policy,
did no otherwise than often does a foolish greedy gameste^, who by stealing a
card to win a stake, forfeits the whole rest.

But having thus in his own opinion assured his own devices, nothing remained
but that the King should not longer survive, le^t happily his sickly judgment
might be ouerruled by sounder advice; his disease was violent, but his
Physicians conceived some hope of recovery, in case he might be removed to
change of healthful air, which in infirmities of the vital parts, the seat
of his sickness, is of greatest moment for the cure.

But hereto the Council would not consent, so he continued without either any
sensible in^nding, or impairing for a time. At the last a Gentlewoman, unworthy
to be named, but accounted to be a schoole-mistresse (...) the purpose, offered
her service assuredly to cure him, in case he were committed wholly to her
hand; hereto the Physicians would in no case afford their advice, because as
she could give no reason, either of the nature of the disease, or of the part
afflicted, so she would not declare the means whereby she intended to work
the cu^.

After some ^he (...) of deliberation among the Council, it was resolved that
the Physicians should be discharged, and the cure committed to her alone: the
apparent defect both of her judgment and experience, joined to the
weightinesse of the adventure, caused many to marvel, and some deeply to
suspect that she was but an instrument of mischief; this surmise was strongly
confirmed within a very short time ensuing, when the King did fall into
desperate extremities, his vital parts were mortally stuffed, which brought
him to a difficulty of speech and of breath, his legs swelled, his pulse
failed, his skin changed color, and many other horrid symptoms appeared.

Then were the Physicians called again, who espying him in that fearful
estate, departed from him with a sad silence, leaving him to the miserable
mercy of near approaching death, some of these whispered among their private
friends, that they were called for fashion only, but neither their advice nor
appliances were any deal regarded, but the King had been ill dealt with more
than once, and that when by the benefit, both of his youth and of careful
means, there was fair means of his recovery, he was again more strongly
ouerlaid.

Yet as cruelty and wrong never stand secure, so the Duke thought one thing
more expedient for assuring his designs, and that was to draw the Lady Mary
wholly into his power: to this purpose Letters were directed to her in the
Kings name from the Council, willing her forth with to resort to the King, as
well to be a comfort to him in his sickness, as to see all matters well
ordered about him; the Lady suspecting no lurking mischief, addressed
herself with all speed to the journey, expressing great joy, that either her
company or her service, should be esteemed needful to the King; but as she was
upon the way, and within half a days ^ourney of London, her foot ready to
slip into the s^are, she received advice both of the Kings desperate estate,
and of the Dukes designments against her: whereupon she returned in haste to
her house at Houeden, where in a short time she heard how ^o pro^table her
journey would have been to London.

So the King having long wrastled with a lingering and tormenting sickness, at
the last his spirits yielded to the malice of his disease, which as with great
patience he did endure, so with no less piet^e did he end it; many fervent
prayers he made, both for himself and for the people of his Realms, and some
when he was esteemed almost past sense, and so spent his last breath in
committing his sweet soul into the Almighties hands* which had created it.

He died at Greenwich upon Thursday the sixth day of July, in the year 1553.
and in the seventeenth year of his age, when he had reigned six years, five
months and nine days; two days his death was concealed, to open a straight
way for the Dukes crooked purposes; his body was buried upon the ninth of
August in the same year, in the Chapel of Saint Peter's Church in
Westminster, and laid near to the body of King Henry the seventh, his
Grandfather.

THIS HISTORY I HAVE BVILT FOR THE MONVMENT OF HIS VNPERISHABLE FAME.
FINIS.


LONDON, Printed for JOHN PARTRIDGE, and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Sun, 1630.


